But the members without a
recorded vote.
Good morning everyone
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon is here
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative will go a.
King Representative bill guys
here Representative Brown.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Cook.
Representative Dow.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Matthews.
Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen is here
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Representative G. Andrés Romero
is here Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Serrato is here
Representative says.
Representative Thomson.
Here Representative Thomson is
here Representative Townsend
Here Representative Townsend is
here Representative Trujillo
here Representative Trujillo is
here Representative inventories
here.
Representative Terrazas is here
Representative **** here
Representative Rod Montoya is
here Representative this.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here.
Representative Lente is here.
Representative Scott is here.
Anybody else going once.
Going twice.
Rural we have a quorum.
Members please rise for.
It
has given you preview of what's
to come later today the members
please rise for today's
education offered to us by the
gentleman from Colfax more Rio
Arriba and centennial
Representative Roger Montoya.
Thank you so much again as each
of us to bow our heads and pray
in your own inclusive way of
your respective faith.
Of us are of sound mind and body
today as we take on the tasks of
governance.
Decisions of relationships.
Our choices.
For that we have an open spirit.
In a moment to think about us as
a family.
It is so vitally important to
the public health and wellness
of our state.
I also.
The original.
To the family of more of here
Gonzalez.
We lost this week in a valiant
fight with cancer.
Him as a group Canarias
intelligence.
Loving inclusive vibrant human
being.
The fifty six years to grace
this earth.
To all of those who just lost
their lives to comment this year
and last.
Been to all the trouble we face
in the future.
We hold the unity of the fund
media into Mexico in our hearts
and souls and.
Thank you gentlemen
Representative Herndon would you
please lead us in the pledge of
allegiance.
And with the gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott please
leisure and saluting New
Mexico's flag.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Good morning speakers.
Mr speaker good afternoon
members I will go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business
interjection sorter.
Good afternoon everyone.
Mr speaker.
The lady from Bernalillo.
They would generally we need to
we have a few answers that we
have to go to bill intro and and
then we'll get started in
recognition and celebration
African American day are a
member.
Representative small has guests
in the gallery.
It's the Russians.
I have some yes Representative
small in the gallery.
We have Martin while and his
wife Patricia.
Either.
Filer and British is a sister
Mary Alice are you there in the
gallery.
Please send of gives way the
most welcome you to the house.
Thank you Mr speaker and we go
to the next order of business
introduction of legislation
interjections ordered.
to read.
House memorial fifty four
introduced by Representative
Herndon Memorial declaring
February eleventh twenty twenty
two African American day in the
house of representatives house
memorial fifty four introduced
by Representative Herndon house
memorial fifty four have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and placed on the
speakers table.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move we
go to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business interjection sorter
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house memorial
fifty four be removed from the
speakers table and made the next
order of business here
interjections order but the
record reflect all action
necessary for placing House
memorial fifty four on final
passage is been taken the gentle
lady to explain the memorial.
Today we are celebrating African
American them the legislature
here in the chamber and it is a
day of joyous celebration and
many people have come to be part
of the celebration with this.
And that Mr speaker with that
regard could you please as chief
clerk to be the memorial
silly the clerk to read.
House memorial fifty four
entries for Representative
funding from a moral declaring
February eleventh twenty twenty
two African American day in the
house of representatives whereas
African American day is a
celebration of the achievements
and contributions of African
Americans to the history of both
New Mexico and the United States
and whereas New Mexico
recognizes the importance of
honoring African Americans
having an active section twelve
dash I dash twelve NMSA nineteen
seventy eight which states the
second Friday of February of
each year shall be set apart and
be known as African American day
and whereas African American day
it is celebration of.
Of the many sacrifices that
African Americans have made
toward the democracy democracy
everyone enjoys today and
whereas African American day
shall be observed by the people
of New Mexico in recognition of
all those efforts.
And we're Is African American
day is celebrated in tandem with
black history month and whereas
a celebration of African
American day is also a time for
people to reflect upon the need
to diversify thinking and
strategic planning to ensure
that all voices are heard in
decisions that affect New Mexico
in New Mexicans and whereas
African American day provides an
opportunity to honor the too
often neglected accomplishments
of black Americans in every area
of endeavor throughout history
and whereas black history month
should not be treated as though
it is just it is separate from
the collective American history
course the black history month
is merely a compilation of
greatest hits Randy ranging from
the March on Washington to some
of the most memorable court
cases inspired by African
Americans experiences but rather
as a day that is focused on the
shared experiences of all
African Americans.
Mexico mingled into a recipe
that everyone can appreciate.
And whereas the African American
community in New Mexico has a
compelling legacy.
That dates back to fifteen
thirty nine one S. Esteban and
Spanish more from North Africa
travel to New Mexico seeking
gold and whereas after the civil
war.
From three thousand three
hundred to three thousand eight
hundred African American
soldiers probably known as
buffalo soldiers Attorney give
term given to the troops by
native Americans were garrisoned
at eleven.
Different for to the territory
of New Mexico and we're eyes
today New Mexico has a vibrant
African American community with
a population of approximately
fifty five thousand black people
according to the United States
Census bureau and whereas this
part this past year has seen an
increase attention on police
violence systemic racism.
And disproportionate health
outcomes faced by African
Americans.
And as efforts to advance racial
equality and civil engagement
are urgent in the light in light
of recent history.
And whereas everyone is
encouraged to celebrate African
American day by honoring the
contributions that African
Americans have made throughout
history.
I also recognizing that the
fight for racial racial justice
and equality continues to this
day now therefore be it resolved
by the house of representatives
of the state of New Mexico that
February eleventh twenty twenty
to be dead designated African
American day in the house of
representatives and be it
further resolved that copies of
this memorial be transmitted to
the governor the executive
director of the New Mexico board
on African American affairs the
board chair of average of the
African American museum and
cultural center of New Mexico
and the present president.
Of the national association for
the advancement of colored
people New Mexico.
House memorial fifty four
introduced by Representative
printed.
Mr speaker I now move that house
memorial fifty four do now pass
yes now for unanimous consent of
the house that the record show
that the role has been called
and all members present voted in
the affirmative thank you Jerry
I'm gonna take that motion and
hold it just for a minute
because there is a little bit of
debate on the amendment agility
from Bernalillo Representative
bone cut do you wish to speak on
this memorial or are you on the
board for another item.
Mr speaker I'm on the board for
another I am so happy we.
the gentle lady from Sandoval
Representative Powdrell Culbert
thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo you
I yield to the gentle lady thank
you Mr speaker and gentle lady I
just arrived in support of this
and you knew that I would
You know African American day
here at the legislative issues a
little smaller than it has been
in previous years and
especially.
During my tenure.
And it is important and I have
always thought it was important
did we have.
This day here at the
legislature.
But for our community to be able
to come in as well and lobby on
a lot of the issues that affect
their lives just like it does
any other nationality in the
state of New Mexico and Mr
speaker and gentle lady as I
said some a few weeks ago you
know when you start to look at
what.
Documents.
Are being produced by the state
of New Mexico the African
American community is always
designated as others.
As you say in the memorial.
We're not others.
For citizens of the state of New
Mexico who have contributed.
And this lady.
To a state that has so many rich
cultures and since this is the
ladies.
from Bernalillo her first
session.
I would like to say
congratulations on the work that
you've done.
And hopefully for another twenty
years video will at least the
nineteen will be.
I will be here to help the
legislature's celebrate African
American day at the legislature
thank you gentle lady and thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you generating there's
further debate the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
dela Cruz.
The speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo two year old I yield
to the to the general fund thank
you gentle lady Mr speaker I
want to personally thank the
gentle lady for this wonderful
memorial and this introduction
today Mr speaker and gentle lady
I want to personally welcome Dr
hello baby to the chambers this
morning Dr Bailey has been a
dear friend well known many many
years gentle lady Mr speaker and
his work is well known
throughout the community I thank
you doctor being.
Mr speaker gentle lady world I
very much admire Dr Bailey I
actually liked his mom's more.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Dr Bailey's mother was one of my
constituents follows a county
commissioner and wonderful
community curling addition
Albuquerque.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
thank you again and welcome the
opportunity.
Thank you gentlemen there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Santa Fe Representative
Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county you I yield to the gentle
lady.
Thank you Stricker thank you
gentle lady I just want to stand
in strong support of of the
morning memorial today to.
Thank you thank you and and all
others but really your
mentorship that you find you
have that.
I had from you over so many
years over a decade now that
I've known you and knowing
you're working just thank you
For your voice your work in the
proactive diversity equality
equity and inclusion initiatives
that you have.
Supported and worked on in your
service to us in your community
through all these years I just
to honor to serve alongside you
and carry legislation with you
and our work that we're doing or
trying to get with house bill
one twenty six which creates the
the chief diversity officer for
our state our state personal
office and.
I just want to honor and thank
everyone that is here today and
all your work in your service as
well as we were allies the state
on.
dishonored thank you and thank
you for being here already and
through a lot to this pandemic
and it's in Hey you know we
don't have.
All the voices here that we
usually do but you are your
voice is here in the presence
there so important to us and all
the work that we're trying to
accomplish thank you so much Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady I
yield back.
Thank you generally thanks to
the gentleman from Santa
Representative Hernandez thank
you Mr speaker the gentle lady
yield I yield to the gentleman
thank you I would like to send
it today and introduce my city
council from Rio Rancho Chris of
COVID who is here in doing
African American day with us she
is has done wonderful things for
community and she is also one of
the leading experts in
infectious diseases in the state
of New Mexico and has done a a
ton of one for work of helping
us get through COVID so thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen next we have
the gentleman from Chavis Lee
and Roosevelt Representative.
Independent for the Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker and hi two
employees to rise and support
this memorial
Mr speaker.
We have.
Recognize New Mexico's multi
cultures on this for in many
different ways during the course
of the session and today we we
honor the contribution of.
The black Americans who have.
Contributed not only to our
state but our nation as well.
In my part of the world there so
well known err a complete
community that was quite
historically and is not there
anymore and it's Blackstone.
And it was a wonderful thriving
community I'm old enough to have
known of the young women who
grew up in black film and the
it's so important part of our
culture and set of our history
in southeast New Mexico then I
think about the.
Point stand New Mexico.
One of the Americas decorated
army Calvary units for the
buffalo soldiers.
And they were commanded by.
General Black Jack Pershing who
went on to.
Quite a military history.
But none the less that
contribution is another one in
our new southeast New Mexico
history.
So today Mr speaker I rise to
support this
New Mexico is blessed to have
such a multi culture.
Today and in its history and
thank you for bringing this to
the fore thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you John next we have the
gentleman from.
So he's out of the chamber the
generally from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo my
colleague Neil.
The gentle lady.
Thank you very much thank you
our gentle lady Mr speaker for
on the memorial today I rise
also for.
I have also mentioned on the
state.
The beautiful relationship that
I've had throughout my life we
are having been adopted.
My.
The civil rights.
the W. fifty.
The family Merion to.
FirstMerit.
And I have the honor of being
adopted by the family welcome
yes.
to the family and their
significant contributions.
Speaker gentle lady that they
have made on.
Education.
Having been
Justice of New York being the
first African American all over
again.
borough president.
Of the number of.
Rural
first.
And of course the Reverend.
With one of the leaders of the
tax incentive only.
And of course as a result of
that manage the mother of.
My oldest son Yousef.
And so and and his father who is
deceased.
The school I student movement.
The civil rights.
In the late nineteen sixties and
early seventies.
And I also Mr speaker and gentle
lady I have the honor of
working.
Historical documents and
research.
The southern southwestern part
of the state where I ate my
roots of and I'm covering the
significance.
Contributions and settlement of
the African American families
involved New Mexico.
And I learned a great deal of
the history.
The migration has.
On and.
As it moved up as I families
move in different directions and
settled on south western part of
our country and so on a rise
yes
for recognition that I am by in
Ana to honor this African
American history.
Is Steve.
There has been a huge
contributions on to making our
country.
The best country ever and the
exemplifying
how.
Cultures and diverse cultures.
Right and responsibility and
place.
Well in this country so Mr
speaker and gentle lady thank
you very much I honor African
American heritage.
Thank you.
Thank you generating next to the
gentleman from Dona Ana grant
and Sierra Representative
Terrazas.
Thank you Mr speaker
the gentle lady these are you
are you.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to again I think we were
all saying wonderful things and
I just want to I think this this
memorial because we know history
is very important.
It's a beautiful thing it
reminds us of what was good and
bad and allows us to understand
each other's cultures and
histories so important to our
children and for us to remember
how we should the better as a as
a as a community respect each
other in the future so I have I
really appreciate this thank you
Mr speaker I'm calling.
Thank you gentleman next to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
lady yield I yield to the gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker and
lady from Bernalillo I I just
wanted to say first of all how
pleased I am that you're with us
because the lady from Bernalillo
was a prime
motivator for the pregnant
worker accommodation acts that
we finally got signed into law
and I'm really happy to have her
join our chamber and I also want
to recognize a lady from Santa
who with our former majority
leader did so much to make this
a day of huge celebration and I
just want to say for those of
you who haven't been here pre
COVID it's usually a lot more
fun.
And we have all kinds of
celebrations every once in a
while on my phone the picture
pops up of the honorable James
Clyburn standing right there
giving us a speech and he rocked
the house I'll tell you so I
look forward to the day that
I hope it's not far away that we
can celebrate as we ordinarily
do and Dr Bailey good to see you
thanks for being here today and
thank you so much ladies both of
you for your bringing this
forward today.
Thank you generating next to the
gentleman from Rio Arriba
Sandoval in San Juan
Representative Lente.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield I yield to the gentleman
thank you gentle lady I rise as
well in support and celebration
for African American day in the
legislature I know that in
regards to our struggles in our
history we share those along
with you many of you are present
day in our future but I can
recall the particular one Dr
Harold Bailey and in the laci P.
this past summer when there were
some disparaging remarks made on
behalf of individual here to
native American children.
Not only did the end of laci
Pete through doctor Bailey's
work and other stand up they
told to sit down.
We stand up together with the
now today and in the future we
walk with you so thank you so
much congratulations and we
celebrate all of your
contributions to our communities
thank you.
Thanks to the gentle lady from
Indiana Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker highrise to
honor and to recognize is Julia
brown's on the on.
Di S. N. C. is from Los crucis
and she has been not only
instrumental in helping our
our community but also
nationally she was president of
the American Association of the
of the university women and she
has brought that leadership to
Los crucis and to southern New
Mexico excuse me Southern New
Mexico and also she's been in
our former county manager and
has done an excellent job when
she was there and also she has
been a leader with the
federation of democratic women
at the state level as well as
our local so thank you Mr Julie
brown.
Thank you generally see no
further debate the gentle lady
to close.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I now move that house memorial
fifty four do now pass and I now
ask unanimous consent of the
house that the record show that
the role has been called and all
members present voted in the
affirmative requests is for
unanimous consent to show all
members present and voting in
the affirmative hearing
objections order the vote is now
open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of seventy in the affirmative
zero and negative house memorial
fifty four has passed the house.
Okay members we now have
program of some presentations
and.
Eager's as is our tradition here
in the house in commemoration of
in celebration of African
American dad like to invite the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Herndon to the
rostrum to take over the duties
as presiding officer.
Mr Rahman Smith in the house and
now I'd like to have a moment of
silence and recognition for the
first director of the office of
African American affairs.
So New Mexico lost a true
warrior on Monday February
twenty February seventh twenty
twenty two.
It was the first director of the
office of African American fairs
and his name was called landed
no one's a.
He was a retired licensed master
social worker from the children
youth and families department.
And his name means man of
victory and wise protector.
There was a time when Mr will
move on the was the only black
faster adoption worker in the
state.
And in nineteen ninety six he
started a training unit that is
used today to train newly hired
social workers and staff in the
state.
Mr Milan those served as
president of his local chapter
of the association of black
social workers in two thousand
and it was in two thousand and
four that he actually changed
his name from which brown to
kalon to move on to.
He often stated that he had been
sent to New Mexico by the
creator and the ancestors to do
what he could to make a positive
difference in the lives of black
people in New Mexico by any
means necessary.
Aimed at on that mission until
his death just for a moment of
silence in honor of the laundry
room on the.
Thank you.
Introduced the rostrum gas to
you today some of them you have
met but I'd like to re introduce
them to you we have with us Dr
Finney Coleman with the faculty.
He's the president of the
faculty Senate he's also you and
them professor and a former
United States Army intelligence
officer welcome Dr Finney
Coleman.
With both the.
Current national board president
of the American Association of
university women that is Dr
Julia brown.
In addition we have with those
the woman who is known
throughout the country as the
song bird of the southwest she
is also a former principal in
Albuquerque public schools she
is right a baby.
Introduce the medical director
for infectious diseases and the
Rio Rancho city councilor Dr
Karissa Culbreath.
What the needs no introduction
you have in fits and stands and
works the leader of the
president of the NAACP
Albuquerque Brandt welcome Dr
Harold Bailey.
And we have some special guest
in the rostrum that I'd like to
introduce to you now.
They are in the gallery I'm
sorry they're not on the
rostrum.
And this is Dr Vickie Bannerman
the deputy cabinet secretary for
PED.
Ramon billion the black
education a member of the black
education team at PED.
The bond Williams the black
education team member from PED.
We have Lynn have fun the
president of the New Mexico
chapter of the A. A. U. W..
And we have the Cole Bedford the
liaison for the black Education
Act team for PED and she's also
a member of the New Mexico Black
central organizing committee.
The members of the organizing
committee for the black to
please stand.
We have an eighteen year old
from ball ski school came here
to spend some time with her with
us on the lady hi you Mr.
Carry out.
With her grandmother.
A lady that carry out the duties
of this.
And she said no family would be
complete without her mother Dr
Torrez Kali are who is a
professor at UNM.
So as we move forward with this
program it is my pleasure to
introduce to speakers so we'll
talk to you today about the
importance of African American
day and along with other
important information to share
with you first we will hear from
doctor Finnie Coleman.
Madam speaker.
Members of the house.
Thank you for this opportunity
to.
Speaking with the this morning
regarding.
The excellence and the black
community and a salute to black
history.
I'm asked this morning to.
Provide an outline of the points
that I would make.
If invited back for a longer
session in this chamber.
A discussion of one of the
country's most remarkable
survival stories.
I have six minutes and thirty
seconds to get that done.
In a longer session I would ask
you to think about African
American history outside of its
traditional historical context
as American history but is an
amazing chapter in the history
of the African diaspora.
To do so is to move away from
the national pension of
imagining that the history of
black people in this country
begins with slavery.
What we cannot manage negate are
ever ignore that epic thank you
your institution we must
understand that to fully
appreciate the breadth and depth
of black history we must put
that history in the context.
But many millennia of history
that includes malai.
Some high and gun empires the
rise of Timbuktu.
The construction of the pyramids
of Egypt.
I would take time to detail help
people of African descent we're
living and thriving on this
continent long before the
English disappeared from Roanoke
island or settle Jamestown.
My colleagues will share points
about Mustafa as a moody.
Esteban that are on this list of
the New Mexico.
it is exploration of New Mexico
individual disappearance here.
In fifteen thirty nine.
I would share the remarkable
story of communities of free
blacks existing New Mexico and
Colombia as early as fifteen
seven I would talk to you about
the Arribo.
That led by Gaspard younger.
Is there a cruise.
After crossing the history of
the black diaspora I would
transition to the history of
blacks in the United States of
America.
Perhaps the most in during a
fact about African American
history its people its culture
its literature it's music is
that what our nation has lost
its way and it has lost its way
many times in its history.
People of African descent
blacks Negros Afro Americans
African Americans.
Always been there to help the
nation change course to find its
way again to challenge solution
to live out its creed to demand
that the princes of principles
of freedom and liberty.
Escape from the clutches of the
prophecy.
In terms of black culture I
would explain how feel shouts
and hollers the sorrow songs in
Negro spirituals form the roots
trump and stem virtually all
genres of American music.
Rock and roll jazz blues country
music or country blues.
Disco pop what all created in
black communities.
In a longer session we might
discussed the genesis of African
American literature and how some
literary scholars would argue
that the only genre of
literature that our country's
ever contributed to the world
literature that's been the slave
narrative.
In terms of political and social
history after all we are in the
people's house this morning or
this afternoon I would love this
body that when America broke
away from England seeking
freedom while remaining
committed to slavery.
That black America provided
Sojourner truth Frederick
Douglass Harriet Tubman to lead
the nation out of that darkness
black men and women who teach
important lessons about what
freedom and bravery truly me.
We would reflect on how would
America double down on Jim crow.
Invested in the convict lease
system.
Posted racial segregation.
Demanded this Francis month.
The black community prove
produced fentanyl hammer.
Elevator Roy Wilkins Malcolm X.
Martin Luther king junior Elaine
brown and Angela Davis to
explain the true meaning of
justice and liberty for all.
I'm a proud veteran.
I would be remiss if in that
longer talk I fail to remind us
that when called upon black men
and women have never failed.
Did he the call of the nation.
That black men and women have
served in every conflict since
the nation's founding often
fighting and giving their lives
in wars to protect freedoms that
they themselves.
And their families did not and
could not.
Enjoy.
Really young black politician.
What are are you in the months
before.
The coming president of the
United States that prosperity is
only sustainable if it is
shared.
That democratic government is a
commitment to shared prosperity.
That we must fight to make sure
that all people are included in
that shared prosperity.
We must fight to realize the
promise is embedded in the
country's founding documents.
Over time the will of the people
expressed through democratic
processes will bend toward
justice.
What provisions of the rights
laid out in the declaration.
That is the source.
Of the poor of a spoon.
I would conclude that longer
talk with the reminder that in
spite of the many travails and
setbacks that this community is
faced hope is always from the
turn in the black community
that's celebrating that this
history is to embrace the unity
brotherhood sisterhood across
race across creed.
Rosko our politics and religion
that continues to define black
America.
This is always been a community
that has embraced unity peace
and prosperity the American that
American history is woefully
incomplete.
In the absence of the black
history.
One of the nation's most
important stories of survival
and achievement in spite of the
pads.
I had three seconds.
Thank you.
And god bless this house.
Will know him from Dr Dunia
Brown.
Good afternoon.
I'd like to thank the
legislature for celebrating New
Mexico's diversity with these
racial and ethnic observances.
And to think speaker Egolf in
today's session speaker.
Kernan.
For making today's program
possible.
President Gerald Ford.
Officially designated February
as black history month in
nineteen seventy five seventy
six I'm sorry.
In an effort to highlight
history
often neglected and overlooked.
I do not know.
Because the nineteen twenty six
the store in Carter G. Woodson.
And the association for the
study of Negro life and history
declared the second week of
February as Negro history week.
This was significant because it
marks the birthdays of Abraham
Lincoln the president who
abolished slavery and Frederick
Douglass a man who escaped
slavery and went on to become
the leader of the abolitionist
movement and an accomplished
author.
It's important for us to
recognize that the colorful
blanket that is the New Mexico
which is really much like a
month today movie channels
Caloris.
Is inextricably interwoven.
All of the groups that have
contributed throughout New
Mexico's history starting long
before it was a state.
As as already been stated
African American history did not
start with slavery in the New
World.
An overwhelming body of new
evidence is emerging which
proves that Africans had
frequently sailed across the
Atlantic to the Americas
thousands of years before
Columbus.
One of the first documented
instances of African sailing and
settling in the Americas.
Or black Gyptian.
Led by king ram says the third
during the nineteenth dynasty
in twelve ninety two the state.
The strongest evidence of
African presence in America
before Columbus comes actually
from the pen of Columbus himself
in nineteen twenty a renowned
American historian and linguist.
Leo winner of Harvard University
and has both Africa and the
discovery of.
America explained Columbus noted
in his journal that native
Americans had confirmed that
black skinned people that come
in big boats for many years
bringing goods and supplies to
trade.
And in the fifteen hundreds
Esteban day Dolan yes also known
as Esteban nickel and Esteban
the moor.
An expedition that discovered
what is now Arizona and New
Mexico.
Indeed.
Help to open up the southwestern
states west of Florida as far as
the Pacific.
And of course blacks later
joined the Spanish
conquistadors.
From the time of the first black
was elected to this legislature
in nineteen ninety five we've
grown to three two and a half
and one in the Senate.
The state has seen its first
black mayor in the person of
Albert Johnson elected a mayor
of Los crucis in nineteen
seventy six he served two terms
before his untimely death of
leukemia at the age of forty
nine.
Today is the only black person
to have served as mayor of any
city in New Mexico.
The state has seen its first
black county manager at first
light city manager I have the
honor of serving in both those
positions.
Like the New Mexico.
Experienced several firsts in
twenty twenty.
Carol was elected as the state's
first black senator.
And in case you haven't noticed
that is present in the room
Senator of.
Rural buyers became the first
African American district
attorney and Anjana County.
And for more Henderson became
the first black appellate judge
in the state.
Duras Hamilton the first flight
principal in Los crucis.
Was named.
And was also the first black
woman to enroll at the
university of Arkansas.
Mrs Hamilton is in her nineties
and still lives in Los crucis.
Alford Matheson who had a long
and distinguished career as a
corporate lawyer and professor.
Was named dean of the law school
at UNM and twenty fifteen.
One of the last surviving
Tuskegee airman.
The famous red tail fighter
pilots years in New Mexico.
Montoya placing flowers who
turned one hundred six this last
Christmas day lives in Oscar Los
crucis.
He doesn't like to dwell on more
stories and talking about the
chilling and destruction that
war can bring for first to talk
about things that he has built
and contributions he's made to
the community and to talk about
his kids and grandkids.
There are six doctors among his
children and grandchildren
including pediatricians
urologist cardiologist and
psychologist and another who
attended the Berklee college of
music in Boston.
I'd say that's not bad for a man
who was once told me never
amount to anything because of
the color of his skin.
Now this list is a illustrious
tend not exhaustive the black
history is about much more than
chronicling a list of first.
The time and place of a break
for.
Flex not only remarkable
individual achievement that in
itself an indication of the
progress source sometimes the
lack of that progress of black
people and realizing.
The centuries old intertwined
goals of freedom equality and
justice.
Again I applaud the legislature
for establishing this day and
other special observances for
the ethnic groups in New Mexico
and the governor for her strong
stance on diversity equity and
inclusion let's all keep
learning growing and
collaborating for the benefit of
all of this thank you.
In the African American
community it is tradition that
in a gathering that the way the
bills gatherings come to an end
as with the prayer and with the
song so we're going to recognize
the gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan County to provide
the prayer it will be followed
by the song bird of the
southwest will give you the gift
of song.
Gentlelady.
Representative Johnson.
Thank you madam speaker.
In honor of African American day
in our legislature I would like
to borrow a prayer from my
Angelo.
Father mother god.
Thank you for your presence
during the hard and mean days.
For then we have you to lean
upon.
Thank you for your presence
during the bright and sunny days
for then we can share that which
we have with those who have
less.
Angela.
Thank you.
While we wait for the songbird
in the southwest to provide us
with to get us on I'd like to
recognize that we will part of
me a principal and APS is with
us today and I use of guns
Allah's represents the largest
one of the largest sororities in
the country alpha Kappa alpha
sorority thank you for being
with us.
Nova anybody you
know.
Do you
You
You.
You
on nobody but IT you.
No.
Nobody buddy you and.
Hi to you.
Goal we can home really I see.
Goal we go home.
Um no.
one.
Do you.
I goal we home I see.
we
know.
And.
Official program and thank you
all for joining us for African
American day in the legislature.
Yes Mr speaker I just want to
rise to thank all of you here on
the rostrum in the gallery for
joining us in another
celebration African American
damn have the whole house thank
you that was incredibly.
Moving and inspirational and as
we enter the last six days of
the session I was right on time
thank you thank you thank you
madam speaker.
Madam speaker.
Madam speaker.
Hello this general sentiment
from San Juan thank you madam
speaker I'm sure was just an
oversight but I want to make
sure that we recognize the
fourth ranking member in this
chamber and the currently the
longest serving African
Americans serving in this
legislature representative Jane
Powdrell Culbert.
The gentle lady please advise
the lady.
Other announcements.
Madam speaker.
Yes the gentle lady.
Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker first
thank you so very much for a
beautiful and moving costs start
to the day
I wanted to Madam speaker take a
moment to recognize that this
morning one of our state police
officers was shocked and injured
in an unfortunate event and so I
would just like for the body to
send our best wishes for a
speedy recovery to the officer
thank you.
The lady.
Madam speaker is.
Thank you unemployment that
officer is a friend of mine and
it's really hurting my heart and
I would like to do a moment of
silence for him he is not
critical but he is in the
hospital right at this moment
and I would like to honor him
and while we are having a moment
silent I would please ask that
they can provide to the person
the despicable despicable person
that did this because they are
still at large thank you.
Thank you all.
Zoom I recognize the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
don't go.
Thank you madam speaker before I
moved to and maintenance then I
also wanted to thank the leaders
of the African American
community who filled his house
with love enjoy and such and
then spirit today thank you
wanted to express my support for
eight you madam.
The funding Holly from
Bernalillo county in the
memorial you've presented today
and to do we humble to celebrate
support and fallen I Meeder said
today and every day across our
state of the nation.
Madam speaker and members of the
house and public this week many
of us across Albuquerque
received heartbreaking news that
we lost one of our own said in
the an unexpected the.
I was asked to share some words
about her today right and by her
dear friend in line in Reigate
cardio.
On Monday February seventh the
international district and all
of New Mexico last name for in
and let the community here.
Mystery novelist or as work in
schools as well as across the
entire community to the leader
for the international district
healthy communities coalition
many hands building Crawford is.
Your neighborhood association
and the list goes on.
I remember working with right
now when I was the director at
New Mexico ease and families
Reno is fierce and unapologetic
and holding people accountable
if they weren't acting in
partnership and with the best
interests of the families in the
idea in mind and she also led
with such blows billions hope
and division to her community in
other words she was someone many
of us to.
Her husband Marcus and children
hello Lisa Lisa and Julian will
listening compassionate partner
and mother her children called
her in the past month me in the
numbers.
I love in believing community
lives on in the initiative C.
Reid and the friends and family
who survived her as many of her
colleagues with a ring and lose
for as presentation.
Mr speaker as neighbors take to
the streets and ID to remember
in and today I asked members of
the chamber and the public take
a moment of silence so that our
spirits me join there is as we
all honor and celebrate Mesrine
as it is for as.
Thank you we all rise in a
moment of silence.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
The one of the S. have already
says that we social now well
sure yep that's a.
These are the who hate.
Madam speaker members of the
house at your destination you
have received a couple of
Ballantine's cards.
From language students across
New Mexico.
From Chinese to Spanish from
French to Navajo from Arabic to
Russian Kerrison devil.
Thousands of students across the
state of New Mexico are working
every day at developing their
bilingual and bi cultural
proficiency.
They wanted to thank you for
encouraging them and recognizing
excellence.
What the New Mexico Selah by
literacy.
And they wanted to thank you for
recognizing that multi lingual
ism.
Okay culturalism.
Is one of our greatest assets in
New Mexico.
When I asked the teachers to
gather these cards for you what
am I supposed to tell the
legislators when they asked me
what does this chart state.
In the teachers answered two
minutes please tell the
legislators.
Go find a New Mexico language
student to translate for you.
In answer.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker members I
have a a special guests and I
don't know if he's around
anymore but she is in there is a
best dressed person in the
legislature can you haven't seen
them is very very W. day
my guess is only again he is a
fifth grader at Concord other
elementary school invited us
which is partly in the district
that I represent.
The other is a magnet school.
of the American national with
American national certification
for bilingualism Mr speaker we
do have a certificate that we
will of.
Take to the school and present
to them in person but I did want
the body to please welcome all
in we get.
When when would you please come
down to the front of the gallery
so we can all see here a
beautiful suit and welcome you
to the house.
Welcome to have you here.
Mr speaker phone by the power
vested in me by the
constitutional laws of the state
of New Mexico I officially
declare you to be the best
dressed fifth grader that is
ever step foot in this
legislature.
Gentlelady from Chavis.
Mr speaker point of personal
privilege please state your
point.
Mr speaker.
On Monday.
Lots of my fellow legislators
here in this body signed a
letter that was sent to Mister
Randall more he's the chair of
the United States for service.
In the state of New Mexico
receive notification from the U.
S. for service this past
weekend.
Notifying us that there would be
an aerial assault on the stray
cattle in the heat of the
National Forest.
This slaughter was to begin
Tuesday morning.
Despite the negotiations that
were held between the Forest
Service The New Mexico livestock
board in the New Mexico cattle
growers association to try to
work out a plan together these
cattle from the England national
force.
The United States Forest Service
ordered aphis wildlife services
to begin the mission.
Of killing the cattle using
helicopters and rifles
yesterday.
The total number of cattle that
were killed and left to rot in
the forest.
Was forty seven head.
Their attack on these kettles is
continuing as we speak Mr
speaker.
This operation.
Is going to keep on until it's
complete.
Mr speaker I guess my concern is
we have hungry people in the
state of New Mexico a few years
ago this legislative body made a
commitment to provide free
lunches to all public schools
because we identified that
hunger was a major issue.
Mr speaker.
Those animals.
That were slaughtered.
And left to rot.
Could have been in the food
chain and been of benefit to
many.
Instead they are being consumed
by predators.
That already have the natural
inclination to defer day
producers livestock.
The overall situation and ways
to protein is setting Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker this is an example of
what I'm talking about.
The four services estimating
that there's two hundred head of
the strays in the he led
national for.
If those cattle had been
gathered and processed to H.
kale would have produced around
four hundred pounds of edible
beef.
So whenever you couple that with
the two hundred head that is in
excess of eighty eight thousand
pounds of beef.
Right now.
One pound of ground beef to at
the Walmart store here in Santa
Fe because four dollars and
forty eight cents a pound.
That computes to three hundred
and ninety four thousand two
hundred and forty dollars.
That is being wasted ladies and
gentleman.
Trader Joe's in Santa Fe sales
one pound packages of ground
took for six dollars a pound
that tallies up to flopping.
Five hundred and twenty eight
thousand dollars of waste.
Mr speaker.
This is made national news
because of our efforts ladies
and gentleman and I wanted to
for taking this stand.
They violated I can't tell you
the number of livestock laws in
the state of New Mexico.
But why is it that the federal
government believes it's okay to
defy our livestock laws break
their own rules and waste over
half a million dollars of the
ten totally viable food.
That is now Raji Mr speaker
thank you very much.
Thank you gently.
The general granted although and
Sierra thank you Mr speaker I
also would like to have a point
four personal privilege and talk
about this issue not only that
not only is is the food not
being consumed by New Mexicans
that could that would been
processed by the livestock board
typically that's what happens
with the straight cast and it
would have it would have
generated money for the state
and and one of the problems that
that folks need to be aware of
is the fact that we have there
have been troubled wools
translocated into the Sheila in
my district and ran it bordering
requests as in my my
constituents there is a record
number of kills this year on
cattle rules do not eat the cavs
they just kill them when mothers
or pregnant they they attack the
hind end of the of the pregnant
rules of pregnant cattle.
And they killed the baby in the
womb and they leave if they
don't eat it but these carcasses
are going to be left these dead
cattle are gonna be left and
what's going to happen is the
predators are going to become
familiar with the taste of this
beef.
And they're going to seek out
beef in the future we're making
it easy they're estimating
between a hundred and fifty to
three hundred cattle a hundred
fifty I know of now that they're
going to shoot and and we don't
protect the mystic animals.
From depredation.
And so the the behavior of
livestock is altered by the
presence of predators.
It reduces it results in and
reduced weight gain it lowers
the reproductive success and
reduces the me quality and and
we are introducing wolves into
the light at the same time that
we're giving them access to this
meet.
Animals that are shot from a
helicopter and left for
predators to eat and so you know
we we have got to stand up for
this and and even in New Mexico
the department came in that she
doesn't have its own program for
any compensation fund to address
the deprivation that's happening
by the Mexican wolf and this is
very likely to compound the
issue and to have a great impact
on the people who make their
living for ranting in the lab
and people who work hard every
day we talked on the FFA day how
this is a joyful and and a hard
endeavor if you've ever ridden
horses or you've written for by
for you hi there you've been in
the he left you know how
difficult that touring is and
how hard it is to be a cattleman
in the wilderness in the forest
area of the law and this is
It's a problem and and I'm
really disappointed in the
outcome of what the federal
government has done and the fact
that New Mexico is allowing it
to continue thank you.
There is an answer from the
gentleman from Bernalillo Cibola
McKinley Sikora San Juan and
Valencia Representative Harry
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker point of
the gavel the day Representative
Joe brought up it's a good point
because of.
I was up no one on the
reservation all but two months
ago.
Mr speaker they have the same
problem you know there's of well
while the call roled cattle they
have a four hundred of them they
have been trying to work with
the New Mexico National Board to
of.
This is a problem in this does
seem to be getting any traction.
They cannot access the kill of.
Because of the trouble for of
this portion of the heroes of
the situation Mr speaker we need
to really address that it's a
problem to all to all right all
of our state sure and that's all
I have to say thank you Mr
speaker.
The gentleman nice to the
gentleman from.
Creative aka one live eight
Roosevelt and San Miguel.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the body.
This is a hard.
Big overreach from the federal
government.
We have.
Problems.
With horses in the state of New
Mexico.
We don't go out and shoot him.
We have problems of stray dogs
and cats in the state of New
Mexico.
We don't go out and shoot him.
Why should we be killing cattle.
That are unidentified on
identified.
By the federal government
whether they're branded or not.
These cattle should be brought
up.
And inspected after they've been
shut.
And they should be.
Inspected for brands and see if
they belong to anybody these
cattle should not.
Be classified.
The way they are classified
these are stray cattle.
They can be brought back down
and their owners could take
possession of them or the New
Mexico livestock board to take
possession of them.
And they could be sold.
These are animals that don't
have to use these are animals
that belong legally to the New
Mexico livestock board if they
are on branded.
This is a big overreach from the
federal government somebody
ought to be held responsible for
it.
There's people all over this
country looking at what's going
on at the healer we need to come
together as agriculture
producers and hold somebody
responsible for these actions
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you John.
Generally if you.
Thank you Mr speaker we go to
committee reports.
Interjections ordered her to
read.
Mr speaker agriculture as they
give them water resources
committee to Mr referred house
bill twenty four has had it
under consideration reports
emerged accommodation that do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted Derrick J. Lente chair
in NMAA consent of the creative
point road to gather accident
with a single vote reflected in
the journal so they're acted
upon individually no objections
ordered click to read.
House bill one seventy seven do
pass and then to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one eighty six do
pass and thence to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House memorial.
Forty four do not pass but house
agriculture is a given the water
resources committee substitute
for house bill forty four do
pass respectfully submitted
Derrick J. Lente the chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we're
adoption favorable committee
reports and house bills twenty
four one seventy seven and one
eighty six Senate unfavorable
Committee report on house
memorial forty four but a
favorable committee report on
agriculture sake is a water
resource we substitute for House
memorial forty for all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
On Tuesday reports adapted.
Mr speaker your consumer and
public affairs committee to is
been referred Senate bill forty
three has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that a do pass
and then see for to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair of adoption commuter
option of a federal committee
for methadone forty three of
those if you could please
signify by saying aye.
This was a three point about
that.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to miss
been referred house bill forty
three as amended has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted
Patricia A. Lundstrom chair.
Unanimous consent of the reports
for the other act on the scene
of a refer to the terms of the
wrecked on individual here in
objections were for three.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill sixty
eight to pass.
House bill one fifty one as
amended.
To pass.
House bill one seventy one do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair.
Move adoption transaction a
favorable committee reports on
house bill's forty three is
amended Judiciary Committee
subsea for sixty and house was
one fifty one is amended one
thirty one is amended all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was a reports part opted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred Senate bill thirty
eight as amended has had it
under consideration point same
as recommendation that I do pass
and that's referred to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Elisabeth Johnson
chair.
Then it was consent of the
creamers are together act on the
single refer to the journals of
erected on individually or in
objections were required to
read.
Senate Senate bill forty two
pass and thence to the taxation
and revenue committee.
Senate bill one thirty eight to
pass an amendment to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair members the
privative I'm sorry.
Unanimous consent to hear
motions.
Reduction we're not sure if they
will committee for instead of
those thirty eight is amended
forty and Senate bill one thirty
eight all those in favor please
signify by saying hi also snake
Reports reductive.
Mr speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee to is
been referred house bill one
ninety five has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation to do passed as
amended and that's referred to
the taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted of the
sale the contact them
considered the currentpercent
together act on a single vote
reflected the generals of the
**** on individually or no
objections were referred to
read.
Senate for substitute for Senate
bill thirty nine do passed and
then to the commerce and
economic development committee.
Senate bill forty one as amended
to pass and then to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted a sale the ongoing
chair.
Move adoption we're adoption
favorable to reports hospitals
has to one ninety five center
for sub two percent above thirty
nine and Senator forty one as
amended all those in favor
please signify by saying aye
was was named reports are not
that.
Mr speaker Education Committee
to mystery for House memorial
forty three has had it under
consideration for same as
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair members consent of
the committee projected on a
single refer to the terms of the
right time usually no objections
were click to read House
memorial forty eight to pass.
Senate bill one to pass an
answer for to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair move adoption of
the committee reports we're
actually favorable twenty point
House Morris forty three and
forty eight and if it will
committee for the Senate bill
one all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was make reports are that
that.
Mr speaker your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill one ninety three has
had it under consideration for
state with recommendation that
it do pass as amended
respectfully submitted Georgene
Louis chair members specifically
refer together active from the
single refer to the terms of
their act on individually
hearing objections words or to
read.
I'll start resolution fourteen
to pass and then to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Reduction we're adoption
favorable committee report on
house bill one ninety three and
house joint resolution fourteen
all those in favor please
signify by saying hi.
All this was me three point are
adopted.
Mr speaker you're enrolling and
grossing Committee to miss been
referred house memorial ten
House memorial forty two House
memorial forty six as amended
with certificate of correction
has had them under consideration
point that same have been duly
enrolled in gross preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Roger Montoya chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
adoption a favorable committee
force House Morial's ten
forty forty two forty six as
amended with the certificate of
correction all those in favor
please signify by saying hi.
All this was a three point or
not to that the record reflect
the duly rolled in gross copies
of house memorial ten house
memorial forty two and house
memorial forty six as amended
with a certificate of correction
of assigned by the officers of
the house in open session.
You.
Thank you Mr speaker we got our
messages.
Sort of thirty three passes for
the Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house of
the Senate has passed Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill forty eight Senate
bill one thirty five and
requests the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk Mr chair.
If you.
Thank you Mr speaker we got
introduction of legislation.
No objections were there to
read.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight and act making general
appropriations and authorizing
expenditures Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill forty eight.
Senate finance committee sent to
do.
For Senate bill forty eight A.
K. A..
H. B. two C. two.
Is referred to the
Appropriations Committee.
Senate bill one thirty five
introduced by Senator Hemphill
and Senator Stewart and act
relating to state funds limiting
transfers of certain excess
revenue to the general fund
operating reserve if the balance
of the tax stabilization reserve
is greater than twenty percent
of the aggregate recurring
appropriations Senate bill one
thirty five introduced by
senators Hemphill and Stuart.
Senator one thirty five having
been read twice by title is
referred to the appropriations
and finance committee.
gentlelady for you.
Thank you Mr speaker we got
announcements.
Direction is so ordered.
Members are intended to bills.
I discuss it with the floor
leaders just to bills this
morning they will break for
committee come back in the
evening and during the committee
work.
the whips on the floor leaders
will visit about what we will
take up we come back to the
floor okay these next two bills
I discuss with the accounts and
in Martinez.
We're going to do I was thirteen
and twenty.
And then break for committees
and come back in the evening.
Okay gentlelady from million a.
Thank you Mr speaker we got a
third reading.
Junction sorter.
Generally ready on item thirteen
yes Mr speaker we get to that
point please but the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing House Bill sixty as
amended on final passage is been
taken the gentleman to explain
the bill thank you Mr speaker
what a beautiful celebration we
had today for African American
today truly good makes us all
think about diversity and and
our state and our culture our
state and in our state and
that's the reason why I bring
this bill this afternoon house
bill sixty
Is one that according to data
from the New Mexico public
education department there are a
hundred and twenty four native
American language teachers in
New Mexico's public schools.
In stark contrast to their
colleagues these teachers made
American language teachers are
in my case in in my opinion
unfairly compensated for many of
them only receive about between
twelve thousand and fifteen
thousand dollars per year full
time to teach their native
language to their students.
House bill sixty would guarantee
a minimum salary for native
American language teachers known
as five twenty cert holders this
bill would ensure native
language teachers are treated
fairly on par with the teachers.
This bill is in line of the
state's plan to raise salaries
for all teachers without this
bill.
Native language teachers would
not only would not be included
in the state's raises the gate
for wide in regard in regards to
disparities.
And by elevating native language
teacher salaries we can then
legitimize and elevate native
American languages that they are
in fact essential to the state.
And that there is the that they
are essential to the culture and
the survival of native Americans
in the state as well that being
said Mr speaker I stand for
questions the gentleman there is
German for San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Santa someone
you.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman just a couple of
questions.
First off there is appropriation
Mr speaker and gentleman of one
point two five million dollars
and then appropriation was
stripped from this bill.
so I'm just wondering is is how
is that going to be covered
that.
Cost we're looking at an
increase in cost of about one
point estimated one point two
five million dollars how is that
going to cover Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen before
answer question allow me to
introduce my expert witness a
bill to do so with me today I
have a thanks governor ridge's
because of the public coaches E.
X. chief of staff to the late
pin lu Han X. a major a
this chief of staff and just all
around good guy but I think many
of us know we just because
anyway so he's here with me this
afternoon but to your question
Dylan the appropriation was
stripped because the the money
isn't house bill two the one
point two five million and the
reason why I was strip is
because this policy is an
amendment to the Indian
Education Act to ensure that we
can make that change to ensure
these native American language
teachers receive that equity in
pay.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman is just a apply as
well to the so currently you to
to bring this into parity does
this apply to to Spanish
language teachers or I'm I'm
trying to it will be because of
the comparison that I see in
here is
as I read on page two
the minimum annual salary for a
person holding native American
language and cultural
certificate shall be equal to
the minimal annual salary for at
a level two licensed teachers
and the so as a level two
licensed teacher are there.
Second language teachers or or
or other language teachers who
are teaching primary language as
well who are deemed to be level
to licensed teachers currently.
Mr speaker and gentleman
regarding the levels of salaries
of pay for teachers in this case
as a second language teachers
currently second language
teachers though that perhaps
teach Spanish French Italian
German in any one of our school
districts receive payment at
certain levels of celery sell us
level one at this point in time
is.
Between.
Thirty and thirty six thousand
dollars per year.
Level two bump that up to
between
forty and forty four thousand
dollars per year and so
currently the the way that it
works is to my surprise well the
reason why we brought this bill
is native American language
teachers those that teach the
true indigenous languages that
are still in survival in New
Mexico today.
Don't have that expectation to
be able to receive in appreciate
those levels of pay.
Madam speaker and gentleman so I
guess source are you saying that
currently lack of that that
other language teachers are
receiving that pay.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
thank you Mr speaker genesis
just really a parity bill is
what I'm hearing Mr leader
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle yes.
Okay maybe I'm hearing otherwise
I don't know this very well I
just spotted today was reading
through and I was trying to
figure out what the requirement
to receive the level two license
teacher pay was and and so I'll
leave that to others I I I have
I will listen intently to the
base thank you Mr speaker.
I'm listening to German COVID
for Rio Rita and San Miguel.
Mr speaker thank you will the
gentleman from the sun this on
the lawn San Juan and Rio Arriba
please yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman a deal
to you.
Certain colleagues I commend you
Mr speaker and gentleman for.
Raising this issue.
Language is part of who we are
as individuals.
I happen to Representative the
beautiful Pueblo of okay windy
in the north and the language
preservation to the elders and
to the very youngest is a vital
piece of how culture survives.
When I was a young man the
fifteen I was part of an
international gymnastics
training course and got on my
first airplane and toward Europe
that I was astounded at how
fluid.
The Spanish and French and
German every country that I went
to language was so respected and
honored and I I just commend
this work I don't have a
question I just rise and vibrant
and loving support of language
preservation and the ability
that this bill will do to do
exactly that for our instructors
that are direly needed and
tribal communities across our
state in the nation.
I yield back.
This for the right the gentle
lady from granted all go and
Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentle lady my
friend from all those counties
thank you thank you Mr speaker
and thank you my friend and I I
too believe that we should be
doing everything we can to
address language preservation
and I think that this body in
the Senate as well have put
significant amount of money into
you know showing that we agree
for that that we agree with that
and it's been very broad and
bipartisan support to do so and
so in no way are my questions
the to to indicate anything less
than support for the investments
that we've made in in building
the capacity to teach the
language to get these
endorsements it simply on the
idea of parity and equity for
all and so Mr speaker and
gentleman committee did hear
this in committee and the part
that I struggle with and I still
struggle with is the fact that
the language in the name of
American language and culture
certificate is a criteria that's
established by the tribe of the
pueblo and it does not require
even a bachelors degree Mr
speaker and gentleman is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentle gentle lady
you are correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and although I mean Madam
although if we want to
acknowledge and and to have
those folks teaching in our
classrooms there's no
requirement that they have a
teacher license certification or
any sort of teaching on in the
classroom is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman but
they would now be paid at least
a level two or level three.
Mr speaker gentle lady you are
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
and and we had a discussion in
committee about the definition
of tier and I I actually share
your view I think that two
children's behavior is caught
not taught in that we are all
teachers actively or passively
and everything that we do
whether we are a bus driver we
or whether we are janitorial
whether we are maintenance
whether we are groundskeepers
wherever we are.
We're always teaching and I
agree with that.
And and Mr speaker and gentleman
in committee of.
I could not get a direct answer
as to whether it's a janitor.
How has this certificate.
Who is not directly teaching in
a classroom would be eligible
for this pay is a yes or no.
Mr speaker gentle lady to answer
questions.
The janitor would be eligible.
To receive this type of
compensation.
And Mr speaker and gentleman as
would someone working in the
cafeteria.
Mr speaker generally they would
of course.
Excluding the fact that they
would not be being a janitor for
a cafeteria worker a landscaper
earning this wage the only time
that they would ever earned as
we age would be when they are
teaching native languages Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
different than the conversation
in the classroom can you show me
where that's out in the
language.
Mr speaker and gentle lady all
those types of agreements are
delineated in the memorandums of
agreement that are already
currently in place through the
five twenty certificate holders
as a common practice already
which is why I mentioned in my
beginning that there are
currently a hundred and twenty
four five hundred five twenty
certified teachers within the
state today and that's a
practice that is done between
the public education department
of the state of New Mexico and
those tribes Mr speaker and
gentleman in debate and
education we've discussed at
length and I I felt that I act
passed in many different ways
and at the time Mr speaker and
gentleman you had said yes the
bus driver would get this pay
because the bus driver is
teaching while they're driving
they're engaging and and and
languages being spoken and so
the bus driver would be eligible
and I now understand Mr speaker
gentle and the bus driver would
not be eligible unless they were
in the classroom teaching a
language class.
Mr speaker gentle lady that but
I would not be eligible if
they're driving the bus were as
if they were in the classroom
teaching the native tongue than
absolutely they would be
eligible for this right okay
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and you're saying.
That is a fact and there would
be no that that the
qualifications for the native
language and cultural
certificate would prohibit
anyone who is not teaching in
the classroom to receive this
pay if this is new language how
is that how's that assured.
Mr speaker generally all of
these details regarding the the
memorandums of understandings in
the agreements are all done to
the I just twenty certificate
that again that are between the
public education department and
that tribal nations Mr speaker
and gentleman so so you're
saying that what we pass this
bill.
Even though it doesn't have
specific language that the
person holding the certificate
has to be teaching that the demo
use between the tribes and the
schools that's where the
decision we made.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
absolutely I mean that this is
out of the two thousand and
three Indian Education Act for
this is a common practice
already.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is a
common practice but it's not a
common practice that someone
without a bachelors degree
received here to enter three
rate this is a very big change
and a substantial change moving
forward so so I'm just we also
discussed in committee if if the
sponsor would be open to
creating some sort of of
equitable pathway that existing
again PED because right now
we're asking for PED to for
obligating PED this pay but
we're doing it outside of the
existing pathway that we use for
life licensure and certification
pay and at the time Mr speaker
and gentleman that was not
considered an option.
Mr speaker denies that a
question is that is that still
the case that if we want to keep
this the tribes decide is not up
to PED to create an acquittal
pathway and the tribes decide
who gets the certificate and
then what I'm hearing you say
through an MLA or whatever
agreement comes between school
districts in the tribe they'll
decide whether someone has been
a classroom or if their bus
driver because this language
doesn't describe it is as if you
are the certificate you get it
so I I don't see the prohibitive
language or the language that
gives an option so explain that
to me sure Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I know that perhaps this
is a very important concept in
many of of our minds but I but
let let let let me allow me to
give a little bit of detail
regards to tribal pueblo native
culture of languages in in our
cultures they're all or so
there's no way to obtain a
bachelor's degree in care
Thirtytwo of or Hey ministers
who need languages that is
there's no way for a master's or
doctorate so many of these
individuals that have applied to
be five twenty certified come
from the communities that we all
live in they have a wealth a
wealth of knowledge cultural
knowledge linguistic knowledge
that they bring to the table and
it is at that point where they
say I will go and I will do to
their tribal leaders whether the
governor president I will go and
I would teach our native tongue
in the schools.
And it's through that process
and it is well documented with
between PED and the tribes and
the school districts that this
is in fact a common occurrence
where that individual goal will
be nominated by the the tribal
government to order their
leadership and an agreement will
be made between the school
district and that tried to then
become five twenty certified
blessed by then the public
education department and then be
eligible to receive this type of
compensation which in this case.
Twelve to fifteen thousand
dollars a year is.
Offensive we think about the
other wages that I noted you
don't make a whole lot of money
but still offensively to re talk
about trying to preserve and in
this case save native American
languages that are disappearing
on a daily basis Mr speaker and
gentleman I I'm I can't disagree
with that thing you said what
I'm concerned about based on the
language in here is that it
there's no requirement that they
be teaching a class of this
conversation very different than
what we had in committee and in
committee I said with a gentle
be eligible you said yes what
about starry eligible use that
test I asked of a maintenance
person in doctor shop who's not
directly interacting with
children would be eligible at
that time he said yes because we
have a shared culture that we're
teaching everywhere we go when
we rise when we sleep when we
eat when we go in the field when
we're working and so we have
that sure culture so in the the
question is.
How are we those are responsible
for taxpayer dollars assured
that the folks that are
receiving this tier two until
two to two and tier three pay
will be teaching in the
classroom the native language.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
know when when when we bring up
the the conversation that we had
in committee hearings you know
and you ask the question will
get a janitor be this are going
to last could be this and I
answered yes yes yes yes yes and
today I still answered yes
simply because.
Having the title of a janitor or
a landscaper or or or a
maintenance person whatever that
might be doesn't mean that they
are less of a person if they
bring that cultural intellectual
knowledge to the classroom and I
think at the end of the day
there's many many of our tribal
communities where one day an
individual be perhaps quote
unquote just a bus driver a
quote unquote just a landscaper
and then the next day they'll be
asked to leave their Pueblo as a
tribal governor as a president
or whatever it might be so this
is a common practice that is
that's taking place in many of
our tribal nations throughout
the state and so when you talk
about the aspects and and the
notions of janitors and and and
maintenance workers absolutely
because.
Many of those people again have
that wealth of knowledge that is
decades old that trump's
anything that you could ever
find any university through a
bachelor's degree or master's
degree or even a doctor's degree
thank you thank you madam
speaker thank you John and I
absolutely agree with you if
that person has a role of
teaching language in the
classroom.
But if they are not teaching
language in the classroom and
their duties do not include that
then I think we need to be clear
that we're not unless you are
intending that we're not
intending in for the for them to
get level two or two three pay
when they're not teaching in the
classroom and I don't I don't
see a differentiation here and I
don't see language that would
allow in in the way to not pay
level two or level three for
someone who holds that
certificate but doesn't have the
duty of teaching native language
that's that's all I'm trying to
understand here and so I don't I
don't see that the language
prohibits that.
Madam speaker and and gentle
lady that would never happen at
this point in time what this
bill brings is teachers will be
paid to teach.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman can you show me where
that is in the bill.
Madam speaker and and gentle
lady.
The bill only provides the
mechanism to which will allow
the equity in pay to be made.
It again is a common practice
through PED school districts and
the tribes that certify I twenty
certificates to allow this to
happen to those memorandums of
agreements.
Thank you madam speaker in thank
you gentlemen and I I.
Definitely support.
Language preservation support
what we have the and large
investments.
Tens of millions of dollars that
we've investing in investing in
preserving the language making
sure that as teachers get their
degrees they also get these
endorsements I I still remained
concerned that the sling this
bill doesn't assure that the
holder of the five twenty
certificate is only rate this
level two and three when
teaching language thank you
madam speaker thank you Madam
there's further debate the
gentleman from curry.
Representative Crowder thank you
madam speaker live gentleman
please you madam speaker I yield
to the gentleman from a creek
on.
Thank you John general are I'm
going to kind of start into the
back of the bill a work for a
little bit
at the bottom of page one it
talks about the native American
language and cultural
certificate.
Shall be issued and renewable in
accordance with procedures
established by the department
based on an agreement made with
the tribe or pueblo has that
already taken place or is that
yet to come.
Madam speaker and gentleman it
is already taking place
currently that's a practice
currently.
Okay so the state the PED
department is one of the the the
Goshen in teams of the tribes or
pueblos or the other and there's
an effort to come together to
agree upon the guidelines that
this has to be taught in a
school in a classroom or this
has to be taught in a certain
way it is that the process
that's ongoing as we speak Madam
speaker gentle.
Madam speaker and gentleman
perhaps it'd be helpful to walk
you through the process of a
five thirty five twenty
certificate as it relates to a
document from the public
education department that fully
supports these types of
activities but if you if I may
madam speaker and gentleman the
process is the tribal public
develop standards and criteria
for native language competency
to which only the tribe knows
that competency level.
The tribe of will review and
approve standards and criteria
for native language assessments.
Then the tribe or pueblo New
Mexico Public Education
Department sign in and away the
PED does not review or approve
standards and criteria because
how would they know what the
criteria of a representative of
act of excellence of fluency in
a native language would ever be
because not written.
Finally the tribal members take
the native language assessment
the tribal certified tribal
members competency to teach a
said language individual applies
for native language to begin
with PED then the individual
submits fees for application in
background checks to PED then
there after they are considered
five twenty certified and then
eligible to teach their native
tongue in the classroom.
Thank you John I appreciate it
is helpful to to to try to read
that I appreciate that madam
speaker gentleman's.
I'm gonna back up the line
nineteen on page one where it
says the department may issue a
native American language
cultural certificate instead
shall the department seems to
reserve the ability to either
accept or reject whatever the
tribes and pueblos are offering
is that correct.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
that that that that is correct
because the department
essentially is the authority on
behalf of the state to be able
to approve or deny these types
of certifications okay and then
madam speaker John I'm assuming
that's part of the process are
going through now is to discern
what they they are going to need
from the state's point of view
in order to issue those
certificates is that correct
Madam speaker John Madam speaker
and gentleman yes in this
practice has been ongoing for
the past twenty years and at
this point time.
well thank you general general
my last question is is just an
observation that it says in here
that the certificate would be to
a person proficient in native
American language and culture of
New Mexico tribe or pueblo so
it's not just one it's not just
language it is not just culture
but the requirement as I read it
with the word and requires both
is that correct Madam speaker
gentle.
Madam speaker and and gentlemen
the it can be taken as both
because we talk about cultural
competency culturally
appreciated of education within
the New Mexico today we thought
we hear a lot of tech lands now
but Yazzie Martinez Yazzie
Martinez Yazzie Martinez but we
talk about truly being able to
culturally appreciated and teach
native American culture and
language there is no other way
around where.
There are plenty could go and
teach till and he was purple
because I don't know their their
their culture and tradition nor
do I know their language for as
if Derek Landy applied through
this process is that I want to
try to teach to a in the seventy
would dialect of setting Pueblo
than perhaps but I do not
possess that type of
qualification to be able to
consider myself a teacher of my
native language nor my culture
but I tell you who is my uncle's
that farm my uncle that perhaps
our our maintenance been or bus
drivers because those folks have
passed the rigorous tests of
decades of understanding culture
song tradition oral
knowledgeable oral histories and
the language that will help to
ensure that that language will
preserve us.
Thank you John thank you Mr
speaker order order I think I
heard you say is is though it's
stated as two separate items one
is the teaching of the native
American language and the
culture it's kind of viewed as
one in the same it's it's all a
component of the whole is that
correct gentleman Madam speaker
Madam speaker and on they are
inseparable thank you John I
appreciate you taking time to
walk me through that help me
understand thank you madam
speaker there's further debate
the other Brian and Mr gentleman
from Valencia Representative
aka.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentleman yield.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
yield to the gentleman from
Valencia County.
Thank you John
I was fortunate to hear this
bill would come to the committee
and in a by.
My questions are gonna be
hopefully for clarification so
that we understand this okay so
if you allow me just a couple of
very straight for direct
questions a gentleman and a
Madam speaker.
So what we're talking about.
Of the language and who will be
eligible for the state okay
having been an educator myself I
understand that many of us have
different certifications like
bilingual otherwise but based
upon if they have to actually be
putting that in serving students
in that approved program in
order to be paid for that is
that is that the intent of this
bill is that.
From us it could be because I
could be a custodian what if I
have that degree I would be
physically in the classroom
providing services that will be
compensated for the time in the
classroom is that correct madam
speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker and gentleman only
there certified.
I understand and again are we in
my own district we do have we do
teach to work so I am familiar
with the process I do understand
about the licensure
Madam speaker gentleman's one
question I do have is regarding
the level one two and three what
what was it in the bill that.
You know for many of our
teachers with the alternative
licensure or traditional
The other in education we have
the levels one two and three.
It is was a reason in this bill
that level one was not an option
for a teacher that is providing
language services.
Madam speaker and gentleman
level one teachers often
referred to as a as a beginning
teacher I beginning teacher must
undergo formal mentorship
programs and an annual intensive
performance evaluations by a
school administrator and so in
this case madam speaker and
gentleman none of this would
apply to native American
teachers because again they they
are not beginning to teach their
native tongue this is something
that they've already mastered
decades ago.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen the question I do
have is under center to do
appreciate the fact that the
family is removed and the
building negotiate at the this
at the district level between
the district and the of the
problems are tribes they
support.
The other question I have is
actually about the processing of
the person is going to be doing
this okay we just heard ability
of the day the talked about
background checks we talk about
these types of things of miss
madam speaker and gentleman what
these folks are providing the
service also go through a
districts approved hiring
practices.
Madam speaker and and and
gentleman absolutely they would
go through the same
Even application background
checks that is normal for the
process of becoming a teacher.
Thank you for that clarification
gentleman and madam speaker.
The other question that I did
bring up in committee was
regarding the the equity and
fairness of it and it and it
relates to actually time in the
classroom okay so when we're
talking about for a discussion
of teacher shortage now.
The costumes that we are having
special or secondary levels
which I would assume for mail so
this will take place in our high
schools imposter middle schools.
Some of our classroom teachers
maybe teaching seven sections
you know with the anywhere from
a hundred fifty two hundred
eighty students dependent upon
what area they are
in a discussion during the
committee had a gentleman.
I asked if the person is wanting
to sections.
Areas such as a periods a day
with the pay what they get the
full amount of the level to
level three or they be paid at
the level two level three right
for those two sections that they
are teaching.
A madam speaker and gentlemen
and and again the teachers would
pay to to teach and in this case
it in a spending seven section
transaction details of whatever
it would be thank you thank you
madam.
They would be pro rated at that
the number of sections that
they're teaching.
Yes thank you madam chair thank
you Jim and I I do think that
that that does make sense to me
because what we're talking about
equity we're talking about this
which I support the language I
mean we we do this our own.
But I know that it's very it
could cause some
Winds of inequity for these
people that attention seven
sections with these kids and the
person who's teaching only two
periods a day has the same
amount of there so I I think you
gentleman for clearing that up.
Final question madam turned
gentleman was regarding the
The actual selection the
criteria of the of the level to
level three license for this.
Of these criteria each try
branch of group that will be
provided the site was do they
have to submit that is part of
the aisle you to the District
Court to PED course and just
house within the trip within the
Pueblo or the tribe.
Madam speaker and gentleman at
this point in time the common
practice is been for the past
twenty years since the five
twenty two because I've been in
places that I definitely have
inability to provide their own
input on what is important to
their culture their language on
behalf of their own respective
tribe and that and that's a
great thing that's something
that we want to retain and this
type of legislation and and we
talk about wanting to go and and
then move forward that's
something that it's it's it's a
shared responsibility that they
try would not want to spend send
someone to the school district
that is not fluent that would
not have the best interests in
their public presentations
history oral traditions and
language I mean they're they're
going to send somebody that is
they know top tiered on behalf
of the public hibernation to
teach their children of the
future of that aspect of of
education.
Thank you gentleman thank you
madam speaker my last question
is is really about is there will
be teachers be evaluated I mean
we do know that we have a
teacher evaluation platform in
the classrooms is it your
understanding with the intent of
the bill that the the folks are
providing language instructions
would fall similar of human
emotion and also it with the
connected to the is an
opportunity to advance if you
start at level two.
To move the level through
through the evaluation or
through the certification of the
the pueblo tribe.
Madam speaker and gentleman a
great question the the the the
trial would determine and and
perhaps in this case find those
evaluation records valuation to
make sure that we're staying on
par and on target in regards to
how we are teaching those native
American students so we talk
about the ability to advance in
in a level two to three those
types provisions would also be
within those and we use as well.
Thank you madam madam speaker
until I I think it's with the
question is really about as a
high school administrator as a
person in charge of HR.
I was in hundreds of thousand
dollars part of my
responsibilities was to actually
go and see as far as you know
other sectors I I again I don't
speak the language that does but
as far as the
Classroom management the.
the objective that are there to
make sure that we are you know
making good use of those but I
guess that's what I was saying
is the evaluation of the folks
providing language services the
exclusive to the tribe or
improbable or is it going to be
a joint effort between the site
administrator because if of
instruction is up in my building
I definitely like to have some
input into
but the effectiveness of the
tension of the content the more
the actual other components of
the instruction.
And and madam speaker and
gentleman that that's enough to
share responsibility but I'll
allow me to expand on a couple
of of institutes that are held
within the University of New
Mexico that help these
individuals that may not be
teachers that might have been.
Again quorum court just the
landscaper just the bus driver
there the public tribe or nation
that help them to become a
better classroom teacher in in a
in a western format the way that
we understand how to learn and
that's the summer institute of
linguistics for native Americans
at the university New Mexico as
well as the American Indian
language policy research.
Teacher training program that's
a mouthful there too at the
university of Mexico.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you John it is also
features that will be providing
that for the record to go that
or is that just an option
resource for them.
Madam speaker and gentle and
that's something that the tribe
that David M. always do in fact
require and if I can also just
did you brought up the fact that
that you're not you are part of
the loss of the school district
and you help there as well I
think you can probably
appreciate this that.
The Burmese public school
district.
Truly through their board of
director there the school board
to their new superintendent
Matthew month Daniel
made this a reality last year
where they saw that inequity and
they found the money's within
their own budgets to to make
this a priority for their own
native American language school
teachers and so.
The trend has started the
appreciation of language has
already begun and so to be able
to help him and other school
districts to appreciate this is
going to be extremely monumental
with regards to how we react and
how we come back and help to
preserve native American
languages.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you John I have no more
questions.
There's further debate the
speaker of the house of Brian
Egolf Representative speaking
administrative with the
gentleman yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Santa Fe thank
you madam chair rise and support
of the bill and I I want just a
few clarifying questions because
I think we got a little murky on
this issue about.
I don't know why we're taking a
janitors that that was the
question was often given one
janitor so let me give you madam
speaker gentleman hypothetical
let's imagine that I've got a.
That I have a teaching
certificate and I am a second
level teacher.
Let's say that I am a hired by
school district to go in and
provide legal services to the
school district okay.
Madam speaker my gonna be paid
for being a lawyer or my gonna
be paid for being
a teacher.
Madam speaker and gentleman out
of the city to be paid for being
an attorney yes that's exactly
right so madam speaker and
gentleman I think it's important
to set some baseline rules for
how all of this works we'll
start with the constitution of
New Mexico.
We have an anti donation clause
is as you cannot receive a thing
of benefit from the state unless
you are providing goods and
services that's the foundation
of this issue.
So the hypothetical that you
would be a janitor in possession
of a certificate saying that you
are qualified to teach native
language in a public school in
New Mexico Medicity Care that's
certificate doesn't entitle you
to pay any money from the state.
Unless you are providing goods
or services to the state
relating to that certificate.
So madam speaker and gentleman
if you've got a janitor who is
been recognized by the tribe or
pueblos being competent to teach
native languages in the
classroom if you don't receive
compensation for teaching native
languages in the classroom
unless you were teaching native
languages in the classroom.
If you are and I think I
appreciate the not a head from
my to Kyle there that is figure
gentleman the you would enter
into if you are janitors in the
school district.
You get this certificate you are
recognized by tribe or pueblo as
having cultural competency
language competency to teach in
the classroom the native
language.
Madam speaker gentle and we do
not enter into a separate and
distinct contract with the
school district to provide those
services apart from your
employment contract as a
janitor.
Man speaking German yes Sir
right so I think it's a it's
yeah I think it's a red herring
if we're going to say that by
giving this.
Parity by putting in state law a
recognition that a speaker that
we want to do everything we can
to preserve native languages and
if we want to allow the people
most able and competent to
determine who should be teaching
native languages in classrooms
Madam speaker Jen with that
would be the tribes of public
have New Mexico that if we're
going to do that we shouldn't
be.
Throwing out arguments and all
of a sudden paychecks are going
to start flying to all these
people who have certificates
when they're not performing the
classroom work.
I think it's very important that
a speaker gentleman to keep in
mind that this bill is aimed at
doing one of the most important
things that we can do
as a state government which is
help our fellow governments.
In the incredibly important work
of preserving their native
languages.
We are with this bill showing
respect to tribal governments
respect to the nation's public
and tribes in New Mexico by
saying we want to respect your
decision for who should be
teaching your native languages
in our classrooms.
For the people who are honored
with that certification madam
speaker gentleman we are going
to compensate you in the same
way we compensate other
classroom teachers in the state.
Finally madam speaker Joe and
when they do that important work
in the classroom they will be
paid for that important work on
an equal basis to other teachers
whether or not the person
teaching the language in the
classroom is a janitor at a bus
driver a cafeteria worker for a
lawyer the volunteers to come
into the classroom and teach the
native language so thank you
madam speaker thank you Jennifer
for the opportunity to try to
clarify this a little bit thank
you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Cibola.
We can only support roles on one
and Balenciaga Representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair madam speaker
of the day a kind gentleman the
yield to me.
Madam speaker I yield the need
fundamentals counties.
The
gentleman we funding seems to be
the big the issue we're trying
to do here and that's just my
opinion.
Mr madam speaker No
Representative as you know I
represent the Navajo Nation
we're off the black among
officials rural rural.
All of the insurers are about
kids not losing.
The native language or under
history the eligible for a
Spanish of speaking students.
Madam speaker and Mr
Representative overboard how
important is it to preserve the
language and culture and history
of our native Americans Spanish
speaking students.
Madam speaker and gentleman
without language culture does
not survive.
Thank you for the room.
And gentleman.
But how important is that you
know can you kind of touch base
on how important the really is.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
in the but my my previous
comment is without without
language that our culture ceases
to survive I think encapsulates
everything and everything that
is so important why there is now
such an effort by all the public
tribes and nations as well as
now school districts and and
even a public education
department because so much
emphasis on language of vital is
ation to ensure that we can
retain this identity as as
native Americans and so when you
talk about the importance.
Long story short is it means
everything.
Thank you madam speaker
Representative that they want to
hear.
Once we do our language is
Spanish.
It
is so it hurts everybody when
we're in our history we cannot
afford to do that because once
you lose it the madam speaker
Representative it's gone forever
that of the statement.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
is a true statement.
that's all the questions I had
the madam speaker and I I
support your legislation
approved moving on thank you.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from patrons of
coral and Balenciaga
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman yield madam speaker I
yield to the gentle lady from
all those counties thank you
madam speaker thank you
gentlemen high rise to make a
statement that we respect all
ethnicities I represent so
called Magdalene now Magdalene
in New Mexico that we have a lot
of native Americans major as a
matter of fact.
Most of our from the Alamo
Navajo reservation.
we do offer a native American
language have a whole language
class that my granddaughter just
took madam speaker and gentleman
so my question.
Is.
Can anyone get the certificate.
Mr speaker of Madam speaker kind
gentleman Madam speaker and
gentle lady no.
Madam speaker a kind gentleman
can you clarify.
Madam speaker and and gentle
lady I I think we've we've gone
through this work is reserve to
those that are within the
individual publication I tried
that has excelled in as shown
that they have a mastery of
their own native language thank
you madam speaker kind gentleman
I would I want to bring to the
bodies
inside that I have a lady in my
community that is Anglo.
That was raised on the Navajo
reservation her mother and her
father taught at the on the
Alamo reservation she's fluent
in Navajo.
And.
Was raised in the in the culture
and so I'm just curious why she
would not qualify.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
you know I I think there there
could be exceptions but that is
all left up to the publication a
tribe in regards to whether or
not that would be acceptable to
them.
Thank you madam speaker so it it
could possibly be open to every
ethnicity as long as the the
tribe for the.
Pueblo agreed to it is that
correct Madam speaker kind
gentleman.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
you know there's just so many
contextual types of situations
where a person the and that
situation may not be the best
fit for the may be the best fit
but when they're not the best
fit for me means that they have
not grown up in the cultural
societies that as perhaps maybe
and and Anglo and in your case
you have your your your
hypothetical is and Anglo woman
would not be accepted into many
of the societies the traditional
houses the culture traditions
that many of of our own within
the communities can appreciate
and have been able to appreciate
since their birth and acceptance
into the publication tried.
Thank you madam speaker kind
gentleman I daughter who's also
a teacher who's taught at the
Alamo Navajo reservation and
welcomed warmly hi my dad if
And has also been accepted into
a tribe and has a name.
And so I I just want to make
sure that we all respect each
other's ethnicity and background
as I have full respect for this
bill but I also feel that it
should be open to everyone but I
understand madam speaker kind
gentleman that it would be up to
the tribe in pueblo and let's
hope that we can all to share in
society together thank you madam
speaker.
There's further debate for a
second time Representative from
someone of Representative
Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker this
gentleman yield again madam
speaker I yield the gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman I think that the
problem is that is.
That that is being held on this
side of the aisle is just the
lack of specification in the
bill itself
because a plain reading.
Says that if you hold the
certificate.
Thank you we paid at.
at the level two.
Hey.
And so madam speaker and
gentleman I just.
I don't think we want to hold
this up.
But I I if if what I'm hearing.
Is the intense.
That that you expressed an what
of speaker egolf in his
questioning.
Pointed out.
I'm wondering if you would be
willing on on the in the other
chamber to make just a little
clarifying language and that I
am suggesting is on line twenty
three on page one.
let me read that sentence and at
the end I will give you the the
language.
I'm gonna start in nineteen line
nineteen concerning certificates
the department may issue a
native American language and
cultural certificate to a person
proficient in a native American
language and culture of New
Mexico of the New Mexico tribe
or pueblo.
Meets criteria established by
the tribe or pueblo and this is
my suggestion to teach native
American language native
American language and culture.
Mr speaker and and and and
gentleman madam speaker and
gentleman all right does a
specify for the purpose
specifically because I am
hearing the purposes not so a
bus driver for a cafeteria
worker holes that certificate.
Would get paid but specifically
you're saying for the purpose of
teaching keeping the language
alive and the culture alive so
the purpose and maybe the
language I have here is to teach
native American language and
culture maybe you would want to
separate those to be to teach
native American language or
culture.
I'm not sure if that would be
acceptable but that the the
reality madam speaker and
gentleman is we pass
legislation.
Office for and we have an
intent.
We have a stated intent.
And what I found Madam speaker
and gentleman is when something
that is challenged in court.
They don't go back and review
what is stated on the floor.
as the intent they go to the
written.
Word in the law so madam speaker
and gentleman I'm not going to
hold this up here.
But I do believe on the other
side there there will likely be
an amendment that would be
drafted just to clarify.
That the purpose of this
legislation is not to pay a bus
drivers janitors or cafeteria
worker.
That wages for merely holding
that certificate but
specifically for the purpose of
teaching language and culture is
that Mr speaker and gentleman is
that something that that you see
is something you can support.
Jim.
Madam speaker and and gentlemen
unlikely and and the whole
reason we're building this bill
is a five twenty difficult is in
fact a teaching license and so
there's no reason to be
repetitive and that's the whole
reason for the bill is to teach.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I I
don't mean this to be
disagreeable here but that is
not what the bill says the bill
says holding the certificate.
And so Mr speaker and gentleman
I think the what would garner
full support unanimous support I
might say is if the language
specifically was.
As we have stated over and over
and over is the purpose is to
make sure that that the language
and culture is taught and that
no one else besides a tribes in
which I group which I agree with
should be determining.
through a different certificate
program what is the requirement
that the speaker and gentleman I
think it's just to that level if
if this passes the way that it's
written.
And.
Someone who.
Receives a certificate and then
goes into the classroom to
teach.
This.
For the for this purpose and
then for whatever reason I is
removed from that position or
steps down from that position
but still holds that
certificate.
And then becomes a janitor.
For a cafeteria worker or a bus
driver it appears to be the way
the simple reading of this is
that they would still receive
the level to pay that someone
else who is teaching.
It had and holds a bachelor's
degree.
And is teaching a different
language French or Spanish or
whatever.
because it's it's not it's it's
just not specific and they could
in turn.
Take a school district court.
And it would be an unnecessary
expense to the school district
if we just made this simple
clarification in the law I
believe Mr speaker and gentleman
that it would
That that that would suffice and
in court so madam speaker
gentleman's as I stated I'm not
I don't plan to have anyone hold
this up on the side because I I
understand the intent.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
I think that clarification.
We is going to save school
districts
Unnecessary
court challenge so thank you
madam speaker and gentleman
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentleman from Santa you.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Santa.
and gentleman I just rise and
support of this.
And.
Some of you may know some of you
may not know but in another life
I spent nine years working for
the national rifle association.
And we had a program called the
Eddie eagle program.
And Eddie eagle was to to slow
for kids preschool through sixth
grade of the.
A gun is not a toy.
And if you see a gun you stop
you don't try to leave the area
and tell an adult.
I was living in in the
Washington DC area working for
headquarters.
And
was able to get the program.
In the Senate to mingle and also
the
Remember burns in the battle
zone.
So we spent a week out here with
the program while I was doing in
in Santa Domingo.
The janitor.
It was real interesting I have
been to our elementary school.
And it was interesting because
the janitor was standing in the
doorway.
As we're representing the
program.
You know it does mascot called
Eddie eagle we had these
gigantic coloring books and all
this activity.
Support.
Supplies for the program.
And the kids seem to be enjoying
it.
But so was the janitor.
Was standing at the door with
his bro.
And so he puts his bone down.
Come in.
And he's starts doing the
program and to.
And.
It was interesting to watch how
these little folks.
This program and all the noise
they were joined me you know
being.
It had with Eddie eagle.
But the janitor have far more
impact I think what the kids got
out of the program.
Then I could've ever come close
to.
So we come to stand beside then
we do an eagle in English then
he tells me that he's going to
do it into a.
It's.
Live at the gym.
And so I think it's really
important.
To have a program.
Like this and I've learned.
Over these years being here in
the legislature.
The every I don't know the the
the the thank you for calling a
reservation at a portable and
I've phone.
They are very different very
different and the language in a
very different and people.
And so on one does not count
out.
Construction workers I don't
count out the the maintenance
guy of the yard keeper because
it's real interesting and and
then Arizona I spent a week in
Arizona and and Indian land.
And the same thing happened.
Someone a man who was just
standing there watching them you
obviously was not a teacher and
educator.
But that individual was able to
get through to these kids in a
way that I would have never been
able.
To.
And.
Five years later I'm still at
the in in our a.
Five years later.
They're still ordering.
Additional.
Materials.
And so I just I honestly believe
that had not.
In the yeah landscaper and had
not the janitor team in.
To work with us on the program.
That we would not have had that
kind of and that and so I happen
to live working with the man
from Santa and we spar from time
to time but I think this is a
very.
You know that idea.
And I think that sometimes kids.
We'll save thing to those
individuals are talk to those
individuals in a way that you I
could never.
Get through to them so
Madam speaker and gentleman not
I didn't rise and support of
this only because I've seen it
in action thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia.
Thank you a similar speaker and
will the.
Gentleman from.
Someone someone DOT will yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo
county.
And I
I'm glad to see the most
distinguished the native
American
in New Mexico ceded the behind
you there
Gentleman from Sunderland.
Someone.
one of the most distinguished.
Ten million in their native
American communities.
In the US the most bitter and
gentleman from Sunderland
This issue of
Kind of equitable the four.
the native language specialist.
Can a has a long history.
And
I know that the by a
You know I thought the Spanish
language arts for fifteen years
of APS.
Mimi and schools there in my
community of a fiscal and.
The larger south valley.
When I went into teaching
We were struggling.
with the school district
meristem on speaker.
to have differential pay.
For a individuals
certified in bilingual education
and English as a second
language.
And and it was a struggle.
but.
The Albuquerque school district
estimates speaker got it done
they won the first districts in
the state to create differential
pay for a Spanish language
teachers
and
And that was a big plus.
Because it elevated the caliber
of Spanish language instruction.
in the classroom.
in terms of being.
These educators that had
specialty training.
I mean they went over and beyond
their degree to to get the
bilingual certification.
And that and I think your effort
is right along that path.
In a of a of doing just that.
But the legislation so I speaker
kinda adds a of a component.
That I can relate to
specifically in terms of my
instruction.
And what I would do is a much
bigger is I would bring in the
elders to my classroom.
And you wouldn't believe.
Just how.
The children would gravitate.
Towards really honing in on what
this elder was saying.
Been trying hard to grasp the
concepts Spanish language
concepts of how this elder was
portraying these stories.
You know
elements of culture.
a profession in a given all one
example is the most Baker.
Is a no our and you get Baca.
he's the I started inviting him
into the classroom.
When he was about eighty eight.
Passed away when he was ninety
six.
But our Senator Baca was a sheep
herder.
They're on the please go land
grants.
And he told the story.
Spanish because he only knew
Spanish annual couple words in
English.
But it was a fluent Spanish
speaker.
The Mexican dialect Spanish
to mix and I like Spanish
speaker.
Which you don't hear anywhere
else in the world except here.
You don't even here in Spain
anymore.
You know that archaic Spanish
that serve on this bill the
sixteen hundreds.
I.
This story.
Was on line and some are
speaker.
In that I had the of the
children were with their parents
to develop questions for locals
and you get.
And and then he would respond to
the questions.
One question Stima speaker was.
Those goes to India.
It's.
One of the largest in the.
Did you have
when you're growing up.
Saw the wasn't against much
bigger some incentives for me at
this as the cost of the pants
what's this thing about pets.
Nine candle yes.
The law though I don't know what
state it's going to be told that
the dog that that that he says
I think the media is that a
domesticated.
Dauberman or or gas.
So then
my speaker delivers on the line.
There was any gavels into this.
Story.
That would qualify.
For a movie by Walt Disney.
Just on that one concept.
So he started saying.
One one hundred.
When I was a need for.
And when I was young and I
started she burning when I was
like twelve.
We didn't have pets.
The same is a Spanish.
We had.
To bring dogs.
That we treated like family.
He noted that oriental.
Australian shepherd.
So many goes and tells the
story.
In the language.
He says.
But the story doesn't end there.
The way the reason that these
she burning dogs.
Would be so devoted so dedicated
estimates speaker in protecting
the sheep.
Is what we would.
When that Bobby was born.
Yes my speaker.
Is what we we would remove it
from the female of the.
Imported.
With the lactating sheep.
So that we essentially.
Was raised.
By that female she.
So the property estimates bigger
screw up.
Thinking.
At the moment she.
The the female she was our mama.
The much bigger.
And gentleman from.
Funds on the line.
And this to us weaker through
the kids for a loop.
Think of the legend
of the moment she.
For a female she being the mom a
of of a little dog.
It.
What.
Senator.
Professional cheaper than the
one is run as a years.
What that basically bread in
that poppy was is killer
instinct.
Of the funding that she.
That.
I guess the quote this.
And other predators.
And that is the money speaker
and gentleman.
You know you're lying with the
experts in the different tribes
of the state.
That dynamic to the classroom.
You know those cultural
experiences.
In all of kind of integrating
language with actual reality.
Of our native peoples.
So to exclude them.
From the classroom is at the
service.
To the cultural heritage and
traditions of our native folks.
You know because language is
used to really.
Portray those values those
customs those traditions handle
as best estimates speaker to
project that is not our elders.
Are native language speakers.
And what you're doing with your
legislation.
Must be the gentleman from
someone on the line.
Is to write fully compensate
them.
For being that expert.
That they are.
And
In our suppliers so.
Kind of fired up women's.
It's been a rough back all these
memories.
You know and
And in Austin last week of June
of this on the land I do the
same thing with the put on that
I just.
They go into the classroom they
bring all their.
Their medical herbs.
All there.
Their their medicine of healing.
And a lot of times estimates
because gentleman from.
Some a lot.
The medicine of healing.
Not necessarily a tangible
plant.
For a rural.
There was a spiritual
connection.
The almighty.
You know in terms of how these.
Funded us traditional healers
some are speaker.
What do all these additional.
he leaned procedures.
And what the what the students I
guess appreciate it more of
these put on that us.
And hearing their stories.
Is.
The traditionalists.
Spinal.
Put on that I was going to
veterans.
It's a much bigger.
Never accepted.
One penny of compensation.
They did what they did why.
Because they would say.
Size bigger.
God gave me this gift question I
charge for it.
In a and so the kids got a
different date.
You know of why people do what
they do is that defend your
wallet.
What is the going to carry out
that.
Given that god gave you.
And in this particular case of
you in our people.
So as you guys have my speaker.
Gentleman I really applaud your
efforts.
In kind of really moving this
type of legislation for because
it's right in line.
With the outcome.
Of Yazzie Martinez.
And you're like at the
forefront.
Moving forward legislation that
does exactly that.
Thank you so as we put.
There is further debate.
The gentlemen of four leaders
from Chavis any no taro
Representative Townsend thank
you madam speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Thank you madam speaker I yield
the minority floor leader.
Thank you Sir bye.
I'll just cut to the chase
pretty quick.
hi I appreciate what you're
trying to do.
there is another group of
teachers.
That are not being treated.
Fairly.
And those are teachers in.
Our system thank sign in their
ability to communicate.
I see.
It would be if you would be so
kind to add them to that.
Bill it to your bill so they
would be recognized.
And it's a very small sector of
people is this something that I
don't have a four amendment I
have one being drafted but.
There's no real need and going
through all of that effort I'm
just asking if you'll add it to
your bill I'll have it drafted
in five minutes.
You let me know Sir.
You know.
Madam speaker and gentleman I I
think that your thoughtfulness
about those sign language
individuals is is very worthy
and I and I appreciate that and
I think about them too but.
We we definitely think about it
but I think at this point in
time this is such a narrowly
tailored piece of legislation
tied to again the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit tied to native
American language teachers that
to expanded this point.
probably wouldn't work.
Well madam speaker and gentleman
I think I think it will work
but I'm not going to try to
force the issue with the I'm
just if you would be so kind
I'll introduce a.
I'm I don't think there's I
don't think it would affect your
appropriation I don't think it
would have a negative effect on
the process that would just.
Support of the teachers that it
did something that this
desperately needed so I'll leave
that to you
Madam speaker and gentleman if
you don't think it'll work this
tell me I'll go through the
process.
The gentle lady and and and
thank you madam speaker and and
gentlemen you know the the the
reasonings for bringing
attention to this matter is
really to try to encapsulate and
revive over a hundred and thirty
years worth of United States
policy in trying to.
Kill the ended the state the
man.
And to say that here is
extremely powerful raised but
that was the policy in the
mantra.
Of a society that ex did their
best to extinguish the people
that were here first.
And so it's not that we don't
appreciate.
Those that the sign language nor
that those that teach a
different aspect of a trade.
This has everything to do with.
Trying to recover from again
those hundreds of years of.
It is difficult histories that I
think bring back.
Images of.
Individuals torn from their
families from their homelands
taken to a school in this case
in this town right down the
street at the Santa Fe Indian
school hair chopped.
House washed out of the spoke
their native tongue but still
have the courage to come back to
retain that identity in their
own in in their own villages so
that being said Madam speaker
and gentleman at this point in
time I don't believe that it's
necessarily timely to bring that
type of moment here Madam
speaker and gentleman I
appreciate that I won't
introduce a with that being said
I will tell you that is
everybody in this body.
Would recognize that as the
civilization has
Grown and I think it it has been
a growing experience in many
ways there have been issues that
none of us on either side of the
aisle in of every origin should
not be proud of it's not about
celebrating what did happen it's
celebrating the future and the
and what's ahead of New Mexico
so for that I stand
and I'll support the issue thank
you Sir thank you for the debate
gentleman close thank you madam
speaker thank you for the debate
folks I now move that house bill
sixty as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill sixty once amended the vote
is now open.
Three.
To.
The vote is now closed for forty
in the.
Clark took apologies I'm new at
this the clerk to call the
remaining members who have not
submitted of of.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon is yes
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong yes Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong is a yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash is yes
Representative um call.
Yes Representative bone because
the yes Representative Harry
Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
is a yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
is a yes Representative Lord.
Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis is a
yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid is yes
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen is
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Yes Representative Rod Montoya
is a yes Representative
Pettigrew.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato is a
yes representative Ted Office.
Yes Representative dass is a yes
Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson is
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo is
yes.
The vote is now closed with
sixty three in the affirmative
zero in the negative this bill
is passed.
The gentleman from Santa are you
ready on I the gentleman from
Santa
to get married because the
gentleman from Bernalillo are
you ready on item twenty yes
please.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill seventy nine on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Thank you madam speaker
honorable members this is house
bill seventy nine the key
component to our crime fighting
package as as a legislature and
state government the session it
does three three simple things
with regard to the criminal
code.
Secondly murder the penalty
is only fifteen years.
You can you can do more time for
a subsequent drug case you can
do more time in prison on a farm
operate with no injuries that
you count on murder you can do
more time in state law on a
kidnapping with no injuries than
murder that that contradiction
can no longer stand and so this
raises the penalty of murder in
the second grade from fifteen to
eighteen years so that nothing
surpasses it in the criminal
code except of course for first
degree murder and also because
of madam speaker because second
motor for three murders kind of
on its own to in the criminal
code we fix of we fix of that
contradiction by increasing the
penalty for attempted murder
from nine three years two nine.
And then maybe more importantly
madam speaker with regards to
the statute of limitations
because it's considered a
secondary crime the taxes to
other secondary crimes with
regards to the statute of
limitations which is six years
that can no longer stand this
bill lifts the statue
limitations the ability to
charge someone with the crime of
sector re murder from six years
to to to the light to the life
forever essentially and with
that I'll stand for questions
there is the debate gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
he'll.
Madam speaker yes.
Preparation for this
conversation.
I spent some time working over
the file and found.
Mr Reid.
And madam speaker.
In general because.
The impacts were described in
that document.
All the.
Involved.
Additional cost to the state.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think what I'm interested in and
what the people we represent
would be interested in is how is
this going to make and will it
all by citizens sorry for.
Thank you Mr speaker madam
speaker gentleman from the I
think that to have consistent
come along the cross the board.
To adequately fund our Google
justice system and to and to
provide victim services will
make us all safer will make us
all safer for it was to grow our
economy there's not there's no
better better crime fighter than
a job for the rest of this
provision yes to have a better
more consistent criminal code
will make us safer because the
worst crime you could ever do.
Is intensely murder someone and
so there cannot be any penalty
greater than than murdering
someone this bill fixes that.
Fixes that in addition Madam
speaker gentle from the.
Ability to charge someone with
secretary murder
Has to happen it ten twenty
thirty years after the fact it's
almost impossible to convict
somebody of first degree murder.
this will give prosecutors the
ability to charge someone with
second degree murder so that
that person never goes to sleep
ever without contemplating
whether he's going to be
charged with murder the very
next day.
Involved in criminal justice
system could you briefly
describe to me what the
difference is between first and
second.
What is the madam speaker
generally.
We only have three hours
so
the dental the dental lady madam
speaker the pikes lane is better
because.
Because she's currently studying
studying law but it's you do you
go through it for six weeks with
the intense professor but
essentially first degree murder
is a planned a planned murder
with malice aforethought it's
with premeditation second degree
murder is an intentional murder
you want to kill that person at
that moment you just didn't plan
on it earlier that day so first
degree murder throughout
throughout the ages throughout
cultures throughout time has
been considered the most heinous
crime that that human could do
secondary murder of the ball
through the centuries and is
considered the second worst
crime you a person could do.
Michael German this just as a
for example would apply in the
circumstance of a drug deal gone
bad spelling of the moment to
type situation is that our
current let us figures for me
yes yes if there's no self
defense issues and at that
moment at that moment in time
you would want to kill this
person you intentionally killed
this person it's not a voluntary
manslaughter or involuntary
manslaughter it's like the
person up you know gets beat up
at a party they go home they got
they're going to come back and
they killed the person that in
it was no premeditation prior to
that that that's for the moment
incident.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen for your answers
there's further debate the
gentle lady from some of our
federal the representative
federal Culbert.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo you
madam speaker yes.
From Bernalillo.
Can you tell me how this piece
of legislation.
What role if we were to passes.
How does this affect.
The dust ability would you know
I have on.
The major issues with.
Their ability to plead down to
lesser charge.
But also and also how it
affects.
The discretion.
There are judges have now as far
as sentencing.
Thank you minister general delay
from Santa I think I think
prosecutors will be much more
comfortable and and for families
of.
Homicide victims will be more
comfortable because it's
horrible to put something down
from thirty years to step
fifteen.
So the prosecutors tell the
family I cannot reach my burden
of proof on first degree murder
on the net depleted down to
second degree which would drop
it all the way from thirty to
fifteen now it would drop from
thirty to eighteen which is
still horrible for the family
but but the I think it would
facilitate
Facilitate those plea agreements
and give a little more solace.
To the family with regards to
discretion this doesn't take any
discretion right from the judges
any discretion right from the
judges with regards to
the sentencing range it's there
is no mandatory time in sekarang
murder.
And this is bigger and
gentleman.
That's what my concern is you
know I have a nephew that was
murdered just here in November.
And I'm involved with the the
investigators and everything on
that.
And that's mine my concern
because I know.
That.
The mitigating circumstances.
Play a role and how someone
sentence.
I understand how.
The judge's discretion.
So I guess what what I'm looking
for is a mandatory.
You know something.
In there you always know with on
the side that there's something
else that went on you don't know
how long would you know that it
it it went on.
The lead up to them that the
just explain the difference
between.
The two but still bad is there.
And so.
I'm just trying to better
understand.
This implied because I've always
felt.
Even when I was working with the
police department and the courts
and.
And everything that.
For those of us who.
Are the victims family members
that the judges and the DA.
Discretion.
I felt.
A number of times was just not
there.
So trying to with this get us to
some kind of a parity I'm not
worried about taking discretion.
Away from the judges.
Matter of fact I think they have
too much discretion quite
honestly.
But to make sure.
That individual.
What is the ready said you can
do the time don't do the crime.
To make sure that that time is
there.
But also.
They did what they deserve.
I'm just to see you know more
about a loss.
As to the impact.
That.
Changing this law is really
going to have as far as how it's
pleaded out if any in the
judge's discretion is this.
One from thirteen to eighteen.
Is this.
Mandatory they can't take it any
lower than that that eighty.
Thank you madam speaker
generated and sent of August
that your family.
I was aware of what happened
back in November and I think
what you just expresses a
sentiment that there.
The other you know you'll have
prosecutors and victim state I
want just to someone just as you
I I slightly disagree with that
sentiment there is no justice in
a in a homicide.
You cannot make it right the
state cannot make it right.
so that's that's just a just a
difficult pill to swallow yes
this doesn't change.
This doesn't change the game in
terms of no discretion all of
our crime should be the
exception for dreamer you know
zero to some things you know.
A mandatory times kind of muddy
muddy things up
I had two more trials than that
we would like and.
You know maybe other cases don't
get prioritize as much or
whatnot but this simply raises
at on the top and it raises on
the top and which is very very
important also facts matter and
lives matter the one case that's
that stood out in my mind was
these two cops are chasing
chasing about guy one goes
around the side of the house of
the members on the Senate house.
Here is the one of the officers
here's a scuffle.
There on the corner and sees as
partners that.
The guy gives up the bad guy
gives up jobs as nine for
whatever and and just in the
moment of passion he just kills
in that that secondary murder.
That person got less than that
than the fifteen years you know
because of the circumstances
surrounding that murder.
Nine times out of ten maybe nine
nine tenths of a hundred the the
the murder gets the fifteen
years.
But everyone walks out of the
courtroom like well what the
heck just happened you know
fifteen years.
The
And then also keep in mind madam
speaker tonight from some that
are not all set not all not all
secondly convictions plea out it
happened as a result of a trial
maybe the this the prosecutors
trying to convict him of first
degree murder in the jury comes
back second agree or whether it
or the person's arguing self
defense or voluntary
manslaughter the jury comes back
second degree so does not
necessarily
The resulting in please in fact
for homicide cases that we give
police detectives and
prosecutors the resources.
They can because they're so
labor intensive they could they
could go they can this actually
throw the book at all Thomas I
defendants without sacrificing
all the other crimes on their
desk.
I'm still the jury still out on
this.
I am.
Hello nephew that was murdered a
few years ago he was two years
ago long and short of it dad's
girlfriend beat him to death.
I work with the DA office in
Dallas.
And.
They ask.
We want.
He was three.
The children was twenty nine.
She had a son that was for.
And I wanted to go for the you
know didn't taxes you get death
penalty.
And they
But his mom.
The Max that she could do.
Was forty seven years to send
today not take the forty seven
years I don't want the death
penalty.
And so this young lady this bill
and the forty seven years and I
check on her from time to time
to make sure she's still doing
the forty seven years.
And that's the Max that that we
could get without doing the
death penalty in Texas and I
tell the story only to ask.
Is changes small.
Is is involved.
Some discussion.
Whether it's the judge you know
we had a word with the DA and
and and I work with the DA in
Dallas.
Down and disgusted with the this
is the Max we can do we do this
you know this this this and this
it turned out this girl just
didn't want to be bothered that
particular night with the little
kia do.
Had a cold.
And so when will this.
By changing this.
Does the family still have well
they still have because I didn't
read all of the legislation the
entire bill away to still have
some say.
In order for gratification with
the the sentencing thank you
madam speaker deleted from some
of our absolutely yes absolutely
yes we have we have a some of
the strongest victim rights laws
in the country victim rights
laws in the state of Mexico are
constitutional.
Of the victim has a right to
consult with the with the
prosecuting attorney the victim
has the right to speak at every
a sentencing hearing and post
sentencing hearing in court the
judge know the prosecutor can
deny that right of of full
participation but keep in mind
it's the state versus the
defendant and ultimately is the
prosecutors called with regards
to the tactics and the and the
final decision of the Russia
that case
The object Ms are at the table
and and and and I Madam chair
good.
The only person in a homicide.
The entire family is a victim.
Not just the reality but in law
the entire family of a homicide
victim is the victim of that
homicide.
So usually what happens is they
pick up one person from the
family to be the point.
That means with the prosecuting
attorney in the economic it's
and then that person reports
back to the family.
Then as gentleman is still out
but thank you anyway.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya not in
the building not in the room.
Sing no further debate the
gentleman close.
She was asked to be removed from
the border thank you thank you
all these two provisions were
combined in the executive
message the statue limitations
provisions passed this house
twice in two thousand sixteen
and two thousand eighteen the
increased penalty for secondary
murderous past this house once
in two thousand eighteen those
three were all unanimous votes I
now move that house bill seventy
nine do now pass we are on final
passage of house bill seventy
nine the vote is now open.
Ago.
The electronic version portion
of the vote was close the clerk
to call the members without a
recorded vote Representative all
point.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Anderson
Representative Anderson both yes
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative ever
Armstrong votes yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative bone grafts.
Representative will go votes yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
both yes Representative Lord.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen both
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
votes yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero yes Representative
G. Andrés Romero is yes
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative
Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato votes
yes Representative office.
Yes
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson both
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes I vote of sixty six in
the affirmative zero in the
negative house bill seventy nine
is duly passed this house.
Gentleman from Santa Fe.
Mr chairman of the next order of
business announcements
miscellaneous business.
Seeing no objection it is so
ordered.
Are there any announcements.
Representative from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam speaker house
judiciary will be fifteen
minutes after we recess or
adjourn recess today on the
floor.
Gentlelady the gentleman Mr
speaker of go ahead always
wanted to do this.
Madam speaker now the eleven
fifty nine AM of the house
adjourned until twelve or one
PM.
I also come to order.
Madam speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended that the journal show
that all those presidents one
session of presidents afternoon
session there's no objections so
ordered better speakers
unanimous consent that the rules
we suspended the record show
that the journal's been read in
full improve subject to revision
and approval of the rules in
order business committee there's
no objections so ordered.
Thank you that was.
Any other nonsense.
Miss.
Gentlelady from house
Representative Ortez thank you
madam speaker at today is my
first daughter's eleventh
birthday.
She's real sad that I'm here
right now so what I'd like to do
is for you all to say Happy
Birthday to her name her name is
Gillian.
Members would you please join me
and sing Happy Birthday to
Gillian.
Happy birthday to you Happy
Birthday to you Happy Birthday.
Hi and Happy Birthday to you.
Thank you madam speaker and
members.
Thank you gentle lady Happy
Birthday.
Any other announcements Madam
speaker I move house in recess
until eight PM.
The house will stand in recess
until eight PM.
CNN.
Yes.
