Garant.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid your.
Representative Pettigrew your.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Vice chair Garcia.
Your.
Madam chair Rubio.
Your.
Thank you Representative
Herbert.
Welcome good morning.
Good morning.
So we do have a quorum thank you
all for joining us for folks who
are listening online welcome to
our this committee we are
transportation public works in
capital improvements
we have a couple of bills today
and will be starting first with
Representative Montoya with your
legislation I don't know if
there's anyone else that you
wanted us to promote to panelist
but I can go ahead and do that
now if if you have some names.
Thank you madam chair no I I
think
I'll make a presentation and and
on my co sponsors is a member of
the committee Representative
Madrid.
At the at the appropriate time
Representative
Representative Madrid may want
to say something okay
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Madam chair are test driving all
state from to to add to the
come to the presentation but
I'll let Mr.
Representative major.
Okay great so Representative
whenever you're ready.
Thank you madam chair.
One eighty three is more of a
discussion piece I realize what
where we are in the session
being
late our and obviously the the
appropriations budget has
already been set.
more than anything I'm wanting
to have this discussion heading
into the interim so that we can
start talking about a
steady a regular stream of of
income going into the roads into
our road fund.
I a friend of mine who lives in
Texas says that
That.
When you travel to New Mexico be
sure and rent a vehicle because
you don't want to drive your own
vehicle New Mexico roads.
And I think that's maybe a
little bit unfair I think a lot
of that of course our
interstates are earned really
good shape most of the time and
this state roads or interstate
or the US highways going back
and forth are are fairly well
kept
but I think in part because
every year we know that there's
matching funds out there from
the federal government if we are
on if we invest those dollars
into the interstates are under
US highways to a look to a much
lesser degree there's not really
a real regular funds.
that can be counted on by the
department transportation for
for.
State roads
too much lesser degree local
communities our our last.
With their county roads and.
The roads to state roads
maybe and and and much more
disrepair and so what we've what
we've done throughout the years
madam chair and members of the
committee is we come in with all
of the dollars in the general
fund and then we determine and I
think this is not the way we
should be doing things we
determine.
Other priorities and then what's
left over many times I think is
is a secondary thought to our
roads and
I think what we would need to
does not affect as I was reading
through the the LFC FY are.
LFC no Legislative Council
services when I was reading
through the FIR
it stated that one of the
problems with this bill is that
because of our growing and
general fund recurring costs
this could be a problem setting
a specific amount of money the
side.
Every year for roads because we
wouldn't be able to to respond
to our ever increasing general
fund
budgets so other things that
were going out there and and
spending money on.
I'm.
Very well that is keeping us
from being able to invest in our
roads so this bill if you were
to to to look at the second page
really this the all of the
substance of this bill is on the
second page beginning in line
one where it says a fifty five
percent of the funds from the
The excise tax
would go to the state road fund
and that's that's the fund that
is for our our our big state
roads and interstates
in US highways and eighteen and
it's eighteen point seven five
percent would go to the
transportation project fund.
And the remaining twenty six.
Point two five percent would go
to the local government
government road fund.
As I looked into this more I I
think I would probably put a
greater percentage into the.
Into the transportation project
fund since a little bit more
flexible and for people to be
able to use
the the the good thing about the
Out the going into the local
government road fund is that a
higher percentage of match from
the communities has to come in
now that on a positive side it
means dollars go further on the
negative side it means some
communities cannot compete for
those same dollars but the
The transportation project fund
the match is only five percent
and maybe it's a little bit more
needs based so and and looking
at that I tried to.
Lower the amount if if I were
writing this today maybe lower
the amount going to the local
road governments road fund and a
higher amount of transportation
projects fund just because.
Those local communities it be
easier for some of those
communities to be able to to
access that fund and it would be
more needs based one of the
things about the the state road
fund those are big expensive
roads are are the US highways
and the
the other states to go through
New Mexico
The good thing about investing
there is the match is very high
very like that very much I
Medicaid for helping take care
of the interstate and US
highways the matching dollars
from the federal government is
very high so.
Once again.
What I'm trying to.
I do here is just begin the
discussion there has to be a
steady flow of dollars to roads
that that is one thing that I
believe every member of the
legislature agrees on is the
responsibility to our citizens
to maintain good roads.
And unfortunately the way that
we budget it many times it feels
like
our roads are an afterthought
our infrastructures an
afterthought
we we go after new programs new
projects we we we really have
grown the administration.
Massively over the last several
years and.
In in my mind if it's been to
the detriment of what we could
be doing especially with these
one time dollars coming in from
the federal government and from
these big dollars coming in from
oil and gas
I think that's a.
A little bit more investment
right now we have the dollars
into the into the the state
roads and local roads would be
very very helpful
with that madam chair I stand
for questions.
Great thank you Representative
Montoya Representative Madrid
did you want to add to that.
Yes thank you madam chair
To the points of a
Representative Montoya a couple
years back when we do this I
researched this and we're not
reinventing the wheel as I said
back then we're basically going
back to the way it was the
beginning and the end our state
government to be able to
allocate this funding and it
became a very resource for
resource that we were sending
monies aside and at that time we
will see you know we're doing
better manage our roads overall
right now the state of our
country our worst of words state
rooms we have a big need to get
a sustainability of managing
them and getting caught up to
the flow of economic growth
potentials of the state of New
Mexico at so this would be eight
A. funding resource you will of
taking a portion of the numbers
are two can be played with the
literally because of anywhere if
you look at it from a quarter
percent to a half percent
increase in two big dollars and
helps us when we look at our
funding projects out standing in
the state of New Mexico it's
close to a billion dollars there
were still lacking in funding
for our state rooms I'm gonna
when I always said to of this
bill is it we work we have to
remember that every state road
will go through county and and
and and city road so it's going
to have to work collaborative
and sometimes just again to
appoint Mr Representative
Montoya is bringing is that
there needs to be some
collaboration because a big deal
is there's money potential
commute building a reserve fund
as we're doing a lot of other
things in education we're
creating these resources of
being able to build up the our
ability to meet more capacity of
middle financially first these
rules are going to go without
having to be improved and made
better as well as go back.
And maintenance of the existing
rules so this is an ongoing a
steady stream flow that we can
manage statewide within
ourselves and give a lot of a
lot of economic opportunity as
well disagree the contractors to
bring and they have to help
those this project so I I like
to get it wrong level of how it
relates these big dollars to
people in our state and our
roads and our economic growth
and that's what transportation
does it conducts a conduit of
our state's abilities or in
abilities and we have it in so
many areas of our state that we
have the ability of new
corridors that we really have to
consider project when the
reports were state that we come
in and out access to our state's
economy and grow to other
potential of a manufacturing and
other business in the world will
provide us more tangible so
that's what I want to say to
everybody that we're not
reinventing something we're
going back to something that
used to work for you all and and
we're not going to say we want
all but we even took a half to
order would still make some big
significant numbers to aid in
our
department of transportation the
state of New Mexico so that's
what I want to say it madam
chair thank you for our mystery
as well to the members of the
committee thank you.
Madam chair.
Thank you madam chair I actually
forgot to mention I currently
there is dollars twenty one
little almost twenty percent are
going to state roads right now
and.
just shy of ninety percent going
to the to the project to the.
The
project funds really on looking
at doing is is making it.
Greater percentage going there
so there there are dollars going
there now that but as as
Representative Madrid mentioned
the needs this year
are are astronomical and the and
and it's just been growing the
need to just been growing every
year and we we seem to get
further and further behind and
so increasing that number
approximately just just under
forty percent or just over forty
percent we're going to roads
right now out of this fund and.
Near almost nearly sixty percent
are is going to the general fund
and that's what we're looking at
doing is is saying look.
The.
Kind of the for service
is what we're looking to do here
is everybody uses the roads and
everybody who buys a car is
going to be driving on those
roads I'm one of the things that
I would also like to mention is
currently
If you're driving a electric
vehicle you're not purchasing
gas other than the the small
percentage that's coming out of
the echo X. eyes
folks are driving electric
vehicles really not contributing
very much to the to the rose so
This would also allow that maybe
a little more parity for for in
that.
In those vehicles which we as we
understand going to become more
and more the.
More more higher percentage on
our roads matter fact I'm
actually this last week when I
bought is the power boost the
for tower so my vehicle travels
on electricity about.
Quarter of the time so.
Anyhow it's it's just becoming
more and more.
Of an issue I think as we go
away from fossil fuel vehicles.
Yeah I know thank you
Representative thank you for
your presentation.
And will open it up to committee
members shortly we'll go ahead
and go to the public if you can
raise your hand if you were in
the attendees and we'll go ahead
and take quite
whether you're in support and
opposition of this legislation I
only see one hand and the so
we'll open it up danceable.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes we can.
Thank you very much Madam chair
of for this opportunity a I want
to thank you and the committee
for looking at this issue I want
to thank also the sponsors of
this legislation and I think
it's a very worthwhile.
Issue through to talk about now
on tax policy
One thing that I would like to
add a couple of things is that
that.
Investing in it now in our rules
is really a very good positive a
revenue source to the state
general fund it's a it's
positive because it it and and
impacts of the in a positive way
the gross receipts taxes income
taxes corporate taxes payroll
taxes and increases the
employing Climent by small
contractors in our communities
and small communities throughout
the state our roads are located
in the throughout the state and
somebody City somebody's County
and then somebody's district
provided right so it's a win win
Tax Policy issue for us for our
local state and I I really
appreciate that you're you're
discussing that now the I would
just like to mention one other
thing that in the nineties
requests I know some of you may
may not have been born yet but
but in the nineties mid nineties
the federal government the
Federal Highway Administration
and the president's and that of
the United States the encourage
the states to do innovative
financing and what the federal
government did was give our
state.
from there revenue
transportation revenue
hundred twenty hundred twenty
five million new dollars every
year but they encouraged us to
an approved a borrowing the
mechanism there so that we would
be able to improve the
interstates which were fallen
into disrepair so the state of
New Mexico was able to go
through this innovative
financing is we're able to bar
one point two billion dollars to
to do major projects in our
state the the largest one was of
course the big guy.
The I. twenty five by forty
with a knee also allows us to do
the road to Farmington and many
other US roads so that the focus
on that was the at improving
building and improving the
interstate system because it's
so important for for the economy
of our state I mean we're we're
lucky that we have this huge
interstate system and in our
state but this would be a very
welcome I think for the
department of transportation the
secretary does a tremendously
good job to try to get the
dollars necessary for those up
from funded projects a literary
near districts all over the
state so I thank you again
Sanchez and thank you madam
chair and committee members for
a looking at this that I hope
that maybe something that can be
done this this recession because
the funding may be available now
and thank you and you guys have
a good day.
Thank you Mr soul for your
comments
we don't see I don't see anyone
else in the
attendees with their hands right
so we'll go ahead and go on to
of the committee members of
first we have Representative
Crowder thank you madam chairman
the chairman it as we move
forward in this we think about
you know moving this discussion
into the interim period I would
like to have a little bit more
clarity about the actual names
of these funds I I believe we
have what's called I. local
transportation projects fund.
Is showing up on one of my
analysis but not on the FIR so I
wondered if the secretary Santa
was in the audience we could let
him speak to that issue.
And then number two I would like
to have the secretary's opinion.
how helpful how beneficial this
could be the to the DOT.
I'm I don't see the secretary on
but I'll promote Mr Dodge I know
he's here so George might be
able to answer some of those
questions so.
I'm promoting him now hopefully
he won't be caught off guard
thank you madam chair he's never
caught off guard he's always
ready.
All right that's good that's
good to hear
Let's see.
Hey there George I'm I am here
madam chair thank you right so
yeah if you if you don't mind if
if you have any thoughts or
insight on what Mr
Representative Crowder is is
discussing.
Yes just just madam chair of
George Dodge local government
issues director and M. D. O. T.
and to Mr to us Representative
Crowder's Representative Crowder
is statement or question is of
the local government
transportation project fund it's
now the transportation project
fund has been in the men's help
to our local governments I
travel across the state and all
these folks are are constantly
thanking us and thanking the
legislature for the money that
they've given to these local out
governments it's been a great
help because a lot of these
communities don't have the where
with all to do it on their own
and it's it's just a been a
tremendous help across the state
hello this is I think that if if
this is one of the better
programs one of the best
purpose of reversing for local
governments
as far as support of this bill
yes we take this discussion this
as of the sponsor said into the
interim and flush everything out
and make sure that everything is
correct.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Mr Dodge I.
Some of the literature that we
get it it's specifically says
local transportation projects
fund in this town.
On my analysis just says local I
mean just says transportation
projects on.
You know why we see local on
some of it are there two
different funds or just
sometimes it just says the word
local in front of it or is this
dedicated strictly to local
roads.
Madam chair and Representative
Crowder this is on the up.
In twenty nineteen it was the
when it first came up with the
first initial fifty million
dollars that was the L. G. T. P.
R. F.
and in twenty twenty I believe
it change to transportation
projects on the first the first
one the first initial money was
fifty million dollars and the
second one was so.
One hundred twenty million.
Back in twenty twenty one so is
it is it is the same funded
transportation projects funded
strictly for the locals yes Sir
okay I could remember the
statutory language behind the
fund if it's strictly for locals
then I think that's good to know
going forward that's the one has
the five percent matches to the
twenty five percent match I'm
not sure what's going to happen
to the local government road
fund or not that's going to be
phased out or below where shut
down or whatever George of madam
chair can you advise us on that
you know what's going to happen
to the local government road
fund.
Madam chair and Representative
Crowder the local government
role fund will stay.
Okay well I keep a balance madam
chair Georgian at funder will it
go down to zero and and just be
kind of on hold until it's
needed for a different purpose
or what.
No Sir Mr madam chair.
I'm having.
Madam chair and Representative
Crowder know that that local
government real fund will stay
and the balance the balance will
be continue to be used for the
local governments okay all right
thank you madam chair I I just a
little bit of clarity on that
going forward
I appreciate very much thank you
for your responses George very
helpful.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Crowder
next we have Representative
Garrett.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Montoya I I like
the fact that you're approaching
this with the discussion for
what's best and to follow up
Representative Crowder it would
be I know we get handouts
periodically but it would be
really helpful Mr Dodge and and
people from transportation if
you could give us a chart of all
those funds and they're
dedicated purposes madam chair
and Representative Montoya it's
I heard in your remarks it
sounds like you were very
responsive to the New Mexico
municipal league
and their recommendations that
additional local bands be
transferred into the
transportation project Fund.
Because they thought it was more
efficient and willing supports a
sixty forty split between
funding state and local projects
and I understand that correctly
that that is something you're
going to be considering as you
go forward with this.
Thank you Representative and
madam chair yes of the.
The local Roshan as as as former
Representative Dodge and by the
way it's nice to see a couple of
former representatives a chiming
in for actually a.
Representative Silva I believe
values chair of this committee
committee
so it's it's nice to see a
couple blast from the past and
and it is very nice for
Representative Ezzell the to
remind me how young I was in the
nineties.
I think that I really enjoy that
part but madam chair and
representative yes the rope of
the local road of of road fund
still has a purpose and I think
because it can stretch the
dollars a little further because
the match is higher I think that
the problem is became very
restrictive and the new projects
Fund the transportation project
fund just a lot easier for for
for more communities to be able
to participate because the
matches so much less and it's
more needs based so I'm yes the
the communities I have had only
a couple but they reached out
and stated that they like this
bill but they they would like to
see a higher percentage go into
that fund.
Because of the reasons I have
have been mentioned including
just the availability for for
smaller communities to be able
to to compete for these dollars
as well.
So yes hi this is very much.
This is this was a discussion
piece this is to put it out
there and it started discussion
which was what I was hoping for
and and what I'm hoping to
continue.
Thank you Representative in and
madam chair and then my only
other point four as you move
forward its attacks and Revenue
Department pointed out that your
bill would eliminate all motor
vehicle excise tax revenue to
the general fund.
Which they were concerned about
the fact that it removes a
recurring revenue source
reducing the legislators
budgetary flexibility so I I
don't really have a question
just that I would assume that
something you would talk more
with them about.
Yes thank you Representative and
then madam chair if you don't
mind I I would like to respond a
little bit the the rest of that
paragraph goes on to say
that the recurring budgetary
needs for other things it it's
going to be restrictive and
knows and I I would rather
restrict those and fund our
roads I would rather have more
money going to infrastructure
because I think it will as as.
Mr silver said a former
representative of us at
our roads are necessary for
commerce and and I think it if
we look at dollars going into
infrastructure a lot of times I
think we look at as an
expenditure rather than an
investment so I I think it would
be an investment in in commerce.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair those are all my
questions.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Harper.
Madam chair thank you so much
for the opportunity to ask a few
questions and and Act.
Maybe.
Maybe even zoom out to like this
thirty thousand fifty thousand
foot view on this.
I'm.
I have a wonderful little to
page white paper that basically
just the history of the motor
vehicle excise tax and I need to
find that and
Scan and email it to the
committee this fascinating to
see
Representative
Madrid and much more correct
when the motor vehicle excise
tax started you know decades ago
it was about a two percent tax.
and went to the general fund.
but over the years it's gone
back and forth about a dozen
times between funding the
general fund verses the road
fund were some split of the two
and in the C. slowly you know
increases a quarter percent
increases twenty percent and and
that it held steady at three
percent for quite awhile and
then recently raised a to four
percent and of your March
portion that extra percentage to
roads.
but you look at the history and
essentially when ever
we've had budget surpluses
where where things are going
really well.
The motor vehicle excise taxes
diverted from the general fund
to Rhode Fund.
To help us our roads and then
when we do have you know of a
formal gas industry or or worst
recession some serious challenge
was generating revenues it's
pull back more vehicle access
taxes pull that federal fund to
put to the general fund.
And so I actually I understand
why the tax revenue department
and there are so the tape the
massive concerns but really the
legislature's done this about a
dozen times over the last you
know century and and we continue
to have that flexibility so I'm
not so much concerned with that
too so I'm looking at our
surplus right now in the in the
general fund are you know we're
we have
you know we never had dollars
like this the general fund so it
makes sense for this to be a
good time to to those dollars
over.
I guess.
it really is going out for the
fifty thousand foot view.
Madam chair
We.
I really believe in the next
probably two decades still be
more electric vehicles on the
road then at your traditional
combustion engine vehicles.
We've talked about this as a
committee several times I think
I think we really have an
opportunity here I think now is
really the time to really
evaluate how we are funding our
ropes.
And I say this because you look
at our our gasoline tax and for
a long time the gasoline tax
contract up with inflation and
population growth in those kinds
of things but you look at the
last decade even more our
gasoline tax revenues and flat.
And that's because
fuel across fuel efficiency is
greatly increased and providers
are more fuel efficient and so
people are overall buying less
ghastly.
so even with more people and and
inflation it's been flat.
Sadly conversely the cost of
materials for roads.
has gone up substantially.
And so the department is
essentially doing.
the best they can was was.
Basically constant revenue but
increasing costs.
Insulate and they've done a
great job or state roads are are
generally great shape our our
interstates pharaoh's this
generation.
it's really our local county and
municipal roads said that need
more help.
So so madam chair and I'm just
I'm just thinking you know.
we could raise our gas tax rate
you look at the average of our
other states around us we could
probably go up about six seven
cents and still be within the
average or well below average
and and I believe the tax policy
is to be about the average so we
could raise our gasoline tax.
But as we have more electric
vehicles on the road.
That's that's gonna not be as
great help.
So what other revenue streams
are there there's more vehicle
access we talked about there is
vehicle registration I think
that could be a great
place to look maybe we change
our vehicle registration to be
more like a.
some other states have a based
on weight of the vehicle and
have it essentially for electric
vehicles pay for what they would
have paid in gasoline tax.
we can also
yeah and maybe maybe
registrations becomes I'm a more
significant revenue stream as
the gasoline tax revenue goes
down.
would also look at some other
states have done which is
how many miles has this vehicle
traveled.
And
Do we.
you know have some you know
every year some pay a payment
based off how many miles you
traveled.
there there are some concerns
there was with privacy and then
also not every mile I drive my
vehicles in the state of New
Mexico so there are some issues
there but I just really would
like to know challenging madam
chair this committee during the
interim what's what's really be
serious about looking at how we
fund our roads and because we
talk about this for several
years I mean this
Representative Madrid mentioned
that this was not a new idea
that's right and we have this in
our and our tax reform bills six
seven years ago and and I think
we just need to really get
serious about okay how are we
gonna have Leger vehicles
contribute how are we going to
continue to fund.
our roads when costs keep going
up and especially local roads.
And and I think it's just a
great opportunity.
But I'm sure
These are just kind of my
thoughts I don't know if
Representative months where
Madrid if you have anything
you'd like to add.
Thank you madam chair
yes that is exactly what we're.
Really wanting to do here is.
This is a discussion that that
that has to come this is this is
one that we see the diminishing
returns to our roads and.
I don't know that this is the
answer you mentioned
Representative Harper then
should several things that could
potentially play into our
overall plan to be able to fund
our roads but this one seems to
be very straight forward vehicle
excise tax is very specific and
I think the best tax policy is
when.
The folks who are actually.
Going to be using the roads are
paying for the roads so I do
like this I think this is an
easy one to for to be to be
implemented I I don't I'm not
saying the numbers that I put in
this bill are the right
percentages but I do believe one
thing and I think we see this
right now with the needs that
are around us
what we have going into rose
right now it's just not enough.
And I if we can the hard thing
is to put into a fund put
dollars into of the into the
fund and then.
We don't retract from from that
when things start to get a
little tough the roads seem to
be the first ones that that take
the hit and.
And I don't think that's a good
thing because construction of
roads that those are good jobs
and and those folks to.
we're working construction are
are good citizens raising
families spending money
I think having a consistent
Fund here Astor's checks several
boxes mostly better
infrastructure better roads so
thank you Madam.
Madam chair from may and.
To Representative Harper point I
think it's a very good idea that
we were reflected look from our
on the tax on gas it's not been
done and she's so long and that
you would we went up six per
cents over a period of three
years the significance of the
return that we would have an and
to be able to allocate it
locally or to this you know to
the state is a great opportunity
and what we don't we remember
all our transit inequities to
the power of being able to drawn
against it and bond against it
and that gives us a lot of
potential of doubling our
money's very quickly to.
Help our projects there's still
a fund funded and as you
mentioned many times things are
planned out so far out in
advance.
Maybe for that reason it takes
quite awhile to get to that in
the if we could create these
revenue new jet streams I call
on some funding that can go to
some quick even wanted to your
market that would be a way to
appease everybody of how that
money is working around the
state to these bigger projects
and tying or shoring up
unfinished projects so very good
point so Representative Harper
brings up that the to be
reflected and historically again
we have a pattern we can do it
when it allows but even if we
don't do it even a minimal one
one percent tax increase will
help us get to the average and
will still be below I think
these are means that we'll have
to do it right now so we make
this transition last point of
this weight issue of vehicles I
think is a really really good
idea we're dealing now with
these electrical vehicles on our
roads are weighing so much more
and I'm gonna put so much more
wear and tear on our vehicles on
our roads that in itself isn't
has been adequately to the
outcome but we need to start you
know doing some research to that
point to I think we'll see some
more needs rise up out of this
so I appreciate it was
discussion thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair I I
appreciate the time and just
commend the sponsors for two
minutes discussion moving and
I'm very hopeful that next year
we can make some good changes
that's a you know are not are
not partisan we all of our roads
and and know that to having
great rose to so many things for
communities so thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative and for
folks and I don't know if he's
listening in Senator Tallman I
know it's probably going to
speak on the next bill but he
will be chairing the interim
committee this year so just keep
that in mind and and hopefully
he's listening to this
discussion Representative or.
Good morning and thank you madam
chair.
Representative Montoya I
appreciate you Representative
Townsend Representative duration
ASEAN of ground rules.
I do believe it's it's long
overdue.
Yes the guy and the rooms that.
Grew up.
In this industry and
infrastructure
How important are infrastructure
is to ensuring that our.
Revenues for.
Is increasing all the time the
amount of economic development
of the new rotors news sewer and
water line brings to an area and
everyone of this is seen it
somebody builds a sewer line to
know where and all the sudden
there's subdivision there any
year in so.
With that Representative forty I
appreciate the.
Bill I do agree that we need to
the conversation about how we
get there and
You need to take that out I
don't know how madam chair we we
ensure that this on to our list
for for primary discussions over
over the rules with that Madam
chair I would.
I would offered do passed so
that we can have opportunity to
have the committee from taxed
Rav.
It going into the interim
session so we can look at the
bigger picture not just from the
transportation side but as
Representative Parker talked
about with respect to how this
is going to affect
Our revenue streams from from a
taxation standpoint these are
really love to have those
comments on record so we could
sit there and slice and dice so
since we're as we're talking
through this through the summer
so with that when the when the
opportunities right.
My motion for do passed would
would staff thank you.
Great thank you Representative
Pettigrew all all note that as
the as your motion for the past
wool hat I'm gonna head over to
Representative LA Cruz I know
you do have a question before we
move forward with that.
Thank you madam chair and good
morning members are it's not so
much a question is it is a
comment that our kids aged fifty
central necessary to local
governments be able to have
access to these funds are and
I'm assuming that includes
counties as well.
The district I sure have nearly
at our road needs are are on
that today the the more.
busy thoroughfares tend to be in
decent condition
to be more of the smaller roads
that are that are difficult for
residents to navigate to keep
their vehicles maintained well
because of the roughness of the
road.
Sometimes the rules are or just
someone of disintegration and so
I I do think this is a critical
need to support this effort
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative next we
have I sure see a.
Thank you madam chair a.
Thank you a representative will
go up Representative for
bringing this up it is very
important of madam chair will
really give it the.
Representative.
Is electric cars also
Representative read about it in
the way these cars.
Let's say we're rules of.
Really really to visit that
because.
It is seven committee madam
chair another ten years from now
we're not gonna have any session
would face a big problem that we
face advowson faced a problem
now recent later so that's just
my daughter and now with that
being said madam chair when
you're ready to entertain motion
I'll second that motion.
Strong vice chair only if you
sing the song.
thank you all for the discussion
Representative monthly
of we appreciate you bringing
this forward with Representative
Madrid I certainly I'm very
supportive of this this
conversation this discussion I
know a lot of what
Representative Harper discussed
having a very robust and sort of
Wholistic approach to figuring
out where we go from now on in
terms of how we deal with and
fully fund a lot of these bees a
road in these projects I think
is is critical and so I'm I'm
looking forward to that
discussion and I'm happy as vice
chair of of the committee going
into the interim to help
navigate and and bring that
forced in in discussions with
the Senate on on on putting that
on the agenda so
please feel free to to reach out
and I'm happy to to help in in
that process so I know that we
have a motion Representative
Representative Mr Dodge did you
want to say something.
No ma'am I would just like to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this forward I am the local gum
relations director for of the
department of transportation and
the the impact that TPF is had
and the excise tax for these
local governments is tremendous
and we look forward to on behalf
the secretary we do look forward
to the robust discussion during
the inter thank you very much.
Thank you thank you George so we
have a motion from
Representative Pettigrew and a
second from by Representative or
CS is there any opposition to
this bill moving forward to the
committee on tax and
Representative.
It looks like there is no
opposition so
will will well you
Representative Montoya you do
have a due pass on this
legislation and
and we will hopefully see you in
the inner.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members yes I just I think
somebody said this earlier and
that our roads are it's really
not a partisan issue this is
something that we all of good
roads and
I I really would love to see
just.
Find whatever whatever the
combination is of funds
to help DOT be able to I think
helping them plan out there
years is helpful as well rather
than I think the shovel ready
projects move to the top of the
list a lot of times and I think
that doesn't allow for the
planning for for some of the
smaller communities and I I
think this as Representative
percent the these it's those
small roads in particular I
think that are really taking a
beating and I appreciate I thank
you guys for your consideration
and I look for talking you are.
Thank you Representative.
Next we have Representative
Garrett
I don't do you have any experts
that you need to bring on.
Yes I do madam chairwoman if you
can move Senator Tallman and
effectively tardy in.
And I'll introduce of house
memorial I'll ask senator Tom
and
He's leaving the Senate Joint
Memorial on the same topic in
the Senate and then I'll ask
I'll second party whose
economists working with the
national.
Infrastructure bank coalition to
say a few words if that's okay I
think you're yeah.
Okay.
Yeah I start
rewriting go ahead okay so House
memorial forty seven.
I urge the members of our
congressional delegation to
possibly scope sponsor but to
passed house resolution three
three three nine the national
infrastructure bank active
twenty twenty one that creates a
national infrastructure bank to
finance a variety of
infrastructure projects which
would affect our state in the
whole country.
Infrastructure development as we
all know on this committee needs
careful planning and it needs a
reliable source of long term
funding so I'm right now we
have.
Many coming from the federal
government we've additional
bills and Congress however there
are things that have to be
negotiated every year this would
we move that uncertainty and
really
And the bill that would have
steady fiscal implications I'm
House memorial at cell sites the
American society of civil
engineers who produce the annual
trip report that we hear every
year in this committee so we
know that there's a shortfall of
billions and billions of dollars
to really address all of our
infrastructure needed to really
keep them in good repair.
This is not a new idea actually
the first secretary of the
treasury Alexander Hamilton
established the first national
infrastructure bank the
continued under George
Washington Abraham Lincoln and
leader of President Roosevelt
during World War two era and I
want to add that we have had
meetings I wasn't at the meeting
with Congress woman Herrell but
I know members of the and I'm
just going to repeat it and I.
B. national infrastructure bank
members of that coalition met
with Congress woman Herrell
staff I was on as soon with
Representative leisure Fernandes
we met with the legislative
director of congresswoman
Stansbury and we've had some
zooms about this with our two U.
S. senators.
But we felt like it would be
good to have a resolution to
have this memorial that we can
provide with our rational
delegation because there's so
many needs as we know in our
state but the other thing I
might say is infrastructure bank
would be able to fund some of
the things like affordable
housing some of the massive
water projects that we need that
we will that that we just need a
real and fusion of money and
sometimes they need to work
across state lines so with that
I'd like to invite senator Tom
just a few words and senator we
do hope you're the last
discussion and then I'd like to
invite Mr tardy to say a few
words.
Senator Tallman.
Can you hear me.
Yeah we can hear you.
Okay.
Thank you for giving me this
opportunity to speak
Just a quick.
Comment on your last bill.
The New Mexico has the third
lowest gas taxes seventeen cents
has been increased since.
Nineteen ninety three twenty
nine years ago Senator Gonzales
and myself tried to.
Tempted to sponsor a bill last
year increase that got it went
nowhere.
I'm sponsoring a bill this year
that would to.
Let the the in additional
registration fee on the electric
vehicles.
Because obviously they don't pay
a.
Hey gasoline tax and working on
that bill for three years.
And then maybe this year what
will be the year but obviously
we need to up.
Have a look to vehicle owners
pay a pay toward the maintenance
and construction of our roads.
So National Bank this rule that
have real compassion on this
subject you know for years.
It was the envy of the world and
is infrastructure but no longer
we fought fallen far behind
China and Europe.
The need for a such.
The bank is.
Is really a.
Underscored by the society of
civil engineers to just gave us
recently a C. minus on our
infrastructure we moved up from
a deep plus from two thousand
seventeen no fixes of the plan
off for way too long you are
airports roads and public
transportation to have a drawn
frequent to comparison with
other developed countries you
know you you I've been to China
twice in the last twenty years
then to Europe a couple of times
there you come back we look like
a third world country
The phone behind China's Spence
eight percent other interest
their GMP on infrastructure
China's.
Europe Spence five percent.
Yeah I state spends allows you
to percent we're really falling
far behind the rest of the world
if you can't move good some
people fast you're going to fall
behind
so it's really it's really a
huge huge problem thirty percent
of our rules in New Mexico are
are up in poor condition twenty
to twenty five percent of our
households don't have broadband.
Senator Padilla who is the most
knowledgeable about this issue
says we need a billion and a
half dollars guess what going to
getting a hundred million
dollars from the infrastructure
bill that was signed by but
Biden couple months ago I'm not
fairness though.
There are several requests.
Other.
Federal grants we get that would
maybe give us somewhere between
a hundred and and and of the
billion dollars that still
leaves a gap of a half a billion
dollars for infrastructure elect
a great we're getting no money
electric grid from the
infrastructure built.
And I've been told by experts
that we're rapidly reaching the
point we will no longer be able
to transport more electricity
out of New Mexico because our
great can't handle it no money
from we have no money for that.
Water.
Drought here.
In a large part of the of the
west.
Some experts are saying we could
spend the whole trillion
dollars.
That was recently enacted by
Congress and infrastructure
alone.
is your member recently our
state engineer resigned two
months ago.
And according to the papers
major reason was because he
doesn't have the sources he
claimed that we need to billion
dollars for our infrastructure.
I guess what we're getting is
six of that three hundred fifty
million dollars one six so what
we really need.
And
So it's it's.
China madam is China investing
heavily into its domestic
infrastructure but it's
providing loans and grants to
small countries around the world
by influence so not only are
they way ahead of us on their
infrastructure but they're
getting money and loans to other
countries we are getting that
they could take care of we're
rid this country is of the
client people don't talk about
it.
The China a couple times the
infrastructure blow you away
they got to three thousand miles
of high speed right we have zero
like I said if you can't move
goods and people faster going to
fall behind on.
They have the airports look like
something out of the space age.
Very futuristic very modern and
of course the roads are in very
good condition of bridges our
system of art your full bridges.
Most Americans don't realize how
far ahead.
Europe and China heart to have
front of us here like I said
before you go overseas you come
back here we look like a third
world country.
So.
Water infrastructure.
Also the our expert.
In a few minutes we'll speak on
the and the financing of that
but the bottom line is there's
no debt and no tax increase and
this is been mentioned it's been
used to over the last two
centuries by Washington Lincoln
FDR.
thank you talk a lot about roads
in your first bill yes they're
very important but as I
mentioned there are other things
that are very almost equally
important watered our electric
grid.
Hi speed trains and broadband
they should be this in the next
obviously rules are important
but so is water.
Our electric grid and high speed
trains and broadband so that's
all I have be glad to answer
questions of thank you for
giving me this time to speak to
you this morning thank you.
And.
Thanks for for joining us did
you want representative Mrs a
party to work to speak yes madam
chair woman if if of miss more
tradition gives a brief remarks
particularly about the financing
and any other thing she feels.
Go ahead whenever you're ready
ma'am and and welcome thank you
very much for having me I
appreciate it thank you very
much madam chair my name is Alfa
Committee tardy on a macro
economist I work for twenty five
years at the International
Monetary Fund including all as a
petroleum and on energy expert
and also a previous
organizations to **** out today
I'd like to talk to you about
this proposal in Congress HR
three three three nine this is a
bill that would create a five
trillion dollar public bank to
lend for infrastructure projects
all across the country and the
key here is that the bank is
large enough to cover all of the
financing gap that it's been
identified by the American
society of civil engineers in
seventeen categories of
infrastructure in addition it
will cover some other key
elements that we really need to
get our American economy back on
track and and particularly in
the state of New New Mexico New
Mexico as well so that would
include of high speed rail
affordable housing a large scale
water projects to address
drought where we grow so much of
our nation's food in addition to
the other kinds of water
infrastructure that we need so
the key our ticket here on this
on this bill is that it would
create an institution a long
term source of financing for
infrastructure that is large
enough as I said but in addition
will not put any more burdens on
the federal budget which is also
already experiencing a high
degrees of our national debt
having gotten us out of the the
great COVID of depression from
the last two years but in
addition it will not make any
calls on the Congress for a new
new money's so it will be with
this and I'd be with respect to
the federal budget is budget
neutral no new taxes no new debt
new deficit spending so it's.
Should be appealable to both
Republicans and Democrats alike
who are concerned with the the
state federal side of finances
but there will be plenty of
money in the bank to provide all
of New Mexicos needs of low cost
very low cost loans for meeting
all of your road projects making
sure that we get finally money
out into state and local areas
to repair roads keep them
maintained so that they will be
of given a longer lifetime low
life expectancy of also connect
them to your bridges this is
really critical we've had
bridges that have gone down
recently for example in the
Pittsburgh area we don't want
anything like that to happen in
New Mexico these linkages are
very important for moving goods
agricultural goods included to
local markets so the bridges are
connect source of connection to
the roads we want to do the
whole transportation network in
addition we want to put in a
high speed rail in New Mexico
because this will really grow
the economy even faster than the
road network we can connect
Albuquerque to see sister cities
and Phoenix Denver and Dallas
Texas and grow the economy along
those economic quarters we could
put in new water supply systems
all to address the drought that
much like the ones that were
built the last time we had a
bank like this during the the
Great Depression and World War
two mobilization we've been
built on facilities like the
elephant Butte dam all along the
Colorado River and other water
facilities as well we want to
put in both affordable broadband
everywhere as senator Tom has
said the estimates are New
Mexico's needs for broadband or
anywhere from one to two billion
dollars which will be getting
from the bipartisan bill will be
something very small for
broadband this will allow the
state to compete and make sure
that we get in resources all all
over the state.
we want to put in affordable
housing we noticed that now
homelessness is starting to
occur in the downtown
Albuquerque where it had been
there before kind of you know it
is this is a condition and major
cities is especially in
California and others as well we
wanna make sure everybody has
affordable housing at that there
housing secure this will really
all of the help to grow the
economy New Mexico's economy is
at the lower portion among the
states in the in the country and
with big you I I would have
noticed is listening to these
speakers before on the previous
bill is everyone recognizes the
link between building out
infrastructure and building up
the economy and this will
provide New Mexico with of of
all of the resources that it
needs to do both so thank you
very much and I appreciate it
and I'm available to answer
questions.
Three thank you so much for your
your presentation Representative
Kerr did you want to add any
more.
No I'm excited that we can have
this ambitious but very
realistic proposal to present
today with that we stand for
questions.
Right before we had to the
committee members for folks who
are in attendees if you are here
to speak in favor of the
legislation please raise your
hand and I will call on you.
Okay great.
first on the list we have Dennis
one billion Sir go ahead.
Mr McVeigh I go ahead.
Can you hear me yes I can hear
you okay.
I am the immediate past state
director of New Mexico let we
have endorsed this proposal
primarily because it's going to
benefit the state of New Mexico
and our constituents it's going
to create twenty five million
new jobs throughout the country
and a good portion of those jobs
will come to us.
As our expert management party
has pointed out New Mexico is
among the poorest states in the
country.
And we can only benefit.
From a national infrastructure
bank that would finance.
Projects that we need at a level
that we need.
My own dad worked for the.
See see see the civilian
conservation corporation under
the FDR administration.
One of the few times when
northern New Mexico where I come
from received adequate attention
for our infrastructure and
economic mates.
I would like to point out that
the committee proceedings are
being presented live this
morning to my health education
class I have explained to them.
That this proposal is essential
to their future economic health.
I thank you so much for the
opportunity to address this
committee and we urge you to
support HR thirty three thirty
nine.
Thank you Mr.
next we have mark strand.
Yes my name is mark strand I'm
the current president of the
central New Mexico labor council
I'm here the urge and support
House memorial forty seven.
Which urges Congress to create a
five million dollar national
public infrastructure bank to
land for infrastructure projects
all across America being a
lineman by trade I've worked on
our national power grid and I
understand the importance of how
much we need to expand and
strengthen our current grid to
deliver the new renewable power
that we are planning on putting
on our current existing grid
this bill also allows for high
speed internet we're very rural
state and we need to expand our
internet to all across our state
this allowed means to get it
done.
Building a high speed rail
project Yuneec New Mexico is top
of the line we come to all of
our programs are.
Our national labs and everything
else we rose into the top.
By getting a high speed rail in
here will be connecting west
with the rest of the America and
hopefully be able to expand on
what we already have in place
this is also the only bill that
I've seen that brings in new
water to New Mexico right now
we're currently in a horrible
draft and by bringing in fresh
water we'll have a.
An opportunity to continue with
what our forefathers to started
so with that I urge you to
support House memorial forty
seven thank you.
Thank you Mr strand next we
have.
Right Ellen Smith.
Yes hello.
My name is ray Allen Smith thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee of I am in New
Mexico native retired CPA and
I'm the president of a large
activist group called
indivisible Albuquerque I
support the big idea of the
national infrastructure bank and
HM forty seven I heard on and on
a report on NPR this morning
from an international
environmental group who was
studying what it's going to take
to get us to net zero by twenty
twenty fifty around the world
and they said.
That that the only way we're
going to get there is with the
fundamental economic change
worldwide I believe the national
infrastructure bank is a way for
us to achieve that fundamental
economic change because as you
know banks create money and we
all know that in addition to the
descriptions that we've already
heard I want to point out a few
things that are a little more
specific maybe to New Mexico.
When we can offer good paying
jobs as was mentioned twenty
five million new jobs around the
country are people aren't
subject to needing money needing
to borrow money from the
predatory lenders.
Here in New Mexico we can
develop water transportation
networks from the weather parts
of the United States to our
beloved desert home we we can
improve our recreational areas
which bring interest and improve
our economy our upgraded power
grids would enable us to send
send are plentiful celery went
out of state markets this is a
no new taxes idea it is a big
big idea it's tried and true
it's revert recession proof and
we'll give us lots of jobs we
need the New Mexico legislature
in the yes column to encourage
passes the US House Bill three
three three nine in Washington
thank you.
Thank you.
Our next we have a John wick
shifts.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor we stand in strong
support of this measure and
thank the sponsors op for all
the reasons that have been
stated before especially the
fact that not only will this
this bank create jobs but as was
previously stated these will be
good job C. will be higher
paying jobs one ones that will
take into account things like
prevailing wage so for all of
these reasons we do stand a
strong support and hope you will
as well thank you.
Thank you John.
Next we have George and Dorothy
gamble.
good morning madam chair can you
hear me yes we can.
I am doors will I'm a ball
outreach volunteer with the
alliance for local economic
prosperity and in that capacity
of eighty I represent the
alliance on the food and ag
Policy Council the food neck
Policy Council is celebrating
its twentieth anniversary year
this year and it has worked for
twenty years to to support
policy that protects Water that
works for healthy soil that
works toward food production for
especially farmers markets that
has that supports policies that
support our farmers and ranchers
who grow our food and this
morning I just like to say a
word of on all our B. have
already mentioned by Senator
Toleman Water the humble
resource water is the most
important resource New Mexico
has there are currently six
bills pending in this
legislative session that relate
to water if they pass if half of
them passes it says drop in the
bucket of what is needed to
protect and and develop our
resource water we we need a
money to finish the fifty year
water plant we need money to
actually computerized the
information we have about water
in the state we need water we
need money to put into the water
trust fund there are so many
areas that we have we are under
funded and can not protect
water.
So I do support House memorial
forty seven I hope you move this
legislation this memorial
forward and later to date you
will be hearing more about of
Farman AgDay in the full
legislature.
Thank you very much.
Thank you ma'am next we have
Kelly Allen and and just for
folks who are giving public
comment if I know that there's
what I'm and please feel free to
share as much as you'd like but
if there's any redundant
messages if you if we could just
keep it going with with that so
all of I'll give it over to you
Sir manning.
Thank you madam chair and
committee I answer manning from
Albuquerque and I'm also a
member of the alliance for local
economic prosperity I have and
we'll speak to a couple of
different things that might
compatriot
Dorothy just spoke.
The national infrastructure bank
deserves New Mexico support
because New Mexico needs
adequate investment four inch
infrastructure well we are
grateful that the bipartisan
bill just infrastructure build
was just passed by Congress it
only funds one tenth of what we
need.
Under the proposed national
infrastructure bank New Mexico
will receive access to thirty
three billion dollars and I have
to say I applaud this committee
is a discussion of the previous
bill because it talks about the
legislative process that so
typically results in a lack of
consistent funding for
infrastructure and maintenance
by creating a national
infrastructure bank money for
building and maintaining our
infrastructure will not need to
be allocated to the federal
budget or subject to political
pressure as a bank the N. I. B.
will be able to make loans for
infrastructure when they are
needed regardless of federal
politics or timing.
I know madam chair that this
committee understands that
infrastructure equals jobs and
we're talking about our future
we're talking about jobs for our
young adults here in New Mexico
they are technical jobs they're
difficult jobs they are well
paying jobs and jobs with
benefits.
Infrastructure also connections
for business for government for
tourism.
Hi speed trains yes can connect
this to the rest of the world
which we desperately need but we
also need freight trains for
rail.
For example from Farmington to
Gallup.
Infrastructure also means
safety.
Safety for water for electric in
for internet for our health care
system
when we improve those areas we
all are safer.
New Mexico is a big stage with
big needs and we need reliable
funding to upgrade existing
infrastructure and to create the
infrastructure that will.
Create the future Mexico that we
all dream of a thriving and very
unique stage going into the
future I urge this committee to
approve house memorial forty
seven thank you madam chair and
committee thank you Sarah next
we have Kelly Alan.
Thank you so much madam chair
and committee members I don't
want to be redundant of with the
three things that already I do
want to speak but two things
specific to to to my heart that
one of my major concerns is the
homelessness problem in
Albuquerque or the state of New
Mexico as a whole
in preparing for first begin
with you today I did a bit of
research and the US interagency
council on homelessness or high
said that there are three
thousand three hundred thirty
three homeless people in the
state of New Mexico this was
based on January of twenty
twenty two I'm sorry January
twenty twenty data so with the
pandemic and loss of jobs I'm
sure that that number is much
higher but one of the concerning
our numbers that I found was the
total number of homeless
students in New Mexico is eleven
thousand five hundred and
seventy four people I'm as you
know students that are suffering
from chronic homelessness so so
my eight big issue on the
passage of this and I'd be the
national infrastructure bank H.
R. thirty three thirty nine is
is homelessness and and the
water shortage I personally live
in the eastbound area and every
home on my road has either and
had to drill a new well or
install a cistern system because
the eastbound area is simply a
drying up we have been impacted
by this are myself I live with
my eighty year old parents and
we have to decide who's going to
take a shower or who's going to
do a load of laundry on any
particular day because the water
issue is is so.
That and I know it's bad across
the entire state of New Mexico
so I just wanted to speak to on
my support of HR forty seven I'm
and thank you very much for
allowing me to speak.
Thank you Kelly.
Next we have Richard Roybal.
Richard go ahead.
will come back.
Next we have Rudy Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
I will be redundant on the
topics that have been discussed
but certainly.
in my view.
Adopting the national
infrastructure bank.
Is for all the reasons I was
stated about jobs and whatnot.
But also it comes down to the
health and safety of.
New Mexicans especially those in
a rural communities so I stand
strong support of.
The memorial forty seven and
urged the committee to move
forward thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and I
for some I I assume that was a
different Ricky so it's it's
good to hear your voice.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Next we have.
Good morning madam chair this is
Laura Montoya I am the former
Sandoval county treasurer and
resident Sandoval County there's
so many infrastructure needs and
demands in New Mexico and we're
counties and municipalities need
it most some more urgent than
others letting Congress know
that New Mexico supports HR
three three three nine let them
know we have infrastructure
needs like building bridges
updating our water systems
providing solar making sure we
have broadband in our rural
communities providing funding
for our farmers and ranchers
that feed us and helps us to
create more jobs that are high
paying that are you members can
help use their special skills to
create more for New Mexico urged
the body to please support our
house memorial forty seven thank
you.
Thank you Laura next we have
Anthony my ****.
Can you hear me now yes we can
hear you thank you very much my
name is Anthony your Martinez
I'm a retired university
business professor.
A retired lieutenant colonel US
army.
Our is a retiree I devote more
time to serving on the national
Latino farmers and ranchers
trade association board of
directors and we have a chapter
in New Mexico we support Latino
native American and black
farmers and ranchers.
Also one more time helping grow
small business.
Are in the private sector and
native American communities
including the Navajo Nation
specially wrong.
The technology and broadband I'm
also pretty active supporter of
the national infrastructure by
commissioner of.
Our our support the national
restructure banks are in five
ways but I'm only gonna mission
three because the others have
been repeated one is growing the
private sector economy of the
Navajo Nation and pueblo tribal
communities.
Number two the overall you will
help create huge numbers of jobs
and business opportunities for
everyone in the state including
Latino Navajo and pueblo tribal
contractors and subcontractors
thank you to growth will be here
to fuse the funding in the
construction industry across the
state and finally the national
infrastructure bank will enhance
more local chores determined by
local governments and and the
people as previously discussed
in the earlier here thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Martinez.
I'm.
We have Richard Roybal will try
you again.
I don't know if his
Mike is working but he did leave
a comment earlier where he's he
said my name is Richard Roybal
let district director he
currently serves on a financial
institution board of directors
retired engineer and the whole
hearted whole heartedly supports
House memorial forty seven.
Okay is there any opposition to
this legislation.
Doesn't there's no hands raised
for opposition so we'll go to
committee members are there any
committee committee members who
would like to ask any questions.
Our first we have Representative
Harper.
Thank you madam chair
Senator Tallman and present your
it's it's great to see you here
this morning you know I I was
you know I was on board with
this for a while but then I
started hearing all kinds of
crazy things about how this is
going to really help you and
help us get to zero carbon and.
I guess my.
My first question Senator is.
When you look at.
so you mentioned early on you
know how we're going to hide and
infrastructure as as a as a
country and I'm maybe that's
true.
But you know I I
just visit Europe I lived in
Europe for two years and and I
don't just go to the places
where tourists go I was.
With the people in rural areas.
And and so I'm just.
I'm.
I'm a little concerned that
we're we're we're holding up all
these other countries and and
maybe not in the ways that
Is representative of the real
world
and then comparing ourselves to
that and at that that's a little
concerning to me.
And also we heard talk about
light rail
in in New Mexico and.
My my dad's brother my uncle
developed a light rail in Salt
Lake City so so I'm familiar
with I've talked with I
understand
white railing potential budget
and stuff but I just I look at
you know how is the house the
rail runner working in New
Mexico and and how is Amtrak
working.
You know I I very much support
roads had water and and these
kinds of things electric
infrastructure.
but but I'm.
I'm just looking Sir now when I
look at.
okay now we're going to start a
National Bank and you look at
the gridlock in Washington
between both sides of the aisle
right this isn't just a.
You know one side both sides are
contributing you know who's
gonna who's gonna choose what
projects are funded.
you know I'm I'm just I'm
starting to scratch my head
wondering all debt but Senator
Representative I'd love to hear
thoughts.
Madam chair and Representative
Harper great question I think
some of the ideas that were
expressed by various speakers
today don't necessarily
represent the priorities we
would have a state and I I think
the thing about the national
infrastructure bank it's giving
grants to state and local
governments I'm it's not a
congressional Congress is
deciding who gets the requests
the board which will how many of
the engineers and financial
experts on it and art
nonpartisan they're the ones
doing it but may be affected
could you add to that excellent
question that Representative
Harper rest.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I'm sorry Representative
Garrett I I very much welcome
your question of the projects
selection of would be according
to the a billet self which
describes the projects that will
be covered the ideas that
there's enough funding in there
to cover everything and then as
Representative Garrett pointed
out this will be your be very
much a New Mexico choice on what
kinds of projects you want to
bring in so if you want to
emphasize more road work more
road work at the at the county
level to prepare all your
bridges of whatever kinds
infrastructure you want clearly
you all our building
a lots of the you've reached
renewable resources in the state
of New Mexico you want to
benefit from being able to
export and have adequate power
lines just as Texas has done but
these choices are very much up
to you it is the case that
building things like high speed
rail and you can use the high
speed rail lines also to move
express freight as well but
these will really develop your
economy and connect the state
with our other areas to grow
along economic quarters and
develop your industries that are
already in the state so it's
very much of a case that it
won't be held up by budgets or
anything like that on the board
of directors will be negotiating
directly with you are you and
it's your miscible units in the
state to select projects thank
you.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Garrett and
and express I'm grateful for
that
I.
I I think at.
But this time I'm I'm gonna not
support but I'm I need to
educate myself more on this and
and between now on the floor
Center Thoman Representative
they're all all all connect with
you and and do some more
research and see if this is
something that I can it up
supporting
but I do have some concerns
based off of
yes my dad receive from
attendees today thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Harper
next we have vice chair Garcia.
Thank you madam chair my
concerns are similar to what
Representative Harper used up
when it out and I don't want to
kick the can down the rule but
the you know.
One question on the high speed
rail.
You look at the rail runner but
we spend into that real runner
and we're still paying for it on
that's not very feasible I don't
think that's my opinion only
another thing what were once
ranchers question
or native lands included in this
state in this the price of the
nation and so forth.
Sorry madam chair woman what was
the last question representative
Garcia.
Well yes
Representative if native lands
are included on this National
Bank the.
Yes madam chair and
representative
all of our tribal tribal nations
or tribes and our part our
approvals would be eligible for
this funding and again I adore
people get caught up on high
skill high speed rail that may
be a priority in another
jurisdiction that certainly
doesn't have to be ours and I
also want to reiterate that this
is a memorial to encourage our
congressional delegation to look
at this in the long term so
supporting this we can never
make it even happened but as as
Representative Monterey said in
the last presentation it brings
a discussion of the long term
way of financing infrastructure
in our state in our country to
the forefront but if you want to
add anything to that
yes I would add that there is
the the the entities that can
borrow definitely include tribal
areas that's already in the bill
there's also another provision
in the bill to build up a trust
fund to provide grants instead
of loans to low income areas
that you would have some low
income areas in New Mexico they
could apply for grant money to
build out things like and they
could start their own municipal
broadband all entities develop
their own broadband for their
areas and other water projects
as well they could pool their
water projects to to drill new
wells and those kinds of things
so they will there will be the
availability of grant money in
addition to the lands.
Thank you madam chair
representative to Garrett my mic
concerns are you you the
internet was mentioned or or
However was mentioned my concern
is in my district.
You can have all the internet
and all of I rewind but to get
it from the main line to these
people's houses is a big big
issue and I've been a
representative for six years now
one of seven year matter facts
and I've heard the same story
over and over you can we'll do
this we'll put into the houses
and at the end of the day the
poor people don't have running
water or completely left out of
this you know and I have a
hardware with that because all
it's a big issue you know and I
I think I madam chair I think
they're Representative what the
rule is yes well district in the
state of New Mexico but affected
the rules front here for the
most part because some people
don't have running water of
their.
Forty three city and you know
it's concerning that we're
trying to do some.
Did the urban New Mexico gonna
benefit from in rural New Mexico
be left out again do you have an
answer that manager.
I'm madam chair and and vice
chair Garcia this would provide
another funding source for
counties.
The state and for
municipalities to get funding to
carry out those things as you
know some funding is available
we're working on grants.
This would be and and fusion of
resources for those purposes as
selected by eight you know
counties in our state.
Thank you madam chair
representative here.
The problem still stands I'm I'm
requests how do you qualify for
a grant Madam chair
representative.
Well it's for a grant.
Madam chair of affected can
answer that eight yes there are
several of the provisions in HR
three three three nine page to
find communities that can
qualify for grants one of them
is the low income rural of
congressman Jim Clyburn from
South Carolina the says that any
community that of we want to
director ten percent of the
projects in their that have been
living below the poverty line
for twenty years from within
thirty years and twenty percent
of their population is living
below the poverty line another
it other other poverty line of
criteria in the bill to so one
of the emphases of the bill is
not only to build infrastructure
but to make sure that it gets
out to every single rural
community and that we can do
rural community development at
the same time as a holistic
project to put in water to put
in broadband to put in roads to
put in whatever those local
communities need that they have
not been able to get so far this
was very much the way that FDR
did it during the during the
Great Depression and got out a
rural electrification for
example that this bank would use
the same kinds of techniques to
get out make sure all rural
communities are covered.
Thank you madam madam chair what
what what do you consider a
rural community if if I might
ask madam chair.
I'm affected madam chair if it's
affected could also add to that
right there are some definitions
of that are available we've got
a like Nestle map on our slide
show which shows our rural
communities the definition of
them but for the most part they
are anything outside of the city
areas that have not been growing
over time so they could be
connected to a growing city that
that is recently becoming a
metropolis area but we have good
pretty good definitions of where
those local communities are.
Madam chair representative
Garrett the reason I asked that
question is the.
I want to use all of New Mexico
just for a for a talking point.
These people are out in the
middle of nowhere.
Most of not have running water
it is not really a community
what they consider communities
the chapter house.
And there's there's scattered
out all over the the not the law
I mean the Navajo reservation
inaudible the the item
reservation and the problem
we're going to have years
getting out to individuals was
always brought up Madam chair
and representative is there to
scarcely populated we we could
not servicing goods too
expensive you know I I thought
we had a meeting last week some
other people are trying to do
internet is for governments and
I just question and then you get
give me just a matter while it's
just populated them costume us
we're gonna have to do some all
important and those are issues
of concern me and I you know you
don't have to answer that one if
you wanted to do the tools we
need to address before we get
too far ahead of each other
because all in all urban New
Mexico was a great considered
Los crucis Albuquerque Santa Fe
real Russians they're in good
shape you'll get the bulk of
this and on rural New Mexico
will kind of be put to the back
burner again madam chair that's
all question have thank you.
Madam chair representative
Garcia you bring really good
points and one reason I'm
supporting a memorial is I feel
that there's a real recognition
of the need in our frontier and
rural areas which are.
It's scattered throughout the
state.
So I believe that this infusion
of resources from the and I'd be
could build up our capacity in
our more most rural areas as you
describe of tribal lands but not
just not just our chapter houses
and tribal eight but many New
Mexicans who I mean you drive
along the road and you see a
house every five miles I think
that this is a mechanism so that
our rural counties and holidays
and a rural parts of our tribal
lands can get assistance thank
you madam chair can I enter your
respond on madam chair.
You're going Mr.
Well Garrett madam chair you
know what to do about is all
good but the reality of the fact
is the rural New Mexico is going
to be left out that's the
reality of it in all number one
people out there don't even know
how to apply for grants much
less get a grant and what we
need to do it will proceed with
this is a get some of the
formula or something in writing
to addresses the issues of
people not being able to get
into the system you know because
if you tell somebody that
they're well but for this grant
and you don't have a clue what
to do open it's not going to
happen and we don't have any
assistance for these people to
help them along.
With the process you know and
and don't get me wrong anybody
is this scene you know very very
intelligent well when it comes
down time to writing grants and
apply for the saying that the
different are it's a different
monster if you don't got one I a
also need to reject you so we're
back to square one these people
are trying to survive then the
that's just my thoughts thank
you madam chair.
Thank you vice chair next we
have Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair in the
thank you Representative for
bringing the bill forward.
I know we chatted earlier and
what's committee to know before
I make any comments I have very
very high regard to the sponsor
of this I think she's an
outstanding lady and in a dear
friend of but I find myself
having similar thoughts to what
my two colleagues have just said
when I hear talk of we're gonna
have all this money available
for grants and everything my
first thought is the government
doesn't.
Have an industry to make money
that tax money away from people.
And so if there's going to be
grants and trillions of dollars
they're going to take that from
the people and then disseminate
where they so choose and and
that troubles me and when I hear
all of the testimony.
From a all the all the folks
that this.
Spoke on line item and
illustrations of countries that
we need to be like.
That that that makes me nervous
because.
Don't those illustrations are
are oppressive communist
countries that we're we're
wanting to look like it and that
bothers me.
And then the third thing madam
chair that the job.
Has slowed through my mind is as
requested all the testimony.
Is.
I don't know exactly how to word
this I guess given the political
climate in Washington D. C. as I
watch the news.
To allow our federal government
to to have not just their nose
under the tent but to stick
their head in half their body
under the tent into the banking
world.
Are both sides of the aisle as
our colleagues at the thought of
that happening frightens me that
we would give the government
control or are given the away
into our banking industry I'm
I'm a free market I was raised
that way I've always been that
way ahead businesses on all of
them.
employees and work hard to make
money and done those things.
But to give the government
control of our banking industry.
Or or to allow them such a big
part of the banking industry not
sure that frightens me I I just
think the political climate is
not good it's not right for
those type things in the.
I will not be able to support
this summer this resolution.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Crowder
I know that senator Tom and has
had his handout so did did
Senator did you need to respond
to anything that's been said I
know you dropped out first for a
bit there.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes.
Okay well thank you thank you
Senator Representative Harper
mentioned that something about.
It was all excited about.
Hi speed trains but which is
kind of unfortunate like I said
before I don't know how you know
trains don't go any faster it
I'd say so they did a hundred
years ago.
Takes the same amount of time to
go from should I train from New
York City is Chicago that is
nineteen twenty so how the hell
how we gonna compete with the
rest of the world which is
moving goods and people faster
it just doesn't make sense to
me.
Seventy three percent of the
money that.
That New Mexico's gonna recieve
from the at one point one
trillion dollar infrastructure
is going for roads and bridges.
I am very smart person why is
that he said well that's because
the auto industry and the
highway contractors are strong
lobby.
You can make a strong argument
that we shouldn't be spending.
That we have a lot of other
needs are are just as important.
In the conversation I'm hearing.
The resistance so this.
Tells me all I need to know
about why we are in decline and
we're falling behind we're not
being competitive the rest of
the world.
You know member we had a slight
that supply chain problem in Los
Angeles.
Well that was due to the fact
that we are dachshund highly
automated like the rest of the
world.
I'm not an anti union person but
the longshoremen have fought
automation of our tracks for
years to Senator present
fighting to get them to work a
seven day week of Senator I a
week to help the supplies we
the supply chain problem.
So it's just.
I'm.
Very saddened by what I'm
hearing the resistance of this
because.
It's just.
Reinforces.
My thoughts about why we're so
resistant to change and it's
just it's just a.
The troubling to me.
The what what I'm hearing today
thank you very much.
Thank you senator we have up
next Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative and I
appreciate the memorial in just
as we talked during the interim
session my concern with this is
the federal banking one of one
of my concerns is with federal
banking side of the screen.
Personally.
In my opinion.
If we chose as a state to become
a business friendly state.
We would solve the majority of
our problems that way we would
have the revenue.
That would be needed for our
counties and our state and our
cities to be able to continue to
take care of their structure to
the level that needs to be done.
And we would need to rely on.
Our Big Brother.
We talk so much in our
legislature about our own states
rights but we continue in my
opinion of a broken tally and
say Hey we need somebody else to
come help us out.
And I can't I can't support that
in any form or fashion.
I agree with some of the
comments from Representative
Harper and.
Madrid and Crowder with respect
to.
With respect to this we need.
As a state.
To allow the federal government
to take care of the roads the
bank chose.
The interstate highways in the
and US roads and we need to
learn to take care of ourselves.
We need to.
The very specific with respect
to making our state business
friendly instead of driving
businesses out of the state.
How will disagree.
On a few points were.
One of our one of the other
speakers
I'm bill Sanchez.
Our supply chain shortage of the
lot to do with a whole bunch of
the other issues that go well
beyond automated docks.
Our supply chain issues go to
the point the R. dockworker for
allowed to work.
And.
We at some point in time as a
country need to decide for gonna
be adults for for gonna be kids
let somebody else take care of
us and definitely as a state.
So with that with all due
respect to.
Representative here
this is this is this memorials
not something that I can support
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative group
next we have Representative
Romero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all for bringing this
memorial for work on.
As as I see from the memorial
that's that state and correct me
if I'm wrong you know gets offer
isn't a question is a New Mexico
could be the recipient of
additional federal funding as a
result of the passage of on the
H. R. three three three nine is
that correct.
Yes Madam chairwoman and
Representative Romero that is
correct.
So
and then through the loans and
various things that this
potential national
infrastructure bank would lead
us to have additional national
support for infrastructure which
is what I think I'm hearing
generally from your presentation
on I think as far as the
discussion that we've had this
morning
It seems like we're kind of
getting a little bit of double
talk going because the last bill
that we just had on there was it
meeting we from the sponsor and
I think the committee agreed on
to look into putting the funding
from the excise tax into the
transportation project fund
because there would be a greater
federal match so again the
federal government helping in
our infrastructure needs which
is exactly what this memorial is
advocating for what we're doing
so if we're on the one hand
saying well we don't want the
federal government to help in
the form of the National Bank or
the added funding that would
come along with
this memorial in action by
Congress but will take the
federal match from our excise
tax those things don't you
logically work together so I
think we should be consistent in
our understanding if we're going
to have federal money federal
assistance to help us with our
infrastructure needs I think is
is very much the route to go as
opposed to some of the other
proposals that we we have seen
for example like the the
Anyway I'll leave it there I
just think we need to make sure
that you know we're we're we're
careful in where we will accept
federal assistance where we may
not I think we should be a
little bit more logically
consistent and I think this fits
very well with the discussion
we've had today thank you madam
chair and thank you all for for
the memorial forward to
supporting.
Thank you Representative Romero
next we what we have
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate you give me the
option to speak one more time
I just want to say to a my
colleague representative.
Andrés Romero is that
I think calling out members and
senators double speak and not
being consistent logically.
It is inappropriate and I take
great offense that you would say
that Andrés
hi am logically consistent
almost to a fault and anyone
who's been here long enough
knows that I can attest to that
however even kids bills from my
own party because I was
remaining logically consistent I
think to say that as a
Republican I would support a gas
tax increase.
To fund roads.
Would speak to my logical
consistency.
I also think saying that I don't
think the federal government
should set up a bank Intel I
understand all of the
implications of that is being
logically consistent thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Harper
we do not have anyone else on
the list I do want to ask a
couple of questions.
Which.
I think I won't even go further
into just the the meat of what
this memorial is
Can you just tell us where this
legislation is at the federal
level because from what I
understand from the memorial
it's us basically if we support
this memorial it's giving our
federal delegation sort of that
knowledge to push a little bit
harder for this legislation for
can you describe a little bit of
that because I don't think we've
had enough conversation I think
we've moved to a little bit too
far what this could potentially
do but I don't I think we need
to have a little bit more
discussion on where we are right
now with this legislation at the
federal government.
Thank you madam chair that's a
terrific question I want to
reiterate that this bill this
memorial is to ask our I would
roll representatives and we have
been in communication with
members of their staff for them
directly to sign on to the.
Our.
To have their staff explore it
and consider it I think I can
you say exactly where the
federal three three three nine
house resolution is at the
moment.
Yes thank you very much
Representative Garrett and madam
chair of the legislation in
Congress is been introduced into
the house of representatives
that it currently has five co
sponsors and the number of co
sponsors is growing of course
over the last year the federal
government was very much pre
occupied with with with passing
and the go shooting a passing
the bipartisan bill of which
will only provide New Mexico
with one tenth of the money that
will be available under this
national infrastructure bank so
of that that that process is now
finished and it's then is this a
house states like New Mexico or
not going to have enough to
cover all of their
infrastructure in particular the
rose their bridges their water
their broadband everything there
won't be enough in this bill for
New Mexico so definitely the N.
I. B. will provide you with
additional resources in the
meantime while this bank was
while that bill was being
negotiated of the coalition for
national for structure banks
spent a lot of time talking to
many legislators legislatures
across the country like this one
in New Mexico hi who are very
supportive of the national
infrastructure bank twenty two
twenty six legislature's and
introduced resolutions in
support of the item ID they've
passed in seven aw houses need
Nevada and both houses main in
both houses and also in the
Senate's in Rhode Island New
Jersey and some others so
there's growing grassroots
support many legislators from
both Republican and democratic
districts recognized that they
simply are not able to finance
their infrastructure through
their local budgets much as they
would like to much as they would
like to be independent there's
just simply enough not enough
money in their budgets and
there's also.
So not enough money coming from
the commercial banking system in
the form of municipal bonds to
support infrastructure either so
this national infrastructure
bank is really the low cost way
to provide all of the funding
that you need and you will have
complete selection of projects
autonomy on selection of
projects the ones that you
desire for your state thank you
very much.
Thank you madam so I so what I'm
hearing then is is that this
memorial will specifically
again sort of nudge the
delegation to be more
participatory when it comes to
moving this legislation from the
house side of the federal
government to go forward yes.
That's correct just just like
our constituents call us whether
we support or don't support of
bills when I get you know I
constituents riding me I read a
lot more carefully we want our
representatives and senators to
really take a deep dive into
this.
Okay thank you and one last
question is
you all mentioned that this had
been done already previously in
in our history can you share a
little bit about when that was
and what happened to the banks
that we no longer have it.
Okay good can you go back to
Alexander Hamilton and very
briefly because we're supposed
to be on the floor in three
minutes okay talk about that
we've had four major banks in
our nation's past are starting
with Alexander Hamilton's first
bank of the United States after
the American Revolutionary War
around the war of eighteen
twelve Lincoln's banking system
and FDR's really large bank they
were supported these four banks
were supported by six American
presidents all three and three
on both sides of the aisle
Republican and Democrat they
don't most of our nation's
infrastructure the reason that
they're not here today if they
had a twenty year sunset clause
also that's why the time that.
Okay thank you that's helpful I
I mean I is certainly appreciate
this this house memorial I think
it's important that our
delegation really take a deep
dive on what this could
potentially do for state
I as as chair of this committee
I think this is what is really
exciting to me is is the
possibilities of looking ahead
where could we be in the next
ten fifteen twenty years and and
not deal with issues as they
come in the short term but
actually build a road map and
sorry for the pun but a roadmap
towards what that what New
Mexico could be calm
in the future and and so for me
this is really exciting
legislation just to be able to
allow us to sort of re imagine
all of that and and so I am
really
happy that you brought this for
Representative I look forward to
supporting it and I will vote I
will open it up for now for a
motion I'll entertain a motion
on.
Senator table Representative we
have a motion for do passed
Representative role metal a
motion to table from
Representative Pettigrew the
motion to table does supersede
so we will start to roll call
for a table in motion.
What.
It can you do a roll call bill
please.
Thank you madam.
Just.
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
Representative gala Cruz
Representative Garant no.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
No to table.
Chair Garcia.
Yes.
Chair Rubio.
No to table.
We have the final vote count is
I yes and for now.
Thank you tree so Representative
Garrett your your bill has been
tabled
what the what the vote of five
to four
Would you like to say anything.
I'm madam chair but I really
appreciate the robust
conversation I think that it's
unfortunate that this memorial
won't be sent to our
The rational delegation because
I think it can be a vital piece
since it doesn't use taxpayer
money it could have been a vital
development but I'm the work of
the and I the coalition will go
on and I do hope that this will
participate.
Representative for bringing this
forward
we appreciated and I know that
moving forward my hope is is
that
these are just whether it's a
bank or not these are some big
ideas that we're considering for
this committee and so
I I really hope that moving
forward
we can we can continue to have
this robust conversations so I
appreciate you taking the time
we are due on the floor and so
we will adjourn committee now
and we are planning to meet
for now we don't have anything
scheduled right now committee
for Thursday but we will I will
keep you posted in the meantime
so with that thank you all.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you all.
