It's good to be in front of your
committee and in the house today
I am here to present as you just
mentioned Mr chairman Senate
bill eighty four community solar
and I would like to also
recognize my co sponsor in the
Senate Senator list of phonics
your courses chairing her
committee this morning and also
our house co sponsors
representatives but the Senate
Roybal Caballero and
Representative Andrea Romero so
thank you again for the
opportunity to be here.
I also Mr chairman I would like
to introduce to experts who will
be with us here today to answer
any questions with regards to
the bill and they'll be
Representative excuse me
regularly on his program
director of distributed
generation regulatory policy and
then then Barudin interior west
director and tribal liaison also
vote solar.
I'm so Mister chairman if I
could I'd like to defer to my
one of my house co sponsors
Representative coming at a.
Thank you Senator and good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee it's going to be
before you again we've had.
Many good years in the past on
community solar so I just wanted
to go over briefly Mr chair the
process that led us to Senate
bill eighty four and house bill
one of six although we're
dealing with Senate bill eighty
four gratefully the process
began with Senate memorial sixty
three last year at the end of
the last legislative session
which created a working group in
order to be able to develop
recommendations in New
implementation strategies for
initiatives that would result in
a sustainable and scalable
market based program for the
state of New Mexico this is
really important because the
goal was to bring together
Representative from
Representative Mr chair and
committee from stakeholder
groups around the state in order
to be able to resolve all the
issues as you all have witnessed
in the past few years community
solar has evolved through the
years it's been introduced year
after year but every year in
has been on resulting in major
improvements and so Senate
memorial sixty three brought us
to the point of
developing the goals and what
would end up being Senate bill
eighty four house bill one of
six on and the goal was to be
inclusive of everyone who wanted
to participate and also to find
areas of common ground and to
try to minimize the areas of
concern over ninety participants
took place participated over
about a six month period and it
was wonderful to see in here
representatives from around the
state local and tribal
governments utilities non
government entities the solar
industry and the vast majority
of citizens and so every meeting
we met every two weeks and we
attracted.
Fifty to seventy participants
every two weeks and we reviewed
all of the best practices that
were provided to us by national
groups such as the national
renewable energy lab and then we
discussed all of the issues
relevant to how the bill was
either supported or the major
points of opposition in order to
be able to bring us to the point
of unity the points of unity and
common ground for which we could
then develop the current
legislation before you
just a brief overview Mr chair
and
and members of the committee
because it's important to note
that this has been the most
successful most inclusive and
most participated in process
that I've been involved in
nineteen introducing community
solar along with others for many
years so I'm very happy to
report that it brought us to
this point there still some
things that that you'll see in
the legislation
that we are continuing to
improve our thank you so much
Mr chair and senator and send it
back to you.
I thank you very much
Representative and just a few
more items to share with the
committee Mr chairman
community solar essentially is a
local excuse me local solar
arrays at that are shared by
individual community members
your receive credits on their
electricity bills for their
portion of the power produced it
makes solar power available to
everyone who can't access it for
reasons such as of course
renting finances apartment
ownership home type and and
others there's special emphasis
on tribal communities and low
income neighborhoods increase
options for all consumers
business residential government
nonprofits all with the intent
to lower energy bills and choose
renewable energy Mr Chairman
and economic benefits there are
with regards to solar Canadian
solar and it's stress job
creation in the solar industry
and there will be lease payments
to landowners and as well as
other sectors their economic
benefits Mr chairman members of
the committee we're study that
was commissioned with UNM bureau
of business and economic
research and there is over five
hundred million and economic
benefits to various sectors of
the economy and it creates close
to four thousand high quality
jobs over the next five years.
there will be over two point
nine million in tax revenues
annually for our state which of
course is funded through private
investments and does not
increase require increased taxes
Mr chairman every county in New
Mexico over a twenty year period
could benefit by almost fifteen
million in output and one
hundred and seventeen new jobs
over the next twenty years Mr
Chairman local sectors hardest
hit by COVID that will benefit
the most will be you know
construction restaurants and
professional services and Mr
chairman with that and we will
stand for questions
Mr chair just a formality thank
you Senator we do have an
amendment and I'm not quite sure
what your protocol is for
introducing the amendment and
how to proceed would you guide
us.
Yes I'm.
Practice that sure to see is
been using and house judiciary I
think it's a good one.
If you think the amendment will
affect public comment we should
go ahead and explain it now so
the people or if people are
coming on
the bill as it came over from
the Senate and and make a change
they should be aware of that so
I think it is a substantive
amendment so per perhaps you
could run through the proposed
changes now.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee on.
We
come before you to propose
amendments to should I read the
number Mr chair yeah and can
someone moves the amendment for
discussion purposes.
All.
We motion from Representative
Ferrary
present we're going to have a R.
thank you I'm moving the
amendment point two two zero
five one three point three.
And Mr chair with the amendment
report proposes to do and I'll
go through it one one point by
point and item number one we're
going to strike items one
through three five nine and
twelve of the Senate floor
amendment number one and what
we're intending to deal with
this straight is to clean up the
amendment.
The language as it is misstates
the renewable portfolio standard
known as RKS location as
existing in the ETA energy
transition at which primarily
exist in section sixty two dash
eighteen when it actually
founded in both sixty two dash
fifteen dash thirty four and
sixty two dash sixteen dot dash
for it's important to know
because this is the ETA and the
second point for a striking
number one is the impact of the
R. PS on the limitation of
subscription sign is unclear
because there's not a clear
connection between individual
power consumption and state
portfolio standards.
Number two on page four line
eight after facility we're
striking the remainder of the
line and inserting in lieu of
their of.
And that is by rate class and
residential retail retail
customer or a small commercial
retail customer for regardless
of race class is a nonprofit
organization a religious
organization and in.
Try or pueblo or a political
subdivision of an Indian nation
tribe or pueblo or government
entity including a state
educational institution of
public school.
Authority or other political
subdivisions of the state or
agency instrumentality or
institution of a political
subdivisions.
Yes and amendment section does
is reinstate broader
participation of subscribers to
ensure access to those that fall
outside of the right class of
residential retail customers or
small commercial retail
customers set by the Senate
floor amendments it also it will
allow subscribers of community
solar programs to extend beyond
just residential retail
customers or small commercial
retail customers.
My number three on page four
line ten after include we insert
a qualifying utility this is
basically after qualifying
utility to clean up in just a
comment to correct the language
basically
number four on page six between
nine to eighteen and nineteen we
insert the following new
subsection.
Subsection letter C..
Notwithstanding any provision of
the public utility act to the
contrary.
Percent not otherwise a public
utility shall not be deemed to
be a public utility subject to
the provisions of the public
utility act solely because the
person owns controls or operates
all or any part of the community
solar facility and the our
intention is that we're adding.
This is because subscriber
organizations are not subject to
the same regulatory requirements
as utilities with regards to
filing right K. yes integrated
resource plans abandoned man at
centre of these regulatory
requirements are burdensome for
some smaller subscriber
organization as the regulations
are designed to track the market
power.
A vertically integrated
utilities and not small solar
energy developers.
More governmental subscriber
organizations should not be
regulated as public utilities
and nonprofit organizations
would likely be cut out of the
program if they are regulated as
public utilities.
Going on to make line item
number five on page ten line
fifteen after facility.
Insert.
Qualifying utility and it's non
subscribing customers do not
subsidize the cost of
attributable.
Tributyl looks to ball to the
subscriber organization pursuant
to this paragraph.
It's a language correction which
basically strikes the Senate
floor amendment in contexts to
correct the terminology from
qualifying facility to
qualifying utility.
On page eleven line for after
charges insert provided that non
subscribers do not unduly
subsidize costs attributable to
subscribers so in section seven
eight page six page eleven.
And our public public regulation
facility the amendment and I'm
duly the word unduly such that
non subscribers do not unduly
subsidize the cost.
Concern that this amendment
addresses Mr chair and committee
is that it's imposing a strict
duty on the commission
to absolutely prohibit all cross
subsidization so that decision
which is common between and
within right classes and
unrealistic so the word duly is
intended to provide guidance to
the commission that they should
try to prevent significant
impact and not the in and not
any impacts and Mr chair
With that I think that completes
the.
Items on the amendment thank
you.
Okay.
Thank you for that we're going
to the public now we'll hear
from the public and then we'll
come back and we can have a
debate on the amendment so shall
be if you're ready if you can
put up a whole can do the poll
before we do the at the time to
public comment.
Okay so we'll get this followed
for about thirty seconds and
please feel free to indicate
your support or opposition to
Senate bill you do for the
community solar act.
About ten more seconds.
Okay and we have thirty seven
individuals or seventy nine
percent in support and ten
individuals or twenty one
percent in opposition so we're
gonna go we're gonna do public
comment now and as I said before
we're going to fifteen minutes
on each side and we're gonna
live in each individual speaker
to ninety seconds so if you can
make your comments in a short
amount of time that's great and
we would appreciate that and
that will also allow more people
who share your point of view to
also make their comments so if
you are and we're going to
opposition first so if you are
in opposition please raise your
hand.
If you're in support.
US Senate bill eighty four
please put your hand down.
Because we're gonna do
opposition first.
Okay so first up we have but
Ashley Wagner with the New
Mexico chamber.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee I'm actually back
the policies The New Mexico
chamber of commerce and our
members respectfully oppose
Senate bill eighty four as
amended in twenty nineteen our
organization was part of the
groundswell energy transition
act supporters and advocates
that work hard to get the energy
transition act passed we agree
with the ambition of governor
Lujan Grisham's partitions.
Necessary and the most
affordable faster on the
Mexicans community solar can be
a path however the proposed
amendments to the opposite of
that.
Comment struggling families and
businesses that operate data
date struggle dated date how can
your heart increased costs on
businesses and struggling
families to support large out of
state businesses you need to
keep protections that are
currently in the bill and please
keep that Madam all benefit for
all of our struggling New
Mexicans many of you on
the stand your caring health
perspective you and families
this year a rear end user high
small business employees need
our support.
Energy is necessary and it will
not be easy as a business
community we are one hundred
percent committed to do
everything we can to make it
happen but for us to succeed we
all in the same direction the
current Senate Bill Gates for
the better start than where but
when you strip out the consumer
protections and allow non
subscribers suffer because you
don't want to invest in private
school.
Okay thank you for that
the audio on that was awful on
my end
So hopefully that's not an
ongoing problem
We might be Antonio.
Morning chair members the
committee Mike and Tony with
Xcel energy we're gonna provider
in the eastern part of the of
the state.
I think we as a utility we think
the DTA is still the governing
governing.
Policy for the state and we
don't think that community solar
is.
Legislation is necessary to get
us to our goals of carbon
reduction in state New Mexico
and renewable penetration
Xcel energy we've got already at
this by the end of this year
will be approaching fifty
percent of our lotus gonna be be
met by renewable energy.
I'm gonna let my comments to the
amendments.
That were put on on Saturday by
the Senate's on the Senate floor
we feel like those amendments.
Really codify what the
proponents of this legislation
to be saying all along saying
that this is a lowincome is
targeted for low income folks so
that that language there
clarified that it was this for
lowincome.
introduce thirty percent
requirements and then sit on
subsidized is also what the
proponents have been saying
about this legislation so we
think legislation is is good
from that perspective we are
well that is that was my
comments basically and we still
us stand opposed to the
legislation thank you.
Thank you for that except we
have Terry Cole.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Paul C. drive greater
opportunity.
We appreciate several changes
made by the Senate Bill School
preference for local businesses
and the complexion of lawsuits
I.
These are positive steps however
community solar farm on.
We were and we may make your
supporters.
This mac address mandate the
fact is that most.
We reached all Mr large scale
development yours will pause.
We will make it harder not
easier to realize the full
active generation thank you for
getting more opportunity thank
you for.
In a weird situation which we
are supporters of community
solar we have taken in and and
read the amendments from the
Senate
and and we did we do believe
that those provided us with the
pathway both statutorily and
regulatory wise to getting to
where the solar community solar
would be would have a beneficial
effect in our territory.
that being said the amendments
of today that that report that
we're given today
move us back a step on that and.
And I will also say that this is
a market bill this is not a
climate change.
Scenario these are relatively
small systems.
And and and we know that it's a
market system because of the
amount of of requests that we've
gotten for feeder information
from out of state corporations
that are looking to move into
the el Paso electric territory
with community solar so to that
end we propose today
unfortunately.
Thank you for that next up in
opposition we have Carlos on
time.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee of
Carlos on tech the president of
the New Mexico business
coalition we respectfully oppose
Senate bill eighty four.
We feel this is an outdated
initiative that actually
complicates movie required.
By the ETA to clean energy.
One of the biggest concerns that
we have always had about these
types of initiatives is the
subsidization impact on low
income people and fixed income
rate payers who are right above
the line of those that can't get
hello the end up paying higher
rates as to other users because
of the implementation of these
solar gardens.
And also I haven't seen the
amendments but.
If these are not regulated
you're putting the users the
subscribers and the public at
risk I urge you to oppose this
bill thank you for your time.
Thank you for that next up in
opposition we have Matthew army
of.
Thank you and good morning
chairman the queen and members
of the committee Senator Lopez
and Representative Roybal
Caballero Matthew had a meal
with the public service company
of New Mexico.
And we're PNM looks set
legislation like this we always
keep in mind a very perspective
of the technical perspective
essentially how this will work
and will this work the company
or business perspective is this
the most efficient and
productive way of providing
service and the because of the
customer perspective how does
this affect our customers in
implementation structurally
fiscally and environmentally
this legislation typically as
and the great thing about our
industry there's a lot of ways
that things can get done
especially with the addition of
new technology however so we're
done at scale is more effective
and financially beneficial and
with the energy transition act
it's infancy community solar
like the because I think that is
outdated if the ambition for New
Mexico is clean energy PNM
understands that we're gonna
need partners especially local
partners for sure that we can
all meet the governor
sustainability goals and this
bill as amended looks to really
compliment or local companies
and our workers to emphasize you
know PNM associate support of a
responsible and updated the
implementation of community
solar however we always have to
remember remember that we cannot
be sustainable if you're not
first reliable and we
respectfully oppose this
legislation thank you.
Okay thanks for that we're still
on opposition we have a few more
minutes left we're gonna go the
creek's until.
In opposition.
Regular needed on your and.
All right great I'm Greg
Sonnenfeld engineer award
winning Asalem this and energy
modeler in the San Juan here C.
K. I've been organizing for
climate change for about five
years I've done an economic
analysis of the pros choose bill
and it's this compares utility
solar a it's very very expensive
the bill have been up here to be
co opted by the solar industry
and as well as the workgroup the
majority of the workgroup repeat
industry staffers and that looks
like they got what they wanted
to build the the few right here
climate change advocates in the
Senate recognize this that they
recognize that there would be
that this bill would create a
six hundred million dollar to
fact tax on nuns non subscriber
repairs that the CC was in a
market solution and that nearly
in the tired subsidy was paid by
this defective tax on non
subscriber rate payers up and
they they fixed it that they put
in a no services Asian clause
and the state leave this alone.
The expert witnesses described
there would be no subsidization
when this was added all the NGOs
described it as the strong the
program so I think is a
disconnect between what the
expert witness said and what the
NGOs are saying which makes me
very wearing so I'm gonna ask
you to leave the non subscriber
portion alone there are other
ways to fund this through grants
to utilizing storage to create a
capacity upgrade deferral
benefit and I think that they
should pursue.
Okay thank you for that and
worse we have time for one or
two more in opposition the next
speaker is that the loss of.
Are you in opposition to this
bill.
She disappeared.
Are you in opposition to this
bill no I'm in support okay so
hold on to second is there
anyone else who would like to
speak in opposition we have a
couple minutes left.
Okay so seeing that now please
put your hand up if you would
like to speak in support.
And we'll start with the law.
Okay thank thank you Mr chair
and committee members I'm Beth
Beloff executive director of the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico
representing Santa Fe city and
county Albuquerque and Los
crucis our member governments
are interested in increasing
also quantity up in access to
renewable energy in New Mexico
and believe in all means of
doing that.
including community solar we are
in support of community solar
because it provides access to
all who want to subscribe to
solar energy regardless of
income or property ownership
rooftop solar is not an option
for renters or low income
household community solar is it
helps reduce the cost of
electricity and this bill has a
thirty percent carbon just for
low income households it
represents approximately one
percent of the annual capacity
cap for total utility retail
energy production per year this
is small further community solar
will provide significant
economic benefits to the state
and to local jurisdictions as
well as growth in in green jobs
I urge you to support this bill
thank you.
Thank you for that next up with
David Hermio.
Yes Mr chair of members of the
committee David how to me on the
registered lobbyists for the
City of Albuquerque New City of
Albuquerque stands in strong
support of this legislation
thanks Representative Roybal
Caballero for taking the lead on
this issue over the last
numerous years thanks Senators
Lopez and Stefan X. for
introducing this bill in the
Senate and getting it over to
the house
all the City of Albuquerque was
was pleased to support the
energy transition act and but it
is important to note that the
energy transition act was just
that the transition not an
ending of itself the opponents
of this bill would often have
the body believe that the energy
transition act itself was enough
in wasn't ended up itself this
important legislation provides
ask Miss be offset access to
community solar to disadvantaged
communities and folks who might
otherwise not that great in.
Transition to renewable energy
it puts us in a position to take
an additional step towards all
clean energy and affordable
energy and more options for all
consumers for so for that reason
City of Albuquerque bridges this
body to pass this bill thank
you.
Thank you the next step we have
Melissa Pickett.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you my name is
Melissa Pickett I'm a native New
Mexican and former strategic
planning consultant to tribal
government I'm also a long time
advocate for supporting local
economic development they speak
in favor of community solar as I
believe it is important to
supporting tribes in asserting
control over their energy
resources with a particular
focus on making solar
implementation feasible within
remote and underserved
reservation communities
additionally through workforce
development and educational
training we can ensure that
tribal members from the tribal
communities have equitable
access to living wage career
pathways in solar approval of
community solar is long overdue
I urge you to vote yes on this
bill with the amendment
introduced today thank you very
much.
Thank you next up we have a team
that Christodoulou.
Good morning chair committee
members and sponsors my name to
be increased to do little and
I'm the political director for
the Adelante progressive caucus
as well as an energy engineer
I've been in support of this
bill for the past few years also
with the New Mexico solar energy
association and was on that
working group this version as
the representative announced a
new amendment is the best I've
heard and kudos to PNM the other
utilities for the ETA they have
become our heroes in saving us
from the climate emergency
however these utilities keep
asking for new gas this bill
will help stop that.
This is an emergency I want to
put you in name I'm also a
retired navy commander that in
the olden times when we had
wouldn't warships all the
sailors would perish unless they
all became.
Firefighters it was an all hands
on deck now this bill needs to
to pass and get everybody
engaged in this emergency I ask
for a do pass of this version of
community solar and thank you
very much.
Thank you we have Robert Romero.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee of thank you
I'm Robert Romero registered
lobbyist for K. Carson electric
cooperative we support Senate
bill eighty four and the
amendments okay Carson has done
a successful community solar
project with degrees Pueblo
would like to thank the sponsors
for working with the collapse on
this bill and again we stand in
full support of this bill thank
you.
Next up we have G. Bunton.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is JD
Bullington registered lobbyists
for the Pueblo of Laguna.
Public una supports the proposed
amendments as presented by the
sponsor which will help restore
the integrity of this bill and
the original intent of the
legislation as it was envisioned
by the Senate memorial sixty
three working group and the
tribal community solar task
force which the public gonna has
been an active participant.
Community solar has been part of
the pueblos renewable energy
strategy since it was adopted by
the Public Council in two
thousand and sixteen the pueblo
Laguna has multiple
opportunities for community
solar the pueblo six villages of
Laguna and synonymous seated up
allied a all right casa Blanka
and Seema could utilize systems
ranging from.
Point two five to two point
seven megawatts in smaller areas
with the Pueblo could also
provide community solar to a
combination of residential
government and commercial
facilities thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have Melinda Smith.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Linda Smith co
chair of the legislative
committee of the Rio Grande a
chapter of the Sierra Club with
thirty five thousand members
statewide we strongly support
this bill I participated in the
diverse stakeholder groups
involved in the development of
the bill and I think the
sponsors for their efforts.
The bill as originally written
intends to make solar energy
affordable and accessible to all
New Mexicans to pay utility
bills regardless of income or
housing situation and the recent
UNM study demonstrates the
economic benefits since of
community solar including adding
thousands of high quality jobs
and millions of dollars of
revenue to the economy in the
next five years however the
Senate floor amendments
compromise the regional goals I
urge you to vote yes on the
amendments to be considered
today to reinstate broader
participation of subscribers and
remove requirements that PRC
regulate subscriber
organizations as public
utilities twenty states are
already implementing community
solar successfully New Mexico
can be one of them thank you.
Thank you for that we've got
about five minutes left the
public comments or not can get
everyone next up we have our to
missio Romero Eaker.
Good morning chair members of
committee when I was on the show
merry Kauffman here's a number
of yucca using artifical crisis
action to express our support
for HB SB eighty four has
members throughout northern New
Mexico and all of our
communities stand to gain from
the passage of this bill when we
organize the crosstrek two years
ago community solar was one of
the first policy tools we
advocated for in order to
address the climate crisis it's
a tool that would allow us our
families were renters and low
income residents and small
business owners to be able to
access renewable energy for the
first time.
While also at the same time
being a source of local economic
development and small business
or at least it was last week on
the Senate floor poison pill
amendments were added regulatory
roadblocks would strip away the
market incentive from
independent developers and
consolidate utility control over
solar energy destroying the
vision of independence solar
gardens blooming across the
state legislature's took the
community out of community solar
in order to make.
A bill that would continue to
bow to the whims of utility
companies we will not soon
forget the demand made by
hundreds of youth in the state
has been undermined by our own
representatives we ask you now
as members of the House reverse
that miss remove the Senate
floor amendments and pass a
version of just be eighty four
the truly bring solar to our
communities.
Thank you for your time are you.
Thank you.
We are bombing.
Five hundred.
We can hear you now.
My name is Bob man can you hear
me yes okay I'm thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
R. I am a speaking here for
myself but I.
A member of the board of the
alliance for local economic
prosperity.
in support of the bill and I
want to also mention that I
support the amendments that were
proposed today of.
What.
I think this bill brings to New
Mexico in a very important wire
two things one is that
accelerates our shift to clean
energy and to yes
Bring forth the opportunity
first the disadvantaged of good
to be able to participate in
solar energy and also.
Has the prospect of making it
possible for them to reduce
their utility payments so in
that sense I in both ways I
support this bill and urge a do
pass on just be eighty four with
today's amendments thank you.
Okay we have Larry current.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Larry R. and
registered lobbyists the city of
Los crucis agency Beloff.
Talked about the coalition of
sustainable communities and city
of Los crucis is a proud member
of the coalition has adopted a
resolution in support of
community solar and other other
initiatives pushed by the
coalition and I don't wanna make
too much of a habit of it but I
by echo what my good friend
David how to meal and his
testimony about the energy
transition act and support for
community solar what is going to
mean for communities and so we
urge your support for Senate
bill eighty four we think it's a
good piece of legislation and a
good step forward thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you except we have Paul
Gibson.
Thank you chairman McQueen
committee members and especially
the bill's sponsors for both
introducing and then amending
the support legislation my name
is Paul Gibson co founder retake
Our Democracy an all volunteer
organization with twenty five
hundred members statewide we
take it maybe the community
solar act priority for this
session but we're disappointed
with the amendments made in the
Senate and are greatly relieved
to hear the amendments proposed
today by bill Sanchez they
restored the intent of **** for
and the framework developed by a
stakeholder coalition Network
for many weeks to design it
Senator amendments would have
essentially gutted it just be
eighty four creating regulatory
hurdles that do not exist in any
of the other states operating
community solar they would not
protect the community from
community solar that would
prohibit the possibility of
community solar these hurdles
and other restrictions on the
bill would prevent Bennett
virtually any community from
employment to community solar
your hearing from cities tribe's
youth and environmentalists all
in support of this bill and your
hearing opposition from the
utility industry big business
retake is proud to stand the
environmental community and
strongly encourage you to vote
yes on SB eighty four as amended
thank you very much.
Thank you except we had element
Bravo.
There are your need.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee I'm
Eleanor Bravo I'm chair of the
board of new energy economy we
support Senate bill eighty four.
With the amendments that
Representative Roybal Caballero
has have presented today I'm not
clear on whether these
amendments have addressed the
thirty percent low income
requirement which we object to
consumer protections are built
into the original bill because
of the element of competition
the cost of electricity are
market driven so there's no need
for regulations addressing
barely one percent of energy
consumption we concur with up
with the previous comments made
by miss be lost and other
members of the department of
community please vote yes on
Senate bill eighty four as
amended by Representative cope
with wearable Google here thank
you.
Thank you so so we're time for
public comment what I would like
to do is the people who saw
their hand up would like to
recognize you and just have you
you state your name to your with
if anyone and you can see if you
propose or support the bill but
without making statements of
next up we have Joseph.
I'm not sure of his last name is
not over or that is that's is
organization.
Joseph.
You just introduce yourself and
say you here with.
Your muted on here at.
Thank you Mr chairman Ms Joseph
Hernandez with again Angie and
organize our neighbor Education
project from Shiprock New Mexico
I support this bill okay great
perfect that's just one one next
step we have Oscar some since.
Yes this is Oscar since
representing Rio Grande and the
visible Mr chairman members
committee we highly recommend
that you pass an ability for as
amended thank you thank you that
Janet Carter.
Hello my name is my name is
Janet Carter and I am I live in
Santa Fe New Mexico and I
support this bill with the
amendments today in the Senate
and I speak for myself I
thank you.
Thank you we have.
There is increased
Good day my friends.
I am Andrew stone of pace Fund
New Mexico and a board member of
New Mexico solar energy
association and I stand in favor
of this bill as amended thank
you very much.
And last we have Serra manning
I'm not sure service programs
for Serra would you like to
introduce yourself.
Thank you I answer manning I am
long time supporter of local
economic development I support
the community solar act as with
two days amendment
and I live in New Mexico I have
solar on my roof and I would
read a love to be able to extend
that to all the room look remote
locations in the state thank you
very much okay thank you for
that and that is our public
comment so thank you all who are
watching it thank all thank you
all who are who participated wed
like to do now is move the
amendment for adoption and then
we can either adopt the
amendment or have to be on the
amendment up to the committee
so.
motion to adopt the amendment.
This to adopt the minutes.
Their second.
Okay I'll second that
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
One is a small in the.
The.
She.
Larger commercial lows.
To be.
Connected to these facilities
I was always under the
impression community solar was
about residential service could
could you address one of those
changes were made to.
Mr Chairman representative could
you be a little bit more
specific and go to the exact
amendment that you're referring
to.
Well the the portion of your
amendment that allowed of.
Sample Mexico State University
to.
Of.
To the community solar system
that's a fairly large load and
why take up very significant
portion of the resources that
were developed by a five
megawatt system crowding out
potential.
Residential customers.
So what do we want to let large.
Users slide for example.
University of participate in
this program.
Mr Chairman representative I as
I stated on believe your of
referring to amendment number
two and I as I stated in my
Explanation it reinstate the
broader participation of
subscribers in order to ensure
access to those that fall out of
the right class of residential
retail customers or small
commercial retail customers set
by the Senate floor amendment it
also allows subscribers of
community solar programs to
extend beyond just residential
retail and small commercial
retail customer so Mr chair all
we for if I could I'll ask one
of the experts Rick Gilliam to
explain further.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Scott
the amendment on the Senate
floor to reduce the size of
commercial customers to small
commercial customers only
Really prevented some important
constituents from participating
in community solar our
universities colleges community
colleges which are spread around
the state hospitals other
government related organizations
would not be would not have been
allowed to participate in the
our community solar program as
the amendment in the floor had
originally intended this opens
it back up and and keep in mind
that there's still a cap of
forty percent of the total size
of a community solar project
that would be the maximum
allowed for a larger commercial
customer like a community
college to participate so
there's still sixty percent
available that fact is a forty
percent requirement for our
customers under twenty five KW
which would be mostly
residential customers and the
remainder of can be residential
customers what as well so it's
likely that sixty percent will
be residential customers even
under that scenario.
Mr chairman Mr Gillian.
Tell me if you would about the.
Why there is objection.
To the PRC oversight of these
facilities.
It's my understanding that the
PRC is charged with the with
protecting the interests of.
The the providers of this power
and the customers and the
elimination of that oversight
which seem to be detrimental
perhaps to a utility customer or
use the community solar
customer.
Protections could you address
please.
Mr chair at.
Go ahead Mr Rick.
Mr.
Mr chair and representative
Scott yes
first of all the oversight of
the PRC is not eliminated by the
amendment the PRC so has
oversight on our consumer
protections are complete
proceedings there were several
elements added in the Senate
floor amendment that that remain
in place what.
What amendment for of the of
this amendment does is to
eat avoid full regulation of a
community solar right a
subscription organization by the
commission which would involve a
great deal more than that type
of oversight it would be
involved in establishing rates
would be involved in our
requiring things like resource
planning certificate proceedings
a Batman proceedings a lot of
reporting requirements and
frankly our subscriber
organizations which should be
very small and community based
in nature.
Would simply not do it because
the regulatory burden would be
so much I'm a contact on the
other hand
the
Regulation of the community
solar facilities would be
acceptable by utilities and
probably out of state utilities
as well for example there's a
company called next error energy
which is the an affiliate of
Florida power and light that
goes all over the country
building renewable energy
facilities.
Could very well be attractive to
an organization like that so
large utilities from out of
state as well as the in state
utilities would be able to
participate in this bill because
they have the resources to to
address the regulatory burden
and it would turn it would have
turned to this bill into a
utility only our community solar
bills and that's not the intent
as you pointed out this is a
community solar bill and we want
communities to be are leading
the charge on these projects and
finally I would just say that
The.
That communities so our concept
is market driven and as I'm sure
you know regulation is a
substitute for market
competition which is why we have
monopoly utilities our community
solar because it's subject to
the discipline of market
competition does not require
regulation in that sense so I
think we've covered adequately
the the consumer protection side
of things and regulatory burdens
that would be associated with
being a public utility would be
our and an estimate to that
community solar subscription
organizations are.
Thank you for that Mr Kelly and
Mr chair representative.
Gilliam I'm advised.
The forty percent limitation is
removed.
Is that accurate.
Mr chair and representative
Scott no that's not accurate it
was removed from one place where
it was duplicative it's still
exists
And I believe it's section three
A. R. D..
Yes on page six of the the bill
in with amendments in context.
Okay go ahead.
Let's move on to.
The low income provisions.
This.
Could we discuss permitted Mr
Chairman representative and Mr.
Mr chair.
I'll defer that to Mr Gilliam to
begin.
How would Mr chair first of all
can you state your question
related to what you're trying to
have us
Explain.
I believe alters the low income
provisions of the Senate bill
that came across and that's the
I guess I'm asking why those are
being altered in this please.
The reason I ask you Mr chair
and representative for clarity
is because I don't I don't see
where we're removing lowincome
provisions in the amendments and
we're discussing amendments so
unless you can point me to where
we're doing that I have
difficulty in answering your
question Mr chair.
Mr chair representative I don't
have that specific.
A point in the bill and shrunk.
Let me look for it and could we
move on to the.
To the issue of cross
subsidization.
And discuss the objections to
the.
Changes
Across from the Senate bill on
that issue.
Thank rather than just asking
for discussion could you ask a
question.
I think we very present in the
bill and we can debate that but
you know we're on the amendment
if you have a question about the
bill the amendment excuse me
please please ask it but just
asking for generalized
discussion isn't particularly
directed.
Mr chair representative and Mr
galea the but alters the across
subsidization language in Senate
bill.
Eighty four.
That is the alteration that I
would like to discuss why does
that need to happen the way it
does.
Mr chairman and
Representative I will
And because I'm not clear on
what you're pointing out to all
go ahead and
Turn the question well there
wasn't really a question on it
you're asking why it well why it
alters that so why don't I just
Thank you alluding to
Amendment number six.
which I stated.
The intent of this amendment is
introduced because it adds
unduly the term unduly such that
non subscribers do not unduly
subsidize costs.
The concern that this amendment
addresses is that imposing a
strict duty on the commission to
absolutely prohibit all cross
subsidization which is common
between and within rate classes
is unrealistic.
The word and duly is intended to
provide guidance to the
commission but they should try
to pre vent significant impacts
not any impacts that's as best
as I can explain with the intent
of on the amendment number six
which you're not referring to Mr
Chairman and Mr and
representative but I'm assuming
that that is the amendment
number six that you're referring
to and that's the best I can do
in explaining it any further
unless Mr Gilliam would like to
add to it but it to.
Would you like to add to it Mr
chairman.
Representative yes I would like
to add to that thank you.
Go ahead.
Mr chairman and Representative
Scott
If you'd like I can explain why
there are are many existing
cross subsidies in rates in
utility rates today what I'd
rather do at least at this stage
is just just say that utilities
are not held to the standard of
zero cross subsidies between
customers between customer
classes and so forth so adding
the word I'm duly to the the
language in the bill essentially
point community solar facilities
on the same footing as utilities
when dealing with the cross
subsidy issue at the commission.
Mr Chairman representative Mr
Gillian would not be accurate to
say though that a cross subsidy
within a single rate class would
be a very.
Usual circumstance.
Mr chairman and Representative
Scott no our cross subsidies
exist throughout right classes
and in fact I would go so far as
to say that anytime you have a
right class that has more than
one customer in it then you have
a cross subsidy because our
rates are average for the entire
customer class Public Service
Company New Mexico has over four
hundred and I believe seventy
thousand residential customers.
It's likely that none of those
customers are paying their
actual cost of service are there
are customers that have that
same the same energy use so
they're paying the same rates
but have very different those
profiles which means that they
impose different costs on
utility so no I would not agree
with that at all there are.
Cross subsidies within right
classes extensive process cities
within rate classes as well as
between right losses.
Thank you.
Skillion of Mr chairman that's
all I have.
If you representative Scott next
up on the amendment we have
Representative Dixon.
And once we you know once the
building amendment of personal
the they will have to be on the
bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
sponsors of the bill
I would like to so so I've spent
some time.
the last twenty four hours
trying to go through the the
original bill the Senate
amendments and then this
proposed amendment.
And one of my.
Big concerns slash question.
Deals with the
language the amendment.
Sorry so many papers here
Number two in the amendment
where we're adding in
is a nonprofit organization a
religious organization Indian
nation tribe or pueblo etcetera
including.
A state educational institution
of public school public Housing
Authority or other political
subdivisions of the state or age
agency instrumentality or
institution of a political
subdivisions.
So.
What what really concerns me and
and I may be an out liar here is
that my understanding over the.
You know the past several years
that I've followed community
solar as an issue is that what
we're trying to do is.
Increase access of solar and
renewable energy to low income.
Full of folks who are renters or
cannot put rooftop solar on
their homes.
And.
So it but if we could start
there so why are we expanding
this concept is to such a broad
swath with with this ammendment.
Mr chair and representative
thank you for the question I
think the the key point here is
on the development of a facility
so that the more the broader
access there is to develop.
Smaller community facilities
that can share.
multiple customers is the idea
behind Mr Chairman
representative affording
affordability and access so the
idea is that we're not providing
the facilities
a utility scale.
Advantage what we're doing is
opening up Mr Chairman
representative the development
of these facilities in as many
smaller locally placed
communities in areas so that it
has it multiplies in the sharing
of
of community solar so we're and
we're saying Mr chair and
representative that if we open
up
to public schools for example or
public housing facilities
they then.
Allow the subscribers.
It's it's a you budget wise a
subscription process to
subscribe to sharing on the
energy from the community solar
facility that's localized in its
small community so again it's a
it's a it's not that we're
placing them on the same footing
and as a facility and giving
them any further advantage it's
the opposite the more that we
four churches for example
are located in communities and
so churches would also fall into
this category I don't know
Mister chair Mister dealing with
like to add or Mr Rudin.
Mr would and would you like to
go ahead and add to this.
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr.
Representative Dixon so all the
expansion of the subscriber
definition is basically there's
a few provisions a few points
that helps enable for the
development of these projects
insurance fully subscribed
facilities so that's really key
for the anchor tenant issues
having an anchor tenants such
as.
Religious organization church
school that really helps reduce
the financial risk of projects
which also helps low income
customers be able to you know I
these projects and to serve them
the proposed language also
ensures that tribal government
or subdivision entity ratepayers
can participate in a community
solar project office tribal
lands so there are provisions
for the native community solar
projects but for instance if we
want to do one of these projects
in Albuquerque as a tribe wants
to subscribe to it it just gives
you know open up the language so
that it is not just serving
residential customers for small
commercial retail customers.
Thank you to this as I mentioned
it's just facilitating getting
anchor tenants so that's the
forty percent requirement that
Mr million mentioned in section
three eighty five on page six.
Mr Galvin Mr chair would you
like that anymore or is that are
you okay.
I'm cert if that's not
sufficient I'm happy to add more
but I've talked to the
representative.
Okay hi if thank you Mr chair
and
Sanchez.
So.
One of the things that we've
heard in the debate and on the
amendment or you know in in that
the public comment was
municipalities in support of
this and so I want to take a
specific example so that I that
I really understand what I am
being asked to vote on.
So I am rooftop rooftop solar.
I'm and I also you know and I
PNM customer.
If the City of Albuquerque.
Wants to participate in a
community solar project.
And they start you the City of
Albuquerque then.
Does not need to obtain as much
energy from PNM what happens to
my cost as a customer.
Mr chair and
Representative can't I would
like to have Mr Gilliam present
a scenario in response to your
question because I think that
would best apply thank you gave
us that a great question to be
able to do that
Mister chair Mister dealing.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
Representative Dixon
So I think the question you're
asking is if Albuquerque
participates are and a project
and at the cap which would be
forty percent and what state
it's a large project five
megawatt project that would be
two megawatts
for the Albuquerque portion of
it our.
First of all it's important to
understand that Albuquerque as
well as all the other
participants subscribers and
that project would continue to
pay all the distribution costs
associated with service to their
homes and businesses.
Are so there's no
lost revenue there if you will
our second already
the bill credit that that the
commission will designed based
on the the language in the bill
essentially gives a credit for
the generation and transmission
system that is not used by the
City of Albuquerque or the other
participants and that community
solar bell.
So that's where I think your
questions coming from who pays
for those costs and there's
there's several answers to that
first of all
There's a reduction in
Albuquerque I in I'm sorry in
PM's costs because that two
megawatts for Albuquerque for
instance is no longer needed
from the from PNM.
secondly PNM is in the process
of going through a
replacement of the San Juan
generation station are ownership
that it had and.
The community solar that is
being built were or that would
be built would be part of that
replacement so in other words
where is they may have had to
replace five hundred megawatts
in the City of Albuquerque's
example they would replace four
hundred ninety eight or for that
to take into account the entire
project they would replace four
hundred ninety five dollars.
We're talking very specific here
and and you know kind of the
context is all else being equal
but of course all else's never
equal particularly with
utilities because our all the
other customers of PNM are
changing their usage constantly
summer using more summer using
last people get more efficient
people buy electric vehicles.
We'll put on rooftop solar all
of those things change the load
patterns of of each customer
class across the entire service
territory so all of those things
taken into account well
in balance with reductions due
to community solar will balance
out when there's a rate case.
Which is another important point
to remember when the community
solar facility is built there's
no immediate effect on other
customers the rates don't change
immediately the only time
they'll that will be taken into
a fact is the next time there's
a rate case which is every two
or three years or so with PNM.
when that rate case occurs there
are those effects will be taken
into account and the reduction
in usage and reduction in demand
resulting from the participation
in the community solar facility
will
result in fewer costs being
allocated to the residential
class and to the commercial
quest to whatever class that the
City of Albuquerque's facility
is a part of so the costs that
are reduced in the allocation
process to those cuts that whole
customer group so all those
things taken together and the
fact that even five megawatts
which may sound a lot in
comparison to rooftop solar is
very small comparison to the
entire PNM system the the impact
is very small if any of it and
that's that's why we as we
talked about earlier with
Representative Scott that it's
important to have that term
unduly in there because with all
the changes from from one right
K. to the next right right K.
it's virtually impossible to
eliminate any and all cross
sensitization.
Including ones that already
exist in rates and I also that's
an answer to your question and I
Mr chair and and Representative
are just add one final point
that I think is it was in the
testimony that you brought up in
several cities
in the City of Albuquerque in
particular you know the City of
Albuquerque can actually
subscribe
in order to be able to procure
their own renewable energy so
the more the subscribers the
more you open access on the
subscriber end of it the more it
that's the concept of the more
we reduce and expand
the access and affordability
aspects so that it becomes what
Rick just described as more of a
long term
Because it is a fact on the
right having on the rates and
everyone's caring you know their
specific
Us and others it's not unfairly
distributed in other words so
they can become their own
subscriber and that's the
objective the objective is to
Find that brought access so
Mister chairman and
representative hopefully that.
Cleared up some answers.
Questions.
Thank you
chairman and Sanchez.
I guess
Sorry.
So.
So you if I'm understanding this
correctly then you're not
anticipating a significant
change in or impact to non
subscribing customers secretary.
Mr chairman of sorry.
Go ahead Mr chair.
I was on mute sorry go Hedrick
Mr chair and representative yes
that's right and that's what
we've seen in other states I'm
actually in Colorado and we have
not seen those kinds or is it
really any impacts of community
solar
are on other customers so it's
been a very positive thing for
customers here in Colorado.
Mr chair representative I think
that in the case across how many
states now over to twenty states
right including the district of
Columbia and what we've seen Mr
chair representative I
participated in several national
summits where we talk about
community solar and exchange the
budget and the impacts and I can
say that the overall general
suggestion amongst all of those
states and the last one a tenant
at thirty states involved was
that it it was not having a
significant impact in impact
they were encouraging two years
ago four years ago and then two
years ago and then last year
really looking forward to make
New Mexico to add to that
our portfolio positive impact.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Sanchez my last question is
given that why.
What is the purpose of that
unduly.
The language
for unduly affecting.
Mr chair and representative
As I
try to explain with
Representative Scott
unduly essentially puts
community solar projects on the
same footing as in terms of
treatment by the PRC as electric
utilities are in New Mexico are
today because it's as I said
it's virtually impossible to
eliminate any and all cross
subsidies between customers and
between customer classes that
are.
It it would be holding community
solar to a much much higher and
stricter standard to say that no
cross subsidies could occur.
It's very difficult to one even
identified those cross cities
because you have to balance
revenue reductions with the
benefits that are provided so
the the term on duly essentially
gives a little bit of
flexibility to the commission to
decide whether or not there's
any cross subsidization.
I thank you Mr chairman Sanchez.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you further debate on the
amendment Representative
Strickler are you on the
amendment of the bill.
On the amendment.
Representative Strickler thank
you Mr chairman and and thank
you
Representative.
And and experts.
Yeah I I guess my question is on
on the on the amendment I know I
know you you stripped out the
sentiments.
And your back to the I guess the
original bill and
the a five megawatt system.
It requires about five fifty
acres it is to to build a
constructive state is that right
to Representative.
Mr.
We are just Representative
Strickler two things first a
district the man it doesn't
propose sister about all this
and for amendments if you look
at the amendment there's a list
of changes and secondly I don't
think the amendment changes the
size of the facilities.
Okay.
Okay.
Let's work on the amendment if
we can't.
All right.
Well I think I think I better
save money my question for the
bill itself on the
Yes the amendment.
Is a little confusing to may so
I'll I'll defer my questions to
the bill itself.
Thank you for that any further
discussion on the amendment.
Shelly could you take the role
then then it.
Think about please.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon.
Ask.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sarinana.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler now.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Dixon.
Representative senior muted.
Representative Dixon your muted
oh sorry
Sorry what are what are my
options at yes or no on the
amendment.
I know.
On the amendment.
Tell me did you get
representative Sarinana.
I did not I don't think she was
able to and you'd if she's here.
I'll go back to her said no okay
thank you my apologies.
Representative Montoya.
Yeah
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair Stansbury yes.
And chairman of queen yes.
Okay and that is a yes do you
pass for the amendment with a
vote of five to four.
Could you chair for a long yes
of course Mr chairman.
Right well Mister chairman had
to go present a bill in the
Senate so we will now move on to
the main bill other members of
the committee that would like to
ask questions or discuss the
bill.
Do we have a motion.
Okay looks like we have
Representative Scott please.
Thank you.
More questions here with respect
to the bill.
It looks to me like there is the
potential here to draw.
Two hundred local.
Legally regulated power.
To the utility grid.
Of.
Mexico because she.
Looking at the legislation.
Potentially involves fairly
significant amount of cross
subsidization.
Particularly with respect to
the.
During specs.
This piece of legislation.
That's right each system.
What sure.
We're looking at the potential
of up to twenty of these have to
be integrated.
There are required to be
leader and it looks to me like
there is surely.
Significant potential that this
will have a negative impact on
ratepayers not participating.
In these programs.
Okay madam chair.
Representative.
Experts could Joel regional
addresses concerns.
Madam chair and senator would
you like the experts to Mr
Gillian to address this.
All as Mr Gilliam to address
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
Scott
I take it your question goes
beyond the discussion we had
earlier
So I I'm not sure what I can add
other than you know as we you've
heard R. twenty states and the
district of Columbia have net
meter I mean sorry have
community solar programs this is
not been an issue there this
bill has followed the best
practices of community solar in
those states the projects are
market driven which introduces
discipline or maintains
discipline on the development of
these projects projects will get
built on last customers actually
subscribe to these projects.
We had are already some
extensive discussion on the
cross subsidization issue and as
we talked about the term on duty
does not eliminate the the
consideration of.
Ross subsidization it simply
gives the commission a little
flexibility the same flexibility
that the utilities currently
have to.
Not have to.
Go to the strictest standard of
absolutely zero cross subsidy
because as as I mentioned
earlier that's virtually
impossible to achieve either and
rates and our our right class
issues today or with the
community solar bell so I'm
hoping that this is getting out
your question but if if you have
something more specific I'm
happy to try and and help you
with that.
Thank you Mr chair
representative it would be
helpful madam chair sorry if we
address specific questions on
that way it we can director and.
Tension.
I would.
And an expert.
She.
Madam chair if you would.
Want to.
Pay your bill up for a specific.
I want number and I would like
to do for the balance of my
questions until I get a chance
to look at that if you would
Representative Strickler or
somebody else go for.
Of course yes thank you
Representative Scott
Representative strictly your
next thank you madam chair and
and thank you Representative and
I guess I just wanted to get a
cost figure a five megawatt
system I know you need about
fifty acres
the fifty acres it's hard to
come by and downtown Albuquerque
Los crucis or Santa Fe at the
cost of the land itself.
really drives up the cost at at
I know.
And San Juan county we we have
quite a bit of open land mainly
BLM land management plans and we
have a couple of hundred
megawatt commercial projects on
the drawing boards and and that
requires about a thousand acres
you know to.
Four hundred megawatt facility
so can you give me some cost.
that that would it would take to
put in a five megawatt system.
and and where would you put the
where would you put the facility
of if the land costs were too
high.
Madam chair.
Mr Gillian would you address.
Please.
Yes madam chair and
representative
well first of all a five
megawatt system would require a
about twenty five to thirty
acres not fifty just to put it
in perspective and of course
your ride land in Albuquerque
would be much more expensive but
there's a trade off so if you
had land available in
Albuquerque the cost to
interconnect would probably be
lower than it would be and some
other parts of the state where
the land is less expensive but
the interconnection cost might
be higher so it's difficult to
tell you with any kind of
precision what that trade off is
in terms of the actual cost
but I mean suffice to say that
these projects won't get built
unless the subscriber can
actually save money on their
bills as a result of the the
pricing of the projects.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and and Representative and an
expert and so
In the Albuquerque area let's
say you know I'm this using an
an example you you're just gonna
have to find thirty acre parcel
you know outside the city you
know at the county where lance
cheaper a year and the service
areas so that would that would
work is that is that what
happens in these other states to
is that what happens in Colorado
Colorado real estate is
extremely expensive and they
don't have a lot of
you know the private lands is
pretty costly in in Colorado for
example real from a with a real
estate market
so in the Albuquerque area.
You know let's say you find a
suitable.
Site you know twenty miles from
the cities of is is that is that
a possibility is that.
What this would boil down to if
land costs are too high.
Mr.
Madam chair and and
Representative let me just
remind you as has been the case
and all the previous years and
in the current legislation when
we talk about five megawatts
Madam chair representative we're
talking about it being a cap for
the projects and so anything
coming in under that particular
cap
I gonna very and signs and the
gonna vary in cost and Mr chair
madam chair and representative
as with any development project
there are those variances cost
of land what's the market cost
of the land at that point but
what's the state you know
there's a lot of factors that
you're raising madam chair
representative they have to be
taken into consideration so
And that and that's part of what
we call the project costs you
know there's.
All of those site selection land
costs market values negotiations
that go on between all of that
in order to put a project give a
development project.
together so it's very difficult
because you know and there's
also time what are you gonna do
this so the there's a lot of
factors madam chair and
representative so I just want
you to keep that in mind because
I know that you've been involved
in a multitude of development
projects in your career and so
it's the same factors varies
according to size and cost of
the project is not a very
according to size and cost
depicts of anything under five
milligram Miller.
Make a lot and I think what is
the cap.
I don't know if that was helpful
but that's been consistent
throughout
Percent of note that I guess I'm
using the the Max K. the maximum
case of five megawatts
and I and I really appreciate
expert Gillian tell me that the
acreage footprint is smaller now
because of the efficiencies
I just want to give you an
example and San Juan County
in the city for me.
The San Juan regional hospital
put in a a at a slower rate it's
on ten acres.
They they used to curse.
It is one make a want and that's
one reason that I guess that may
be an old you know it was it was
built within the last three
years four years and so I guess
they they didn't have the
efficiency as you have today
that you know a less land for
private wants and that's
facility cost about six million
dollars.
It is quite costly the the pay
out on that on that project.
Twenty.
In the.
And she madam
The hospital H. state supply of
electricity and so they had to
work out a deal with city
farming.
By the balance of the power
I think the soul the soul right.
Rates about thirty percent of
the time and so the local
utility city of Farmington
provide seventy percent.
That energy and it's you know
it's quite costly so I know
costs have come down and so my
question is just just a one you
know what if situation
you know how much would it cost.
To build a five megawatt system
on thirty acres of land you know
you know.
Twenty miles away from
Albuquerque just just ballpark
it maybe just get maybe you
don't know land costs but maybe
you can give me the cost to
build and construct in New
what I'm also assuming Madam
chair and representative that
you have a lot of infrastructure
you can tie into the grid
creation I mean they they pick a
spot so that would give you some
efficiencies.
Madam chair and representative
thank you for the question
because we do have some really
good examples in the state right
now and all point to one on
indication of cost is what the
decrease brought to us and and
you're absolutely right again
Economy basic economics talks
about.
Demand and supply and so I'm
gonna give it and then costs
have gone down considerably over
the years since the sun one
facility that you mentioned for
hospital but and because Reese
level for example they told us
that they the faster than was on
two point two million dollars
for a one megawatt project
that's on six acres in size and
so on there you have to also
factor in that the cost madam
chair and representative also
take into consideration all the
leveraging of the various
financial financing
The instruments that are in
place for a project and I forgot
to mention that earlier that
part of the development costs
in is you look for yes
leveraging the best financial
It's just that you can get for
your project and we're seeing
across the nation more and more
financial institutions seeing
the success of those over twenty
two states that are hot the that
they're having this success and
community solar and then in our
own state of New Mexico we have
several pueblo center being very
successful so the finance
institutions are more open now
to be able to leverage help
leverage our those costs so
that's just one example two
point two bills million dollars
for a one megawatt project on
six acres.
This this really good
information I'm gonna have to go
back to San Juan regional
hospital and and figure out to
what the heck they were done to
spend six million dollars for
one megawatt systems on ten
acres so I guess the.
The costs come down considerably
yeah almost two thirds
and you know they just have to
have this ten acres of court
there you know for you know
their asset base and so they
took advantage of that and and
put in the system but again it
it and it maybe four years ago
so the cost of really come down
so that that's good enough.
That.
Representative Strickler I'm so
sorry to interrupt you but your
we have some weird audio from
you I'm not sure if you're using
headphones but you might want to
check the connection okay I'm
sorry
All of let me wrap it up I guess
Mexico tech technical difficulty
so thank you very much
Representative and and and madam
chair.
Thank you Representative I'm
Representative Scott did you
have some follow ups.
If not we'll go.
To do.
Try to jockey.
Electronics.
And a paper trail here that.
Just give me some problems this
morning.
Madam chair representative and
expert
sections six tour will community
school program administration.
On the.
Senate substitute bill.
Hey.
It appears so.
Madam chair that the.
The utility is required to
accept.
Hundred percent of the output.
Of the community solar facility
is that correct.
Madam chair I'm looking that
might my last other laptop went
down in the meantime could we
have Mister Gilliam
answer while I looked at myself
as well thank you.
Yes madam chair and
representative that's right
that's something six section six
a one.
Chair representative experts and
out here in.
In paragraph four of that
section.
The community solar bill credit
carries over to the next monthly
bill.
Yes the.
Yes how the community system is
in excess of that subscribers.
Utility bills is that correct.
Madam chair and representative
yes that that's correct that's a
parallel situation to rooftop
solar.
And.
But.
Chair.
Representative Mr Gilliam.
That carry over does not occur.
We can rooftops.
Which ponder standing majoring.
On a rooftop systems just month
to month is that not accurate.
Madam chair and representative
my understanding is that there
are several options what you
describe is one option and carry
over is another option and if we
turn the page over to to a page
Hey.
Yes the.
Community solar facility is not
fully subscribed.
The the unsubscribe Energy
carries over for the year.
Is that also correct.
Madam chair and representative
that provision allows the
communities I'm sorry the
subscriber organization are here
to provide subscribers for that
unsubscribed energy before the
utility is required to pay for.
And on that note I just want to
point out because we don't have
any experience in New Mexico yet
but your neighboring state
Colorado has had community solar
for ten years and to in twenty
nineteen I believe it was the
average subscription rate for
community solar projects here
was over ninety nine percent so
about half less than I have
about a half a percent was was
unsubscribe Energy.
We're back at yes you want to
hear this.
When we get back.
Okay.
Madam chair representative.
And Mr Gilliam so.
This could this be described as.
At.
Hey.
Right.
With her provisions.
Looks to me like this.
Has the potential.
Recurrent situations do not okay
now for you to utilities costs
Rated with.
Having to maintain.
Generation transmission and
distribution system.
Current takes that into account
it looks to me like there is a
very significant potential.
For cross to desertion.
with those calls to.
subscribers or folks are just.
just to.
Las of utility system for their
whole.
Understand madam chair.
Representative and Mr yelling
can you understand why that
might be a concern to folks.
Madam chair and representative
of.
I don't think you've described
that are in exactly the way that
it occurs
if we're talking about rooftop
solar systems the power that a a
customer with a rooftop solar
system gets from the utility is
paid for at the full retail rate
all production transmission
distribution costs are included
in that rate.
For the power that the rooftop
solar customer gets from her own
solar system R. the customer
does not pay for any of those
utility costs because none of
those parts of the utility
system are used and rates as you
know are based on cost causation
if you use something you pay for
if you don't use it you don't
pay for.
Same thing is true for community
solar because community solar
connects to the distribution
system subscribers pay the
distribution costs but they
don't pay for costs that they're
not using that is the generation
and transmission I think we've
addressed the cross subsidy
issue already with the
discussion we had earlier and
the the insertion of the word
unduly to assure that
the.
Perspective on community solar
is the same as it is on general
utility rates that is no
absolute and elimination of all
cross subsidies.
so I hope that answers your
question.
Chair representative Mr really
does not.
Because even though.
Those facilities are not being
used.
The utility is required by
regulation.
To operate and maybe they'll so
that they are available.
So that.
It
costs are being down because
they're not being used is not
completely accurate statement
because they still have to be.
They still have to be reliable
they still.
Have to be available okay I
don't think we're going to
we're going to resolve the issue
our staff I have significant
reservations about this bill but
I will I'll stand down and let
other folks ask questions thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative and Mr Gilligan
for your answers.
Thank you Representative Scott
do we have any other questions
from the committee.
If not do we have a motion.
Adam chair I move that we have
it do not pass on Senate bill
eighty four as amended and it do
passed on Senate bill eighty
four is amended in health Energy
Environment and natural
resources madam chair substitute
motion to table.
I'm thank you Representative
Ferrary and Representative
Montoya the substitute motion to
table I believe does come first
and so let's go ahead and take
the role on the motion to table
the bill please.
Madam chair do we need a second
on that motion to table yes I'm
sorry.
So there's no need for a second
and on a motion to table.
Second.
Proceed with the vote on that
motion.
Hi Representative Chandler no to
table.
Representative Dixon.
No to table.
Representative Ferrary no to
table.
Representative Montoya.
Yes to table.
Representative Ortez no to
table.
Representative Saniona no to
table.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes to table.
Representative Townsend yes it.
Vice chair Stansbury.
No to table.
And chairman McQueen.
The motion to table fills with a
vote of six to four.
Okay and we are now back on the
motion from Representative
Ferrary was there a second to
that motion second it Madam
chair.
Okay let's go ahead and take the
role on the motion for a do not
pass on the original bill and a
motion to pass on the
substitute.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Pass.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend Here.
Representative Dixon.
I'm sorry were on.
Yes.
And I'd like to explain more of
a.
You vice chair Stansbury yes.
And chairman the green.
the motion passes with a vote of
six to four.
Great thank you and we will now
move on to Senate bill one
twelve.
Yes we have a a request to
explain a rant Representative
Dixon please.
I thank you madam chair
I.
Voted to move this bill forward
I have serious.
Concerns about the scope of this
bill I believe that community
solar is a wonderful concept and
can be very good for the state
but I am concerned with the back
and forth of the amendments and
what I see as a.
An expansion of what community
solar is and the potential
impact this can have on
other
Consumers and so I would really
you know I hope that some of
these issues can be resolved in
the next committee and I also
understand that this is a pilot
program but I did want to
clarify that while I am in
support of the concept I have
serious reservations about the
bill as it is thank you.
Thank you Representative Dixon
okay excellent discussion on
community solar we will now be
moving on to just be one twelve
and can I just say thank you I
didn't get it we the senator and
I did not get a chance to say
thank you so we just want to say
thank you to you and the members
of the committee and to all of
the of those who gave testimony
in support and in opposition we
appreciate the time you gave us
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative a couple gyro and
Senator Lopez we appreciate your
guises presentations.
Okay now we are moving on to
Senate bill one twelve we have a
number of folks in our
participants to our committee
and person is going to
promote so at hopefully Senator
Stewart is been able to make it
and Representative Rubio should
also be in the participants and
we also have for experts Tom
Solomon John Clark Johanna
Nelson and John James pope
viewing of the what sorry.
We can take just a moment to get
everyone promoted.
Madam chair who was the third
expert witness that you listed
James Posey what.
The one before that.
I'm sorry your Lujan and us and
thank you.
Okay I see Representative Rubio
are you ready to go or we still
still waiting for.
Senator Stewart.
I'm I'm I'm Madam chair of that
committee members she may still
be presenting in committee so
I'm happy to move forward if if
if that's helpful to the
committee.
Yes thank you let's go ahead and
get started and hopefully
Senator Stewart will be able to
join us as well the floor is
yours great thank you madam
chair thank you representatives
this Senate bill one twelve is
legislation that has been moving
up across the Senate and now
making its way to the house that
that works on and to try to
address issues related to
sustainable economic
opportunities for our state
particularly around developing a
task force to really address
these issues and and to move
forward on on on a lot of these
conversations that I think are
very important a lot of us
I am I'm for over the course of
the last few days have been
working with Senator Stewart and
her team to merge much of a lot
of really important components
that are important to the work
that I've been doing with
The organization to
representative from my
communities from across the
state to really promote the what
what what what it what it will
be for many of our communities
moving forward in terms of
workforce development and
training and so Senate Senate
bill one twelve the sensually
creates a task force to begin
this work there is an amendment
that if if someone in within the
committee would be I'm willing
to move but the but the
But the amendment and I can talk
about that right now that that's
helpful is that it makes changes
to
the the name of the the council
and then also in terms of who
will be part of
the Advisory Council.
Some of the changes to that as
well as
Of the.
The
How we how how is how it will
work and then also in terms of
incorporating some important
language related to participate
disproportionately impacted
communities
the the representation within
this council as well as making
sure that the workforce
development study that was
conducted by the university of
New Mexico and and the
department workforce solutions
is included in the plan and make
and and on really recommend and
and having the council
Of utilizing that commission
study to guide the process
moving forward
through this through this entire
process in which this council
will find itself really focused
on
really addressing sustainable
are sustainable economy here in
the state I'm willing to hand it
off now to the experts if they'd
like to say something before we
we open it up to the committee.
Thank you before we have our
experts way and since
Representative Rubio is already
discussed some of the it
proposed amendments for this
morning can we get it to to to
to number on the amendments
please.
Yes the number is two two zero
five seven one point three okay
do we have a motion to move the
amendments.
Great so we have a motion to
move the amendment for
discussion from Representative
Ferrary in a second from
Representative fourth as is
there any objection the
amendment for discussion.
Okay see none the amendment is
adopted.
All right let's go ahead and
move forward with our experts
please.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is John Clark
and the deputy secretary of the
economic development department
I apologize I have to wear the
mask and my background is
actually my house but I'm
actually in my office at the
moment getting some computer
issues fixed I would just like
to think Representative Rubio
and Senator Stewart for putting
together this bill and working
together and working with us on
the amendment to you see before
you I think this really
represents an extremely
collaborative effort to figure
out how to move forward best
with strategic planning for
economic development in the
state and making sure that a lot
of historically underrepresented
groups are for we received a one
and a half million dollar
federal grant from the economic
development administration to do
some work on planning for short
term recovery and long term
diversification of the economy
and we're starting that work in
this year and putting together a
strategic plan but this the task
force in council that would be
created under this bill
provides a statutory framework
for some not just oversight but
input really valuable input from
across the state into how that
plan will be important as well
as updating annually going
forward so again just want to
think of Representative Rubio
center Stewart so much for
working with us on this we're
very supportive of the amendment
you see before you.
Thank you Mr Clark to we have to
them and any other experts on
the Senate the Senate bill
portion of this and then we'll
move to the incorporation of the
amendments piece Mr Solomon
please.
You Representative the faster
Stansbury.
Yeah my name's Tom Solomon and
I work with Senator Stewart to
draft the original version of SB
one twelve I amended that Bayern
mental advocates and also
retired electrical engineer I
actually spent thirty four years
of high tech manufacturing with
Intel twenty one years of age
here in New Mexico so I've got a
real soft spot for good factory
jobs that I'd like to see many
more of them and other good
sustainable jobs growth here in
New Mexico and you know the
fundamental purpose of this bill
is to look forward to a future
in New Mexico where we have a
much more sustainable economy
and to build that kind of
economy in the state
that is less reliant on natural
resource extraction I think
that's the direction that the
economy and the world is going
and it's time for New Mexico to
put together a real solid
strategic plan to pull together
all the elements necessary to
build that in a fashion that is
just with the just transition
for the affected communities and
so
I'd be happy to answer any
questions about and one of the
driving economic factors that
are pushing us towards that
direction but I think I'll leave
it to the bill Sanchez to make
the main arguments thank you
very much thank you Mr Solomon
next we have James pope we what.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is James Kobe one and I am the
policy director for the center
for city policy happy to be here
in support of SB one twelve is
proposed to be amended and I
want to thank the bill's sponsor
Senator Stewart in particular
for her hard work on this
legislation and the and then and
said she is presented thank you
also to the good work W. John
Clark and EDD and Senator
Stewart chief of staff Sanders
more to making sure that those
amendments have been crafted in
that we're seeing them today
center for civic Policy convenes
the power for New Mexico
coalition which is made up of
community groups who are experts
in grassroots organizing in
communities across the state
these organizations have been
advocating for these issues
since two thousand eighteen and
each support SB one twelve as
amended the organizations
include some awesome Pueblo
needle New Mexico coffin Nibert
E. P. Ole CV NM and on the
policy side policy solutions
Institute and CCP the proposed
amendments will ensure that
people from across the state
will be insured a seat at the
table in the important important
long term planning for
sustainable and prosperous
economy for all New Mexicans
this will be accomplished by
providing advisory spots on the
task force for community members
the task force will also ensure
that recommendations from the
clean energy workforce
development study will be
implemented with the support of
Representative Rubio power for
and advocated for the funding
and the mandate for an anti WSD
commissioned the study this
study was no small feat it was
conducted with significant
support from the community
organizations that I have named
and during the height of the
pandemic at the very bottom of
the oil and gas industry along
and it reached over eighteen
hundred New Mexicans as a proud
member of okay we get Pueblo I
can say that the study itself is
an important snapshot of.
The economic pain and suffering
that our communities feel and
the resilience perseverance and
unity that are some of the our
greatest New Mexican traits and
those recommendations and
solutions within the study which
came directly from our
communities should be
implemented this concludes my
remarks madam chair thank you
for.
The opportunity to address
committee I stand for questions
with the sponsor.
Thank you Mr Povey why and I
just want to take a moment here
as a to let everyone know that
we do have Spanish English
translation available this
morning we will have some folks
presenting some public testimony
who will be doing so in Spanish
so if you're looking for the
interpretation so you can listen
to the translation in your
preferred language there's a
button on the bottom of the soon
this as interpretation and
Representative Rubio also make
this announcement and Spanish go
ahead Representative Rubio you
madam chair but then again
though only to present this yarn
bomb something it into better
and that that ASEAN easy way
then and bring me the invaluable
to stop whenever you can see on
my apple that you left thanks
you on an Espanola and used as
an apple that are in Espanol is
going on this with this and when
you.
Great thank you all right at
this time we will take public
testimony and we'll go first to
opposition
I is there anyone in the waiting
room on and public attendance
who would like to speak in
opposition to the bill.
Okay.
Madam do you want me to try and
let me translate that rural
areas are less gets done in one
thousand that they they said
he's not would act S. thank you
okay so when I'm on up it'll see
stand up we look at a proposal
just that just isn't the same
most of us into this place this
those common values so okay
seeing no sentimental and apple
you'll see some aluminum foil
Bolivians the most in just a
moment.
Madam chair there is the
interpreter that hasn't been
elevated I don't think Sandra
foster.
Yes thank you and Shelby could
you please help us get Sandra
foster promoted to be an
interpreter this morning yes
thank you.
Let them stand by for just a
moment and tell all of that is
in place.
Seven can you let us know as
soon as you've got it set up.
Yes I am I promoted her up there
she is.
The work is at.
Actor.
We should be all set okay great
let's go ahead and go to the
public now for public comment
for anyone in opposition please
raise your hands if you are not
an opposition please put your
hand down and we'll go to
support next.
It looks like we have someone
named Valerie wept that on the
line please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee at valley where
the registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
thank you for the opportunity to
pose SB one twelve as amended
today at the extractive industry
has long provided New Mexico
financial support as well as
fuel and energy New Mexico is
rich in natural resources that
can find the state much security
we also have concerns and how
this initiative will be funded
as appropriations have been
struck in the amendment for
these reasons we ask that you
vote no on SB one twelve.
Okay thank you so much it
doesn't look like we have anyone
else in opposition on the board
let's go ahead and go to the
public in support please press
share hands up if you're in
support and would like to
testify on behalf of the bill.
And we'll go ahead and go with
the first person on the line go
ahead.
Chair committee members manage
at the increased to do little
and I'm the political director
for the Adelante progressive
caucus and I am an energy
engineer and entrepreneur the
sustainable economy task force
is going to be important as we
need to plan to move off of
fossil fuels because we need to
save our future we know that
is already been established so
let's go ahead and look forward
and plan because if we don't
land then we're going to plan to
fail.
Thank you.
Yes.
Thanks.
It looks like we have our New
Mexico.
Good morning a chair and members
of the committee since our
founding almost two years ago
jako you feel not for Congress
action and our questions
partners have championed the
need for just transition of the
state economy we've called for
just transition study plan and
fund we are glad to see that
during the session those
proposals are being addressed
New Mexico produces more than
twice the national average of
greenhouse gas emissions per
capita this is largely the
result of our greenhouse gas
intensive oil and gas industry
our state houses the world's
single largest and cheapest oil
field in the Permian basin of
our planet the soon to face
ecological collapse it will be
in large part because of the
action or in action being taken
in New Mexico right now we've
been given a clear moral
imperative transition are
unsustainable economy but given
the oil and gas revenues
compromise more than a third of
the state's budget we needed I
vestment and diversification
plan.
Any just transition policy must
have real size based Tomlinson
accountability measures to be
sure our government is
responding to the crisis not
industry demand being equitable
inclusive and in consultation
with those most directly
impacted specifically frontline
indigenous black and brown
communities youth and displaced
workers this transition must be
led by those most affected by
its consequences we support this
legislation to help us move
towards that transition
especially because the task
force composition represents a
commitment to equity and
environmental justice making
sure impacted communities have a
genuine seat at the table and I
truly listen to.
We need a just transition and we
need to just be one one two
thank you.
Thank you next we have John
Graham.
Thank you thanks committee
members and all of the sponsors
that worked on this bill and all
the community members from
across the state from the
various organizations I'm I'm a
Franciscan sister and I'm the
director of New Mexico
interfaith power and light and
we're very much in support of
the joining of these efforts in
to just the one one two we work
with faith communities all over
the state and we continue to
hear from them that they believe
we need to be caring for
creation communities we need a
diverse economy and it needs to
be sustainable and this is
especially true of our community
members state leaders in
Carlsbad who often say nobody is
listening to us we want to
diversify economy and it it's
like nobody really cares so this
is a very important bill it's
about the common good news about
ethical moral responsibility and
leadership that includes the
frontline communities we very
much support this bill and thank
you so much for the work on it.
Thank you very much next to have
Erica great go.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Erica today those policy
director at or les which is also
a member of power for New Mexico
coalition we stand in favor of
Senate bill one twelve as
amended and view it as a racial
justice issue in order to have a
just transition to renewable
energy communities of color need
to be part of the planning
process and have access to the
training they need especially in
tribal and rural communities in
order to benefit from the job
opportunities that come from
this transition for this reason
we urge members of the committee
to vote in favor of Senate Bill
what one twelve to ensure that
black indigenous and people of
color are at the table when
decisions are being made for
them and their families thank
you.
Thank you next Representative
hall gets that.
Thank you for this opportunity
to speak I want to thank the my
name is Paul Gibson and I am the
co founder of retake our
democracy it's an all volunteer
organization twenty five hundred
member statewide retake make SB
one twelve one of our
transformational bills because
our planet is basically begging
New Mexico to protect it
capacity to do so is compromised
by our economic dependence on
gas and oil we have a robust
economy that relies upon gas and
oil this is a bargain with the
devil because of New Mexico
being sucks at nationwide
building and identified as a
major contributor to methane if
we can take the steps called for
this bill we will set up a adhoc
model to the nation we're
encouraging we need to find a
better path forward and this
wall of bills will help us to so
the bill will convene
stakeholders across silos to
focus the for the state to
develop a path to sustainable
economy are you Sir watching us
and we need to do all we can to
protect the future we take is a
proud sponsor supporter of our
SB one twelve and hope you will
a lot are you gonna do passed
today thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Gibson next right
Jason Thompson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jason
Thompson I'm here as residents
registered lobbyists for western
resource advocates I would like
to thank the sponsor bringing
this bill forward that we stand
in support of the bill and full
support of the amendments on
also the critical inclusion of
the just disproportionately
impacted communities from clean
energy workforce study and also
want to just lift up to
highlight that entered the
critical work by the community
based organizations across the
state and I Representative Rubio
that made all this work possible
be carried forward into the
amended bill and for those
reasons and reasons previously
stated the Santa Fe sport of the
bill and I urge the committee to
I do the same thanks for your
time.
Great thank you next we have
Gladys from some of the some of
them Pueblo you.
When is the US the number is
eight.
He is a passionate on the early
side members almost excuse.
I'm so close to the point that
that was in the state of
Victoria
need to see them so that they
I hope will get hold on that
blast.
What is that it's a busy until
those Santa Monica on the
assistant that lives okay Google
they must get that are nothing
that'll here.
Do not just tell you that I am
with job I love community that
deficiency that is common.
Then it must with the data what
is the what is the those see
what they
allies into those you could ask
yes.
Part of this legislation
and we really support its
efforts to develop an economic
development strategy for a
robust transition plan for
states we believe that this task
force will help us identify
opportunities and initiatives
that are forward thinking and it
will create quality jobs for
frontline communities
communities of color in rural
communities we believe that this
at initiative is necessary to do
it they diversify our economy
which will hard to help our
state in communities in
providing a stable and reliable
workforce that will in turn
enable a dignified giving for
everyone with that we think the
Sanchez Senator Stewart and
Representative Rubio in our day
to pass thank you.
Thank you so much Charles good
marker.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak today on
behalf of this bill SB one
twelve as amended.
And I'm speaking on behalf of
the policy solutions institute
in New Mexico voices for
children yet just yesterday
before this amendment came about
I had written a letter to many
legislators and
urging you to pass most bills
seeing them as complementary and
parallel in many ways but the
merging of the two bills is just
wonderful for New Mexico with
that merging I believe it
becomes one of the most
transformative bills of this
entire session
it is so wonderful to see that
the disproportionately impacted
communities will gain greater
equity as that transition which
is already happening whether we
are part of an and ingresa
consciously or not transition
way from fossil fuels is already
happening so this merging of the
bills will help those
communities that have been
disproportionately impacted too
you enjoy better outcomes as
well as being part of the
process.
Believe this these better
outcomes for New Mexico.
That will lift up all of New
Mexico will produce better
outcomes in terms of education
and health care is all those
communities are lifted up thank
you very much please support
this bill.
Thank you Mr good marker and
expand Mary Feldblum.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Mary Feldblum and I represent
resources oil and gas
accountability project
transitions are always.
Challenging and painful because
communities are impacted both
negatively and positively this
is such a great opportunity to
develop a sustainable economy
for rural economies that are in
order such trouble in I also
want to point out my background
is in economics anybody who
looks at the fossil fuel
industry knows that their prices
are dependent on the national
markets and they are very
volatile and I would I was
looking for a quote that I had
from Senator share our several
years ago when we were in
trouble all economically because
of low oil prices for oil and
gas and he was urging that we
have to diversify there's no
question and and and this is an
opportunity to look at all all
sides of the of the picture and
to make sure that our rural
communities have the benefits
that they will deserve thank
you.
Thank you the next we have
Steffi widespread.
Good morning madam vice chair
and representative my name is
Stephanie Weissberg I just
retired from U. N. M. as a pre
college outreach and education
manager at the school of
engineering and I'm speaking in
strong support of SB one twelve
on behalf of my own children who
are software engineers in New
York City and all the hundreds
of students I've worked with who
have studied hard but have
difficulty finding jobs in New
Mexico as any engineer knows
problems for innovation so New
Mexico could be a national
leader in clean energy and
climate solutions such as
agriculture K. X. we need to
grow jobs that do not depend
heavily on water and can nurture
and accelerate the development
of amazing technologies being
worked on in our universities
and labs now is the perfect time
to invest heavily in these
opportunities yes as a state
investment council is doing but
first we need a road map and
that is what SB one twelve
provides so please support this
bill thank you.
Thank you next we have Camilla I
lament.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Camilla I
women representing the Sierra
Club and R. thirty five thousand
members and supporters around
the state I'd like to speak are
so as a story of self reliance
in the two thousand nineteen
session we were looking to
transition our electric sector
towards renewables and
legislation integrated things
like required apprenticeships
and just transition funds but I
want to point to Representative
Rubio is vision that she brought
to the table along with power
for New Mexico when she said
that there were key elements
that we needed to reflect on and
that communities need at the
opportunity to create around.
She dedicated capital outlay
funds to the department of
workforce solutions that led to
a study which interviewed
hundreds of frontline families
and workers around the state
giving them the unique
opportunity to imagine new
work force opportunities the
amendments today follow up on
that study that have been
creatively interwoven with what
SB one twelve does to build on
Senator Stewart's excellent
efforts to envision a
sustainable economy we
enthusiastically asked members
of the committee to vote yes on
SB one twelve with amendments
thank you.
Thank you Mr I amend next we
have Jim dejar sin dejar dean.
Hello and good morning everyone
thank you madam chairman madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Jim day for data and
I'm the executive director of
the renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico we're
known as we are and we're a
group of predominantly local
solar companies and while fossil
fuels to power our economy for
the last hundred years we
believe that it's time to
transition to a company that's
more sustainable and diverse and
we have great outdoor
recreational resources food
culture of course great
renewable energy resources as
well so for those reasons we
strongly support this bill and
we strongly urge the committee
to pass thank you very much bye.
Thanks so much listening Janet
Carter.
Hello my name is Jenna Carter
and and I speak on behalf of
myself I live in Santa Fe I just
want to say that I support this
bill because we need to build a
sustainable and diverse economy
in the state I lived many years
in Nevada and some of the state
of Nevada suffer from.
Not having a diverse economy and
I hate to see the same thing
happen here in New Mexico or
I've chosen to retire and about
half of my children and
grandchildren.
We need a sustainable calmly but
we also need economy that can
that that is very good and can
can find a variety of jobs and
economic and economic benefits
your budget for all people of
the state and that's why I
support this bill thank you.
Thank you next we have Susan
Sherman.
Learning madam chair committee
members my name is sue Schurman
and I'm speaking in support of
US one twelve sustainable
economy task force as in New
Mexico resident and longtime
community organizer this bill
would help support a just
transition which is critically
important in a state like New
Mexico which has so many people
of color who could potentially
be impacted by the transition
from a fossil fuel economy to a
renewable sustainable economy
which is mandatory to address
the current climate crisis time
is running out the time to act
is now I also echo the previous
comment that frames this bill is
a racial justice issue thank you
so much madam chair and
committee members.
Thank you next we have just said
not.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Got to have been a good morning
I am the Dinesh Energy organizer
for neighbor.
Education project and I stand in
support of SB one twelve
expressly with the advancements
that you have
heard today it is again this is
really going to help of a lot of
tribal communities appeared at
in New Mexico especially when we
talk about you know of of
prioritizing a frontline workers
and and working families
you know I I do get the the bold
solution to end the over
dependence of the extractive
industries and and I think it
can lead to a lot of more ways
of of diversifying the the
economy here which is important
and the and again I would when I
think about the what this will
lead to is is there's a lot of
you know programs especially at
Navajo tech you know it is
they'll grow the existing
programs there in a and which
already has a facility out in
curtain in New Mexico so I I in
working with the highest area
high schools to help you know
grow may need a clean energy
economy industry so I look
forward to to this end and ask
for you to pass this bill thank
you.
Thank you next is Michael Eisen
felt.
You madam chair and committee
members my name is Mike Eisen
child I live in Farmington and I
work for the San Juan citizens
alliance we have a ballot at
thousand members in the four
corners area we speak and
support today for SB one twelve.
We are a community that has been
impacted and although we have
derived what a budget are
financially from the fossil fuel
industry we see.
A significant decline in oil and
gas and coal in our community
needs investment in innovative
in transitional economic
opportunities economic diversity
diversification and this is a
sort of
Bill that is visionary and will
help us plan for the future it
is less dependent on fossil
fuels.
We're looking forward to being
part of the economic
and sustainable decision making
processes that can grow New
Mexico thank you so much for the
opportunity provides comments.
Thank you listening Amanda
Carroll.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name
estimate the cow I'm B. climate
energy advocate with
conservation voters New Mexico
and we stand in strong support
of Senate bill one twelve in the
members of the committee that it
will benefit.
At CNN we believe in promoting
climate policy that includes the
voices of the disproportionately
impacted communities of New
Mexico and with the inevitable
transition from oil and gas to
carbon free energy we want to
make sure that equity and
inclusion of the low income and
at risk communities and of New
Mexico are the central focus of
this economic transition and
diversification and this bill
does exactly that for this
reason all the previous ones
mentioned by the prominent
proponents we Essien and
vehemently support this bill and
encourage the committee to do
the same thank you for your
time.
Thank you so much next we have
now and I've been every benefit
that.
Good morning madam vice chair
and committee members my name is
nana benefit this I'm the
community organizer in Grant
County for cafe axion I strongly
support S. B. twelve as amended
as it is the culmination of many
many hours of work and is
inclusive inclusive of the
voices of many rural communities
including my own.
Though we deeply love and
respect our mining traditions we
know the time to begin to look
to the future is now it's time
for our communities not
corporations to be the voices of
New Mexico SB one twelve begins
a dress transition that is good
for all Mexicans and we strongly
encourage your support for this
important piece of legislation
thank you very much have a great
day.
Thank you so much next Nordea
bank.
For.
Okay looks like we might have
lost you next we have Jeffrey
the LESC.
Thank you madam vice chair in
committee numbers for the last
several decades both economic
experts wells people in our own
state government legislature no
we are overly dependent on oil
and gas for state revenue like
it or not we're at the tail end
of the fossil fuel age and the
where as in the past we've
considered all the revenues we
have gotten from oil and gas be
a blessing it's not one.
Adamant for us but we're
uniquely blessed with solar and
wind resources I'm like.
Many states to the extent that
we have that blessing the
creation of a sustainable
economy task force would allow
the state to begin the plan for
a just transition identify
strategies for diversifying our
economy and making changes in
tax policy and otherwise plan
for the development of a more
sustainable economy please
support to just be one twelve
thank you very much.
Thank you so much and it looks
like miss a was able to get back
on would you like to go ahead.
You seem to be made and.
Okay.
Okay page ninety.
And madam chair members of the
committee my name is Paige may
from New Mexico voices for
children and we stand in full
support of Senate bill one
twelve I want to thank the
sponsor for developing this
proposal and their commitment to
diversifying our economy and our
revenues for too long New Mexico
has been beholden to that though
more bass revenue cycles of the
oil and gas industry which is
particularly dangerous now and
in the future because research
shows that the oil and gas
industry was already in economic
decline before the pandemic even
began the city gross annual
goals and changes in energy
consumption patterns mean we
cannot continue to rely on this
industry as an ongoing source of
revenue or for job opportunities
there's too much at stake in our
children our communities and our
classrooms deserve more funding
reliability to support the
programs and services that allow
New Mexicans to thrive we know
this process cannot happen
overnight but it does require
the thoughts dedication and
expertise from various agencies
community and business leaders
and tribal communities as laid
out in the still to ensure a
just and equitable transition
and diversification of our
economy so we urge your support
for just the one twelve thank
you.
Thank you so much and it looks
like M. miss a is still trying
to give heard public comment
let's try one last time.
Okay.
Hearing no more public comment
will go back to the Sanchez
we've now been joined by Senator
Stewart who's that primary
sponsor is Senate bill one
twelve Senator Stewart the floor
is yours.
Thank you madam chair of the my
understanding that you've all
done the heavy lifting and
accepted the amendments from
reps and Rubio's bill I'm proud
to work with her we've been
talking about this for a year so
if you adopted those amendments
I'm I'm here to answer questions
and just to support the great
work of Representative Rubio.
All right well thank you senator
for joining us today we're happy
to have you here in committee
and with that we'll open it up
to the committee for any
questions.
Or emotion.
For the past second.
We have a motion for a do pass
on Senate bill one twelve made
by Representative Ferrary with
the second from Representative
Ortez.
Shelby can you please take the
role.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes thank you Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sariñana yes.
Representative Scott no.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Townsend now.
Vice chair Stansbury yes and
chairman of green.
Yes.
That is a due pass with a vote
of seventy four you want to
write Senator Stewart and
Representative Rubio you have a
bill passed congratulations Hey
and.
I wanted to say thank you to
everyone who came to testify
today I know if you hands went
up after we finish public
testimony apologize that we
didn't get to you but thank you
very much first that showing up
and thank you to our translators
for being here today so thank
you.
And it looks like Mr chairman
are you back.
Great.
I am I I think you're in church
and I and I think we're done
okay all right well that's it
for house energy and natural
resources thanks to everyone for
joining us today we passed some
bills and will be back on the
floor this afternoon at two
thirty thanks everyone have a
good morning.
