Chair.
Your.
Madam chair here.
Madam chair we've reached a
quorum with eight members
present great good morning again
everyone I hope of folks have
their coffee in front of them
and we will continue.
We will continue with
House Bill excuse me Senate bill
eighty four.
Let's get Senator Stefanics and
everyone else on that team when
you raise your hand and we'll
get you over to the panelists
mode.
Great good morning senator good
morning it's a pleasure to be
back happy Sunday.
Yes nine on the floor that you
guys have late nights to.
Yes fortunately not last night
so that was nice.
Well of a bill eight house bills
on the floor last night great
thank you things are starting to
move thank you.
So Representative Nibert did you
last have the floor and you
still have before.
Thank you madam chair we left
off on a seven.
Contacts bill what.
Yes for fall I'm gonna skip over
the page Chandler
if so starts on page Dr but
thanks to work by by next
question will be from
Madam chair and and senator.
I see that we bring in the
public regulation commission but
have.
Some what are your consider
oversight
Past the of
these projects but it's really I
think as we established our the
other day it's really just with
respect to the public utility
side.
Because I have really no R.
forty over the
So we're.
It says the name of their marks
in New York.
Of the subscriber organization
and.
So what what precisely is the
role of the public regulation
commission with respect to of
these community solar projects.
Madam chair representative and I
thank you for the question
right now in the of bills it has
that the commission would do the
rule making and still have the
consumer complaint process and
also to oversee the range that
the chill that but we have an
amendment that's going this
morning I believe that might
I did the PRC oversight
regulatory authority in consumer
protection provisions do apply
to the subscriber organization
so when we get to that it I
believe that amendment late
strength in that section.
Okay so so.
Under the existing for maps are
but they're just focused on the
public utility side M..
The pay our state would be
unable to really deal with
issues such as
If you affects the.
Overall ability of the public
utility to performance
functions then there would be
some of.
The availability of the PRC to
really address those types of
issues all the way that the
amendment will will clarify that
for that's one concern that I
have overall page eleven.
And this is in paragraph seven.
I see the word security efforts
and that was added by the Senate
finance committee
It looks like.
I was what I was reading up the
question came to mind who does a
security interest run in favor
of.
Miss madam chair and
representative line for.
I'm not sure if that was kept in
of Mr Gilliam can you address
whether or not we kept that in
from this the
Senate floor amendment.
What yes.
R. madam chair and
representative.
Just to be clear are you in
paragraph section seven a seven.
Serve
At seven is correct.
Yes that is still part of the
amendments in context and that
the current bill.
Yes Sir so we're trying to find
consumer protection for the
subscribers and then it talks
about the
the subscriber organization.
Shell.
Do the settings including a
security interest a lot of kind
of interested in how that that
it sent those all right.
I thought that the the
subscriber organization was
receiving a state the.
Subscriber.
All in the
Have a share of the interest in
the solar facility.
That was being operated by the.
subscriber organization and so
the security address struck me
as a little bit
the art I I just did not have
that that.
Thank
Madam chair and representative
the in some cases and other
states particularly for
Low income customers and and
residential customers to our.
In order to avoid the customer
having to make a significant
upfront investment in the
project are those costs can be
financed by the subscriber
organization similar to the way
that rooftop solar is our
sometimes in the east to
customers in under a lease
arrangement as opposed to a just
a straight purchase.
So right off by on that point.
I'm.
Amendment and thank you the
amendment is adopted some of
these issues would not still be
an issue and so I I don't know
if if I I don't want to
interrupt Representative Nibert
but I I think that
If you if you would yield it
would give me the opportunity to
maybe make some of these
proposals and then we could
maybe relate them he could have
questions on if the bill is a is
are at the moment is adopted.
That may answer some of these
questions.
Representative.
Madam chair does the amendment
deal with security interest.
Well I don't believe it does but
the.
Senator Stefanics did you answer
your Madam chair representative.
Not neighborhood and gray goes
no it does not so your question
is still on the bill that would
not be changed.
That I think that okay
Representative Nibert you still
have the floor.
Thank you madam chair
So.
A person who wants to subscribe.
Hey don't buy their pro rata
share of the.
The celery.
Thank you and borrow money in
that sense to be a subscriber
and then they're paying back to
the subscriber organization not
only the operating three but
also a financing fee for their
share of the cost is is that how
that would work madam chair and
senator.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert Rick are
would you respond please.
R. madam chair and
representative Nibert.
That's my understanding in total
the the subscriber would still
save money obviously otherwise
they wouldn't participate in the
project
so yeah sh.
So madam chair and and senator
I know that.
We have have a number of.
People back I think we had some
legislation a couple years ago.
Dealing with some this call of
for lack of a better term fly by
night solar companies that there
were not properly
Installing rooftop solar on
people's phones and more people
were basically taking.
Hey money up front and not
getting the end results are that
were promised.
Do you see any is there any.
Provisions in this legislation
that actually provides those
consumer protections of the are
stated in New Representative
seven.
Yes.
Madam chair representative
Nibert great question we've had
several questions about sections
of the consumers who might be
involved in such a project we
have in the amendment we're
strengthening that not only the
consumer complaints but the
grievance process but in
individuals the subscriber will
be signing a contract the
subscriber organization will be
bonding for twenty five years
which would cover losses of how
we're the equipments the use of
the Energy etcetera now that
does not mean that the solar
panels would not still be
operating after twenty five
years but there would be some
protection for the consumer for
twenty five years.
You know I think you're.
Or when I read this I didn't see
a lot of.
A lot of those protections for
our you know again I think.
Responsible people to realize
what they're getting into.
And the.
It obviously says adapted by
Sarah disclosure statements and
things like that so the people
have the information but the I
do think people need to get into
these things with our eyes wide
open.
And if they're not paying for
their share of the costs
they have to realize that
they're not only going to be
charged a.
All three for the operations of
the facility but the subscriber
organizations going to collect
but they're also going to pay
Over time their share of the
cost of the project plus I
suspect the.
Interest on top of this tribal
realizations blackboard at front
those are cost without securing
some sort of return all on their
yes.
Well I hope you're right yes we
do have sufficient
Wastes Representative
disclosures so people recognize
what they're getting into as I
may be surprised at the end of
the day what the what Senator
what actually occurs might be a
little different.
Our.
Adam chair on when I started my
question you said that I wanted
to go through the bills first
and then I would have some
general questions those are my
specific questions with respect
to the language of the bill of.
Representative Gallegos says
that she has of amendment
wondering if yeah I'm right here
but for.
And have an opportunity maybe to
ask questions later R. to go
over my general comments on on
the legislation that that would
be proper.
Senate that's fine.
Okay and I will yield the floor
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Gallegos thank
you madam chair
I as I said I have an amendment
and the amendment number is two
two zero seven nine one point
two.
And I'd like to have the
amendment moved for discussion.
The minute.
Great for discussion
Representative Gaydos please
explain your.
Thank you madam chair this
amendment makes nine changes to
the bill I'll go over each
change and then turn the
discussion over to Senator
Stefanics and her experts to
answer the questions these
amendments kind came from
negotiations between the
stakeholder of the bill and
and the Sanchez and
So with that I'll start with
amendment one.
It strikes House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee amendments
to and six.
Amendment to.
As municipalities counties or
charter private or public school
or community college and public
Housing Authority to the debt
definition of subscriber.
The amendment removed
universities and state
government this helps prevent
large consumers from exiting the
utility system which leaves
higher cost for other consumers
would unfairly subsidize these
larger consumer fixed cost.
And then it's three and four at
the consumer protection cases I
cared most about it gives the
commission the authority to
administer and enforce the rules
and the requirements of the
community solar acts including
the regulations of the community
solar facilities for example the
local preference.
Low income consumers requirement
fees yes Representative tion
oversight but it does not make
the community solar act
regulated utility under the
public utility act.
Amendment I just re letters the
subsections.
Amendment six seven and eight
changes the program cap from an
annual statewide program of a
hundred megawatts every year to
two hundred megawatts throughout
the pilot program timeline
until twenty twenty four.
This will allow utilities to
plan efficiently and effectively
to ensure reliability and safety
of the solar facilities are
inter connect with onto the
grid.
It also allows time for the grid
modernization and for the answer
infrastructure to catch up to
the demands of the transition to
the sustainable energy proper
planning to this program will be
critical to maintain reliability
in New Mexico can not be
sustainable without being
reliable.
And finally amendment line is
another consumer protection
please that provides a cap on
how much a non subscriber is
subsidizing for the subscribers
of community solar it protects
the non subscriber from paying a
large subsidy the subsidized are
capped at three percent.
And the non subscriber aggregate
retail rate on the annual basis
this cap per rights transparency
and protection to consumers it
is me what customers on how much
the cost can be shifted to other
customers if needed to develop
community
The community solar program and
with that madam chair I stand
for questions.
Representative I'm gonna go back
to Senator Stefano X.
are these from the amendment
yes madam chair they are and can
I explain why.
Please.
I'm.
In thank you madam chair on
Saturday morning I had the
opportunity to meet with of the
director of health who had
expressed concerns about the
consumer protections and a cap
on any cross subsidization.
Also I meant with PNM excel and
el Paso electric.
They have very specific requests
and all of these amendments
Are in line with some of their
requests so that they in fact.
Could manage the start up of the
program appropriately they felt
that having a hundred megawatts
the first year right out the
gate would overwhelm that
process in the system because
they would have to learn the
rules adjust and make sure that
every project coming onboard
would be appropriate so excuse
me we negotiated from the three
hundred megawatts two two
hundred megawatts over three
years instead of one hundred
megawatts every year.
They also had the
recommendation on the subscriber
definitions as Representative
Gaydos indicated to delete the
our state
building used in the large
higher education but we did
leave and community colleges in
rural rural areas and public
education facilities.
I would use as an example that
down.
It is a.
Are you still on highway
fourteen that would become that
could become a great base for a
community solar project for the
entire area instead of all these
individual houses trying to set
up something.
if we did that make the once we
did and that the program
actually would not start until
after the rules were promulgated
to have that your start the
subscriber definitions the cap
on the cost shifting.
A district to the consumer.
Protections and of we clarified
that the application fees for
the PRC.
Go to that program.
So I believe that if any of the.
Opponents later wait in I think
they would be neutral for.
Click supportive.
Thank you senator.
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator so I want to go back to
this about the amendment is
honesty of redressing us and I
understand we're not
but I want to find out from the
Santo madam chair
so going back to Representative
nine point point.
I mean here's what I want to lay
out as my concern okay
solar company comes in we know
we've already had experience
with us that you know some of
these solar companies are not on
the up and up
I think the thing that probably
most confuses consumers is the
financing arrangements and
specifically not understanding
that security interest could be
attached to the home that we're
receive priority and consumers
don't find out about that please
write a seller.
So I'm now looking at a proposed
amendment to a bill.
and I'd like to know what is it
we're doing about.
It is just disclosure is there
some protection from the
consumer for you know the solar
companies putting priority
security interest on a home and
I think it really goes to
Representative diverse point
which I share the concern so I
was curious as to what we're
doing to address that issue
thank you madam chair and
senator could respond
appreciate.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of the life the
when I'm gonna use an example
when Santa Fe County was
considering a community solar
project we went so far as to
pass a resolution that would
allow in assessment the
assessment for participation to
be attached to of the property
taxes so it would be
an additional amount that would
be paid with the property tax
and that when a property was
sold or passed on it would pass
on to the next owner of that
property for sure it would be a
different situation they would
be
purchasing their share but as
long as if they move someplace
as I mentioned earlier on the
previous meeting if they move
they could transfer or leave
that to somebody else in the
territory of the utility.
So we want to be sure that we
are protecting the individual so
if a person is
Let's say seventy five or eighty
and they really are a big
environmentalist and they wanted
to be involved in this them I
know they're not going to live
another twenty five years.
They in fact could.
Pass it on if it's that
ownership situation they would
be able to transfer that with
the property which would
increase the value of the
property or the debt would still
be on the property when they
sold it.
Madam chair Senator I apologize
that is just my question that's
it I want to find out about
disclosure on security interest
so in other words solar company
says in very in their documents
what a lien on your property.
What is the protections of the
consumer knows that understands
what that means so when they go
to sell their home they know
they've got a lien on it they
may have priority over the
basically probably not expected
accepted the cancer home without
satisfying that security
interests that's what I'm trying
to find out I I none of that
answers my question my concern
I'm focused on consumer
protection at this moment in
making sure that consumers are
protected in the event they go
to sell their home they know
that leans on their property how
is it we're making sure that fly
by night solar companies telling
them that fact before the sun
about online that's what I would
find.
Thank you madam chair
representative you know I am
going to refer this to our
attorney this Thomas.
You are.
I'm good morning madam chair
representative Ely so as a
general matter in community
solar projects the subscription
to the community solar project
does not carry a security
interest on somebody's home so
think of it as say Netflix when
you subscribe to Netflix you pay
a monthly fee and when you don't
want to use Netflix to cancel it
Netflix doesn't put a security
interest on your home they don't
lock you into a twenty five year
contract so unlike say rooftop
solar aware that solar project
is actually physically attached
to your house and if you finance
the solar project the bank of
course is going to take a
security interest to secure that
loan but in this case
subscribers are not necessarily
depends on the model they're
different models but the typical
model is is literally just a
monthly subscription or six
month subscription depends on
the terms of the agreement but
there is no physical attachment
of the project to anybody's help
home properties so there's no
security interest that's going
to be placed on the home
property now there is a
possibility in some parts of the
country where subscribers
actually own a haven't ownership
of part of the project itself so
you have a one megawatt solar
projects sitting on five acres
of land again not attached
anybody's house so you might
have a security interest against
the solar project in that case
but in the typical community
solar model the the renter or
the condo owner for the small
business that subscribing or the
school that subscribing to the
solar project.
Is not going to have a security
interest placed on their
property.
So so the security interest I'm
again I'm like rooftop solar
which is physically attached to
your property here the one
megawatt project is sitting out
in a field somewhere and not
sitting on people's property so
the security interests is not
going to touch to to somebody's
home or to their condo or to
their building.
I guess are.
Chair Senator expert and I
appreciate that answer I guess
what I'm looking for is I just
wanna make sure that as we get
into this when people are trying
to the subscribers or they want
to have an interest in it
that there is not the
opportunity for you know
companies to directly provide a
security interest on a home are
related to the financing of the
project I mean I I just you know
somebody can't pay up front and
a solar company says okay we
don't have to will stretch this
out over time but we're going to
put a security interest on your
home if you're telling me that
that's not gonna happen I'm okay
with that but I I'm not it makes
me a little nervous that there's
nothing in the bill that talks
about how solar companies cannot
do that all that they got to go
through a bank of India bank
looks at it but I.
You know I'm I'm listening
Representative not that
discussion and I'm I know kind
of philosophically I'm of the
mind that.
Consumers
if the critical issue for me is
disclosure once it's disclosed
to the consumer those
protections are built in place
then it's somewhat buyer be
beware Oxford from fraudulent
activities but I do think I'm
kind of focused on disclosure
but in this case if you're
telling me they cannot do that
help me understand where the
bill of the amendment ideas that
a solar company could do that
and make sure that a security
interest is attached to all
that's what I just I don't want
people to have a support you
know it's it's ineffective
surprise billing you go to sell
your home and there is a
security interest on your home
that you didn't know existed
tell you which side you're on
and now you know you're going to
get less money to closing it
comes as a total shock to
consumers that's what I don't
want to have.
Madam chair and representative
of in the movie it actually
clarifies that the subscriber
organization is not.
Eight residents it is a
of that organization has an
anchor tenant.
And usually that is the entity
that's carrying the burden.
With the developer and we're
talking about small commercial
retail customer regardless of
race class and nonprofit
organization related religious
organization in Indian nation
tribe or pueblo municipality or
county a charter private or
public school so we're not
talking about.
The
the subscriber organizations and
then they bring in.
And they are allowed to have up
to forty percent of the Energy.
In this project and then they
bring in residential customers
and also bring in the low income
of.
Customers so that they are
carrying the burden so he Lara
could you talk about the
security interests of those
subscriber organizations.
Yes so again the Liber so the
the low income right pair the
renter again they will pay a
subscription fee and the
consumer protections that are
built in to the bill proper
include of course full
disclosure and so the full
disclosure of security interest
is partly a term that was added
of course on the Senate floor so
if you look at the language of
the disclosure requirements it
says it will provide consumer
protection subscribers including
uniform disclosure form that
identifies information and
there's a list of information
including cost benefits keep
contract terms security interest
so if there is a security
interest and it doesn't prohibit
security interests
in the independent on the model
that that is the subscriber
organization model if there are
security interests those have to
be fully disclosed so that's a
statutory requirement that the
P. R. C. will be responsible for
requiring and enforcing and
other relevant and reasonable
information record pertaining to
the subscription as well as
grievance and enforcement
procedures so so the the
original language of the
consumer protection which would
be for all subscribers it would
include rental so to renters
were subscribers small business
owners schools tribe's whoever
might be a subscriber will get
the benefit of these uniform
disclosures so said
Representative Eli if there is a
subscriber security interests
tied to the subscription which
is rare but it's possible and
the law of the bill.
It doesn't prohibit but if there
is a security interest tied to
it then that information has to
be fully disclosed for the
subscribers before they
subscribe to the program so
people will have that
information before they
subscribe and can then make a
decision on whether to subscribe
so if you get if you get an
agreement a subscription
agreement that says we're gonna
put a security interest on your
home well and you don't want
that well don't don't sign the
agreement and so the PRC will
require that full disclosure
before you have to enter into an
agreement and that's a key
consumer protection is having
that information before you
enter into a subscription
agreement here all right and
then just a final point and as
is that the PRC with down on
madam chair and senator and
this is Thomas yes yes I am is
Thomas that I as I understand it
the PRC will have the authority
to put the of the forms and make
sure that the disclosures
adequate they're not being
handcuffed in terms of how they
can make sure that consumers are
properly that correct Madam
chair representative Ely yes the
the statute requires the PRC to
develop uniform disclosure forms
and for that disclosure to
include the list of information
required under the statute okay
I appreciate that I'm sorry I
just I I just got a drill down
on that so I appreciate Madam
chair Senator this time the
second.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair I I that
is really brought up of a
question for me you know last.
At our last meeting I ask what
would be the project cost and we
couldn't come up with what the
cost was so I said well let's
let's make it a hundred thousand
and you know band that's based
on rooftop solar that I know of
is twenty to thirty thousand.
But.
So we're saying that a small
retailer.
Could go in and set up this
Project and then he's going to
go and look for subscribers let
me ask you what happens when
this small retailers like now
something like COVID or whatever
and he goes bankrupt what
happens.
So.
Madam chair I'll start the
conversation and Miss Mister
Gilliam can out follow up if I
missed something Representative
Rehm it does allow the project
to start up with at least ten
subscribers and up to of.
Any.
The hundred of subscribers but
if there is no love.
And I can describe this well if
there is energy that is not
being used the utilities are
allowed to purchase that energy
at the discounted.
right that's available to them
now but.
They the subscriber organization
has up to a year in which to
fill the project before the
utility becomes eligible to take
that energy so Mr Gilliam
correct everything I said.
Madam chair and representative I
what you said is accurate
I would only add that to the
extent of project
No longer has an owner that's
that solvent are the project was
still produced energy utility
will still get the Energy at a
very low cost from that project
R. and the subscribers will not
be on the hook because the our
our.
Subscriptions are transferable
and maybe they can be returned
to this subscriber organization
so are the subscribers are
protected and utility gets very
cheap energy.
Madam chair and and Senator it
this just doesn't make business
sense you're gonna have to go to
the bank and borrow a hundred
thousand dollars and you know
they're gonna they're gonna look
at a small business.
And say well who were the
investors what do they have to
lose what collateral do they
have I mean they're absolutely
going to have to be tied in
allowing them to subscribe dive
in and dive out.
It just doesn't make sense what
what if okay so let's assume
that everything's running
perfectly and several of the
subscribers discussed the side
Hey I'm gonna die about this
month I'm not gonna have a
subscription and now you have
less than thirty percent.
Of the low income.
What happens now.
Madam chair in Representative
Rehm the subscriber
organizations are
Except during this COVID time I
understand the nonprofits should
be teetering
we're talking about cities we're
talking that counties we're
talking about public education
of schools that are in existence
that will continue and we're
talking about tribes so nations
and tribes.
Those are.
Entities that will.
Last if not in perpetuity for
many many years it is true that
is some of our non profits
might have the ups and downs of
financial
Impacts and there are some
nonprofits that have closed over
the years not just during the
silence period and that is a
situation that would have to be
dealt with but the other
subscriber organizations are
long lasting stable ones.
Well madam chair and senator all
of the ones that you just named
can do this right now.
I I just I don't see this is a
business plan that you could
actually take to the bank and
borrow money on but.
And I don't know if you have a
comment on that but madam chair
that's all my questions right
now this really doesn't make
sense thank you.
Thank you Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Which.
Yes guys of the.
Looking at the amendment.
I would like to focus on a
couple statements that the nurse
Thomas my and because it's
changed my understanding of what
was what was really going on
with this and.
So.
We have the.
Subscriber organization that
owns or operates a facility.
We have subscribers.
And I thought the whole intent
of this was to allow
subscribers to invest in and on
a piece of a solar facility.
And that's how I thought that
this thing has been presented
for.
Of.
What for five years.
But what.
Mr Thomas said a minute ago.
Has has changed my understanding
of what's going on and and she's
she said that the typical model
is a six month subscription.
And so.
Yes.
If you just have a subscriber
organization that owns and
operates the facility and it's
just looking for short term
subscribers.
That sign up for periods of time
not for the duration of the.
Productive life of the project.
That's a different business
model that's a different goal
that's a different the
situation that that what I
thought we were dealing with and
so I just.
But my first question is do that
I understand that I write it
down correctly when when you
were talking about that the
agency Thomas group that will
alter my
view on this the dramatic.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert both of my
experts have experience with
community solar projects in
other states so miss Thomas.
And then Mr Gilliam if you have
something to quickly at thank
you madam chair and
Representative Nibert so I'm as
I did not mean to imply that
typical subscription period is
six months subscription
agreements can vary so but and
and the model themselves can
very so there are some community
solar models where the
subscribers do in fact have an
ownership interest in the
project and so they will be able
to benefit in additional ways
for example they might be able
to take part of the tax credit
that might come from federal tax
credits but that's that is a
model but it's not the typical
model the typical model is again
renters who can't take the tax
credit for example or small
businesses or others who will
want to subscribe to a project
each project is going to be
different the cop the length of
contract might be different and
that's why the disclosure of
that information is so important
every subscriber organization of
might have a different length of
term with the contract it might
it might be a one month term it
might be month to month it might
be six months it might be five
years everyone's going to be
different and that's really for
the subscriber organization to
work out and remember all this
is going to be disclosed because
the statue will require them to
disclose that so if you are a
renter in I'll just pick a
utility a territory and there
are three community solar
projects getting developed and
you look at each of the three
and you say all project date has
a month to month subscription
for whatever reason maybe that.
Business model works of course
if the business model doesn't
work you won't get any
subscribers right so so the
developers and the subscriber
organizations have an incentive
to develop proprietary acts and
and to the economics of the
project to make it work they
have to get subscribers in order
for it to work so they've got a
balance kind of what they want
to do from a business standpoint
with what the subscribers want
to do and that's the benefit of
course of having this is more of
a market driven program where
subscribers subscribe
organizations will have to
entice subscribers right they're
gonna have to give them a good
deal or the subscribers are
going to buy in and by that I
mean subscribe not necessarily
so there are different models
the the legislation does not
require one model or for another
the key aspect of the
legislation is that it does
require complete disclosure of
the terms of any subscriber
agreement and so so to to answer
your question the the model is
not typically an ownership
model.
There are ownership models and
there might be some in New
Mexico but it is typically a
subscriber model where I don't
have an ownership interest but I
can transfer my subscription
right
so if you get even though that I
don't own that right I can still
transfer it and so or I can give
it up all together and give it
back to the subscriber
Organization US so those kinds
of flexibilities also create
consumer protections right if I
don't like the deal that I'm in
I can give it back and get out
of it just like I can cancel
Netflix if I don't like the fact
that Netflix just raise my rates
another back of a month so so
those are some of the the
critical parts of the probe of
the bill and of the design again
that the PRC will be overseen
that will give flexibility to
everybody quite honestly and I
would differ any further.
Comments of to Mr Gillian.
Thank you
madam chair Rick.
Madam chair and representative
just very quickly I think the
bottom line is that the
subscriber organizations are
competing on price.
Subscribers want subscribe
unless they're getting a good
deal unless they're saving money
and as long as they're saving
money are they typically will
continue to be subscribers.
Again madam chair and senator.
It sounds like the subscribers
are at least.
Based on the comments.
Generally will not own our.
Piece of the of.
Solar facilities and they are.
Simply simply subscribers
renters if you wall.
And and that's maybe different
than some of the comments I
received from the public
through.
Who state that they want to and
that's what I hear the word
investment that generally
connotes ownership.
And the not simply entering into
short term leases so
Madam chair and Senator
Yes.
It it seems to me that.
This is a very complicated of.
Till one AM on the other end
it's it's going to be of so
that.
The relationship between the
subscriber organization and the.
What utilities and then eight co
ops that up and
of that relationship is is
is set by the statute and
there's not that
Set requirements with respect to
the subscriber organization
toward the subscribers and
it looks like our.
We're going to have a number of
models a number of different
things going on and it looks to
me like the some fairly
sophisticated legal documents
will probably be prepared to to
deal with those relationships
and.
We are.
Us.
People who are.
By the very definition of the
people that you're demanding be
certain percentage of
subscribers will will probably
wax the ability to hire their
own lawyer to review this stuff
and will be in a position.
Not not a very good bargaining
position and and my concern is I
think that they're going to
believe that they're getting
product day when they're
actually getting product be and
you know all the disclosures by
but I have all the disclosures
that at the end of the day I
think that a lot of these
consumers have been told
throughout this process and have
have hopes that the they're
investing they're buying into
something when the the sounds
like most of models are not bad
at all and that that bothers me
Right deal because I think.
At the end of the day
What these people are going to
be paying a lot of money
and they may get some back if if
it's really productive but it's
not going to be the returns that
that I think people are
expecting and I I am concerned
about the there's a reason that
the utility companies.
are getting into solar and it's
not at the five megawatt level
so at the hundreds of megawatts
level are the the solar facility
in Russell's up to a hundred
forty megawatts right now
You know those are the the all
commercial facilities that
they're wanting to put off a lot
of all right.
I am.
Really.
I'm gonna have to give great
box to to the side your doctor
the the subscriptions of the you
know because.
The the networks analogy of this
type project just because of the
just doesn't do much for.
All I thought we were creating a
vehicle.
To allow people who could not
put rooftop solar on their homes
to allow them to invest in a
solar project so that they got
whatever budget they may believe
our garage profit and M. own
something which is why you have
a security interest the.
If it's just simply by a
magazine or via cable TV of
subscription all.
Looks to me like the.
This whole effort is to.
Help subscriber organizations
get a federal and that that's
all it is.
I'm troubled by that thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Mr
Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and
commitment compact committee
members I move we adopt the
amendment.
So.
Thank you we have a motion by
vice chair to adopt the
amendments and a second by
Representative Eli is there
further discussion.
Okay the clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that you have
money in the affirmative.
Right so Senator we have adopted
those amendments and now back to
the bill as amended.
Madam chair.
Representative Eli yeah all
moving to pass so Senate bill
eighty four is amended.
Right we have a due pass stand
and I'll second that is there
further discussion on the bill.
Okay the clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night perch.
Representative nightmare.
Thank.
Here it comes up Representative
Nibert.
Yes on the bill yes yes I'm
our our vote no.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair.
Yes madam chair yes madam chair
with that you have six in the
affirmative and three in the
negative.
Great so thank you Senator by a
vote of six to three you have a
do pass on Senate bill eighty
four as amended thank you madam
chair members of the committee
we really appreciate your time
on this bill thank you thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee very good thank
you.
Thank you we're now moving on to
Senate bill one twelve.
everyone on that bill that is
going to be.
Speaking please raise your hand
and will promote you.
Welcome Representative Rubio.
Good morning everyone.
Good morning I believe Senator
Stewart should be also joining
us as well but I can get started
in the meantime if necessary yes
please get started thank you
madam chair Committee members of
Senate bill one twelve creates a
task force to address economic
diversification in the state
beyond just the the the fossil
fuel industry but really
expanding beyond energy we
recently amended it on Monday to
incorporate important aspects of
house bill of two ninety seven
which you all have heard which
included
language to codify a study that
was conducted with frontline
communities around this issue as
well as really centering
disproportionately impacted
communities who have been
impacted and will be impacted
with transition I just got
notice that Senator Stewart is
logging in and I can provide you
can provide some of of her
comments as well but overall
that is why the bill does is is
created task force that's really
centered on frontline
communities and really looking
towards creating a plan for
sustainability and economic
diversification in New Mexico.
Great thank you Representative
we don't see her just yet do you
want to have any of their
experts week or are you ready to
move on.
we can move on to questions if
that's okay I don't know who is
here as experts but I believe.
Clark and Mary Feldblum yes.
I'm in yeah.
Okay maybe we have no no it's
it's Tom Solomon and then
and and and Mr Clark.
Okay we don't have okay reduce
have Tom Solomon and Mr correct
would you like them to speak or
should we move on to questions
how we can go ahead and move on
to questions if that's helpful
okay great so let's go ahead and
open the pool if the audience
would like to speak on Senate
bill one twelve.
And raise your hand in support
or opposition the pool is open
and will keep it open for about
ten seconds longer.
Okay so we have twenty nine in
favor and one against and so if
you would like to speak in favor
of the bill please raise your
hand.
James this sorry your I needed.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is James Kobe
wine and I am the policy
director for the center for
civic policy and the power for
New Mexico coalition I want to
thank Senator Stewart and
Representative Rubio through the
work on this legislation we
strongly support SB one twelve
the legislation insurers
community members will have a
seat at the table in the
important long term planning for
state sustainable and prosperous
New Mexico economy I will also
include it will also in plant
community recommendations laid
out in the clean energy
workforce development study
which CCP and power for New
Mexico it advocated for in
twenty nineteen with the support
of Representative Rubio the
study reached over eighteen
hundred New Mexicans during the
height of the pandemic and at
the very bottom of the oil and
gas industry slump as a proud
member of okay we get Pueblo I
can say that the study itself is
an important stamps on of the
pain that all of our communities
feel please support still.
Paul Gibson here now and it.
Actually sure is I think I and
our approach.
Can you hear me we can hear you
great thank thank you madam
chair committee members I also
want to thank our Billsponsored
for introducing this important
legislation my name is Paul
Gibson co founder retake Our
Democracy an all volunteer
organization with twenty five
hundred members statewide this
year I we identified twenty
bills we call transformational
bills and SB one twelve is one
of them humanity didn't
transition from the stone age
because they ran out of stones
had other options that were
cheaper to produce.
At more adaptable applications
we do not have to wait until
every drop of oil is extracted
to make our transition indeed
our younger generations are
begging you to do so with SB one
twelve the choice is clear plan
for a just sustainable
transition or turn our backs on
the needs of younger generations
who will be forced to deal with
the ramifications of your
decision we take our democracy
in its twenty five hundred well
informed engaged and active
members strongly support just be
one twelve we hope you will too
thank you very much and thank
you for your service.
Thank you.
You are now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Karen what lock
with the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we stand such in
strong support of this
legislation for all the reasons
stated by the previous speakers
and the experts this is a this
is to develop a plan and it is
for the long term but the it is
for the short term as well as we
need to quit act quickly
transition away from oil and gas
in the state.
with the with the electric cars
that are coming on and all of
the alternative energies we need
to be prepared for a new economy
thank you very much and we want
to thank the sponsors for
bringing this legislation.
to missio Romero each have
Parker you are now and it.
Sorry so I was muted on the
policies hello again or sorry
hello chair members the
committee my name is our initial
merry Kauffman here's a
spokesperson for yucca since our
founding almost two years ago
yucca and our grassroots
partners have championed the
need for just transition of the
state of New Mexico we called
for a just transition study plan
and fund SB one one two as
amended as amended begins to
answer that call New Mexico
produces more than twice the
national average of greenhouse
gas emissions per capita this is
largely the result of our
greenhouse gas intensive oil and
gas industry our state houses
within at the world single
largest and cheapest oil field
in the Permian basin we have a
responsibility to developing
more sustainable and less deadly
economic base for our state
given the oil and gas revenues
compromise more than a third of
the state's budget we needed
divestment and diversification
plan immediately any just
transition policy must have real
science based timelines and
accountability measures to make
sure our government is
responding to the crisis not
industry demand and the process
truly centers equity and
inclusion is conducted every
step of.
Jordan you're now in made it.
Though you'll have to and then
on your end.
Thank you madam chair Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children I want to thank the
sponsors for developing this
proposal and their commitment to
diversifying our economy and our
revenue streams the steady
growth of renewables and changes
in energy consumption patterns
means we cannot rely on the boom
and bust oil and gas industry as
an ongoing source of revenue
there's too much at stake in our
children our communities in our
classrooms deserve more stable
and reliable funding to support
the programs and services that
allow the Mexicans to thrive we
know this process cannot happen
overnight but it does require
the thought dedication and
expertise from various state
agencies community and business
leaders and tribal communities
is laid out in this bill so that
we can ensure a just and
equitable transition and
diversification of our economy
we urge your support thank you.
Thank you some tree Ph.D you are
now and it.
Hello good morning madam chair
and committee my name some GPO
G. I am a mother of three living
in Bloomfield New Mexico in San
Juan County and I wholeheartedly
support SB one twelve and ask
for your support as well have a
good day.
Thank you Luis Carrero you are
now and made it.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Bruce could handle speaking
with strong support of SB one
twelve for the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter and the thirty
five thousand members and
supporters this legislation
creates a task force to study
and recommend opportunities for
a diversified clean energy
economy also adding language
from other great bill it would
implement referred
recommendations from the
department of workforce
solutions.
and this bill ensures strictly
disadvantages and most impacted
communities have seen on the
tape.
It makes sure no communities
left behind during our state's
transformation into a stronger
and healthier in New Mexico we
all know that what New Mexico
can do we can be leaders change
thank you so much Senator
Stewart balls Representative
Rubio is Stansbury for this
great please vote yes on SB one
well thank you very much for
your time this morning.
Thank you Kyle Jim here now and
muted.
Well we ought to have been
Kylian shift I represent an
introspective as the executive
director as well as a voice from
the Navajo Nation and I and I am
in full support of SB one twelve
and feel that this economic task
force would fully transform all
communities especially the rural
communities as we can rely on
renewable energy and this would
empower families to truly
prosper that they can
concentrate on more than
utilities that they can focus on
their well being their health
and that this bill would also
help provide food security and
that we can support the
agriculture community as well
and so in stop deforestation as
well in that we can only provide
health the resources all around
from the air the water the
ground and I just appreciate
everybody's time thank you thank
you.
Thank you Mary Feldblum your now
and needed.
Okay can you hear me yes my name
is Mary Feldblum and
Representative resorts oil and
gas accountability project in
this bill Jordan said
we cannot depend on the booms
and busts of of the oil and gas
industry to fund so our our our
education and so many services
in our budget for years
legislators have been talking
about diversification and here's
a plan to do that and it it's
transitions are painful and it's
so important that the
communities that are impacted of
the tribes will be involved in
this and it's a very exciting
proposal and thank you Sanchez
for doing this so that we can
get going on and doing something
that's really appropriate for
state thank you.
Thank you actually I see your
now unmuted.
Giulio have two and a on your
and.
So we are moving on to head with
us so most assumed.
Hi.
Sorry.
Hello what is the S. present
this in members of the committee
number I think you also remember
this most excellent power for
New Mexico everyone on the list
request assessments in those
particular level of support and
just but I miss you make money
that we wanted to this then all
medical yet can not the new one
the show this that that office
let's do this let's see what's
your.
But the committee hosted the
meant a little bit but I yes.
Your question is can be seen
because if and this will be a
quite a several hundred estate
the state gas company little
source of our hope I with them
which is numbers estimates in
this and those directed at
CENIC's and follow unanimous
classes place you can know I
with trust protects you on is
not what our listeners to Mr.
Yes Representative on a stress
on me just.
One of the top US economic us
in the number of
You know that you so you really
only will make you want to see
that not if but us you must be
mindful list that'll definitely
problematic onion that is I will
get those but by.
Well you're just pressing the
buttons you notice yes when I
was the is there a simple little
thing the comments and be able
to get you not us
when you don't come here lateral
but I can Mr school we that is.
When I'm gonna come bills will
give them a little bit on the
anesthetic when we should be
able one is that what is it is
that right it's a very simple
process they don't come you will
see people but is that all you
little level Mexicans is
struggle in this are going to be
sat in many on the in the latest
poll honestly might cause them
to set us one of when a lot of
economy up on was just
communities it and then not that
bloody that.
Then it yes yes said but I'm yes
Representative can was the place
you'll see me doubles a coastal
ecosystem professional status.
Before we move on just for the
committee's information no one
set us up with the transfer for
this bill so we're not.
Work will let people talk for
those that are able to I
understand but we don't have a
translator for this spell.
Stephanie Welch you are now
unmuted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am Stephanie
Welch I'm an attorney with the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty.
Our communities need an economy
where the of them that is
comprised of sustainable
industry provides jobs with
living wages and good benefits
and that is equitable and
inclusive this bill will move us
toward that goal an economy that
works for everyone and that
reflects our values and needs it
will help ensure that
disproportionately impacted
communities have a voice in
economic development decisions
we urge your support thank you.
Thank you.
Benny OJ you are now and it.
This is.
This is.
This with so most and pueblo you
need to please you're now
needed.
One of the number is getting so
sanitizing embraced almost
axion.
Thank you and this is the reason
you're going to now do it does
that the employment I. meeting
Mr committee that depended I
understand but don't you and I
think yeah I don't even back
when US based on especially
among the states that eighty
that economic got.
Yeah most on that what is
amendment of the was we bought
that that then it must pointed
that they have appointments just
committee that is reading.
Replaced by double state but
given that the night I was get
bent on the demos Bannister's
goal money that is.
I
thought I would ask but I want
to go numb yes and that it that
the Camilla's they letting the
look yeah I'm with them that go
again the academic levels that I
was license based on those that
are supposed to do that as much
as good as the.
Yes you are now and it.
Good morning madam vice chair
committing members my name is
nana Bennett B. this I'm a
community organizer for for for
dhaafay Aksyon in grant Luna and
Hidalgo counties and a member of
power for New Mexico SB one
twelve is the culmination of
many many hours of work and is
inclusive inclusive of the
voices of many rural communities
such as our own so we deeply
love and respect our mining
tradition we know that time to
begin to look to the future is
now it's time for communities
not corporations to be the
voices for New Mexico SB one
twelve begins a just transition
that is good for all New
Mexicans and we strongly
encourage your support for this
important piece of legislation
thank you have a great day.
Thank you crack eight eight
Gallegos here now and made it.
All good morning chair members
of the committee my name is
Erica today was policy director
at today which is also a member
of the power for New Mexico a
coalition.
We stand in favor of Senate bill
one twelve and view it as a
racial justice issue in order to
have a just transition to
renewable energy communities of
color need to be part of the
planning process and have access
to the training they need
especially in tribal and rural
communities to benefit from the
job opportunities that come from
this trained at transition for
this reason we urge members of
the committee to vote in favor
of health Senate bill one one
two to ensure that black
indigenous and people of color
are at the table when decisions
are being made for them and
their families thank you.
Thank you Joseph Hernandez your
now and made it.
Yeah.
Good morning madam chair members
of this committee my name is
Joseph medicine that the next
energy organizer for neighbor
education project I'm I'm so
proud to be joined by many
Dinesh relatives as you are
hearing strong support for SB
one twelve in addition to the
strong support yes the one
twelve I just want to quickly
read the support of my
representatives of
Representative Anthony Allison
who who again I this bill as
bringing in new sources of
economic development and
employment the formation of the
visor Council gives key players
a seat at the table and that's
important because I I do see
organizations and institutions
all come together with community
leaders and in advocates of our
community to help make sure that
we have a the transition and a
solution for our community thank
you very much and please well
yes they do pass on SB one Prof
thank you.
Thank you man berating your now
and it.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is my
neighborhood in and I'm
representing vote solar today an
organization dedicated to
increasing access to the clean
energy transition I'm from Santo
Domingo pueblo on a strong
supporter for SB one twelve for
a number of reasons it is due
time to broaden the decision
making table especially for
native communities and others
who are disproportionately
harmed by the negative impacts
of Connor Environment
sustainable economy is critical
for native communities to
preserve the climate and
cultural practices that rely on
the health of our ecosystem land
water and natural resources.
Please support SB one twelve
because of legislation will
positively impact New Mexico
particularly the socio economic
benefits and workforce
development opportunities
critical for frontline
communities your support of this
legislation and legislation to
allow us to be responsible
stewards to our youth and future
generations thank you.
Madam chair given the
interruption I'm informed that
there is a interpreter available
now her name is Denise Garcia.
So I'm sorry we were not able to
do that we need advance notice
because we have to set it up on
our end
so we're not gonna be able to do
that right now.
That's a Chavis your now I need
it.
Yet they have been in collecting
madam chair committee members my
name is out to Chavis and that
born for Kewa Pueblo here on
behalf of my communities and as
a member of power for New Mexico
there is been a long long
history of our native
communities being
disproportionately disadvantaged
by this fact of industry our air
water and land have been harmed
in ways that cannot be undone
however the task the simple we
must act now we need to put
indigenous black people of color
and other frontline communities
at the decision making table to
inform our just transition to
diversified energy economy SB
one twelve the dresses a racial
justice issue with meaningful
career opportunities while
diversifying our economy for
these reasons we ask that you
please pass SB one twelve is
amended on behalf of all of our
future generations thank you to
the Sanchez madam chair and
members of the committee he had
now at.
Thank you so much thank you you
are now and it.
Thank you madam chair and
members of this committee my
name is Samantha cal and I am
the climb and energy advocate
representing conservation voters
New Mexico we stand strong
support Senate bill one twelve
as amended.
I'm here to support and
reinforce the many proponents of
this bill by echoing their
important message with the
inevitable shift from oil and
gas to a carbon free energy it
is critically important that
equity and inclusion of the low
income and at risk communities
of New Mexico are the central
focus of this economic
transition and diversification
and this bill creates a task
force and advisory council that
would ensure the inclusion of
these essential voices.
We just see it see the NM
vehemently support this bill and
encourages Committee to do that
to do the same thank you for
your time your support means a
commitment to a future of a
healthy sustainable economy for
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Charlotte little your
now and it.
Thank you and good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Charlotte little I
come from the publicist simply
P. and house I stand in support
of this bill this is our state's
opportunity to be a leader in
innovating and economic model
that will create high quality
jobs makes full use of New
Mexico has abundant renewable
potential and protects our
precious and limited water
resources for present and future
generations again I stand in
support of this bill and I
encourage the committee to vote
yes and want to take this moment
to also thank you the sponsors
and all who have worked on this
bill thank you.
Thank you Christian Catholicism
your now emitted.
Dear chair members of the
committee thank you very much my
name is Christian can see just
speaking on behalf of the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico we
represent the cities of
Albuquerque Santa Fe Los crucis
in Santa Fe County comprising
forty percent of New Mexico's
population our members seek the
passage of SB one twelve is it
will support remember goals by
giving voice to the needs of
disproportionately impacted
community members at the state
level helping turn the state
economy in a more sustainable
direction in strengthening the
work of our local member
governments hired you to vote
yes on the SP one twelfth thank
you.
Thank you Kerry robin Brander
your now and made it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Kerry
robin grounder registered
lobbyists the policy solutions
institute as many of you on this
committee no I'm a professional
lobbyists that represents lots
of different interests around
house and all of those interest
really have one thing in common
and that thing is the need for a
vibrant economy that has strong
revenues and a stable budget
we're grateful for the work that
our energy energy producing
communities have done in the
past but we view this bill as a
path forward for New Mexico a
past that owners the work that's
come before us but capitalizes
on the opportunity of the future
we know that all of this
planning is happening in
different sectors with different
industries and in different
silos and state government right
now but we review Senate bill
one twelve as a way to bring
that work to make it coda I
organized and coordinated so we
can chart our own path forward
in the way only New Mexico knows
how thank you so much madam
chair.
Thank you work with currently
your now and it.
Hello yeah thank you madam chair
and committee members I'm just
speaking on my own behalf.
I'm in support of SB one twelve
because of health concerns we
really need to clean the air up.
It last year when I was seventy
one I developed late onset as
much
and I've been healthy my whole
life I backpack on a hike and I
had an attack last night the
last over an hour and I was just
gagging for brass Is twenty
years ago did my first trip down
the Grand Canyon it's slipped my
raft on lava falls I was sucked
down for three minutes I can
guarantee you that the tech I
had last night was far far worse
than being under water for
treatments and waterfalls so
any.
Way we can clean up the air that
we breathe for I kids would be
very much appreciated thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone that would like
to speak in opposition.
Okay seeing and that concludes
our public comment and welcome
Senator Stewart.
Thank you madam chair thanks to
Representative Rubio for getting
you started today.
Right listening to those
comments and great working with
Representative Rubio her bill
was really exactly what my bill
needed so I think together we've
got a great plan I'm sure she
already presented I can talk
more about it if you like but
otherwise I'm here to join the
the crowd this morning on trying
to get our sustainable economy
going.
Great thank you with that we'll
go to committee Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Just.
Through the bill I.
I have several questions and.
My first questions on and I'm
looking at the amendments that
context version.
So it's on page five of that
version that's.
Section one.
See three.
It says to representatives of
organizations with experience
and sustainable economic
development planning secretary
yeah and I was wanting to maybe
tied to al both those
organizations or what your
intentions for those
organizations will be with us
be.
business organizations with
those be in geo Sir or non
governmental organizations with
the nonprofit's work what what
types of organizations are your
real is looking for at the
telling.
the roll.
So madam chair that is the
sustainable economy Advisory
Council that came from
Representative Rubio's bill to
me it's flexible enough to come
United any of those types of
organizations that represent
line for mention of so we you
know we we don't want to put
exactly you know who and where
and what in here because of the
nature of this task force but
let me also see here for
Representative Rubio has a
further answer.
Thank you senator and thank you
madam chair and representative
Nibert there are a number of of
organizations from around the
state who do a lot of work
within our communities and have
direct contact with frontline
workers specifically around the
state and those who are who we
mentioned as disproportionately
impacted communities and so when
that is noted in the legislation
it is to open up the
opportunities for membership of
of those of those voices to be
able to be participating and in
some cases
and and this will be part of the
process around like the bedding
and all of that is that
organizations around the state
who do have direct contact with
community members that they
would have opportunities to be
part of of this this process.
Well I guess I didn't clarify
our I mean the senator said any.
Any type of.
Organization corporations non
governmental organizations.
Iterations partnerships separate
nonprofits
and.
I I didn't quite understand how
your answer I did.
Madam chair representative I
think that's usually how
organizations and other entities
of formulate a lot of their
process sees is through the work
that they do the direct work
that they do with community
members so I don't know if you
want to clarify your question
but that is my
that is.
The way that I can explain that.
Well I'm I'm just.
Shared Representative I'm just
trying to get a feel for the
make up of.
The
It was also.
In paragraph three talks about
to representatives of
organizations with experience
instance animal economic
development center.
I was just wanting to know what
types of organizations for were
intended that Senator says
basically any any type whether
it's a corporation others are
partnerships limited liability
companies so proprietorships
non governmental organizations
nonprofits.
Centrum and I was just wanting
to know what your intentions
were with respect to.
Organizations with experience
and sustainable economic
development planning
What what are.
So madam chair I might
Representative Nibert those were
your words not mine and all I'm
trying to say is that there
isn't a lot of specificity right
there I can think of
Western resources advocates are
in organizations that work on
sustainable economy and number
of other issues
there's an NGO for you
You know I mean we could try to
think about and name many of
them but you know it it's what
it says organizations that have
experience.
In looking at economic
development planning with an eye
toward sustainability.
You know that that says enough
for me to consider quite a
number of different
organizations.
So you know it it I don't think
it's wide open but it's
certainly open enough so that
NGOs.
corporation if that's the work
they do it cetera we want to
have this Advisory Council to be
very robust this is really where
we're going to hear from our
communities of from the impacted
communities from industry.
Of from our trucks
which have land all over the
state and are sometimes very
impacted by what we do so it's
it's designed to give us enough
leeway to really provide
organizations that we want to be
part of this group and want to
have at the table.
And then my second question the
main maxed.
graphs Representative four one
representatives from industries
and business sectors.
in them I eight from tribal
governments or entities.
And so all in all we have
fourteen.
Thank you correctly on the
Advisory Council.
One local government to from
disproportionally at impacted
communities to from the news
organizations one from that
industry at eight.
Tribal.
It's and.
Look to me like.
This Advisory Council.
Is supposed to.
Bars the sustainable economic
task force which is composed I
think thirteen.
members large storage government
Representatives from various
the.
Agencies.
And.
They're supposed to.
Our test sample then the the
strategic plan that's provided
on the legislation so I presume
that the the goal of this is
that to actually plan for and
develop a mechanism by which our
economy.
Is going to grow and that jobs
are created new opportunities
exist for our our children would
that be
and that's your goal of this
the.
This.
Ask questions maybe
Council in the.
Force which is yes.
Agencies and member council
being the.
Members from these organizations
is that really what we're trying
to come up with.
Madam chair I I thank you for
the latest out fairly well if
you look at page seven at the
bottom of page six this is
really the duties of the
Advisory Council will be meeting
on that Advisory Council will
interface with the.
cabinet secretaries that are the
driving force their duties so
that task force may hire
contracted consultants are
experts on page seven that be on
C. a strategic plan which will
be developed and updated
annually show up find policies
to promote the addition of new
jobs statewide replace jobs that
rely on the extraction or
develop natural resources
and this you know when I when I
talk about this and I've had
questions this is not just about
renewable energy this is about
bringing jobs to the state out
of the Senate we passed the
clean fuel standard we up twenty
companies that are already
wanting to come to our state to
help clean up the transportation
fuels that we're trying to
address so it continues
diversifying the state's tax
base to replace that revenue
generated from our natural
resource extraction secretary
Economic Development state
investments infrastructure
alternative funding sources for
the folks that relying now on
the oil and gas we have forty
percent of our budget based on
the oil and gas that just cannot
be sustained for so many reasons
so yes of these cabinet
secretaries is really to think
big and looked it I personally
one actor culture to be
developed more so that we're
actually growing food for people
instead of the big cash crops
that we have now certainly we
brought up a mining rare earth
metals that we have to get from
Asia so certainly the mining
sector ought to be involved so
this isn't narrow.
It's it's left fairly broad
because.
The task force and what to do
you can try but it's really up
to them so long term economic
growth of what what
Representative Rubio's bill
brought to this was a focus on
transition to good jobs out of
these areas where the jobs are
ending because we all need to
move away from burning coal for
example we want mine reclamation
jobs in the San Juan well we
want
Station to high rate renewable
energy jobs which we are doing
all over the state window on the
eastern side so
it's it's it's a bold plan I
think but it it will require a
lot of work on these people
having the Advisory Council is a
good way to bring in more of the
public and to bring in those
communities that need to be
there we've reference the the
report that the workforce
solutions to it under
Representative Rubio is a
direction two years ago they've
got a good idea of where the
jobs are and where they're not
and where we really need to work
on better job growth so
it's it's an all encompassing
idea for the task force and if
we can get this across the
finish line I just can't wait to
see what they're talking about
we're we're attempting to
legalize adult use cannabis
those are certainly good jobs I
expanding our him a growing
growing those are good jobs.
Are both good for New Mexico
don't require very much water
so
we want to healthy community we
want cleaner air well we we I
personally am very grateful for
oil and gas and what they've
done for our economy but they're
on their way out and we need a
good plan to get New Mexico
healthy and have a good economy
as they move out.
Well madam chair and and
senator.
You know people think that the
oil and gas industry.
Is on its way out because it
provides our transportation
fuels and and certainly that
sector is is our.
Being replaced even as we speak
due to the number of electric
vehicles that are that are
coming on the market M. and R.
are going to be more common
places as time goes on I will
grant you that but the petroleum
industry in the natural gas
industry
do not just provide.
Transportation fuels or fuels to
generate electricity.
I would suspect Representative
most of us sitting right now
Our.
Probably substantially closed by
petroleum products
We are.
Everything that we touch.
Here that were were in front of
the screen petroleum so it's not
quite as dire on the petroleum
industry is some work with magic
we still will be plastics the
cars are like because of
plastics
there's a lot of things that
that the dollar drugs used for
so I'm not I'm not going to.
I think that our petroleum
industry in New Mexico is on its
way out I think it will still
have a future is it is it in a
transition phase yes
but the reason for my my
questions madam chair and
senator and representatives.
I read this legislation as
during exactly as a senator
described.
And those are very ambitious
goals are will branch.
And I believe that that to get
there requires.
The best minds the best the
highly motivated individuals.
That that can't can look outside
the box and can can see.
Not just New Mexico but can see
the entire globe and what's
going on international.
And so we have the between the
the the two groups we have
twenty seven individuals.
And one.
Possibly three.
Are from.
Industries are from the very
people that create.
The jobs from the very people
that that create of the the
economic opportunities and so
for a possibly out of twenty
seven.
Are from that sector.
And so my question is how do we
achieve those ambitious goals.
If you only have one to three
seats at the table.
Composed of people that will be
the ones that are looking at
creating those opportunities
bringing those resources to New
Mexico and have the
The experience of the the of.
Yes.
The experience and the knowledge
of what it takes to of.
Create these jobs and to create
these opportunities are created
the the environment that will
encourage these entities to to
come to our state and to
diversify our the to come to our
state and provide opportunities
to our children yes ma'am to
encourage businesses that are
are maybe our.
Antiquated to to change their
business model to employ more
New Mexicans and to maybe get
them all up track the the the is
of meeting the demands of the
new economy if you will
so.
I looked at this and and look at
the numbers and and it just
saying that the ambitious goals
cannot be achieved.
If you're only looking at
government officials and.
The council but that only has
one to three states filled with
with those types of people are
and if you have one to three
states
on a task force like that you're
not going to get every sector of
the state or you know you're not
going to get business people
from throughout the state you'll
get maybe one from Albuquerque
maybe two from Albuquerque but
you're not going to have are
many voices from other parts of
the state so.
All that we achieve that with
the make up of this not just for
and so well madam chair.
You know the significant part of
the task force it sells is it
run by the economic development
department.
This bill that behind and they
asked to be the lead a state
agency is exactly what they are
trying to do now they just
received a one point five
million dollar grant from the
federal government to do
essentially what is laid out in
this bill they were very excited
about the idea of putting our
state agencies together to have
the energy and minerals you have
the environment department you
have the economic development
department you have workforce
solutions you have higher ed and
public at you have the people
that are trying to do everything
you just mentioned in the state
and that is their job of this
came about when we got our new
governor and twenty nineteen
she's did an executive order to
have for state agencies look at
how they can start the
mitigation of climate change
which is going to be hitting the
southwest incredibly hard Hawker
prior or if it's wet we'll be
inundated with water whatever
whatever whether you have
wherever you are it's going to
be more intense and so we need
to think about the future and
plans for the future and that's
what these departments were
tasked to do and they're excited
about this task force and having
the advice we have that will
bring voices that you sometimes
do not here in government so we
think we've done a good job of
having the voices we need in the
Advisory Council and having
these heads of these departments
be in charge of getting experts
in hearing from industry hearing
from who they need to do a
yearly update of the of this
plan and to get to work to
really look at job.
Growth of bringing in other
industries and transitioning
away from using as much funding
this is a little and bust cycle
religious our state government
not to mention a really impacts
on the air water and the
pollution that we have in the
state so I believe we've got a
good balance and industry is
part of it they have a solid
loud voice in this even if
there's only three of them
because everyone of these
cabinet secretaries works on a
daily basis with industry they
will have to be part of this and
they will be part of that.
Madam chair and senator are I
hope you're right I hope that
this task force can accomplish
the walk the goals that you set
out for them
but when I read the bill it
looks to me like we're creating
another matter study group and
we have a lot of a lot of bills
that create study groups and we
continue to get the same results
and our.
Our become somewhat skeptical of
with just study and things.
Forever and not getting actual
actual results that are
meaningful for our children for
our
economy for the service of the
New Mexico and and so are you I
hope I hope you're correct the
this is the vehicle that can get
us there I I just the.
Question whether whether the
make up has sufficient numbers
of of of of people
who will be actually.
In the.
With the experience to do the
lofty things that you're you
intended here.
Madam chair and.
Senator Representative.
Is this legislation require
agencies maybe shift their
priorities and and if so are the
agencies prepared to our engage
in that should just and are they
finance to the point that
they'll be able to
make those ships.
Chair of that certainly is will
be the job of that task force
made up of our cabinet
secretaries I've certainly put
funding into the economic
development department at
recurring funding through of the
junior bill I think
Representative Rubio has also we
certainly will look to see if
they need more funding as we go
forward and we all need to shift
we all need to shift need to
shift toward this dealing with
climate change moving away from
so much reliance on one industry
and having a better economy so
they're already trying to shut
it's part of the economic
development department grant
from the US department of the
environment so I I believe we're
all in that change.
And madam chair and senator
You know the
the bill cycle of the oil and
gas industry is
it is something that happens
with all commodities whether
it's energy.
All commodities.
Mining commodities all of those
industries go through.
Ralphs and jeeps and
You may not know this but.
Bye bye work our professional
career is directly tied to the
oil and gas sure so I do well
what it does well I do for one
it as for so are.
My career I've gone up and down
I think four times are now
through substantial troughs of
substantial peaks
The.
The the entire our quarter of
the state that are are from and
work with that experiences those
ups and downs so we're acutely
aware of the whole industry and
work usually aware of how the
industry provides for for.
Many good things and we're also
acutely aware of where the
industry is is not doing so well
the the impact that has on our
communities.
And so we we are we are very
aware of the need to diversify
our local.
And and we.
Of course are attempting to do
that.
Aber culture as you mentioned is
a very
Orton component in southeastern
Mexico as well that provides
some students stability the
event that secretary but if the
dairy industry all at the
southeast corner of the state
also rides
some peaks and valleys and right
now or dairy producers are are
somewhat and I and I about state
and you guys see here with the
price of milk at the store all
in all it's what three Bucks a
gallon or something
it's it's not a price that the
allows our dairy industry I.
And so.
You know.
We desperately need this
statewide and we desperately
need
Government looking at
everything that government does
from from its tax structure to
its regulatory structure to yes
You know our our workforce you
know the the.
Our children are going through
the the the public schools and
and maybe even going to our
higher education institutions of
it all we put it out a a
workforce that that is
employable said order the whole
gamut needs to be looked at and
so I don't have objections we're
with the.
Taking those matters under right
at the task force and really
looking at.
But I do have some concerns with
how that gets done in this
particular piece of legislation
that again are are I wish this
this so these two groups of all
fall over council.
The task force I really hope it
hope it works I think you're the
end of the day we probably will
need to have some so more people
engaged on the actual business
there about and get input from
people who are actually
experienced
regulatory part the tax
environment the all all just the
day to day things that
businesses look at when they
deport capital and one to three
people on this out of twenty
seven doesn't get right the so
thank you madam chair thank you
senator thank you Representative
for us all our our I do have
some concerns thank you thank
you.
Representative vice chair
Johnson thank you madam chair I
move a do pass.
We have a motion by vice chair
John Sandford do pass in the
second by Representative Eli is
there further discussion.
Okay seeing none of the clerk to
call the roll please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Nibert.
Right thank you.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Zamora.
No.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes madam chair with that you
have six in the affirmative and
three in the negative.
Thank you and appropriate take
that bode count I know
Representative Rubio I like to
say something because of the
issue with the Spanish
interpreters so Representative
Rubio thank you madam chair and
I'll just be brief I just wanted
to thank the folks who were
listening in who didn't happen
they they we weren't able to get
the translation on time so I
just wanted to say some brief
words but I lost guest on again
though we participate but only
now must get out of this year
that is grant estimate but DC
bottled this book additional
development the renewable the
most and that that'll see on
battle is going we but we also
active with the add on to Stucky
president Donald also see start
yes I as more we greet the
god guess was was to say on that
is that the second best to see
on and I just was letting folks
know it's it's really important
for folks to have been part of
this conversation there's been a
lot of work leading up to this
to this effort and I'm super
grateful to Senator Stewart and
and all the folks who've been a
part of this to really make sure
that all of the communities who
are on the front lines of this
issue are at the center of this
work and so with that thank you
madam chair and thank you
committee members.
Great thank you and with that
Senator and Representative you
have a do passed by a vote of
six in the affirmative and three
in the negative thank you thank
you so much madam chair for the
conversation not many thanks to
Representative Rubio it's just
been fun to join these bills so
and we're are going to do with
the work of this committee that
represents nine for wants us to
do I am hopeful you can't be in
politics without being called
thank you.
Great thank you.
New Mexico are hundred Genda is
Senate bill one sixty.
So we have Senator Duhigg.
And if you have any experience
if those folks can raise their
hand and we can promote them.
To panelists.
Cydney Tellis Representative or
excuse me senator.
Yes madam chair.
Okay and go head and began I
thank you madam chair good
morning members of the committee
I'm here today to present Senate
bill one sixty this is a bill
that would extend public
financing of elections to
District Court judicial races in
New Mexico I and would
potentially make New Mexico the
first state in the nation to do
this allowing judges to focus on
the dockets rather than
fundraising and reducing
potential conflicts of interest
in appearance of the propriety
in the court.
Right now the voter action act
provides for public financing
for statewide appellate judicial
races and for PRC races.
This bill eliminates the PRC
from the voter action act
because of the constitutional
amendment that passed in
November making the PRC an
appointed body rather than
elected one and then it adds in
it District Court judgments and
it scales the amount of the
public financing that the
candidates would get based on
the size of the judicial
district so for for the biggest
districts like the second
judicial district where there
are four hundred thousand or
more voters candidates would get
fifteen cents per voter and that
ends up amounting to basically a
little less than US sixty eight
thousand dollars I in districts
that have less than four hundred
thousand voters but more than
two hundred thousand voters a
candidate would get twenty five
cents per voter no none of our
judicial districts actually fall
into that bracket right now but
we want to keep that in there to
account for for changes in voter
populations in the future.
Districts that have less than
two hundred thousand voters but
more than one hundred would get
forty cents promoter so this is
going to cover the first third
fifth eleventh and thirteenth
judicial districts and it would
provide anywhere from about
sixty seven thousand dollars in
the thirteenth which is the
biggest one of those to about
forty three thousand dollars in
the fifth which is the smallest.
And then in the smallest school
districts that have less than a
hundred thousand dollars can we
get fifty five cents providers
providers that's gonna be the
fourth sixth seventh eighth
ninth tenth and twelfth judicial
districts are and it would
provide anywhere from about
twenty nine thousand dollars and
the twelfth which is the largest
to about forty five hundred
dollars in the tenth which is
the smallest with with only
about eight thousand voters in
that judicial district and doing
the scaled approach make sure
that each district that can
train the districts to get a
sufficient amount to run a
competitive publicly financed
race will still appropriately
safeguarding taxpayer dollars.
And the way that candidates
would it would qualify for this
and and again this is all
voluntary no candidate would be
required to use this this public
financing system it would it
would be an option the way that
they would qualify is that they
would collect five dollars
qualifying contributions and
again it's it's that scaled
approach so in the smallest
districts are there they would
be getting a hundred qualifying
five dollar qualifying
contributions to qualify on the
districts where there's
There where there's about the
between one hundred and two
hundred vote thousand hundred
thousand voters the beginning
two hundred qualifying
contributions in districts where
there's anywhere from two
hundred to four hundred thousand
voters they'd be collecting
three hundred qualifying
contributions and in those
biggest districts with four
hundred thousand or more voters
they be getting four hundred
qualifying contributions and
this will be a budget neutral
change because there's already
so this is the the funds that
that already provides for these
it's funded
both by a yearly contribution
from the legislature then also
from the unclaimed property fund
but the the statute forty apply
already provides for a pro
rating of the distributions
based on numbers of candidates
so the
so we would not need and if
there is no appropriation
attached to this bill nor is
there a need for one
and with that if miss is has
anything to adult pass it over
to her.
Good the state has.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Duhigg and members of the
committee I'll keep my statement
short sense Senator Duhigg was
very concise with what this bill
entails but my name is Sydney
ta'izz and I am the associate
director of common cause New
Mexico
has been leading public
financing as a good government
policy for over a decade however
we also specialize in reform
that focus on keeping our
judiciary free and impartial as
an essential component of our
democracy so are currents our
system of the private financing
of judicial campaigns is is very
absurd the way that we have it
right now judicial candidates
are expected to raise private
funds for their campaigns ball
at the same time not no cool is
contributing to their campaigns
which doesn't make very much
sense when you say it out loud
like that this consistently puts
them in an awkward position of
holding fund raisers while at
the same time
you know.
Fund raisers full of room up the
potential donors but also
expected to turn a blind eye
when a check is right in or
handed to their campaign
treasurer in twenty sixteen a
common cause did a study with
judges advocates district
attorneys and other members who
are involved in the judiciary
regarding some potential
opportunities we could do at the
state level to strengthen our
judiciary and one of the things
that we concluded that could be
done first was to expand the
state's public financing program
two other candidates for
judicial office and from the
findings in our research several
judges have indicated to us how
problematic the processes many
judges would much rather be
spending their time focusing on
their court docket rather than
fund raising for their campaigns
a like Senator Duhigg mentioned
we would be the first state in
the nation to expand public
financing to District Court
judges and we are also one of
only two states currently that
even has public financing for
the judiciary the other state as
West Virginia and they only
offer it to their state Supreme
Court so we have a lot of
national attention that is
paying attention to this bill
especially since it would be you
know one of the first national
reforms passed like this so with
that I will just note that
public financing for judges is a
common sense solution to ensure
that our fair partial courts are
your main that way and that we
have an inclusive democracy so
thank you so much madam chair
and members of the committee I
will stand for questions.
Thank you Senator are you ready
for questions.
Yes ma'am chair okay right
before we did that we are going
to take a poll of the audience
on Senate bill one sixty as
amended if you would like to
raise your hand.
In support or in opposition to
the bill it will be open for
another five seconds.
Okay great we have eighteen in
favor and zero against if you
would like to speak in favor
please raise your hand.
Ten years New Mexico your now
and it.
Thank you madam chair and
committee my name's actually
Trish Lopez I'm here on behalf
of myself and thousands of
others who signed a petition
asking you to create public
financing for New Mexico judges
we support SB one sixty your
vote is personal to me and to
every new Mexican who's had a
case with a judge who received
money from lawyers and the
courtroom thousands of us
represent ourselves pro se New
Mexico courts every year courts
are already inherently biased
but more so in favor of people
who can afford a lawyer now
we've learned the system is even
more compromise in my family
court matter alone our judge
made several rulings that left
me puzzled before I learned that
my opposing counsel in a whole
lot partners were hosting
fundraisers for my judge in
their home well she presided
over my case in fact they were
her largest contributor New
Mexico civil code of conduct
requires a judge's disclose
contributions or recuse
themselves in these cases but
that is never enforced by the
judicial standards commission
please leave it where the JSE
and others have not and support
SB one sixty.
Thank you Christine Cannistraro
your now and it.
Good morning members Madam chair
representative my name is Chris
department chair and on behalf
of myself and my family we ask
that you support Senate bill one
sixty judicial public financing
which is not passes Senate and
and it's in your hands over four
thousand of us have signed the
petition to and the corrupt
practices of years bankrolling
New Mexico judges it's well past
time for change thank you for
those that purport this bill
this much needed bell and I ask
that you please vote in favor of
this bill thank you.
Thank you Natalie Sanchez your
now and it.
Thank you so much my name is
Natalie Sanchez I am a licensed
practical a counselor LPC see
here in New Mexico and I'm
licensed in other states I would
just say that it is absolutely
imperative that this bill pass
it is a long many of the reforms
we need to see in our family
court systems
my daughter personally who is
now eleven spent the last three
years dealing with the family
court as her father started to
post divorce litigation I was
one of the fortunate people who
could afford to pay for a lawyer
and spent about a hundred and
seventy five thousand dollars
doing so
to
get us back to where we were the
guardian Adlai item on our case
was hired by a firm that had
given to the judge and as part
of a confirmation bias that
guardian Adlai item put my
daughter through.
Richard Mason your now emitted.
Madam chair members the
committee many miss Mason and
chair the action committee of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico.
It has two positions and which
we can support this legislation
league of women voters New
Mexico believes that methods of
financing political campaigns
and public offices should ensure
the public's right to know
combat production corruption and
minimize
the that I'm do influence.
We also have positions that
supports fair equitable and
reasonable combination of public
and private funding of campaigns
dissipation public private
financing should be voluntary
dispenser greed to voluntary
spending limits and legislation
to provide for so much of
revenue to fund the program I'm
just being one sixty five
minutes out and act as yours
dollars positions of league
stands in strong support of SB
sixty energy do past thank you.
Thank you.
My analyst to Kronos your now I
need it.
Good morning members of the
committee madam chair my name's
miles took now deputy director
of the lan a and we and our
members stand in in full support
of SB one sixty
As the common causes mentioned
this is absolutely a commonsense
bell and absolutely part of
inclusive democracy which we
stand for we believe this bill
SB one sixty
Is really about providing and
instilling faith in our
democracy and our justice system
thank you so very much.
Thank you at the necklace develo
your now and made it.
Good morning chair committee
members and sponsor my name's
that the increased into Lou and
I'm the political director
product the grant of caucus and
this bill SB one sixty falls
within our purview for social
justice any time we can add the
quality and raised and looked
others up and maintain our
democracy is a good idea so I I
heard a do pass for SB one sixty
and thank you for your service.
Thank you.
Did you have an opportunity to
talk well I just wanted to
finish one last sentence I would
just say that after three years
of litigation judge the judge in
our case has remedied the issue
but it wasn't without extracted
extraordinary because with the
court because the evaluator
eleven seven six to psych
evaluations and a special master
so I just wanted to say that the
the judge was able to understand
that the bias of the guardian of
light and she's been removed
from the case but thank you.
Thank you we want to move on to
the committee members I'm sorry
we allow the same opportunity
for people to speak so we're
gonna move forward
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair before I
asked some questions.
I do think I need to address
some of the public comment
because it it disturbs me this
year that that the people are
saying the courts are inherently
biased for judges are inherently
biased of the there are corrupt
practices with more your
bankrolling campaigns
My experience in and maybe my
experience doesn't the doesn't
get much outside the fifth
judicial district but
Warriors.
When they decide to run for
judge number one it's usually a
tremendous sacrifice.
And as every profession or every
our group of people most lawyers
to go on to the bench go on to
the judiciary my experience are
generally not
engage politically.
in fact most of the ones I've
seen are there.
One of the biggest hurdles and
decide to run is I don't know
anything about the political
process and and so.
They naturally turn to there
are.
Plans which are generally other
lawyers to assess that so
there's going to be some natural
tendency to do that get their
treasure to be the the the.
Treasure their campaign will
solicit device by the lawyers
but that doesn't.
Create a corrupt practice in
fact the judicial standards.
For bed judged candidates from.
Securing funds for their own
campaign.
They can self finance but they
can't ask anyone to donate Nico
to their campaign its program
but and if they engage in such
conduct of their subject to of
of this one and potentially
would be prohibited from from
attaining that office and so I'm
I'm really concerned about some
of the allegations that were
leveled.
Our blinds over over the
judiciary of and
all right my experiences of
are unfounded
And I would.
This process isn't going to do
anything different because.
I would suspect that if you
want a publicly financed
campaign for district judge
you're still going to ask.
A trusted friend to be your
treasurer that's likely going to
be a lawyer in the case of a
lawyer
and you're going to want that
person to them organize some
fundraising activities that that
because you can't do it and so
whether it's getting five dollar
donations or whether it's
setting up fundraising
activities that the the judge
can't participate in or even
know who's who's giving the
money
doesn't doesn't.
Resolve the situation I support
this legislation for for a
couple reasons number one
judges because of the
limitations I can't ask anybody
for for donations
it's hard for them to raise any
funds for campaign.
And at least in the fifth
judicial district it's very
difficult to of a raise funds
for judicial rights and.
It's yes Sir are not unusual to
see very limited funds for for
judicial campaigns
so I support this but I do have
a couple questions.
The first question madam chair
and senator is.
Do the judge candidates who are
unopposed in on election.
Would they still qualified for
and be able to receive public.
Financing for a campaign though
it be may be nonexistent.
Thank you madam chair Senator
I'm sorry representative Nibert.
So in in classic lawyer form the
the answer is it depends I if
they are completely unopposed
then no they would not qualify
if they say they are unopposed
in the primary but
but I another candidate has
filed so if I I am unopposed in
the democratic primary buttery
pulpit Republican candidate has
filed for their primary then
they would get twenty percent of
what they would get otherwise
for that primary and then a
distribution for the general
but we want to because we want
to make because because someone
running unopposed primary
wouldn't oppose General they're
still a campaign to to be done
there but the intention is that
when there is someone who's
completely unopposed no they
would not not get access to this
to these funds.
So so if you have a janitor who
is unopposed in the primary but
has a general election opponent
they would receive twenty
percent for the primary election
twenty percent of that what
which they would otherwise be
eligible for for the primary
election and then a full
allotment for the general
election.
Representative at yes okay.
And then my second question
madam chair and senator is is
there are enough money in the
fund to fund all of the District
Court are races that would exist
around the state because we have
I don't know have a District
Court judges there are
statewide.
But doctor I can't even count
the number of judges on the
fifth judicial district that's
that's over ten R. and.
I would suspect that we're
probably talking about the
hundred hundreds of the judicial
position statewide do we have
enough money in the fund to to
accomplish that.
So madam chair representative
this would I believe there are I
saw reference in the fire to
ninety four I actually counted
them up the other day I think
it's ninety seven
judges who would be brought in
under this the important thing
to remember is that for the
majority of those positions
those are going to be non
partisan retention elections
which would not qualify for
these funds so this would only
be in a partisan contested
election
and so.
In the event that there is a
partisan contested election so
so we're not my point we're not
going to there's not gonna be
ninety four of positions seeking
these funds at the same time
And and this is this is a
question we've gotten time to
get and I'm not sure that
everyone has the updated FIR
because it was just recently
updated by LFC but one of the
things reasons that was updated
was two to point out that
because the language in the
voter action act already.
Requires the secretary of state
to determine distribution amount
based on the number of
candidates we would not need
additional funds now.
What that could mean is if if
for some reason we had a whole
bunch of open seats and
contested partisan elections in
one year and there wasn't is
there so many people running and
so many people who had qualified
for the public financing that
the full distribution could not
be given to everyone that would
mean the everyone's distribution
would be pro rated I'm so that
everyone would get some but
might not get the full amount.
That said
We're it's important to also
view this bill in combination
with Senate bill two sixty six
which I think just passed out of
this committee a few days ago
which would stagger judicial
elections right now we have so
many right judicial races up all
at the same time
but with that staggering that's
really going to reduce the
spread out those races reduce
the burden on this fund and and
there are things we need to do
it in the meantime to make for
example I understand is this is
a fund that has regularly been
scrapes
we need to end that practice
these funds should be used for
the purpose for which they have
been given I'm they should not
be.
Taken to help by others
so so while there is a chance
that that there will be pro
rating of the distributions in
those instances where there are
a whole lot of people running
and qualifying all at once hi we
there there there will still be
enough in the fund overall and
and one of the things I'm
committed to going forward is
making sure that we are building
that fund up ensuring it is
protected and making sure that
those funds are available for
these purposes.
Madam chair and senator you
brought up one issue I had
planned on asking this question
but the you brought the issue up
on retention elections are.
A number of years ago we have a.
Judge that was up for retention
and we have a.
An attorney in our judicial
district who was upset with that
particular judge of maybe some
of his rulings and that lawyer
ended up signing a campaign
against that judge and and spell
the what I understand be of
approximately fifty thousand
dollars to
Get people to vote not to retain
the judge and yet the the judge.
Under this bill would have no
ability to secure public
financing to defend the.
To defend.
His or her
retention and what are the other
staff to resort to traditional
fundraising if I understood your
question correctly is is is that
is that accurate.
Madam chair representative yes
that that is accurate they they
would still have the ability to
do private raise private funds
if they they chose to do so but
but because it would not be a a
contested partisan races they
would not have access to to
public financing in that
situation.
Madam chair and and Senator
thank you for bringing this side
this I support this because our
I've seen the inability of of
candidates and and then the
fifth judicial district
candidates for for both parties
are.
Unable to raise virtually any
funds to to finance HM
and the.
People don't realize how
difficult it is to raise money
particularly for the down ballot
elections thank you madam chair
and thank you Senator.
Representative representative
Ely I thank you madam chair and
senator thank you for bringing
this site you know I I guess I
want to share along with
Representative Nighbor couple
things one you know having had a
wife that was formally on the
bench
this idea that you know judges
are motivated by things other
than the case of program is
really just totally unfounded
and outrageous that people
always do that always seems to
come up and I support public
financing of judicial races
black and I'll support this bill
but I am real concerns about the
money and so I do want to walk
you through that because I don't
think it's clear
so I actually did some research
on this last flight this last
time we spent two point three
million dollars on and on one
one court of appeals race and to
PRC racist obviously the PRC is
going away but we are going to
be replaced and it done say
ninety four judges generally the
FY are which I do think we have
the updated version of the list
or something were recently
updated first success ninety
four district judge candidates
would be come eligible for the
funds so that's ninety four
candidates that could
potentially capital fund right
now there's one point eight
million dollars that fund on I
have absolutely no idea how the
FY are gets to the fund might
need additional nine hundred
fifty thousand dollars as time
close and so I just want
everybody to understand that
we're going in this direction of
doing this but it really should
have been in my mind it
appropriations with us I mean I
guess there's not of what
appropriations and I get that
because there isn't because the
purpose of funding but I do want
to be clear with the judges to
say yes if if there's not at
some point way to pay for the US
that program this year is going
to be time and I just think
people.
We need to understand that
I also think that
you know.
Gosh I gotta tell you I'm again
I'm madam chair and senator I'm
with Representative divert I
worry about these retention
elections where we've actually
had a couple of examples other
sampler to carry where same kind
of thing happened we're we're
got upset when after the judge
you know it is very difficult
and I think we need to think
about that the first things
first we need to figure out a
way to pay for this because I do
think that wall the principal is
there that we're going to move
towards public financing people
need to understand we're not
gonna be the money available to
pay for this not in any way
shape or form even a fraction of
these judges run for we're gonna
be in trouble and the final G.
but the judges all things are
going to get public financing
and they're going to get a small
portion of what your title so I
I just generally Madam chair
representative senator if you
want to comment on that I'm
happy to listen but I think we
need to warn people this is this
bill is not a panacea for the
problems public finance.
Sure Madam chair representative
Ely and I think you said you're
looking at the FIR from the six
there's one from the tenth that
that's the most updated one so
so you might want to to look at
that one but but you're right if
if we were to bring in all the
retention races then all those
ninety four judges would all be
qualifying for this and and that
would result in a a minuscule
pro rata amount to everyone
but that's not the case because
this is not applying to those
retention races I we're not
going to see.
Ninety four.
The candidates running for
ninety four positions seeking
these funds but but but you are
not wrong that that we need to
keep we need to make sure that
those those funds that that fund
is supported is fully funded and
is not scrape for other purposes
if we can end that practice
which is something that that I
committed to working towards I I
and and we have this the
staggering I really don't I I
think that we might see some pro
rata reductions of but but I
don't think it's going to be as
be dire.
Madam chair Senator I appreciate
that but that's not really.
So maybe there's an update I can
go back and count they're gonna
be a lot of non retention
partisan elections in district
judge rich and I just think it
is prudent of us to be warning
the judges.
Taxes they should not expect to
get the full complement of money
that we're talking I just think
that's important to put out
there and I don't want to
confuse with scraping funds or
anything else this passes funds
are just great which one point
eight million dollars and
provide judges need to be told.
This has got we've got to do
better in terms of the
appropriation side of the
equation so we passes out again.
But I don't want to mislead
anybody and the FIR may change
that number of change and
frankly I'm looking the
apartment on the on this on the
line fifty that number of change
and so the bottom line is is
that I just think we want to be
accurate as we're passing
legislation stated people we are
in principle in favor of public
finance to the judicial orders
that makes sense and that's why
we're support but in terms of
the money side of the equation
the idea that we're we're gonna
say gosh this is gonna work out
it'll be fine I don't six
correct I'm sorry I think we've
got to be truthful the stated
people yeah I we probably don't
have enough money to fund
regardless whether it's great or
not we don't have enough money
and we probably are going to be
pro reading this I just want to
put that out there quickly and
so with that I'm done and I
appreciate your Senator thank
you.
Thank you representative
Representative Johnson.
Thank you madam chair I move it
to pass.
Thank you we have a motion for a
two passed by by church.
And we have a representative
Nibert.
It's a further discussion.
Is there any objection to the do
pass let's go ahead and call the
roll just in case.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative Rehm.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with that you have
eight in the affirmative.
And one excused great thank you
Senator you have a due pass with
eight in the affirmative and and
they're on the negative thank
you so much madam chair thank
you members of the committee and
and I appreciate this
discussion.
Thank you.
And committee members we don't
have an agenda just yet but we
will be meeting at.
Ten AM tomorrow morning.
That's right ma'am.
And we'll get the agenda posted
very soon and thank you to the
public are participating today
thank you to the committee
members for the discussions and
with that we will adjourn.
Sure do you know what time we're
doing the floor session on
Monday.
No I did ask him and
I was told that it's not been
determined yet so okay.
No sin all right thank you thank
you thanks everyone.
