Make sure Allison can find them.
Well she's looking I was those
of you are members of the
committee we had a those of you
not we had Senator souls here on
Tuesday and he was very
impressed with how we run our
committees on the house side
out.
So they could learn a thing or
two from us.
Well madam chair
it's hard to keep you in line
you know that but you.
So so so it's a team where no
teeth.
I'm I have a lot of people who
need to keep me in line.
So okay go ahead ladies I thank
you madam chairwoman I'm
bringing forth at three fifty
two today moratorium on private
prison facilities and if it's
all right I'd like to start with
the committee substitute because
it's fairly different than the
original bill I will I will move
the committee set up for
discussion thank you madam
chairwoman on this is the
committees the house consumer
public affairs committee says
you for H. B. three fifty two
creates moratorium in any new
contracts increase the task
force that is created by the
courts corrections and justice
interim committee on that will
analyze and really look at the
economic impacts of phasing out
current cut private prison
facilities save the reducing the
the those incarcerated that
population within private
prisons all reducing that number
and the overall number of a
population of those that are
incarcerated and then analyze
the state's facility take over
the state's ability to take over
these facilities are and so they
will offer these findings by the
end of this year and you know I
I think I I know this committee
is heard a similar bill before
and so I know that.
That that was brought forth by
Representative Rubio I know that
you are familiar with some of
the key facts that had a prison
populations in the United States
has skyrocketed to two thousand
even though there's an overall
decline in prison populations
but that specifically here in
New Mexico we are more reliant
on this on this a industry with
nearly half of our are
incarcerated individuals it had
been how is within a private
facilities and even you know
that's significant when compared
to places like Maryland we're at
the same time they would have to
double digit number of inmates
are of those who are
incarcerated
eight which weighed about two
tenths of an actual percentage
point so you know we're seeing
this change both on a market
level but also just a human
level which I think is more
important level we should be
looking at this but this
industry is not a long lasting
one this is shift that's
happening nationally and it
really is important I think that
we start to look at how we can
move our the these populations
and and help transition our our
economy is locally but most
importantly ensuring that we are
providing opportunities for
these individuals they they move
forward so I won't really hurt
too much on these issues I you
know I think I'd love to just
hand this over to my cosponsored
Representative Rubio to say a
few words as well.
Thank you Representative and
thanks you all and it's good to
see you all again
House Bill three fifty two I I I
would like to also emphasized
that much of the feedback that
we received in C. pack in house
bill forty particularly around
how it would affect communities
and and what we heard and house
judiciary was for it was taken
very much into consideration and
so I I think there was a lot of
fruitful discussions when we
were last in C. pack and we
believe that much of what you
are reading in this newer
version in house bill three
fifty two is very much aligned
with what I it was the narrative
that we were hearing as we were
heading out of this committee
last time so I A. welcome any
feedback that you all have as
well and and I'm super grateful
to Representative set up for
taking this issue on because I I
personally feel like it's one
that is is is absolutely
necessary and and that we need
to get something done the
session.
Madam chairwoman if I can also
have my witnesses say a few
words as well.
Thank you I was going to go
ahead and.
I thank you madam chair and
representative set up though and
Representative Rubio
I guess my role here today is
really just talk to you a little
bit about what the differences
are between the former three
fifty two and a current three
fifty two and if you have also
have any questions about is P.
forty as well I'm I'm happy to
answer those questions so HB
three fifty two is narrow no
more narrow in its approach it
just focuses on not allowing new
contracts instead of addressing
existing contracts and it also
as Representative Serrato
mentioned happy creating the
task force which includes
seventeen members with the hope
of getting a report by the end
of the year
so in the report in that I think
in the fiscal impact report that
was.
Rated for the previous version
of three fifty two for a lot of
costs related to the transition
of existing contracts are for
the phasing out of those
contracts I'm so HB three fifty
to the committee substitute what
have some of those in I wouldn't
have those impacts because
they're not limiting or
requiring the phase out and that
and certain timeline of those
contracts as well and I will go
to details right now unless
there is specific questions but
I just wanted to give a general
overview of some of those
changes.
Thank you Mr rose go and then
I'll walk you my phone.
Your own and
Members of the council I I can
we don't have that I was going
to get basically the the gist of
it
as a as an attorney practicing
and local here in Mexico of
practice in Minnesota as well
and seeing the conditions of the
the.
Hide the Saudis the only thing
that we have that
As well as the answer any
questions you have about the
bill would be that this really
is the purpose of this bill is
to take back to duty that is so
is this thank responsibility
we're gonna take people's
liberties and every shape and
form we have a duty to ensure
that it's done right this scene
is not done correctly the cost
is great both morally and
fiscally and that is the
motivation.
Thank you and Madam chairwoman
and members the committee just I
think honestly provided to this
already but I'm other dental
school is with the New Mexico
immigration law center and
looking my phone is with ACLU of
New Mexico and that's our
presentation and we're we're
welcome any questions and thank
you Representative for in for
giving us to there with that was
gonna be my first point so you
took care of that so we will go
to a poll so Allison will put up
a poll and a half.
Posted panelists cannot vote but
if you are here either in
support or opposition of house
bill thirty fifty two please
feel free to weigh in.
Allison is anybody waiting in
them I just not seeing it or is
there nobody I have to make you
co so do that is taking here we
do have okay got it right now
that's okay that's okay and you
can just put up the results
that's fine.
All right so as far as the
results it looks like we have
sixteen and support that's
eighty nine percent we have to
in opposition for eleven
percent.
Thank you Allison so we will
start with the opposition so if
you want to speak in opposition
I'm on this bill please click on
participants and there's a place
to raise your hand and and again
this is opposition.
So we will start with grace
Billups.
I thank you madam chair my
name's grace Phillips and I'm
general counsel for New Mexico
counties and first I want to
thank the sponsor for the
evolution of this bill and the
attempts to you know address
concerns that the counties have
been raising I'm unfortunately
there are still challenges in
the way this legislation is
drafted it would prohibit
replacing a current private
operator with a different
private operator and this
replaced the counties at a
significant disadvantage during
the negotiation it would also
prevent Chinese from who who
currently and there are a
handful of counties that
currently have contracts with
private operators would prevent
them from replacing their
contractor if they're not
satisfied due to performance and
we think that that is a real
problem there is also another
bill that it's moving its way
through the legislature that
you're aware of house bill four
which will greatly increase
liability for counties and will
if it passes in this form result
in loss of our reinsurance that
is going to create the possible
need for counties to consider
privatization in order to be
fiscally responsible I'm see I'm
out of time and chair of the
opportunity.
Okay thank you next we have
Michael Eshelman.
Madam chair woman hi my question
when I am the county attorney
for Otero County New Mexico
Otero County owns two facilities
at chaparral the Otero county
prison facility the inner county
processing facility the prison
has a contract to house federal
inmates and primarily state
inmates the processing center
houses ice detainees Otero
County those about fifty eight
million dollars in bonds of
these facilities the only
revenue to pay these funds is
from the continued operation
facilities the bonds will not be
paid off until December of
twenty twenty eight while we
appreciate the modification to
drop hard deadlines such as
twenty twenty six and earlier
versions of the bill still is
problematic because we could not
interfere to a new contract the
current arrangement will expire
in twenty twenty three you can't
simply extend that because the
state board of finance
regulations if you'd like to
share more about all the hoops
we have to jump through I'd be
happy to explain but we oppose
it because it would impair our
bonds.
Thank you and now we will go to
those in support same thing
raise your hand.
Okay we will start with Carter
Bundy.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity this is Carter Bundy
with asked me we sent a strong
support of this bill we would
have preferred legislation that
would have phased out the
existing private prison
contracts while respecting that
I think this gives us time to
address some of the issues that
the opponents have brought up
this task force will hopefully
I'll look at those and the
sooner we get away from private
prisons to better you'll hear a
lot about the moral problems
with private prisons and the
over incarceration in the state
I just want to bring up the
basic financials what we do
right now is we send tens of
millions of dollars out of state
to Boca Raton Florida to
Nashville Tennessee to the
headquarters of these private
companies who have every
incentive to make sure their
shareholders are taken care of.
If some of these are converted
to public facilities the workers
get a raise they get a
retirement to get health care
and all of that money stays in
New Mexico so for the good of
the state or for gonna workers I
hope you'll consider supporting
this legislation thank you.
Thank you Carter next we have a
lot of Martinez.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is to let him out of the nest in
them if they want to get
organized and would have
somebody when they that it just
my husband was intending to
thousand seventeen my eyes and
I'm here in support of HB three
fifty two because those
intentions Centers ironing
humane they treat people worse
than animals that my has been
almost thank you know that'll
county detention center we let
go to mystics that is damaged in
New Mexico contribute to our
state economy with this money
small business and with our food
pantry so what in more than
eighty five families every week
that in this but they make is
not fair that we give growing
our state and this corporations
come to take what we work for
and I'm making their money on
the back of our families we only
represent money for them they
don't see as well as a human the
only see how much profit they
can get from our softening and
sometimes our lives this is why
I strongly believe this
additional incentives should be
closed because not only do they
take billions of dollars from
our state but they take that
piece from our communities does
they took from my family thank
you.
Thank you we'll go to Bill
Jordan.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of Bill Jordan
with New Mexico voices for
children I want to thank
Representative Serrato and Rubio
for taking on this important
issue.
We're supporting this
legislation because we're very
concerned that private for
profit prisons have created a
perverse incentive to
incarcerate more people and keep
them longer.
That's led to extreme racial and
ethnic inequalities in our
criminal justice system we hope
that New Mexico would at least
begin the process of acting on
this issue this year let's not
wait we urge your support thank
you.
Thanks bill Barbara Schroeder.
Okay good.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm a member of the
Santa Fe face network for
immigrant justice and we urge
you to vote do pass on house
bill three fifty two.
The practice of profiting off of
human suffering should have no
place in New Mexico.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Barbara next is Peggy
gill pro.
Thank you madam chair.
Yes we are going
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I I
certainly support everything
that has been said before I'm a
quicker here in Santa Fe
More we have prisons are
indefensible.
As you've heard from the people
who spoke in the form.
They're also indefensible
they're not really doing
anything aside from those bonds
which are out there to help the
counties were the communities
where they are.
It's time for New Mexico to get
rid of hi this is.
The responsibility of the state
to run detention facilities and
to be sure they actually.
Both the people who are mmhm and
the people who are serving in
the the corrections officers.
Those guys need more support in
the getting private prisons so
please pass this bill thank you.
Thank you next we have New York
rocker.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is near record Policy Council
and regional manager of the ACLU
of New Mexico in Los crucis.
Private detention facilities are
notorious Centers for cruelty
and violence for more than a
decade the ACLU of New Mexico
staff have documented widespread
medical neglect sexual abuse
retaliatory uses of solitary
confinement suicides and deaths
in New Mexico immigration
facilities and private prisons
owned and operated by
corporations as a result of
widespread abuse and neglect.
We filed lawsuits on behalf of
dozens of people detained in
private facilities we've
testified about the horrendous
conditions and in committee
hearings at our state capitol
and we've written letters to
government agencies expressing
grave concerns today I am here
to represent the ACLU's
membership and organizational
support of H. B. three fifty two
we call for an end to private
detention in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you next we have dynamic
catch.
thank you it took a minute to
find the button to mute
ethically creating a company to
make money from human
incarceration is important as
was said earlier and we the
state of New Mexico must not
pass off our responsibility and
accountability for incarceration
to private corporations
Representative benefits to the
state communities has also been
a me make at best I wish this
bill went farther we can't
afford to delay taking action to
stop the practice of detention
for profit any longer it's an
important step we really need to
take now we need to get started
on this road thank you.
Thank you Diane next we have
Kurt Renker.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Kirk record I'm the director
of Lujan advocacy ministry
Mexico and leaders advocacy
ministry also speaks on behalf
The New Mexico conference of
churches I am here today to
offer are enthusiastic and
strong support for H. B. three
fifty two I'd like to begin by
stating our gratitude to both
Representative Serrato and
Representative Rubio for their
continuing to be champions of
this cause I will simply chair
again by shared in relation to
HB forty that we believe that
the role of the state of New
Mexico in the operations prisons
should not be supplanted by
economic players who are guided
simply by profit and we urge the
state of New Mexico reklame it's
immoral and it's practical
responsibility for the daily
lives that for the lives that
are utterly and completely
dependent on the state for those
reasons and the reason stated by
previous speakers and experts I
urge your support for H. B.
three fifty two and I thank you
for this opportunity to speak.
Thank you Kurt next we have all
more role for US eleven wells.
When I started this good
afternoon madam chair and
committee members my name is all
motorists us involving wills as
stated before I witnessed first
hand the atrocities inside the
Cibola detention center managed
by CoreCivic I worked with the
transgender unit and watched
folks fall ill without immediate
support under the CoreCivic
private contract Representative
Hernandez died due to health
complications while in detention
it is time for New Mexico to
stop our dependence on private
prison contracts with that said
I asked the committee to pass HB
three fifty two thank you.
Thank you all month New Mexico
like in.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you very much for listening to
H. B. three percent D. chair I
represent the national
association for the advancement
of colored people the N. A. A.
NAACP through a Santa Fe branch
the end double ACP has always
proposed for profit private
prisons they have their roots in
slavery.
We believe that management
corporations have committed many
civil and human rights
violations is in the so it is
with our state and that they're
not accountable to the public
that pays for them.
We believe that the management
of detention incarceration
facilities must be provided by
the government that does the
sentencing so that there can be
transparency and accountability.
And I would like to also say
most held in these private for
profit facilities are there for
non profit non violent low risk
offenses that are better
addressed in the community we
stand in support of H. B. three
fifty two and ask for your
support
in this bill thank you.
Thank you next we have a long
drug.
And please go ahead and
introduce yourself.
My name is a long road think
that I'm a mother of two little
girls in about domestic worker
member of the central my family
was impacted into very of two
thousand nine when my husband
was detained in immigrant
detention center my daughters
and I live the trauma of being
separated from my husband for
him to conditions in the
detention center was really
difficult to share with me the
many of uses that he suffered
the cold the health conditions
the for that wasn't the best and
often times was not even given
food at all there was no privacy
to use the bathroom sink you
said that the secure there were
security cameras actually in the
bathrooms the conditions and and
this attention centers are the
humanizing their only concern is
how much money they can make
based on how many people are
staying for just one more
hindered in their bank account
my husband is now back with us
but it's not to saying my
husband now suffers from
depression and my eldest
daughter's biggest here is not
to see her father again when she
comes back from school but when
she wakes up in the morning that
is why each reader fifty two is
needed now thank you.
Thank you Alondra and finally we
have Tim Davis.
Thank you madam chair this is
Tim Davis with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty we can
all agree the state should it
monetize incarceration providing
an incentive to incarcerate more
people but that's exactly what
private prisons do this is a
business model that depends on
locking up more people to attain
greater profits it is
particularly troubling since
inequities in the legal system
we to high incarceration rates
for people of color we really
hope that the state can start to
address these issues this year
we urge you to do pass on this
bill.
Thank you Tim now we will go to
the committee okay Sanchez do
you have anything you wanted to
respond to and the public
comments.
I know they can okay
Representative review I think
it's on the same page already
for public or okay so we will
start with Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair ISO
question I did have about this
because.
I was trying to review this and
compare it to the original HB
forty which has gone to
appropriations my understanding
this one if ago Sir go from C.
pack to appropriations so it
looks like with this one you
want to do a phase in from
private to government run
prisons is that correct.
Madam chairwoman and the
committee members thank you for
the question we're the goal is
to really create a task force
that would look at the denture
phasing out.
The presence of the yes.
Thank you for that I appreciate
that I'm trying to figure out
what direction we're going with
this.
Representative Lord your muted.
Or Sam thank you.
madam chair thank you and thank
you for bringing that at so I
guess or to what I'm trying to
figure out is at the end because
I'm looking all these numbers
are very much facts and figures
a numbers person so if we do the
task force the bill goes through
we do move over this phase in
period.
How much is it going to cost us
in taxpayer money to build more
prisons to replace the ones that
were closing.
Madam chairwoman and the
committee members on the part of
it is is if you look at the last
section we talk about the
recommendations of the task
force wonderful is and part of
it is looking at it right
analyze the state's capacity
take over private detention
facilities and so the point of
the task force released have a
deeper understanding and provide
a provided recommendations that
we can move forward with on on
these points so I can't so Madam
chairwoman and committee members
I can't make an estimate because
it really comes down to what the
if then else of the task force
come to.
Thank you I appreciate that that
thank you madam chair and
representative I'm just trying
to see if we get to the bottom
line of where we're going with
this and and I understand you
wanna get the task force to do
that how much money is it going
to cost us and how long is this
task force going to take thank
you madam chairwoman and that
the committee member for the for
the question thank you
Representative lord to the
question that thank you.
So.
A long couple.
But.
women Representative Lord so
what we're looking at is we have
a a similar task force that was
set up in each B. forty and the
analysis there said would be
around a hundred to two hundred
thousand dollars myself and
Representative Rubio have
already put aside a hundred
thousand dollars per junior
money towards a task force to
take care of that cost the the
results are that the conclusions
of the task force would be do
you at the end of this year
December twentieth is the actual
ending that we gave them so that
we can be considered in the
future budget that we're looking
forward to the next year and
thank you I chair representative
yeah we had a Representative
Montoya also put some of his
junior fund toward something as
kind of a actually cool thing so
my other question is what I
worry about okay so in estancia
that was kind of the big thing
for me because that's the next
county over for me there of
course deeply worried about this
because that's really all they
have out there is is that
private prison and Netflix
actually wanted to buy it from
them and they could afford it
because that prison was so
expensive so I worry about the
building costs are aware but the
money to taxpayers aware about
not being able to get enough
facilities to buy them I worry
about how is there anything in
the task force madam chair
representative of that is going
to look at what we're going to
do to find jobs or to move these
people because in estancia
there's going to be no way that
they can afford to buy that
prison so if they close out want
to move somewhere else what what
we can do with all those people
that are out of work I thank you
madam chair and the
representative for the question
yes so the task actually the the
the first thing we we talk about
and then it's on page thirteen I
know this is a committee so so
just got to you all but right
it's on on line eighteen it
specifically determine the
economic impacts of the easing
out private detention facilities
Inc including assessing
potential impact on employment
in the state budget I apologize
reading but yes it directly
looks at that question that
you're talking about and also I
mean again this is really
looking at the long term.
you know economical being opened
a number of our communities as I
mentioned you know we were
seeing federal movement towards
any relationships with these
with these facilities we're
looking at you know it's
definitely a decrease in prison
populations at this time of
those that are course rated I
believe last I heard we are at
seventy six percent of capacity
of our prison populations and
and that's the lowest it's been
in decades so you know again
these are this is what the trend
we're seeing and you know again
we're we're we're keeping these
contracts which is costing the
state money they're not long
term viable you know I'm I'm
very much in the economic person
as well on and so you know I
think you know I think really
looking at this is a long term
investment in these communities
is part of what the task force
will be looking at two thank you
madam chair representative so
up.
Building further on that one
with this task force include
okay so we're gonna look at
building we're gonna look at
bein we're going to look at some
people will be out of the work
force are we also going to take
into consideration the new
employees we're gonna hire and a
specifically the pensions.
Madam chair representative madam
chair when I'm actually going to
turn it over to other elements
for that I feel as though it
does include in the language of
converting discussed but I'd
love to have Mr school trained
on that as well.
Thank you madam chair
representative Representative
Lord that's not specifically
indicated in the bill however
the language in in that first
section thinking about the
economic impacts on state budget
as well I think offers the
opportunity for the task force
to be able to look into that in
addition the task force actually
has representation from a
variety of that.
Looting the Economic Development
Department workforce solutions.
Directions our county is that
are directly impacted.
The members of the interim
Committee at that city's courts
corrections and justice issues
so there there's a broad array
of voices that are included in
the task force to ensure that
the task force looks at this
issue in a in a broad lands.
Thank you I appreciate the
internet thank you Madam chair
representative yes I'm trying to
look at the bigger picture all
the costs right the little
things in my get through like
okay we're gonna hire these
people from the community that's
great but you know the X. costs
for the pensions in the building
I want to make sure that that's
all in there so when it does
come back you know the task
force looks at all this and they
come back they say this is
exactly no hidden we've got
everything in there this is
exactly how much is this going
to cost us and this you know
it's might be this much expense
for awhile but will actually get
more money back a long term or
how that's gonna play out just
so I can get a bigger picture
when this does end up coming
back probably in the next
session so that's all the
questions I have for this
morning thank you our yield my
time thank you next we have
Representative but I just.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I'm sorry I'm
having some tooth pain from a
hold my beer I'm gonna be really
fast so I just wanted to our to
focus on one thing when we heard
house bill forty in this
committee the majority of the
concern in opposition was around
existing contract which I
totally understand
this completely takes takes that
away so
just to focus on something that
Representative Rubio stat during
that that lost a committee
hearing is that.
Nobody should be able to profit
off of somebody else's body and
we should be able to profit off
of somebody else's freedom so I
just want to thank you for
bringing this forward and I'm a
hundred percent all in support
of your bill thank you.
Thank you and thank you for
being a trooper and hanging with
us even though you've got a
toothache
you you get a gold star for
today.
Representative vice chair
Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives and for your.
Continue to work on this I know
this is of as a big compromise
but it's also I think just a way
forward on this issue I think
that so many New Mexicans care
about and I just want to thank
the folks in the audience who
provided testimony on on how we
move that forward I tell the
story quite often because Santa
Fe made the decision to have a
present over the university and
we've been recruiting for since
I think so you know these
decisions are important and I
think as we look at the
evolution of our state this is
one of those critical components
of of looking at economic
diversity in the way that we
really doesn't need the sort of
cultural social and economic
values that we share so
I did just have one question
because it with the building
which does specify any new
contracts that would be
potentially for bed and from
contracting in the future and
just understanding the current
contracting situation does that
mean that they can't go bid on a
new they could never go out to
bid for a new contractor they
can extend extend the new
contract can you just describe
how that's going to work now
with the current contracts that
we do have and does this just
for a bit of bidding process
Serge you know just please
explain some of that thank you
madam chair thank you madam
chairwoman and thank you
Representative for the question
I'm actually gonna turn it over
to us on our other hand
partially because they spent
explain it a lot more eloquently
than I can it is a bit of a
complex piecing.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Romero.
So with the way this is written
as is it was I have a new
contract so it is being
processed everything from here
is stops if you want to contract
at the date of this next with
this bill the new contracts with
stop Hey we had a of a question
from grace folks have on the
same line of the concern be this
with prevent
you for be able to negotiate he
can go out with and she was a
new up there like that is the
point there is there's no
Negated a motion position
because is going to be no new
negotiations after the enactment
of this legislation with regards
to the way the bills right now
those are all governed by
statute thirty three three yes
twenty seven because it is
exactly how of these agreements
are construe and with the way
the construe that allowed to be
with and this is state and these
are our initial contracts of you
if you entered into a new
contract today if you could do
it for up to five years then
after that is the the ability
for extensions presumably the
legislature for salt this and
experiment that invention into
private pension for profit
might go bad in it and this is
for creative set of stated
points were to be reviewed and
extension could be approved or
denied by all parties are not
for at the not gonna have any
type of symbols are.
Reviewed you were trying to
interfere with any existing
contracts for the vote for them
to execute the context fully
this version of the bill does
not address any type of
extension that would be
allowable under thirty three at
least twenty seven seventy per
person it's new contracts
there's the potential time that
allows for contracts is still a
ways out out or greater than we
expected that I the tension will
be in existence and you just
and productively in New Mexico
but as with the task forces will
task forces and what we were
shutting off with the contracts
the system crashed down but we
wanted done sooner we want the
task force to come in New Mexico
with the way that they have
planned to make a committees of
strong have a more viable of
means of
income and also just issued it
is done quickly and smoothly.
Concerned those brought up again
it was I spoke with both is that
we're somehow going to be forced
to assume all liability I by the
by the thank you of these the
facilities and the providers you
cannot delegate the liability
part incarceration of other the
people in your custody so that
liability remains with you just
because you're not the one
committing the negligent act or
the or that does not mean that
you're not be liable for all
you're doing is taking the reins
Parnell the fact in this sense I
I move in this direction Act.
Is that I am and the question we
will be on thank you for your
time.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you experts
I guess just more pointedly so
we we have one private prison
that we're still.
Really focused on right now
And so with that if we say no
new contracts does this mean
that in perpetuity until we
close private prisons that the
only option is to renew that
current contract over and over
and over again versus going out
to bid that's what I'm just
trying to understand
as far as work harder
I think that the answer that's
right.
Contract talks only about four
five years would be a new
contracts or even even if it is
a renewal that would be good for
us and you're not be allowed to
enter into a contract with
Representative regional or our
purpose extension the separate
extension are in the contract
and considered part of the term
of the contract that is a
different beast but by renewal
this.
Now and tenants prohibit
recalls.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative an expert I just
so if in the case that we don't.
how long is the current contract
that that that we have with are
private contractors if there's
only one that I understand how
long does that contract last.
Madam chair representative
middle I can probably answer
that so that there are four
facilities the department of
corrections has contracts with
and so that the Otero county
processing office I mean sorry
that's our county prison
facility has a contract that has
existed since two thousand eight
under that law that they entered
into as you mentioned there is a
maximum of extensions that were
allowed and so the maximum and
maximum amount of those
extensions and on twenty twenty
three.
And so in our this is anyway so
that they would have to enter
into a new contract after that
date the northwest
New Mexico correctional center
has a contract that currently
runs until September twenty
twenty four that contract does
not include any extensions at
this time but it's also subject
to the procurement code and then
you have the Guadalupe County in
the Lee County contracts under
the terms of those contracts
those that can be extended until
twenty thirty four under its
current chart the terms of the
contracts themselves
all of these contracts however I
just want to point out to
include termination clauses
and so we have seen like an of
terra county the last year which
The management training
corporation provided the county
one hundred and eighty day
notice that they were going to
pull out the contracts because
they weren't financially viable
because they're enough
individuals detained which is
really not profit motive so even
though these contracts doing do
exist currently there is always
the opportunity considering
given the reduced populations
within prisons generally that
these contractors could decide
to leave so I think I just want
to highlight the importance of
having a task force to really
start assessing that issue is is
really important because our
communities will be impacted by
one where the other and so
starting that conversation now
is is I will.
Thank you madam chair thank here
Representative X. for and I'm so
extension does not mean new
contract I just want to make
that really clear is that
correct okay and seeing heads
nodding thank you and so with
the get with that contracts that
we currently have existing they
can have extensions for the
shortest amount of time for
Otero is twenty twenty three.
However so what happens if when
that contract ends in twenty
twenty three what happens to the
folks that are in there since we
don't have a law on the books to
do anything with those folks but
they can't get into a new
contract what happens then.
They would be transferred to
state facilities.
I don't know what what you want
to add more but that would be.
And and Madam chair
representative the same thing
would go for any of the other
folks that were in are currently
in other facilities that private
facility should their contract
run out before we have any other
laws
with what to do and then they
can't renew into private
contract so either they would be
entering into a public contract
or
Basically we put into another
facility somewhere in the state
just so I'm clear logistics
about this thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
remember that yes General
basically yes but I I one thing
I do want to mention is that you
know this is something I think
is also I think it's at the
beginning you know the there is
a decrease on that the prison
overpopulation over also you
know again we're at seventy six
seventy six percent of capacity
and we even seen on the
secretary of corrections you
know actually go forward and and
begin that process in certain
private facilities to become to
make the public to take over to
take them over so you know there
there's already a trying to this
kind of happening as well this
task force will really help you
know lay out the terms may help
us understand the in depth
questions I think you know
exists for a lot of these local
communities and for this the
incarcerated population thing
course right it so I I think
that can help but I I think this
is the trend we're going on
anyways I know I know Madam
chairwoman and Representative
you know we we all kind of a
quick sure that this is hand
well that there's a just as you
know
this floating population that
existed anyone want that and so
you know I think I would
consider that as well.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yeah I just
wanted to like walk through the
sort of process as far as making
sure that what we are doing here
there's everyone's understanding
the you know what the
ramifications are and it sounds
like there's ample opportunity
to relocate ample opportunity to
enter into a public contract if
that is or perhaps look at other
economic development
opportunities as Representative
were brought up with Netflix
interested in buying a building
or something like that so that's
where we.
Testing I really appreciate.
again what you're doing I just
wanted to make sure that.
sort of there's no opposition
from the corrections department
and that they're working with
you and hope that they'll be
joining the task force as well
would be excellent so I
appreciate everything that
you've done with this and your
continued effort in bringing
this forth and and trying to get
this through and I support your
bill thank you madam chair.
You Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and
Thank you Representative for.
Bring this bill and an opening
this up for debate.
My goodness I don't even know
where to start with with all my
questions the I guess the first
one.
Is madam chair let's go back to
just the previous conversation
and I appreciate questions that
Representative a.
Romero brings to the table
because because and answers the
good majority my questions and
then it gives me the chance to.
S. mother wants.
The response were questions was
the is it madam chair is the.
If a contract was terminated.
The.
Residents inside that facility
would be transferred to state
facilities my problem with that
is I run the numbers.
Stated have room for so now
what.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
groups again you know this this
is a step by step process right
so I think I think we're part of
some of the questions are also
kind of addressing what the task
force will address and as we
move forward there's no overall
ND and this is part of what the
task force will come to an end
of course you know from my
perspective and I don't to be
too much on Representative Rubio
is on site as well but I I you
know I think we we would
honestly that to the list later
but again that's part of what
the task force is going to be
coming forward with at this time
we're not allowing any new
contracts and so we're already
seeing again you know what we're
looking at at the dates that
that other L. offered you know
that's over a six year span
essentially longer actually and
so you know it's not gonna be
this sudden burst at the at the
the ladies right there's not in
the second the flood of of New
population and I think that will
help with that as well as other
L. and and it looks like you may
want to add to that as well but
I that's that's part of it too
is that we're not looking at you
know at the sudden and date and
I think that that has been and
an easy thing for for your
conversations for for the
department of corrections as
well.
That's what the other.
Madam chair woman Representative
Serrato Representative Pettigrew
thank you yeah I think just it's
important to highlight that the
capacity so currently of the
terror county prison facility
there are about four hundred
and sanity and based I would
need to be absorbed by the
public prison system if that
seventy can no longer operate as
a private private prison
facility in twenty twenty three
so there's a very small portion
of and I think if you look
overall and some of the other
fiscal impact reports overall if
you look at fiscal year twenty
four the private the public
prison system would be able to
absorb the population the
private and in the private
sector it would only have about
four hundred inmates that they
would have to figure out if they
needed to construction facility
or expand their existing
facilities so it's not a very
large amount and I think
thinking about
the general trend that we've
been seeing on the reduction of
prison populations I'm thinking
about the X. the the the longer
view is that those the
populations are going to be
decreasing regardless and I
think just also just
highlighting that
these are these private
contractors have actually
left or have given a ninety day
notice or hundred day notice to
pull out of these contracts so
that always that option always
exists and has actually been
Has been something we've seen in
various times in two thousand
sixteen Cibola County and two
thousand nineteen our thumbs are
two thousand seventeen at
Torrance County and then with
the time in two thousand
nineteen so this is all this
this industry is
as always we're we're there's
always that opportunity and so I
think being able to have a plan
process is super important and
that's really why this task
force is here and also that's
why no new contracts
has been the strategy now is
that we can't see the expansion
of this industry and I think it
needs we need to start looking
at how do we transition out of
the out of it as well.
Promise you that so on that
front on the the the criminal
side there would be no no effort
regards to the I attention side
ice operates on their own as it
is so they move people in our
facilities at all times this has
led to the the situation in
which I put at the hospital had
pointed to earlier that left
chair county and in in the the
situation at work is
the numbers that have other I
stick that federal the detainees
and and
as well as federal inmates were
declining and as such the
revenues were not meeting the
satisfactory numbers down terror
and letter was sent basically
threatening Otero County that
they would be up in the.
Medially a motion numbers not
increase the only numbers that
the the the Tero county or has
anybody tried increases the
state numbers
I'm sure that answer questions
that I think you
Representative think chair of
the time.
Thank you madam chair no that
didn't answer my question at all
Right right gonna soon based off
of the.
Response the earlier response
from from Mr for us to madam
chair that you know some are
going to be some kind of
noticing and we're gonna turn
around and get the sets one
hundred and some of the notice
the tension and so there what we
bring a bunch of bands and come
get your people because we're
not bills.
And so I have to go with that
just based off of off the
answers so let's let's move on
to the next one
But my research.
Two thousand and nine prior to
up to two thousand nine about
forty nine percent of the.
Population.
You see how I want to ask this
question.
Currently right now Chris United
States I says about four hundred
thousand immigrants and private
institutions.
Through the through department
of homeland security through by.
Private prisons are the primary
contract for.
Immigrants in two thousand and
nine it during the bush
administration that percentage
of the population was around
forty nine percent.
It is starting decreased now
because of the actions that
truck to the at the end of the
Obama administration that number
grown up to seventy three
percent.
So with respect to that.
Because it is a nice related
issue I am going to assume that
a good number of.
our.
Inmates or residents inside our
private institutions will be
moved out of state is that a
fair statement.
I'm thrilled would you like to.
Thank you madam chair
representative Pettigrew you're
asking specifically about ice
detainees.
Yes so the ice detainees yes
much for suppression I guess
those just get moved out of
state if if this happens
Representative be correct madam
chair.
Yes Madam chair representative
group
I think it's important to note
that the Cibola County detention
center there is zero I see
Cheney's in Torrance are
eighteen
and also in Terry county
processing center there about
three hundred with an overall
capacity about about two
thousand two hundred SO we're
seeing
the current policies of by the
federal government around ice
detainees.
Means really that there are not
that many of those beds being
used
and so I also I also think that
may be important to
differentiate so president fight
in and I apologize if if this is
already mentioned president
Biden did indicate that the
department of justice would no
longer extend their contracts in
that really focuses on US
marshals populations which says
he will County and terra county
up I think it's reserves so do
have those you can choose the
federal government has already
indicated that they won't be
extending those contracts in
addition we do have indication
to believe because of the
promises but of course it's not
clear we'll see that but also
because of I just general
policies around not no longer
detaining every single person
that comes into this country I
have that ice will also likely
move away from the tending as
well as.
Appropriations is largely as
they did prior and so we we have
really seen a huge decrease and
continuing decrease I think up
to current national population
is imprisoned by ISIS of fifteen
thousand which is a historic low
for that agency.
I agree with with thank you for
that answer and madam chair and
that I agree with that response
and and in my numbers indicates
several the same things with
respect to the to the key
actions that were taken prior to
January of this year and the
things that are continuing to
this point four
one of one of my concerns.
Madam chair is it historically
private prisons had.
Kerry the more non violent
offenders and the public prisons
madam chair.
Historically hold the violent
offenders so as as as we make
this transition is safe to
assume madam chair that this
task force bigger out how we put
two extremely.
Different.
Populations together in the same
facility and and what the costs
will end up being to the state
of New Mexico to ensure the
safety of the non violent
prisoners versus the reserves
and and when I understand the
multitude and even New Mexico
are vital loans are
or separated from each other so
madam chair if you could if you
could help me understand some of
that as well
Appreciate it thank you madam
chair woman thank you
Representative Pettigrew so yes
and in a page thirteen we we
specifically say that they will
look at safely reducing the
prison population overall and
that is including that languages
and one thing that other I
mentioned earlier was who was
involved in who would be
involved in these the task force
itself and we would have
Representative from corrections
that would also be able to to
include part of that as well as
in others that have been
incarcerated as well so I think
those those poppy those folks
also be able to help with that
our agent and that the the task
force's seventeen individuals
offer different backgrounds
they're really looking at again
one of the key components a
safely reducing the prison
population I think the key word
there safely.
Thank you very much Madam chair
representative for that answers
favor and go through the make up
of the seventeen people.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so if on page
eleven of the committee
substitute it starts on page
online eleven in each and and
actually to the the individual
starts at line eighteen on page
eleven so it's a member of
corrections a point by the
secretary corrections member
from economic development
appointed by the secretary of
economic development workforce
solutions Office governor.
Madam chair or actually to
interrupt give me to that page
again because I'm I think I'm on
that page online and I don't
have that I'm not reading that
so page eleven Representative
the newspaper do you have the
substitute.
Yes.
Just just making sure let's
let's verify that I have the
house consumer Public Affairs
Committee sub for House Bill
three fifty two to a two number
two two zero three two nine
point two.
That's right actually looking at
a slightly earlier one other
huge open already.
It should be on the same page
is only slightly different my
apologies for that yes.
Chair women and and
representatives the person I'm
looking at is at the bottom of
the eleventh section ten there
is okay thank you.
All right I'm sorry.
Madam chair representative for
interrupt you now know how much
you I can I can track you thank
you sure absolutely so it's a
member from corrections
department member from economic
development number from
workforce solutions member from
the office to the governor
a member firm of the county
government member from the
interim committee on courts
corrections and justice
and then and then a senator from
the prescription justice I'm
sorry so one Representative one
one Senator from that from that
interim committee on an
individual from a labor
organization representing the
the correctional officers on
into members McConnell Justice
Reform organization to formerly
incarcerated individuals
a two members rich meaty based
organizations.
And then
two members from an immigrant
advocacy organization one member
of the background in public
health and yes the make.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for that
We understand why.
We need somebody to reckon that
lament Development Department on
this madam chair thank you madam
chairwoman and the
Representative as one of the the
goals of it is to determine the
economic impacts and including
the yes the economic impact an
impact on employment so again I
I've actually worked on a couple
of economic development bill
separate from this and you know
typically would you when you're
working on long term economic
development and displace workers
or any cases like that you want
both the WS Department workforce
solutions and at economic
development to be involved to
ensure that we're you know
looking at for thinking economy
that will ensure that we were
looking at those economic impact
and it affects and taking care
of those employees.
Thank you excellent response
thank you very much for that
Madam chair representative so
workforce solutions I get also
the governor again at
Representative for one member
madam chair representative the
county government what what
concerns us is that we have.
Well this what we are.
Four four concern about
potential displace workers in
the economic impact on this why
do we not including
members from.
Guadalupe Lee and kero.
In the US process what what
goodness Committee include a
member from each of those
communities to be part of the US
because as it doesn't affect all
of them instead of just one
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chairwoman thank
you and Representative again you
know we're looking at this long
term statewide shift on the and
and you know that's we have you
know is we don't have.
It's not made up of of one
singular industry that's being
we we don't over do that kind of
I can't by the requests other
live you want to can help with
that but I I I think it's really
to ensure that there's you know
there isn't a one particular
ways that that supersedes any
others in the three the killer
things that we're looking at
right so safely reduce the
prison population as a statewide
objective understanding the
state state capacity take over
private detention centers is
another piece of that you know
and and it looking at the
economic impacts another piece
that so really making sure that
the task force is large enough
and wide enough I guess
calculated up next to ensure
that we're getting at the
diverse voices that that need to
be heard but then also keeping
it to seventeen so that it's not
too much legislative term
wrangling taxed to many people
and too many schedules to line
up and all those elements of
really making a task force
effective.
Sure and and Representative I
appreciate that answer but one
of the one of the statement you
made in that responses we're not
really focusing on one industry
and I would challenge you that
that's exactly what this bill
does is focus on one industry
and so
I think it would be critical and
and impaired.
That
Each of the counties impacted by
this of the students to table
and the last person madam chair
and and Representative the I
don't want to point somebody to
represent the county would be
Somebody outside we can't.
And so
With that not and I'm relatively
confident that I could get that
same response from from chairman
Waterloo and so I would I would
ask the.
There's no doubt that the
schools compacts from the from
conversation reporting at so I
would actually yes please
consider that and granted each
four counties work excellent
with the members from.
The.
Economic Development Department
great department and and I love
the fact that the secretary gets
to choose that person in in in
in that item out of sure on
arrival to of and I think the
that very clearly the governor
gets.
However the governor is at the
time that this task forces
continuing to to go for the
governor gets a seat at the
table under item number four and
I think it would be imperative
that you got us
the bill writers consider.
Making sure that the the.
People with the county get their
own voice and get to determine
who that works with the so
that's just a suggestion that I
have going forward on a bill
that there's no doubt he's going
to leave this committee will to
to pass anyway and so
The other one madam chair and
representatives
We have to remember from
criminal justice reform
organization and I think that's
great I think that we do need to
focus on that
But I think it's also that would
be important that we have member
from the district attorney's
office as well.
Somebody that sits on the other
side and understand some of
those some of those issues as
well and so this.
The general I I'm not trying to
be a very secure with I just
kind of see this on you know we
we we look at that picture of
the courts and it's got the
scale it kinda looks like this
it should be even all the time
and and and I see this.
This committee this task force
being very to your and I think
it needs to even back up to
where we have and can ensure all
levels.
Substance debate.
As as we go through this so that
we have a very clear concept on
on both sides of the picture
with respect to that I'm not
debating whether or not we need
this for for that that's that's
a totally separate debate this
is I'm just debating the context
of the bill.
as I look at that I think that
yes we need those people from
from community based
organizations but again.
This community based
organizations.
We talk about this from a state
what chair representative we
talk about this for a statewide.
Consideration but let's get
let's get focused here thanks
very there for very specific
counties.
So to not have those counties at
the table not have those
community based organizations
from those counties there
doesn't take the perspective
those counties not saying that
we should have some from that
from the rest of the state well.
I'm just saying that that we're
not representing the people.
On both sides of the issue here.
So
again I want to go back into the
to sit here and suggested we
don't need to have some low for.
We're not have private prisons
just.
I'm not even debating that I'm
putting the community here
that's what that's what the
because that's where the impact
us and so granted it affects the
inmates but it also affects the
community so as we go through
that again I think the the this
is a very tilted skill right
now.
It does not.
Will not find a picture that is
balanced and fully debated from
both sides.
My opinion exactly what you pay
for madam chair nothing.
Here's a legislature so with
that I do appreciate the
conversation I I
And so many other questions and
in rural and I'm sure on the
opportunity to debate this for
hospital forty or some version
of all combined or some version
of both so at further on down
route I I appreciate the time
for your.
Madam chair for for the first
bill writers I appreciate the
time of the expert witnesses and
I yield back I thank you.
Thank you I have a couple of
questions so.
I'd like this idea I think it's
a good first step I'm just
wondering.
If if this doesn't become is
that the Task Force doesn't get.
Any money and organized until
July first the beginning of the
fiscal year is that going to be
enough time.
Madam chair woman thank you for
the question you know we
actually looked at the other
task forces that have informed
recently and kind of use those
also is a time line on this is a
really big question we kind of
back and forth and a couple
different dates and really I
think you know we look at what
happened with that with the
Civil Rights Commission for
example they had a number of
meetings as well they were
formed in a similar timeline on
and then you know again the we
we benefit from the fact that we
have been having this
conversation for a while and so
a lot of the the individuals
that would be participating in
the task force or you have been
have been big into this
conversation a little bit
already so I I think the the
summer though is it would has
been based on the timeline of
some of the other task force
forces okay thank you for that
and then do you foresee if we
are continuing with COVID
precautions I you know insured
ball is that gonna interfere or
do you think they can do all of
this pretty much virtual.
Madam chair with the for the
question it's actually funny
something in other have talked
about it's just it's specifying
zero in legislation which would
have been a something new.
But I but yes you know what one
I'm I'm I'm cautiously
optimistic as I think many
Americans are that you know it
looks like we'll have enough
vaccines come by maybe for every
Ameritrade dolls which is
something and then also the the
began we have not excluded that
is a possibility in the
legislation and so I believe
these conversations can be you
know remote if possible if
necessary.
Okay thank you so thank I will
entertain a motion.
On chairman do pass okay we have
a two passed from Representative
Romero and a second.
Madam chair thank you.
A second firm Representative but
I just and I'm.
It's Allison can you please call
the roll.
Representative Harris yes.
Representative Lord no.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
Are you there he's right down
the hallway madam chair let me
go see what happened.
I think you really wants to go
yes that's funny.
That have it.
Getting into the late session
encouraging drug area he is
Madam cherries on it there is
okay.
I'm sorry I I am like the
world's worst multi Tasker.
The
engineer took left brain one
thing at a time and I know
better do that and I apologize
I'm sure I'm a I'm assuming
there's do pass on the table
correct.
Thank you.
sorry if I share more yes.
And madam chair Johnson yes.
By a three to two you have a do
pass good luck Representative
Pettigrew I know I don't know
what that this is Jordan not I
in my household it is then don't
multi task very well I I'm just
throwing it out there I do not
know the shade but that's that's
what the the common wisdom is so
with that I think we are and at
this point committee members we
do not have any more bills we
will not meet this weekend but
hopefully some will be coming
over from the Senate and I have
no idea what we'll get but hang
on and and I think we have
decided to do next week.
Committee it will be at eleven
thirty AM because we'll be going
back on the floor I believe
that.
Thirty correct so so if we if we
meet next Tuesday it will be at
eleven thirty well depending on
how many bills there are we only
have one built we may start even
start later but Representative
Pettigrew did you have something
yes sure I do have an eight
thirty house transportation
right now we don't have we don't
have any bills coming from the
Senate as well so just as it
gets closer is it chair amero
ends up getting three bills on
the table eleven thirty
typically.
The the house transportation is
not a not not a very debated
debated deal I I would think to
our okay okay and then the
speaker the speaker has has told
committee chairs that that's
that's the schedule the morning
folks can have tell tale eleven
or eleven thirty and the
afternoon folks could have from
eleven thirty to two thirty so
so the chairs are be are aware
of everything and so with that
we will stand in recess until
whatever time we need to want to
thank have a have a glorious
free weekend with no floor
sessions no committees no
nothing right what.
I'm
gonna say I said that that's a
joke.
Okay bye all.
