Thank you we have a quorum.
All right well good morning
everyone we are on the final
stretch it House Energy
Environment and natural
resources we're going to be
hearing to your bills this
morning and will be starting
first with SB eleven which is
the clean fuel standard act with
Senator Stewart we have our
presenters I see Senator Stewart
good morning welcome morning and
senator do you have any
experience with you.
I'm hoping that secretary Cheney
or secretary Alicia keys are in
the waiting room and also but
perhaps Amy brown from online
today.
All right it looks like we have
our two secretaries good
morning.
All right and we're joined by
secretary lady and a new pair
I write wonderful let's get
started.
Right well thank you so much for
hearing Senate bill eleven this
morning.
This is a it's a very exciting
bill at it involves market based
processes so it's.
Our transportation sector is our
second highest polluter in the
state transportation missions
and this is an idea that we
think will really positively
impact our economy public health
and the environment so put
simply the clean fuel standard
requires a reduction in carbon
intensity of transportation
fuels that clean fuel standard
act requires a reduction in
carbon intensity by ten percent
by twenty thirty and twenty
eight percent by twenty forty
this is based on the twenty
eighteen standards so those
business that a refined blended
make or import transportation
fuels are covered by the act
does not apply to things like
gas stations it is not at the
fuel retailer these are the
companies that make these fuels
the so those that refined blend
maker import transportation fuel
can meet the clean fuel
standards by reducing carbon
intensity of the fuel itself or
by purchasing credits the idea
of generating credits is where
we introduced a market mechanism
to reduce these greenhouse gas
emissions credits can be
generated all over the state
from agriculture oil and gas
natural gas you can reduce
carbon emissions you can
generate credits as so
we take our time we take two
years it first goes to the
environmental improvement board
and then to set the set credits
and standards and then the New
Mexico environment department
will have rule making authority
to put this in place so it
begins in two years and in the
mean time we will develop these
credits
and look at risk.
Our reading of this kind of fuel
to be allowed in New Mexico
So just announcing clean fuel
standards that we were going to
do that has already
we have I kind of twenty two
companies between the three
committees I've been in that say
they're either going to expand
com to New Mexico for a start
doing business with some of our
retailers so it's exciting idea
it's a it's come this far I
would love to turn it over to
secretary Kenny or secretary
Lisa keys to talk more about it
madam chair thank you Senator
please amendment which whichever
Senator would like to go first.
I mean sorry say.
good morning
madam chair and good morning
members of the committee as as
many of you know I'm Jim Kenney
of the cabinet secretary for the
New Mexico environment
department is Senator Stewart
indicated I'm your secretary
Keyes secretary lady potentially
Sarah Cottrell probes from our
energy minerals and natural
resources initiate a conflict
this morning and Amy brown from
Adelante consulting our expert
we are really excited about this
bill it that the clean fuel
standard is a way to diversify
our economy create jobs and and
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
is a giant step forward for the
state of New Mexico.
in alignment with that that
climate change task force to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
forty five percent by twenty
five.
Forty five percent by twenty
forty Senate Bill level tackle
the transportation sector's you
heard and it's critical that we
enact this bill for the help The
New Mexicans especially children
elderly New Mexicans who are
more susceptible to respiratory
illnesses caused by air
pollution but the bill will go
further than than that in the
sense that it will protect
environmental justice
communities we're as far as I
know we're the first state to
contemplate the environmental
justice communities in a market
based mechanism like a clean
fuel standard of those
communities are the ones that
fair there the greater inequity
of of pollution
When fully implemented where I
estimating even more reductions
about six point eight million
metric tons of carbon dioxide
which is the same as eliminating
tail pipe emissions from six
hundred ninety thousand
vehicles.
So in closing with my remarks.
I think that we show through
this bill that having strong
climate policies it does not
hurt businesses and consumers
that that's a false pretense by
which we sort of look at crime
legislation
and as you heard we're we're the
phone is ringing off the hook in
terms of businesses that want to
come here and expand here so I'm
excited about what this bill
holes for kind of the as much as
I am about the environment so
thank you madam chair and I'll
turn it back to you it's.
Thank you Secretary keys.
Madam chair and that thank you
members of the committee I think
this is the first time that I've
actually been in front of this
committee and a lot of people
think of this as an
environmental bill that as
secretary Kathy and I are really
we we feel like it's also an
economic development bill
and that's why we've partnered
partnered on it this year this
bill is going to create jobs.
Plain and simple it is going to
maintain New Mexico as a clean
and healthy place to live and
it's actually going to create a
tool for private investment and
innovative technologies and I
think that is really the most
important part of this is it
gives companies the fiscal tool
in order to build infrastructure
in New Mexico.
This bill will help New Mexico
be at the forefront of
innovation it will start it will
stimulate people to think
differently it will spur
research and development and our
universities and our private
sector our economists EDD
actually study California and
found that the state's clean
fuel market grew by fifty
percent between two thousand and
eleven and two thousand and
sixteen we believe that there is
massive potential in the
hydrogen vehicle market here in
New Mexico an industry expected
to reach forty two billion by
twenty twenty six all of the
major companies are getting into
this Hyundai BMW Audi Volvo we
would like to attract one of
those companies to New Mexico in
fact there is a company in
Albuquerque called tech which is
already working on technology
today and I'm smaller more
efficient on site hydrogen
production and they just
announced at the beginning of
this year that they raised a
hundred and fifty seven million
dollars an investment when is
the last time you heard of New
Mexico company raising a hundred
fifty seven million dollars so
in addition this bill also.
For the dairy industry to
capital capitalize on the newer
to renewable natural gas
projects secretary Kenny and
secretary Wendy and I were
talking to a company the other
day that is now very interested
in collecting Callum anywhere
here and making it into energy
we have the workforce we have
the technical assistance and
partnerships with the national
lapse well the clean fuel
standard by title maybe may
raise some concerns for those
historically reliance on coal
mining.
And other carbon intensive
industries we actually really
feel like it provides help while
the clean fuel standard set
standards it also allows those
traditional carbon industry to
generate the use of credits
allowing them to maintain levels
of operation while still
contributing to the overall
economy and job creation in
their regions so we really feel
like the clean fuel standard
could provide a long term market
signal that will stimulate
investment major investment
hundreds of million dollars of
investment in manufacturing
production and distribution of
cleaner fuels in New Mexico so
thanks for giving me the
opportunity to come into this.
Great thank you Secretary I am
Senator Stewart you have any
more words before we go to the
public.
But let me just say that
Some folks have brought up that
they think this will increase
gasoline prices for gasoline
that's not what's happened in
California Louis had this for
ten years I believe
California gas prices are high
for a lot of reasons first are
they have a fifty eight cent gas
tax on every gallon
but in the life of the time to
time they've had this clean fuel
standard the prices of actually
gone down so there's just no
evidence that it does that and
certainly in New Mexico we're
gonna make sure it stays at a
reasonable level so with that
madam chair I think we're ready
for public commenters Committee
here however you do it in the
house.
Right thank you thank you
Senator Stewart so here in this
committee and we like to do a
poll before we go to public
testimony so for those of you
who are as you mean in from home
we're gonna go ahead and put up
a poll to ask you all about your
support or opposition for this
bill and you can go ahead and
voice here I'm interested in
this bill now go ahead and click
on it those of you who are
active participants on our side
of the zoom you won't be able to
do so but members of the public
can so will take just a few
seconds to do the pole and then
we'll go to public testimony.
And for those of you that would
like to testify in this bill
will go ahead and take testimony
from those in opposition first
so if you'd like to voice your
opposition to this bill please
raise your hand and it looks
like our Polis complete we have
a fifty four people who are in
support and for who are opposed
so that ninety three percent
support line and seven percent
in opposition yes Senator.
I was remiss to not mention that
the representative Nathan small
is also on the zoom here's the
house sponsor and if we could
let him just make a few remarks
before we get started.
Of course Representative small.
Thank you madam chair thank you
so much pro tem Stuart really as
the secretaries so excited to be
part of this legislation madam
chair committee members this
legislation sets it clear
paradigm that helping our
climate and energy goals is a
cornerstone of our economic
future madam chair committee as
you've heard detailed testimony
this connects closely with
existing industry in New Mexico
will bring new industries new
jobs and new economic
investments in New Mexico and
help position New Mexico as a
fundamental leader in this
technology these efforts and in
so doing better position us for
strong sustainable and lasting
economic growth thanks very much
madam chair.
Thank you Representative small.
Okay we are going to go to
public testimony as I said just
a moment ago will take
opposition first and so each
person who would like to speak
in opposition please raise your
is in hand it will call on you
in the order and you will have
ninety seconds to give your
testimony so we'll go to the
first person on the list who is
Ryan Kenny.
I I good morning madam chair
actually in support what we call
our partners yes if you could
just lower your hand if you're
in support and we'll come back
to you okay great thanks okay
dont or in.
Go ahead Dawn.
I apologize.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name's don
Thorne and with the American
fuel and petrochemical
manufacturers thank you for the
opportunity COVID SP eleven
clean fuel standard.
California's legislative
analyst's office calls their low
carbon fuel standard and
implicit tax on fuels they say
consumers are hit with higher
retail prices which today will
nineteen to twenty four cents
per gallon these costs will
continue to rise as carbon
emissions targets are lowered
Mexico's program with it's much
more aggressive emissions
targets we'll see prices rise
even faster the fact that you'll
be may be less expensive now in
California that was ten years
ago is mostly due to the price
of a barrel of oil which is much
cheaper today than it has it was
ten years ago.
It's also a very expensive way
to cut carbon in New audit of
California's environmental
policies including its CFS
program found the GHG reductions
have been overstated and double
counted across programs in terms
of broader emissions reductions
LCS best can be credited with at
most one percent reduction
California statewide knocks
pollution and a less than two
percent reduction of particular
emissions all of the initiatives
information public give a
publicly available sorry in
audit submitted to the
legislature as required by
California's LCS fest SB eleven
provides for no such legislative
office side.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Tharman next we
have Tiffany that are that.
Madam chairman and members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning took me Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we respectfully stand in
opposition to Senate bill eleven
we appreciate the outreach done
by both secretary Kenny and
secretary Wendy unfortunately we
still stand in opposition we
encourage the legislature to
develop carbon reduction
policies that recognize
agricultural practices as a
benefit to the environment
compliment existing policies and
do not impose increase costs on
our agricultural producers the
low carbon fuel standard to have
directly attributed to higher
fuel costs in both California
and Oregon according to the
Washington policy center the gap
between US gas prices and
California's has increased sixty
one point five cents per gallon
since the low carbon fuel
standard was implemented as
price takers farms would have
limited ability to recruit
transportation costs increased a
tribute to the clean fuel
standards the added cost of
transporting crops to the market
would have to be absorbed which
is put New Mexico farms at a
competitive disadvantage
compared to those in other
states and our neighboring
countries thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning.
Thank you next we have Mister
Jim Winchester go ahead Sir.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jim Winchester I am the
executive director of the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico
representing prominently smaller
producers here in the great
state of New Mexico I PAM does
respectfully stand opposed to SB
eleven the clean fuel standard
act for several reasons our
members to see this act not as a
direct tax but implicit tax that
would eventually reach consumers
who use automobiles in hitting
especially hard at the pump in
California that's been a.
Price per gallon increase of
over sixty cents per gallon over
the past decade
secondly there will be costs
associated with fuel conversion
and that will affect the entire
supply chain with those costs
being passed on to other oil and
gas sectors in in other
industries
thirdly we want to stress that
we wholeheartedly agree with
reduced emissions being a shared
goal but want to point out that
the oil and gas industry has
already led the way
significantly decreasing
emissions while increasing
production the past decade so
for these reasons we do
respectfully oppose SB eleven we
do like the tax credits in the
bill but not enough to support
it we do think the environmental
secretary for speaking directly
to our executive board but again
we do respectfully oppose thank
you.
Thank you and finally we have
John block.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John block I am a native New
Mexican and I propose Senate
bill eleven the standards this
bill calls for as an active in
states like California and
Oregon maybe the average price
of gasoline skyrocket for the
average consumer anywhere from
twelve to thirty cents per
gallon today the price of gas in
California is a hundred thirty
five percent greater than the
national average and in Oregon
it's a hundred nineteen percent
greater than the national
average according to triple lay
this is higher than before the
fuel standard was signed into
law which directly contradicts
the bill sponsors claim which is
flat out false the large cost
increase disproportionately
affect middle class New Mexicans
and poor New Mexicans were
thirty cents extra for a gallon
of gas makes a big difference
New Mexico currently sits at the
national average for gas prices
tied with states like New York
and Pennsylvania and this bill
the gas prices will continue to
skyrocket meaning more working
families will be plunged further
into poverty so I respectfully
urge the committee to vote no on
Senate bill eleven the gas tax
on the poor and thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you okay next we will move
to supporters so if you would
like to speak in support of this
bill please raise your hand.
And it looks like firstly
handing out our to let that.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
dean Archuleta and I'm the state
government relations manager for
XTO Exxon Mobil I stand today in
support of the policy direction
of SB eleven for the following
reasons since we agree with the
overall objectives and approach
of SB eleven we feel the
position of the agency to
approach the detail of this work
through rulemaking will be
positive and we look forward to
working collaboratively to
deliver those objectives in
addition we are happy to see
that the agency is keenly aware
of the need to mitigate prices
and volatility by and price
volatility by building in annual
program reviews review process
to provide the flexibility
needed to avoid them for those
reasons we are supportive of
this be eleven and we look
forward to further engagement
during the rule making process
thank you madam chair.
Thank you all right next we have
JD Billy ten.
Thank you madam chair this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce.
The point the innovative market
based approach to reducing the
carbon intensity of
transportation fuels and Senate
bill eleven.
This bill encourages
technological advancement all
across the private sector in the
carbon intensity reduction
targets are reasonable Senate
bill eleven has a balanced in
targeted framework that will
improve air quality within an
appropriate time line and the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce is happy to stand in
support of this legislation
thank you.
Thank you Mr Millington next we
have all right less.
Mr Ellis.
Okay we're having some
challenges a I I.
Great yes I thank you madam
chair and members
I'm a recent arrival to New
Mexico and former chair of the
bioenergy association of
California a board member of
which has eighty local
governments industry members and
is the leading voice for that.
In California I used to oversee
the solid waste system for
California I'm asking your
support of the SPL Levin
My company has built the largest
scale aerobic digester in the
country we've invested a hundred
million dollars in both
anaerobic technology and fueling
infrastructure we are currently
carbon negative in terms of
operating more than a hundred
and fifty every year the waste
trucks in our state the LCS just
standard is an important factor
as to why.
Facilities like ours are being
built and many are in in
development stages we have about
eight that have been completed
and many more on the drawing
boards so with that I would urge
your support of the SPLM.
Thank you all right next we have
Ryan Kenny please.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Ryan Kenny hi you
representative clean energy our
company is the nation's largest
provider of renewable natural
gas transportation fuel we have
eight stations right now in New
Mexico with its services transit
refuse.
Stores our company is looking to
expand our business but right in
New Mexico because of this bill.
We're California success story
because of the California low
carbon fuel standard.
Sixty five stations along just
in California all providing
renewable natural gas to move
away from fossil because of the
low carbon fuel standard.
And that the credits allow
parity between the lower costs
that the soul and higher costs
of production with renewable
natural gas.
We believe this bill here
replicate what's that in
California with more jobs more
investment cleaner air and lower
greenhouse gas emissions.
This bill provides long term
investment certainty and
straightens job creation
investment along with technology
technological innovation well
meeting carbon emission targets
for these reasons we urge I
thank you.
Thank you next we have Camilla I
will then.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Camilla I
amend representing today this
year.
Sweet W. R. A. and then our DC
we stand and qualified support
of the bill.
And have submitted suggestions
man man that we think would lead
to an improvement of the program
stronger ambition more insurance
says consumer benefits from the
income from the program.
No additionality or credits from
programs that are being
implemented in other formats.
And finally there should be a
green definition of hydrogen no
fossil fuel generation.
Of fuels of hydrogen fuels
thanks so much.
Thank you Mr I will then and
next we have George Davidson.
Mr Davidson at your appear to be
muted.
Sorry about that thank you so
much good morning I'm George
Davidson and testifying on
behalf of the American biogas
council in strong support of SB
eleven American biogas council
as the voice of the U. S. I
guess industries we represent
more than two hundred and forty
companies and twenty seven
hundred individuals including
many in New Mexico and more
interested in doing business in
the state American I guess
councils focus on making it
easier to build I guess systems
in SB eleven we'll help.
We know from experience in other
states that claim the standard
New Mexico will create millions
dollars new investment and
thousands of new jobs and I
guess in RG industries New
Mexico currently has twelve
operating by gas systems but the
potential to build a hundred and
thirty five more according to a
I guess state profile.
These new by systems would
produce over thirty five hundred
construction jobs over two
hundred permanent jobs and at
least four hundred and thirty
two million new capital
investments we also reduce
emissions equivalent removing
one point three million cars on
the road and this is in addition
to all the secondary
environmental benefits from
waste management putting order
reduction on farms improvements
to soil health and air quality
and more.
We've just added will in that
incident incentivize our
industry to build new recycling
infrastructure forget waste
recycling as a state each year
New Mexico produces over eight
million tonnes of newer six
hundred fifty thousand tons of
food waste and thirty one
billion gallons of wastewater
approving SB eleven will
incentivize infrastructure to
recycle this organic material in
addition to creating vehicle
fuel and when you create that
new infrastructure you catalyze
investment create jobs and help
municipalities reduce the costs
for waste removal and treatment
and that's why we support SB
eleven we urge you to pass the
bill.
Thank you Mr chess.
Mr chef I believe you are muted
take a.
Thank you very much good morning
madam chairman and members and
thank you for taking my
testimony I am the chairman of
the American biogas council and
I'm also the vice president of
bio gas engineering for Montrose
environmental and we strongly
strongly support this bill in
addition to what
Mr Davidson I just talked about
this carbon fuel standard will
reduce taxes for municipalities
by helping municipal waste water
plants create revenue from the
waste water such is what East
Bay mud his done in in the
Oakland are in not Dodge city
Kansas is done the same thing
actually is turning a profit
from our waste water
the
also this local urban fuel
standard
in in California if you look at
what they've done between two
thousand eleven in two thousand
nineteen they've generated a
reduction of.
Forty seven point one million
metric tons of
Carbon changing gases which is
ahead of their scheduled by
eight point seven million tons
and this is according to the
California air resources board
Montrose is working on projects
just across the border in Texas
and would sincerely enjoy the
opportunity to work in New
Mexico so thank you.
Thank you very much next we had
Mike d'antonio.
Morning madam chair members the
committee Mike d'antoni with
Xcel energy we provide the
service to hundred thirty
thousand customers in eastern
New Mexico.
Where we stand and support this
bill we have filed that a
transportation electrification
plan and we feel like this bill
in concert with the our plan
will help increase the
penetration of electric vehicles
in New Mexico and help clean the
air and we look forward to
having this new rulemaking the
established so that we can
participate in that as well
thank you so much.
Thank you Mr the Antonio Nexium
Laura taper.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Clark taper and the
sustainability and resilience
officer at the energy minerals
and natural resources department
EMNRD strongly supports this
governor's bill our cabinet
secretary Sarah Cottrell Propst
is a co chair of the governor's
climate change task force and
our support reflects the fact
that this bill will make
significant progress on our
climate strategy both by
reducing emissions and by
creating investment that will
grow and diversify our state's
clean energy economy thank you.
Thank you next to Shelby near.
It looks like you are muted on
your end.
Thank you madam chair good
morning again my name is Shelby
Nila Services EP of renewables
company called Darling
ingredients growing would like
to show our strong support for
SB eleven drawings the nation's
Dacians largest rendering
company we collect animal by
products from the livestock
industry they grew waste from
commercial bakeries and used
cooking oil from restaurants
once these our products are
collected in tears a refined
into finish fats and oils that
can then be sold to the biofuels
industry for further recycling
and sustainable domestically
sourced biodiesel and renewable
diesel we collect you co in New
Mexico and we own a collection
facility in Los crucis the value
of this bill from our
perspective on the business and
is that it places a value on
used cooking oil which currently
has very very low value so the
more value that has the market
place to a low carbon fuel
standard the more we can pay
restaurants for that product and
the more value that there is
restaurants will tend to collect
much much more now as well as us
to expand our business
operations we could probably
expand our business operations
in the state but a factor of
five or ten if this bill passed
and it's very exciting for us
but also very exciting for us as
we get to do this in a White at
businesses reducing greenhouse
gases and reducing criteria
pollutants so thank you again
for your time today and thank
you for your consideration of SP
eleven.
Thank you very much next week
can you please.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee and can use the
coalition of sustainable
communities which is comprised
of the state county of Santa Fe.
To have a cookie and city of Los
crucis.
Many many New Mexicans live work
and study near major roadways
and I think this bill can help
reduce the public health issues
affecting them as those are.
I'm fortunate I'm I'm waiting
consumers so tell I you
mentioned so are chair support
for SB eleven thank you.
Thank you next we have site Yuri
Yamada.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and sign your
Yamada with the public service
company of New Mexico he is
committed to not only complying
with the energy transition acted
diligently working to exceed the
ETA zero emission goals at
twenty forty five can ensure
Senator Stewart it's and senator
secretary Kenny secretary keys
as secretary control probes
commitment to reducing carbon
emissions by working towards a
more environmentally and
economically sustainable
transportation infrastructure in
New Mexico and therefore we're
happy to stand in support of
Senator Stewart and
Representative Smalls SB eleven
thank you.
Thank you all right next we have
Evan Maitland.
Looks like you might be muted on
here and.
Okay yep there you.
Thank you morning members of the
committee my name is Devin
England and I manage clean fuels
programs for charge point on
behalf of chargepoint the
largest provider of the charging
solutions in North America we
strongly support the passage of
SB eleven this policy will drive
private investment in new
transportation technologies and
infrastructure create new
markets and jobs for local
businesses to reduce emissions
criteria air pollution from the
highest emitting sector in the
state clean fuel standards are
proven market based approach to
reducing emissions from
transportation while generating
economic growth by stimulating
technology innovation these
programs have led to significant
private investment in new
technologies infrastructure over
the years in fact over the past
ten years clean fuel standards
in the U. S. have generated more
than ten billion for clean fuels
and infrastructure including one
point three billion for
transportation electrification
project it should be noted that
these that this funding is come
at no cost state budgets.
The KCEB charging infrastructure
these programs work by sending a
clear and effective market
signal to prospective PED
charging station operators that
improves the business case for
easy charging by enabling them
to generate credits into the
program there by expanding the
private sector commercialization
of you charging clean fuels
programs also help fleet
operators including municipal
transit agencies switch to
cleaner fuels and clean vehicle
fleets thank you and I'll close
with reiterating chargepoint
strong support for SB eleven.
Thank you so much weight please.
Good morning this is Sam way
with the coalition for renewable
natural gas thanks for the
opportunity to be with you today
a clean fuel standard is a
proven way to promote apartment
feels analogous programs have a
long and successful track record
in California Oregon and British
Columbia and other other
jurisdictions including the
states of Minnesota washed in
New York and the federal
government of Canada have
similar programs under
development I had the pleasure
running California's program at
the California air resources
board for four years and I know
what works well for all the
carbon fuels including renewable
natural gas I'd like to address
some of the concerns that were
raised by the opponents of the
bill related to fuel price
impacts are the largest driver
of retail gasoline price impacts
is the price of oil and so the
simple way to get away from that
hi both oil price impact is to
move to a low carbon fuels such
as renewable natural gas and
this bill accomplishes that
supporting the use of renewable
natural gas in the
transportation sector has a
ripple effect both
environmentally and economically
helping to re purpose and
prevent methane emissions fund
infrastructure which supports
the reuse of waste and provide
revenue to local entities such
as New Mexico's farmers and
municipalities which manage
their organic waste as a new
input to have an answer gas
production so therefore SB
eleven presents a unique an
immediate opportunity affect
real transportation
decarbonization in pursuit of a
carbon neutral future in New
Mexico respectfully urge the
passage of the bill thank you.
Thank you so much and I'll just
note for a moment the M. I. C. a
number of additional people have
added their hands we are taking
testimony in support of the bill
so we've already taken
opposition testimony just to let
folks know next we have Scott
Scanlon.
Thank you and good morning
members of the committee my name
is Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for Misia valley
transportation.
M. B. T. is one of the largest
locally on truckload carriers in
the United States housed and
little old Los crucis New Mexico
we specialize in time sensitive
service between major
manufacturing areas in the US
Canada and Mexico borders we
really appreciate the approach
of this bill we think Senator
Stewart and Representative small
and we stand in full support
thank you.
Thank you very much next we have
Ian Thompson.
Yes good morning my name is Ian
Thompson I'm madam chair and
committee members thank you for
the opportunity to support the
bill I'm calling from Vancouver
British Columbia but was a
resident of Santa Fe for five
years a number of years ago I am
the president of advanced
biofuels Canada national trade
association British Columbia's
at an L. CFS since twenty
thirteen Canada is poised to
adopt a national of CFS in
twenty twenty two the in British
Columbia in addition to
investments in the national
resource sectors both of British
Columbia's or refineries have
already undertaken or has
announced plans for over four
hundred million dollars of
investments to produce advanced
biofuels the four sectors are
also undertaking low carbon fuel
projects in British Columbia the
impact on fuel prices been
nominal and the standard is
operated quietly but effectively
for eight years with very little
public opposition it is survived
changes in government and proved
to be a highly durable
regulation that is reduced over
ten megatons of greenhouse gas
gases instance in sections we
simply wish to affirm the madam
chairs observation and out of
the secretaries at the beginning
of the hearing that New Mexico
can reasonably expect to see not
only investments for new
entrants into the fuel market
that will aid the necessary
transformation of the state's
oil and gas sector thank you
very much.
Thank you very much next we have
Scott had H..
On mute.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
My name is Scott Hedrick I am I
work for a company called
renewable energy group we're up
north America's largest
manufacturer of biomass based
diesel which means we make both
biodiesel and renewable diesel
first I want to thank
Representative small center
Stewart secretary Kenny for
their leadership this bill it's
very much appreciated.
I just want to touch on on three
things I think you've heard from
a number of speakers there's no
question that a low carbon fuel
standard will help address the
environments carbon loading a
greenhouse gases and it's a good
and the important thing The New
Mexico look at this for the
future I'm to the quick comment
someone make one about pricing
one echo what Sam wait
previously sent
so the fact is if you look at
pricing today in California the
price of gasoline the price of
diesel fuel was actually cheaper
today than it was in two
thousand eight when SB eleven
right AT thirty two California's
low carbon fuel bill was first
passed.
There is a study out there that
weights about nineteen cents to
the cost of the low carbon fuel
standard that's nineteen cents
over two years it's about two
cents a year that's less than
the price of fuel it changes on
a monthly basis.
Actually I just want to point
out that the our company
operates a partially built
facility in Clovis.
We've invested over two hundred
million dollars in other
facilities in states that have.
Clean fuel policy already this
sends a strong signal in New
Mexico that it's open for
business in this area and we
look forward to its passage.
Thank you very much Jason
Thompson.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can thank you madam chair
and Ms Jason Thompson I'm the
registered this for the low
carbon fuels coalition that we
stand in strong support of the
bill would like to thank the
sponsors Senator Stewart
Representative small secretary
Kenny and all the stakeholders
at a participated in this
process okay rituals coalition
strong supports this legislation
that they feel that this is the
type of policy that's going to
drive the innovation and
economic development and low
carbon fuels also while
improving our air quality and
reducing the current waste
streams.
And if so the reasons previously
stated by the proponents and
sponsored we stand and strong
supporter bill and urged the
committee's passage thanks for
your time.
Thank you so much Mr Thompson
and finally it Mr Ralph
frightens.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the House Energy
Environment naturist sources pre
my name is Ralph runs and I'm
commenting as in the.
I was one of the fifty four
signaling support in the poll
taken earlier so I guess the
reason why support twice I one
question I've heard several
components from the bio gas
industry stating that waste
water could be used as an input
in the production of biogas.
However it's my understanding
that all west squeezed water
effluent from wastewater
treatment plants from
communities along the route
Grande must return it to the
river for credits downstream
please clarify if you could from
one of this bill Sanchez work
for others thank you for the
opportunity to comment by a up
my support still stands and I
thank you thank the sponsors of
SB eleven.
Okay that concludes our public
testimony this morning on this
bill and we will now turn back
to the sponsors for a brief
moment before going to the
committee Senator would you like
to say anything.
I'm no it's great to hear all
these folks who want to expand
or move to New Mexico this truly
is an economic development bill
and do remember the study in
California that said after ten
years it's basically two cents a
year was attributable to the
clean fuel standards and that
the gas is cheaper now than when
they started the clean fuel
standards that's all thanks.
Right thank you madam and
senator approach
okay and does anyone on the
committee have any questions or
comments.
Does anyone have a motion I see
and leader Townsend please go
ahead.
Eight years.
Yes thanks madam chair.
I would just verifying
questions so Senator.
In your bill you talk about
reduction and carbon intensity
levels ten percent.
by twenty thirty and twenty
eight percent by twenty forty.
Can you can you.
Expand on that a little bit and
Tell the committee.
Just what is required to get
there me.
What state do you foresee will
will happen in order to achieve
those goals.
Yes madam chair and
Representative Townsend so the
bill authorizes the
environmental program board to
adopt rules implementing the
clean fuel standard of that's
why this is going to take us a
couple of years is that we the
department we have experts we're
certainly going to look at other
states and other provinces of
how they're doing their credits
so the New Mexico environment
department then will be required
to draft rules to implement the
clean fuel standard so if we
enact this now New Mexico
educational environment
department petitions the IP to
adopt rules no later than July
one twenty twenty three and the
effective date of the clean fuel
standard rules would follow that
the ID public hearing and would
take affect probably January one
twenty twenty four so we're
gonna take our time we're gonna
do it right of the bill does not
have a steps laid out because we
are really not there yet it's
all hands on deck to get this up
to speed and working
so we've given a road map and of
we've certainly put of funding
in the budget to get this bill
started there will be.
Some see assessments eventually
a to continue monitoring this
program but at this point in
time we we've we've got a heavy
lift with the E. ID in New
Mexico Environment Department
but they're the ones that
brought this bill they're
excited about it and so it's
gonna take awhile it will be in
New Mexico clean fuel standard
process so I hope that answers
some of your questions.
Sure thank you senator of thank
you madam chair
Just broadly do you actually.
We all want
Or we should one New Mexico to
grow and expand.
And so we're driving needs of
carbon reduction credits do you
see a different formulation for
fuel that will have a lower.
A lower carbon footprint or do
you see
a market based approach to the I
mean what.
What kind of.
Industry and and technology do
you believe will drive you to
what.
to meet these goals.
Well so madam chair and
Representative Townsend counts
and what a what a great question
it's really both it's lowering
the carbon intensity of fuels
lowering the missions and with
the credit mechanism
helping companies get their so
these of clean fuels are already
being developed are already
being sold in other states you
know they have a quite a number
of refineries in Texas they fill
up those trucks and they drive
right through New Mexico to
California because that's where
the market is right now we want
the market to also be here
you've heard from some of these
companies there's there's one
company that already has a
building in Clovis they've just
never started using it because
they move to other states that
have started to do this clean
fuel standards so
that that the most exciting
thing to me has been all of the
people that have COVID every
committee to say we are ready to
expand the New Mexico we're
ready to build in New Mexico but
even if the company isn't here
we're certainly ready to bring
the claim feels that we've
developed here so it is a
growing technology
it's it's we're not we're not in
the start of it but we sure want
to have our state be able to
take advantage of these clean
fuel so it's just it answers so
many things in my mind did
answers our drive to clean up
our fuels to have cleaner air
and to have economic development
so you know the the some folks
of saying well why are you doing
this when we're move were more
moving to electric vehicles
that that is decades away in the
meantime we have the chance to
make fuel.
Is better and I don't see a
clean fuels going away anytime
soon I see the development them
as really burgeoning all over
the country.
Thank you for that Senator and
madam chair just an FYI about
ninety five percent of the.
The Texas refinery production
goes to the eastern sea we're
not California.
Very there's so only one
pipeline connection that takes
drugs through the Sun Belt out
in two.
Arizona really is this as far as
it goes
The.
The idea.
Cleaner fuels it's something
that the industry has been a big
proponent for a number of years
and we have seen.
Thanks for pressure legislation
we have seen all sorts of
different specifications mostly
driven by industry some
government by regulation.
in unique
markets
but almost without exception and
I think without exception.
Whether you're talking about a
Chart standard California air
resources board standards or may
be a
More from Maricopa county
standard does.
Unique standards.
Have increased the cost of the
product and.
And I think the.
I think history will show.
and certainly the fact support.
That.
A regulation.
Like yes.
Is going to.
The.
You know cities you'll see more
backs.
That urban areas like
Albuquerque here Los crucis
where you have high densities.
But economically you're gonna
see a negative impact on rural
New Mexico for rural.
Constituents because it's just a
matter of of where they live
they travel more and so those
prices.
As they rise you're going to
have are going to affect those
people more and I heard some
conversation about environmental
justice.
that
In the in equity of of pollution
to some communities have you
thought about or does your bills
drafts.
the roll but impacts of higher
prices.
Sure I would like to have
secretary can answer that for
secretary keeps which everyone
wants to.
Madam chair of the Townsend
thank you for the question could
see by the way.
Sir the the bill does address
the the not just environmental
justice but it also addresses
rural communities not that those
are one and the same but those
are of particular communities by
which we want to make sure that
the clean fuel standard provides
opportunities to generate
credits in the meeting file way
economically and in a protective
way of those communities and I
can point you to that in the
bill if you're interested.
Sure please.
So madam chair and.
leader Townsend if you go to the
bill.
now that I said that.
Share I can help out page six.
Winds nineteen through twenty
two is one part.
And immediately preceding that
madam chair at lines nineteen to
twenty two is correct.
And then the pair I'm sorry
medially after that.
Thirteen as well minds to it
page six winds twenty three.
The end and then starting on
page seven.
Okay thanks so secretary
With regard to the east with the
potential.
Price escalation of of this.
Policy are there any.
Regulatory caps with in the
within the proposed policy that
would control.
Of the escalation of prices
should they occur.
Madam chair I think that will be
developed through the process
that will be going through in
the next two years that this
bill doesn't have you know that
kind of detail regulation but we
certainly are aiming to do that.
So madam chair and
Senator at I think that
I think that's really good I
would like to see that in
writing in the bill to it at
some point.
I I think.
No my quick.
Review of.
Oregon California prices.
we need to not gap or set aside
the impacts of of crude prices.
They are certainly higher I had
a friend a week or so ago
send me a.
Picture of.
Thank you San Diego it was.
Five forty six for no let.
And that really worries me in
New Mexico that we we drive
ourselves to to a point.
That we are going to.
Really harm a significant part
of our partner population that
just quite frankly can't afford
California prices.
And
I hate I think that is something
that.
We should be responsible.
In protecting our constituents
by putting that in the bill that
we're going to drive the market
to be the most efficient.
As well as the most.
Environmentally friendly of
industries
that we can but we have to take
care of our constituents in the
process in I think what I have
read this bill does not do that
currently so thank you Senator
thank you madam chair and thank
you secretary can.
And madam chair I can ferment I
misspoke we amended this bill
and Senate finance.
Representative Townsend to do of
what you're talking about page
seven lines thirteen through
twenty is the amendment put in
the Senate finance to ensure
that we are.
Very aware and are able to
change and to adjust anything
having to do with
the issues that you're talking
about so if you look at that I
think that will answer some of
your questions thank you madam
chair.
Thank you ma'am.
Thank you so much all right next
we have Representative Scott.
Thank you madam chair Senator
groups to you with the CEO
Secretary economic.
What is twenty eight percent
reduction.
Can you relate that to me please
send terms of.
something is reported by the
energy information agency and
perhaps hello.
CO two do you have that number
available Senator.
Madam chair I can the as
secretary Kenny to tell me who
can answer that.
Madam chair and Representative
the the I I know you're gonna
ask questions about calculations
are I hope we're prepared
that that number in terms of
carbon equivalents would be six
point eight million metric tons
of carbon dioxide equivalents
reduced.
Over the lifetime of the bill
I'm over the lifetime of the
program so let me stop there and
see where you want to go with
your questions and both gave me
From Adelante the RAF madeleines
and I could could potentially
answer additional questions.
Madam chair Mr secretary
a blue total vehicle
transportation.
Emissions in the state in two
thousand nineteen or about
fifteen million metric tons
Hector number.
Madam chair and representative
I'll go with that number I don't
have enough windows to keep keep
going here but
I'll go with that number.
So.
Madam chair Senator Mr Kennedy.
Well issues twenty eight percent
of that would be.
Approximately four million.
Metric tons of reduction annual.
Okay that's very simple math and
child over.
To use that.
With so what you believe.
We would see as a benefit.
Madam chair and representative
Scott I believe so.
Madam chair.
Senator.
And Mr Kennedy I believe are
saying.
In the E. R. A. forecasts.
Planet wide emissions will
increase.
Bakhsh bar forty two.
You.
Metric tons over the period.
We're discussing.
In this bill are you aware of
those numbers.
Madam chair and
Representative Scott
I'm not specifically aware of
them but again that they get
bigger numbers some.
Approximately correct not
disputing the.
So.
Madam chair Senator and.
Secretary I believe with some
fairly simple mathematics.
We can show that the reductions
that will be.
Affected by this policy if we
made all of the targets.
Would not rise to the level of a
rounding error.
With respect.
To the atmosphere of the plan.
Which you would New Mexico just
is too small to lightly
industrialized and to point we
have too few emissions to be
able to make a difference.
Now.
Madam chair.
And senator.
These this policy would create.
What is in effect a commodities.
Renewable energy credit of some
kind is is that correct.
Madam chair and representative
yes through the process that
we've outlined we are looking at
finding a.
Reddit mechanism that will help
us move towards our goal of
reduced carbon intensity so.
So madam chair and senator this.
This artificially created
commodity creates value.
For the folks that are
generating.
These well renewable fuel
credits.
That someone has to pay for.
Would that be accurate either we
have to do that the solution C.
of the of the fuel that were
born and has to increase of.
One order of magnitude just
probably not.
A realistic expectation so
somebody will have to buy these
renewable energy credits that
are created.
As a consequence of this
legislation is is that a
reasonable assumption.
Madam chair I don't think it is
I would like to keep it over
though to secretary Kenny.
Madam chair of Representative
Scott can you repeat the
question for me.
Madam chair Mr secretary up the
the renewable energy credits
that would be that would be a
commodity.
That would be created I this
legislation.
A commodities that has value.
And it would you to the the
folks that war.
processing and selling motor
fuels in the state is is that
accurate.
Madam chair representative Scott
it's generally accurate that the
commodity aspect of this is is
is the credit as you point out
but those fuel producers can
also generate credits by
producing a lower carbon fuel.
So they themselves as a provider
as defined in the in the
legislation can generate credits
as well as any business that ops
in like an ag business or a
hydrogen business can opt in to
generate credit so the commodity
market is open to anybody who
can generate a reduction.
Madam chair of the secretary of
hi I am aware.
Of the petroleum refiners and
the mandates currently in place
with respect to half of all.
And the renewable energy credits
that are required to change its.
As a consequence of the ethanol
mandate and.
And madam chair Mister Mr
secretary these credits cost
petroleum refiners millions of
dollars per year.
And.
And madam chair Mr secretary I
cannot see.
These costs.
For this artificially created
commodity of.
Renewable energy credit I cannot
see how the schools could fail
to be passed along to New Mexico
consumers.
At
least forty state where we
Bartolotta diesel.
We put a lot of gasoline because
we have so for contract.
And I think the experience.
In California and other places.
With the costs associated with
acquiring these credits where
they have been passed on to
consumers I don't see us doing
anything substantially different
here.
That would give me the
sufficient reason to support
this piece of legislation
I'm sure that it will hurt.
Consumers in my district.
And if if you're looking to
fifteen twenty cents four
numbers up to sixty cents was a
consequence.
Of these the.
The need to to acquire these
credits.
It gives me pause particularly.
In a poor state.
Where.
Transportation fuels or a
significantly higher percentage
of the average family's budget.
The R. and most other places
that's that's all the questions
I had madam chair.
So Senator and and Mr secretary
thank you very much for your
answers.
Thank you Representative Scott
next we have Representative
Strickler.
Thank you madam chair let me up
again maybe just a second to put
my said on.
Can you hear me now.
Can you hear me now we can yes.
I have a little technical
difficulties here
thank you madam chair and and
thank you Senator Stewart.
good to say a.
And just a little too early for
may I this day light savings
time is a is a little adjustment
in a.
But I'm glad to see you guys are
are a chair this morning.
I have similar
concerns about the cost of this
program
Senator and and madam chair
we have some
good statistics from the state
of California from their
provided a.
I guess equivalent to the
Legislative Council Service
eight they referred to the
legislative analyst's office and
they estimate that this program.
That they've implemented will
add forty six cents a gallon to
sixty three cents a gallon by
twenty thirty.
and the this report was done
recently a year ago March fourth
to twenty twenty.
And
They they are making
recommendations to the
California legislature to amend
or eliminate this program so.
You know they're the Guinea pigs
California's always a leader and
and so many things I have family
and friends in California.
it's a high cost of living State
high taxes.
hi hi gasoline.
The costs but it's a beautiful
state I'll tell you a lot of
northern California where my
family of her I have a sister
and two brothers in the bay area
and it's just a gorgeous place
but they they they pay they paid
dearly for a
the cost of living there also
Senator in.
There are some other studies
done in California that
there's there's five major
sources of the low carbon fuels
you have renewable diesel
ethanol electricity biodiesel
and renewable natural gas in
interestingly enough in
California.
According to the the Stillwater
associates analysts eighty six
percent the often all ninety
percent of the renewable diesel
and seventy eight percent of the
biodiesel consent in California
were produced out of state and
yeah California's a big state
more the third thirty nine maybe
thirty eight million people.
You know Oregon is a another
example there's only two states
that do this none of our
surrounding states thanks to
this we have taxes big neighbor
to the to the east Oklahoma
Colorado you to owners on none
of them do this we've been out
liar
with this program and I I
appreciate senator that you're
this a to your face and I mean I
think this makes sense.
This is a kind of a bold
initiative for small state I
thank senator excuse me.
madam chair and senator
Representative Scott pointed out
the the
the statistics on on on savings
in our state.
Very small can you shaving find
the agenda and
So I'm just I'm just a little
bit worried that small little
New Mexico
is gonna is gonna.
You know
Maybe have higher costs and then
then we hope
that these these industries
That that spoke in favor of this
bill
mate may set up shop in New
friendlier states like Texas for
example and maybe not in New
Mexico so I don't know what what
what do you think about the the
what's going on in California
and I that this program has been
around since two thousand eleven
is that right.
Okay so they've eight nine years
you know nine nine years of
activity and they're Legislative
Council services got some
concerns about it so
do you share some of those same
concerns Senator.
Madam chair the representative I
don't so we have different
information then you said out of
California it's been consistent
that the the cost attributable
only to the clean fuel standard
over the last ten years has
basically been less than two
cents a year there are so many
factors that go into the price
of gasoline I'm certainly.
Pro that you know you all are
concerned about low income I do
not believe it's going to affect
us of the way you're suggesting
frankly it's the price of oil
that determines the cost of
gasoline and not programs like
this so I just have different
information than you do from
California I am not worried
about those issues we've got two
years to face this and we will
get it right we will do what we
need to do in New Mexico.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you center.
You know we're such a small
state were such a poor state two
point one million people at a
three hundred twenty seven
million people in the in the
United States and
yeah this.
you know I wish I wish our
surrounding states did this it
by give us some center G. might
give us some economies of scale
but I think you do a cut us
benefit analysis
truly with the with all the
facts and figures in California
what I'm reading
what I'm saying from their LFC
equivalent
that this has some this is going
to have some challenges and I
hate to say New Mexico begin a
pay gap there some other things
we can certainly data
to improve our environment and
and with the ATA we've we've got
we've got strong ambitious goals
to.
Implement renewable energy on a
fast track and
so I think we're doing quite a
bit especially compared to our
neighbors
we we've got a very ambitious
program and we're such a rural
state in our Representative a
rural area
you know we have three major
cities in the in the state maybe
half the population and then the
rest of us live in small town
New Mexico and we play
higher gasoline prices and
in Farmington and then other
parts of the state and I know
that.
Probably due to transportation
costs we put another two would
pay probably twenty five to
thirty cents higher gasoline
costs appear in we have to drive
a long ways to to take you know
handler jobs and whatnot so it's
always good to say is center
right you know and will will let
the next person
have their say and we'll talk
about garden said another time
I'll show you my patience you
would love thirteen hundred
chili plants we can't wait we
just a some horsemen are just
that we're at our with our might
my suppliers I used up all the
supply but we've got a great
community garden it's a I'm
showing you pictures is just
fantastic this will be our
fourth year and a yeah a may
they have to switch crops but
we're so far so good the farmers
market stand right thank you
thank you senator thank you.
Thanks so much Representative
Strickler and are we have
Representative monthly and next.
Thank you madam chair
Make sure muted here okay thank
you madam chair and Senator
I just have a couple of
questions
At first for being to whatever
degree
the.
Go up.
It seems like the poor gonna.
Be the ones that are going to be
most affected by this.
and the reason is a.
Madam chairman and senator is
there gonna be the ones less
likely to be able to.
purchased vehicles new vehicles
as needed to deal with the new
requirements for to deal with
the new standard that's out
there I am.
Other than.
Other than.
Fuel that that maybe blended a
little.
A little.
More efficient with more
efficiency and it with less
carbon in it at the the.
Folks who are driving an older
car less likely to be able to
get rid of that older car and
that's that's the poor.
are there any concerns at all
with with
the cost of fuel going up on the
poorest New Mexicans which is a
substantial number.
So madam chair and
representative.
You know what when everybody
talks about the poor going to be
heard.
No I do believe that the poor
also care about the Clemente the
air the cleanliness of the fuel.
They have kids with as well like
all the rest of us this is
bigger than just the cost of
gasoline and what we have study
and looked at in other states is
that this program does not
really affect the cost of
gasoline like so many of the
other factors that go into so
the study out of California is a
less than two cents a year to me
that is nothing compared to the
fact that we are going to get
all of these companies that want
to come here and take part and
many of them will be set up in
our rural areas certainly forget
which company the says I rifle
through my papers but there's a
company that already has a
building in Clovis that they
have been waiting to turn into a
fuel blending company
outfit so I do not believe this
is going to increase the cost of
gas astronomically I just don't
think that's the way it's
working in California and so I
think the credit market credit
mechanism is just exciting to a
lot of these companies it's all
hands on deck to lower the
emissions in our care for so
many reasons public health a
response to climate change it's
going to be hotter and drier in
the south west and that's just
what all the research shows so
it behooves us to try to address
this as a public health issue
and an economic development
issue so I am not concerned
about that because I do believe
this is kind of fear mongering
to talk about all my it's going
to all it's going to affect the
poor I do not believe that that
is what's going to happen and I
know there's a disagreement
between us but I want to answer
honestly and that's how I feel
about.
Thank you at madam chair and
senator I'm glad you brought up
that bio fuel facility and in
Clovis that one we've had
several discussions on over
several years they have a
building in New Mexico but their
production is in Texas across
the border.
and we when we were looking at
the.
Them trying to what we were
looking to to implement that
standard to you to have to use
that bio fuel the the problem
was that the delivery cost from
Clovis to most of the rest of
the state was gonna add
transportation costs to that
fuel that were astronomical he
lived in the a damning or in
Farmington and you're going to
receive file still from that
facility
the cost is going to be
outrageous said transportation
costs of the cost isn't just the
cost of your production the cost
is in the transportation and
that's for rural New Mexico get
set and that's what the poor
people in rural New Mexico get
hit hard it really is it's a
matter of.
At the trucks traveling a
certain distance and if it
doesn't have a return product
it's returning empty so the cost
to transport is where the cost
comes from Senator it's not so
if you haven't been out in
California.
and you have a lot more outlets
of that the cost goes down in a
rural state like New Mexico or
the transportation costs.
Are what kill you that's where
the cost goes up and so
that that that's a real number
that's a real factor and so
That that is that is my concern
but
despite that I know we're gonna
have a disagreement on that but
it's it really is just a math
problem as to how far on the
road vehicle at eight eight have
a truck transporting.
These fuels are going to have to
get to a two from one community
to another that's where the
cost.
But that is really not the the
main question I have for you
as I look through this a bill
I'm not seeing any legislative
oversight it appears once we.
House this piece of legislation
we as legislators wash our hands
of any control.
over.
Any decisions that are made
going forward we we it puts
together a.
It allows for of plan to go
forward and decisions to be made
without without the legislature.
being able to chime in any
further after after this session
if we pass this out the governor
signed it do you have any
concerns about that.
Lack of oversight.
Chair and representative no you
know I I've seen us year after
year after year come back and
make changes to legislation that
we have passed certainly if
there needs to be a change in
the legislation well we will
look at that each year we have
put in the Senate finance
committee improvements at page
seven section at a really
ensures that stakeholders will
be a huge part of the process so
I believe we can change things
that you know we we need to in
the future I have no fears about
that.
So
Madam chair and senator that the
real problem with that is we
have to pass legislative
solution and then we have to.
I assume that a governor.
Signs that that's that's where I
I'm I'm worried about.
They're not being a regular
oversight
it's the the hurdles to getting
that oversight back just to too
great
once again Senator thank you for
joining our our committee thank
you but I'm just there too many
variables here that that's your
map I big part of my business.
Over the last.
Fifteen years has been in the in
transportation and trucking and
the the cost as a.
Representative Strickler
mentioned in San Juan County why
even though we produce oil and
gas in our community
that the cost there is more
expensive.
Regularly thirty cents more than
everywhere else in the state is
because the refineries for that
fuel are not there and so
our product is trucked out some
of it is is pipelined out but
what gets said to the refinery
and then returns to us because
the distance from the refinery
to us and a truck hauling a load
to a school and then leaving
back empty that entire trip that
at the cost of that
transportation go on that gallon
of gas that's why
that you're you're hearing
concerns about rural New Mexico
in particular the poorest people
in rural New Mexico so thank you
those those conclude my
questions thank you Senator.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Chandler.
Madam chair I move a do pass.
Okay we have a motion from
representative madam vice chair
Chandler for it to pass do we
have a.
The second from Representative
Ferrary let's go ahead and take
of them.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative or.
Yes.
Representative Saniona yes.
Representative Scott.
No.
Representative Strickler.
No.
Representative Townsend.
No ma'am.
Vice chair Stansbury yes.
And chairman the queen yes.
Thank you the motion passes with
a vote of seven to four.
All right so it looks like
Senator you have a do you pass
and thank you so much for coming
before our committee this
morning would you like to say
anything in conclusion I noticed
thank you and and I appreciate
all the the.
A discussion we've had this
morning I'm now going to toss
this to Representative small and
the hope that he can do the same
job I've done over here in the
Senate.
Thank you senator thank you
secretaries for joining us this
morning have a good morning.
Okay we are still in business
here this morning and Henrik
we're gonna move on to the next
agenda item which is Senator
Steinborn spell.
and so let's go ahead and bring
Senator Steinborn over and his
experts so we are now on Senate
bill eighty two which is their
radio active waste consultation
task force bill.
Then sending Center signed words
bill for up there Senator.
Here I'm here.
Thank you leave now already
claimed it.
Four thank you thank you sure so
do you have an expert.
I do have a caring next with
State Land Office.
Karen's in the mix Shelby can
use C. M. S..
Miss next is item here oh great
okay all right let's get that
one go ahead thank you madam
chair committee good morning my
old stomping grounds I spent
quite a few years on your it
seemed Committee and I learned a
lot there committee Senate bill
eighty two.
Adds to an existing task force
that is not a law that was
actually created when we created
the waste isolation pilot plant
the federal disposal facility of
low level nuclear waste at that
time that the federal government
work with the state and we
created this law create a state
mechanism to.
Oversee the facility on behalf
of the state to look at issues
related to it also to negotiate
the state.
what when the proposal to store
high level nuclear waste by this
private facility came along a
few years ago all tech name of
the company.
We found that we have a
deficiency in our law that has
no required engagement by the
executive branch to actually do
due diligence on behalf of the
citizenry to look at the impacts
of high level waste even now the
exposure is a lot greater to the
citizens quite frankly.
And because it's private
facility the responsibilities of
the private company last would
be.
Yep of the waste of federal
government have title to the
waste in the facility.
So what this bill for you to us
and ability to is to amend a
radioactive consultation task
force to require them to to
review federal applications
for the storage of high level
nuclear waste operated by a
private facility in the state of
New Mexico and to report those
findings to us.
And beyond that we are beefing
up the task force itself to
include some new agencies well
in some cases it in existence
such as the homeland security
and emergency preparedness
department very important for
this kind of an issue also the
Indian Affairs Department and
by it's very happy to have also
added by amendment the state
land office who of course
including all these discussions
of the waste transits through
New Mexico
Also we were beating up the task
force in requiring it to come
before the Legislative
radioactive and hazardous
materials committee at least
January.
And that that's a great
enhancement by itself right now
the losses are only supposed to
come before the committee vote
regularly and unfortunately
during the previous
administration and that zero
they didn't even know existed in
reality so so by just making it
annually what we're doing is
we're engaging this executive
departments to look at these
issues what is application
specifically and then to get us
as legislators more educated
involved in these issues and and
the citizenry.
So I think it's a great builder
is an amendment to the bill Mr
chair
And
And so we can talk about that at
the appropriate time but but
right now I perhaps I can allow
the sticks to say a word and
turning to.
So Senator we do have your
amendment here I think because
we probably will have some
public testimony and that plan
may be impacted by the amendment
which probably move the
amendment before public
testimony
next would you like to make your
statement before we move the
amendment at the gym thank you
chair members my name is Terry
mix and the deputy commissioner
of public affairs at the State
Land Office and thank you for
letting me be here today and
we're also very happy to be part
of this legislation now I guess
you could say I'm kind of here
to us for a sense of urgency and
the legislature in a do pass on
this bill you might be wondering
why we at the State Land Office
are the expert witness today in
the short answer is the land
that whole tech will be putting
it side on we'll sit on top of
our state trust minerals and
about hundreds of millions of
dollars of potash to be specific
we what we do not own the
service we are deeply concerned
about leaving valuable mineral
assets stranded and the numerous
oil and gas let's see is that
would be impacted in the
surrounding area there are
countless actions the state in
the state land office will need
to take to ensure beneficiaries
are fully compensated and
regulatory oversight is mandated
but Senator Steinborn bill is
the minimum our state must do to
guarantee some level of
oversight of full text and
disposal facility so why the
urgency as most of you know our
country has a nuclear waste
disposal problem in New Mexico
unfortunately has been
identified as the solution to
this growing problem it is our
belief that the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission will not
only rule in favor of the whole
technically our waste disposal
site that this decision is
likely to come as early as may
of this year but definitely by
the end of summer.
So secondly we do not believe
this that the site will be
temporary right now it's
supposed to only be forty years
but as I've talked about the
growing concern an issue with
this but disposal in this
country we think that it's more
likely that it will be a
permanent sites and they had
how did ten thousand metric tons
of highly radioactive spent fuel
rods and waste that will be
stored at the facility but the
reality is they can store up to
a hundred thousand times metric
tons of nuclear waste and so
that's a that's a lot of that's
a lot of waste and this ideal
this location was chosen because
it's ideal for its proximity to
the rail line we've already seen
San Diego gearing up to ship
their nuclear waste that is
currently being stored at a
temporary disposal site along
their coastline this will not be
the last state looking to
offload their nuclear waste into
New Mexico and as I mentioned
before we do not believe there
is anything we can do to stop
this facility from being
approved although we are trying
we have submitted letters and
met with the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission and so the numerous
tribes in state agencies we will
continue to pursue every legal
option to protect our land and
New Mexico's bottom line but we
need you to vote in favor of
Senate bill eighty two today and
give us a fighting chance at
addressing some of the concerns
that come with transporting and
storing nuclear waste thank you.
Thank you Mr next and I think at
this time Senator if it's
agreeable to you would be
probably a good time to move the
amendment.
And.
Can you please give us the two
oh two number on it sure enough
starts with point two to zero is
it still called the two oh two
number and just thank I'm
curious about it's point two two
zero eight seven zero point two.
Thank you and it was emailed out
to the committee this morning
buyer Committee secretary would
someone like to move the
amendment please.
For the and madam chair thank
you do we have a second.
I can't.
Okay I am Senator Steinborn
could you please describe the
amendment and I think maybe for
the benefit of the public since
it's very short and you may even
wanna read it since it's not
available honor.
My page.
Sure you madam chair thank you
okay the amendment.
Sorry the amendment on I'm
getting a phone call that I got
rid of my number one on page
five one eight after the period
strike the remainder of the line
strike line in its entirety and
strike line.
Through the period.
Number two on page six one
seventeen after the period
insert quote the findings shall
not be construed as a state
authorizing or consenting to the
storage of high level waste in
New Mexico.
Madam chair I would just usually
explain what those two things.
Do in the law right now
currently it says that the chair
and the vice chair of the task
force or non voting members even
though the chair is in fact the
cabinet secretary for energy
minerals natural resources
department so we believe that's
an outdated inappropriate
provision at this point in time.
The second provision currently
state law actually yes it is
state policy and law New Mexico
seventy four dash for a dash
eleven point one that the
state's policies prohibit the
disposal of radioactive waste in
New Mexico unless the state
consents that is already the
policy of the state so there
were folks who had concerns by
us triggering a review that we
will somehow implying consent.
Of these federal applications.
And so what the second part of
the amendment simply restates
arts what existing law which is
the findings shall not be
construed as the state
authorizing you're consenting to
the storage of high level waste
in New Mexico that these impact
studies.
Are just after impact studies
but they're not documents that
by virtue of us doing it are are
signaling our consent.
So so with that I'm sure that's
what the members.
Right thank you let me just turn
very quickly to the committee is
there any questions about the
amendment before we go to a
public testimony.
Should we go ahead and adopt the
amendment before going to public
testimony.
To have a motion and with that.
Okay the second.
All right is there any
objection.
The
scene then you have been amended
bill okay let's move to the
public we're gonna start with
the whole so for those of you
that are tuning in we're going
to do a poll in which you can
participate if you would like to
register your opposition or
support for this bill Shelby can
you go ahead and launch support.
Okay.
Okay.
It's not letting me vote madam
chair.
Thanks Senator at if you are on
the participants side is losing
unfortunately you can't
participate in the on.
Democratic and we know what we
were.
All right so it looks like we
have fifty fifty support and
opposition in the audience today
and with that we're gonna go
head to move to public testimony
we'll start with opposition to
the bill you'll have ninety
seconds to give your testimony
if you would like to testify in
opposition please raise using
hands now and we'll call on you
in order and first on the list
is Patricia Cardona please go
ahead.
Yes my name is Patricia Cardona
I am in support of the amended
legislation I am legislative
program I'm so sorry we're doing
opposition right now so if you
M. could come back in the next
round if you're in opposition
please raise your hand now next
is when more.
I am in support.
This is Lynn Moore I'm in
support of SB eighty two we're
gonna do support next so if you
are here to testify in support
of the bill please go ahead and
put your hand down and we'll
come back to our supporters
next.
More generally please.
Thank you for the the difficulty
my name is Dale jailed way and
I'm speaking as a mayor of the
city of Carlsbad I'm speaking in
opposition to SB eight.
There.
Recent discussions at the state
and national level about the
importance of diversifying our
economy.
We are aware of the need for
diversity which is one of the
reasons why we have been
supporting this partnership with
Mexico tech in interim storage
this project is strolled
supporting girls bed it's
rounding into Kerry our city
council is pastor will
resolution chintz for rural
storage and community members
have turned out in large numbers
to speak in favor of the.
The safety reviews for both the
consolidated interim storage
facility in the process of
transporting to this sport the
thorough this will be a world
class facility which will create
jobs for New Mexicans in
generate revenue for New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you Mr more next we have
churches I hope I'm pronouncing
that right Scott.
Looks like you may be muted on
your end.
Okay we'll come back if you
wanted to okay I'm sorry can you
hear me now what we can okay
sorry.
I thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
just got and I represent hoc
take international here in New
Mexico we respectfully stand
opposed to Senate bill eighty
two as we believe will create
redundancy for the state of the
federal government as you all
know specifically the NRC
already does rigorous oversight
of domestic nuclear facilities
and projects this bill has
potential would kill jobs and I
know your previous discussion on
Senate bill eleven you talked a
lot about economic development
and creating jobs this job this
particular project creates jobs
as in fact many of the state's
construction and trades union
members support the whole tech
project as it will create over
three hundred jobs it is a safe
project as the draft EIS
demonstrated last year last
March when that was released so
madam chair committee members
thank you for the opportunity to
speak this morning we
respectfully are opposed to
Senate bill eighty two thank
you.
Thank you so much okay we are
now going to move to support for
the bill if you support the bill
please raise your hand and we
will go in order to have your
testimony taken first we have
John Heaton.
Mr king you are muted on here
and.
Okay got it okay can you hear me
now yes miss madam chairman I I
raised my hand to speak in
opposition.
If I may do so right now please
go ahead.
Madam chairman again my name is
John Heaton and I'm a member of
the Eddie Lacy Energy Alliance
board we have been working hard
in southeast New Mexico to
diversify our economy and we
have discovered an H. and the
safety you can just save nuclear
projects consolidated interim
storage is another one of those
safe projects we have been
working on for some six years
this project brains three
hundred and fifty jobs to our
area capital expenditure will be
approximately three billion
dollars we expect seventeen to
twenty five million in revenue
sharing with New Mexico at one
shipment per month the facility
is a subsurface solid concrete
fortress it Representative it is
resistant to plane crashes
rocket hits earthquakes and
possible terrorist attacks all
considered by homeland security
and the NRC the transportation
is heavily regulated by NRC and
DOT the NRC can not say the risk
of a breach of the cascade zero
but they do say it's a billion
to one and no radioactive
material will be released madam
chairman the NRC is given total
authority for the health and
safety of our citizens for
commercial nuclear projects we.
We we expect that the four
hundred and eighty thousand
dollars could be used much
better thank you madam chairman.
Thank you Mr Heenan okay we are
now concluded with our am
opposition testimony now moving
to support and first we have RT
at all medically Carter.
Hello chair members of committee
my name is our agency your merry
cover I'm here speaking as a
representative of yucca youth
United for climate crisis action
yucca is gravely concerned with
the generation and handling of
radioactive waste all cuts with
the from nuclear fracking or any
other kind of dangerous
industries we are strongly
opposed to the idea that New
Mexico should be a dumping
ground for this waste we believe
it is critical that the impacts
of any new proposed federal or
private disposal facilities
within the state be thoroughly
scrutinised documented and
shared with the state however
respectfully we would ask for a
bill that bans high level
nuclear waste from being stored
in New Mexico point blank not
one the facilities negotiations
for disposal here in New Mexico.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you next is a landmark.
Here we go good morning I'm let
more of Los crucis an
environmental attorney with
extensive experience in nuclear
waste issues who is testifying
in an individual capacity today
thank you for this opportunity
to comment I support SB eighty
two because as our state
continues to become more and
more the choice of private and
federal entities looking for a
place to dump their nuclear
waste it's essential that New
Mexicans have the opportunity to
narrow and transparent manner
all relevant information that
could affect the public safety
environmental health
infrastructure and
transportation impacts on us we
need to know for example if an
applicant is being criminally
investigated in New Jersey for
false statements to state
government or ever been barred
from doing federal business or
fail to create the jobs it
promised in return for receiving
tax credits in Ohio all of which
is the case for Holtec.
This bill provides an expanded
team state players to evaluate
sterling any nuclear waste
applications and enable the wide
dissemination of this key
information to state officials
and the public you need to know
it is crucial that all relevant
information is transparently nor
known in order to protect us we
New Mexicans have many different
questions than the in our State
has asked that we would like to
have answers to I urge you all
to vote do pass on SB eighty two
thank you for your consideration
of this important issue.
Thank you very much next we have
at the neck Christodoulou.
Good morning chair and committee
members thank you for having
this bill put forward my name's
that the increased to do little
and I'm the political director
the Atlanta progressive caucus
an environmental engineer and a
former nuclear power instructor
there is or organizations with
experts in nuclear waste have
assess these plans and it's not.
In addition this is not
temporary citizens need to say
and we don't want out of sight
out of mind decisions made we
need to fight this tooth and
nail for the sake of future
generations why does why do the
area representatives want to
state it and the deal made in
the dark.
Please vote to pass for SB
eighty two thank you very much.
Thank you very much next we have
Karen Douglas.
You madam chair and members
committee I thank you for
permitting the lewd women voters
of New Mexico to address you I
am a nuclear engineer and
service chair of our state spent
nuclear fuel storage state the
committee the safety committee
reviewed both the whole pack in
the NM storage partners
environmental impact statements
and submitted more than twenty
pages of accrued to on each with
detailing errors and omissions
in the draft EIS are we
submitted both written comments
and spoke during the public
comment period in there about
webinars we have various
concerns and and understand that
long term storage in the United
States.
Thirty six years is the maximum
to date at the storied nuclear
power plant in the state of
Virginia the in addition to that
thirty six years it will be
stored in these facilities are
creating for an indeterminate
amount of additional time and
there are aging management
programs at the existing in our
spent fuel storage
installations the seventy four
in thirty four states where
there are evaluating materials
problems both in the fuel
cladding these are corneum ally
circle I you will planning hi Dr
here any indication and the yes
the staff.
I'm it appears that we have one
more person who would like to
speak is having some technical
difficulties I'm Patricia
Cardona are you able to and meet
yourself.
Can you hear me yes we can go
ahead.
Committee members chairman
Stansbury chess Stansbury my
name is Patricia Cardona I am
legislative co chair from Sierra
Club and then just on from the
Rio Grande chapter two southwest
the southwest Alliance for our
future.
We think Senator Steinborn for
bringing forth the issue of
storing high level nuclear waste
to the forefront and amending
his Original Bill to send a
strong message that New Mexico
does not consent to storage of
high level nuclear waste the Rio
Grande chapter stands in support
of the amended bill allowing.
for examining the issue very
closely nuclear reactor
communities are being told New
Mexico wants to waste we need to
have close scrutiny of the whole
tech project hold the whole tech
project increases the number
the and number of.
Radiation related businesses in
New Mexico it does not to
diversify the economy of New
Mexico.
New Mexico has economic does
this type of economic
development has health impacts
and economic displacement of
existing businesses and jobs
especially for food and tourism
there are ninety eight reactor
sites that are currently
decommissioning and looking for
areas to place their radiation
contaminated waste.
From nuclear reactor sites.
The reactor sites have problems
with waste containers.
Want to get rid of the way so
they can do economic
development.
Is support okay sorry I didn't
mean to cut you off the M. D.
that we appreciate your public
testimony and and with that we
will move back to the sponsor
and then we will go to the
committee please.
Mr Senator Steinborn and would
you like to say anything before
we move to the committee no
madam chair I I think I think
I'm good and I welcome questions
thank you okay moving to the
committee do we have anyone that
would like to ask questions.
At leader Townsend please.
Yes thanks madam chair
Senator good stadia
Where is our Attorney General on
on this matter and what was his
opinion.
So Madam chair representative.
Minority leader so when I was
the chair of the radioactive
materials committee I asked for
an Attorney General opinion
because I've heard different
stories about.
whether or not New Mexico had
any role consent in approving of
such a facility I need to get to
the bottom we need to get to the
bottom of what exactly are
levers of.
Authority we had work for even
input and yes correct that the
Attorney General came back.
With the thought of preacher
opinion saying that we have zero
authority in spent nuclear fuel
federal government has total
authority over and up so that
that's his role that's what
they've done they've given in
the and.
I appreciate that
Representative.
Representative I'm sorry Senator
I I was going to give you an
upgrade there and I and I know
that.
About once a Representative
always.
There you go Senator the
The testimony that I have for in
the information that I have
received from.
In Lee County
Mayors commissioners has all
been supportive.
Have you received any different
information of Senator.
Madam chair representative yes I
have in what you just said is
correct there are local
officials who are in support
there's also local governments
were not in sport with maybe you
haven't heard of the committee
of gel passed a resolution
opposed to this one of the most
amazing things I've heard public
testimony was from a former
councillor the city a child
healthy hearing and hops
actually and she said regarding
her position to oppose it she
said if there's sharks in the
water for god's sake Stan the
boat.
And her point was why on earth
would you want to invite these
materials to New Mexico
So thank you for giving up to
their sure that story but yeah
you know at this point time
communities all across the state
many of them have passed
resolutions opposing.
Shipping of this material
through their community keep in
mind that I think people some
people in southeastern Mexico
like to say this is just
southeastern New Mexico issue
it's not it's a national issue.
This decision to build this
facility should that happen is
going to trigger waste being
shipped our communities all
across the country and to all
parts of New Mexico by armed
guard on a rail.
I'm very top secret you are you
can't even find out the routes
other than you know what will be
coming to all parts of the state
briefly I will tell you that the
communities of Los crucis Santa
Fe County Albuquerque the all
Indian public council governor's
gel late a like Arthur have all
passed resolutions opposing this
waste your committee I think
representing about forty percent
of the state so it's and there's
plenty of local citizens in
southeastern New Mexico as well
who are organized against the
proposal.
They
And madam chair to the
information that I have received
this is much much different and
overwhelming late
Is not so much.
And support although it has been
supportive it has been in
support of science
of technology.
The continuing their own
investigation.
Of the of the need for New
Mexico has the.
Good jobs for diversifying the
economy and for doing things
that are better and and
And and work for our future so I
would
Senator I I would.
Encouraging you to leave that
door open.
To make sure that you
understood.
How much support there is in in
the local communities for that
and
I think in the end it worked out
just fine so thank you for
commenting on the internet
general's opinion this we
couldn't stop it it won our gig.
Thank you for listening to the
we're.
Representative.
Retired she.
And I'm more state support
projects in the I think you'll
find that it can be done safely
and.
Accordance with the project and
be a project that will be safe
and progressive for New Mexico's
future thank you.
Thank you later Townsend at
looks like next we have
Representative Ferrary on the
list go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
senator for bringing this
forward I spoke in at some of
the are made public comment some
of the hearings that were held
and then also work with legal
women voters to address this
issue and for them to be in
support of you know bill such as
yours and I really appreciate
you know what this effort is
going to
You know show for New Mexico to
have a voice in this whole
process
what little I think there is but
With can you explain Senator of
Madam tearing Senator
if they weren't going to find
the
Are diverting from going to the
Nevada site
it was yucca mountain
and now they're looking for
another place such as New Mexico
and how Texas doesn't want to
have it on their side forty
miles east of where they're
looking at in New Mexico.
Right madam chair I'm officially
doing two systems at once.
Just restate your question real
quick.
Convoluted as it was madam chair
and senator
because they didn't want to have
the Nevada site that was planned
and now they're looking for
another place Texas doesn't want
this site and New Mexico doesn't
either but it looks like they're
fortifying already to rail lines
to come here and all the things
it seems inevitable.
Well you're right about yucca
mountain being taken off the
table although there those in
Congress that are still trying
to pass
laws reigniting up amount and re
validating it as the official
permit repository even then it's
a.
But you're right that is the
ultimate national solution needs
to happen for this waste it
needs to be buried in the in the
repository it really are a.
In case we have any your future
members of Congress listening
our our country really needs to
get back on that back on that
mission of finding a permanent
repository so I think what's
happening in New Mexico is
it's not a national energy
policy it's a business decision
that's being pursued by a
company and some people think
it'll create some good jobs but
You could argue it's pretty
crazy Policy to ship this waste
across the country twice.
To ship it in in New Mexico for
interim or permanent.
Storage facility that's not
designed to be permanent and
then have to ship it twice so
it's some.
We're kind of bumbling along I
guess you could say as a country
and we need to need to figure it
out.
Madam chair and senator so this
is one way that we can raise our
voices you can hires at the
purpose absolutely madam madam
chair and representative this is
this is our this is the minimum
level of due diligence we can do
for the citizens of New Mexico
and and have eyes wide open
All the more so because were pre
empted and were not given an
official voice in the sighting
of this facility we're not given
any powers of consent which by
the way I think should be
changed in federal law it should
be truly a consent based process
but there are this is just to
help us focus on protecting
ourselves as a state well on
advocating being better advocate
so.
Great well thank you I it that's
I'll yield thank you senator.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
next we have Representative
setting Jana.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator I'm and thank you for
this bill I believe adding these
additional people to the task
force will be an incentive will
will help
I would be with you on this on
this committee that rejected and
hazardous waste committee and I
believe I was there when del
came I think they're wearing
pink shirts that might have been
a different time but but these
people are concerned everyone
around there.
Most people are concerned
not only the town the ranchers
the farmers what could happen if
there is a leak and the biggest
concern is the transportation
we this is being transported by
rail by truck barge up from all
over the country and it's going
to affect all of New Mexico so
this is very real and and we
state we need to fight against
it as as hard as we can I
believe because this isn't good
for New Mexico we can't do this
the dumping ground for nuclear
waste right now we have with
this is low level adding high
level nuclear waste is is not a
good thing
and there there are I was
looking up.
What's happened in other parts
of the country with
these containers maybe save the
storage place where we're going
to if we have to store your
baby's baby pretty safe but the
transportation is the issue and
if something happens will our
our first responders know what
to do how will it affect our
community this is that what we
need in New Mexico so but thanks
for the task force and we need
to get this out as much as we
can that we do not need to we
don't need anymore we've had
we've had too much
Two things that affect our our
our people and we have cancer
especially in the southern part
of the state that's remember the
people coming in saying we have
so much cancer because of
everything that happens in the
southern corner of that state
our state so thank you I'm
Senator appreciate it.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Scott.
Thank you madam chair Senator
good to see you.
Could you describe for the
committee.
The technical expertise.
In the handling and storage of
nuclear materials that this task
force would bring to the table.
Thank you madam chair
representative well right now in
our energy minerals natural
resources department you know
they're dealing with issues
connected to the waste isolation
plant they have but we have a
hazardous waste bureau I think
certainly
as they do more work in this
space they can always used to be
beefed up they can certainly
contract for this technical
expertise so it's it's a it's.
You know they're they're
knowledgeable people in our
state government and certainly
those available for contract
tires well and
So.
But having said that this study
will look at things that go
beyond our.
Just physics and and nuclear
nuclear science I mean you're
talking about industries that
could be affected and how that
affects the economy
Health you know health impacts
of radiation exposure so things
that are well known and go
beyond just understanding you
know.
The physics of a.
No storage facility for spent
high level nuclear waste.
Madam chair and senator.
Do you believe that the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission.
Does not have the expertise to
evaluate the safety concerns.
With respect to the
transportation and storage.
This material yes his license
going to be granted on hoc basis
without a thorough vetting
process.
Well madam chair representative
first of all it's important for
people to note that the license
application doesn't deal with
transportation.
That's number one you just deals
with the location itself.
And which I think is a
fundamental
from us from the New Mexico
standpoint.
From an actual standpoint that's
a kind of fundamental flaw
because what what they're
talking about undertaking here
as a transportation project of
historic proportions the
shipping of the spent nuclear
fuel.
What and by the way and by the
way the company that's being
contracted very nice man.
Talk to him he does very little
rail in his history the last
several decades he's had an
accident a rail accident bobbing
is company so rail accidents
happen that is not part of the
this this license application
that's that's like what will
deal with that later secondly
the NRC is not is not reaching
out and talking to people from
social justice standpoint.
Is not believe me I've been I've
participated in these calls
they've been asked I've written
comments myself participating we
do not proactively reach out to
potentially affected communities
get their opinions on things
that we as secure as the state
have been entrusted it's not
part of their review so yes I
think that there I don't
question their technical
abilities to review the facility
itself but I will also say that
the license has been granted yet
so I'm not going to pre judge
and say.
How that's going to come out
because we simply don't know yet
I do think though that they have
their absolute predisposed to
want to approve.
Facilities like this so it's
that there is a little built in
bias I hate to say that but I
kind of feel like there's a
predisposition to one to approve
So it's our job to.
Be predisposed to want to
protect our state.
Just kind of come from different
places.
Madam chair Senator are you
aware.
Of any transportation high level
nuclear materials.
Are going on around the country.
Press.
I'm sorry Madam chair
representative she said.
Madam chair and senator are you
aware of that.
Yes.
A nuclear materials high level
nuclear materials are currently
being transported around the
country currently.
Madam chair representative I
believe that there may be some
transport happening on a limited
basis.
And madam chair.
Senator for example from.
Los Alamos National Laboratory.
Well Madam Madam chair
representative they're dealing
and low level waste and yes
there's lots of low level waste
being shipped or is just a very
different animal.
Madam chair Senator with regards
to.
The production at Los Alamos
with that.
Be considered low level.
Madam chair representative.
Production is so I'm sorry your
question is are the terms of
shipping nuclear plutonium pits.
You madam chair Senator that is
the question what does plutonium
pits be considered.
Low level nuclear material.
Madam chair representative I
kind of doubt it but but but I
can't speak to that in this
bill.
This bill bill bill primarily
just add spent nuclear fuel to
this task force and doesn't have
has more the limited scope.
Doesn't deal with that but.
Session.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator that's all I have.
Thank you Representative Scott
next we have Representative
Strickler.
Your photos and.
Sorry about that.
Can you hear me.
Representative Strickler we can
actually hear you without their
phones just fine hear me now yep
please go ahead sorry about
that.
The one
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Steinborn and good
to see again while buddy on
energy wait in that class of two
thousand seven the staff for we
go the.
Can you hear me now.
Yeah barely you're the one
you're looking at it.
I'm sorry I can't hear you.
Representative Strickler if you
unplug your your funds we can
actually hear you provide to
your computer audio okay I thank
you for I'm a fix fix my problem
on this and so anyway sorry
about that we we had an interim
committee meeting I believe it
was in truth or consequences
three three years ago maybe
I don't know if you were there
Senator Steinborn what were you
there.
For that particular meeting and
Holtec to again just a kind of a
a presentation on the canisters
that they use to transport this
material.
You were you were you in
attendance.
Well I don't remember if I was I
don't recall being in that
particular meeting in truth the
consequences.
Madam chair representative but I
would have lots of briefings on
the canisters certainly okay
very good well anyway which is
really and it was really an.
Operative the canisters are are
an engineering Marvel and and a
transport this material and
the the the the federal
officials
Have intense oversight over the
over these canisters whether be
transported by rail or by truck
or barge a I think was mentioned
earlier and in their their input
their.
Nothing can penetrate and
pandemic trouble but there there
I thank you Representative
Hayden in his is comments
Earlier he's kind of our local
expert down there on the Energy
nuclear energy and and why ace.
It's.
Dornier instruct indestructible
which is a good thing let me
these high level.
Aerials are transported in other
parts of the country and they've
come up with some pretty good
technology out.
And madam chair and and
etcetera.
I I I do remember a video
presentation of of account of a
crash test of of of these
canisters and they it is for
it's pretty amazing how how
durable they are so anyway I I
know there's a concern that you
have an
that
the transportation vehicle or
you know these canisters have to
have to do the job the or you
know you would be able to
transport this material and I
think that's good enough
you have any comments on that I
think we probably of so I do I
do nothing is infallible madam
chair Senator Representative and
I'm really struck by.
I'm always reminded by that
scene in Jurassic Park where the
billionaire says spared no
expense spared no expense and
thanking.
That his fortress within
permeable infallible and then.
Kind of a series of unintended
things happen you know in
Representative and with we had a
billion dollar incident that was
created by H. rom being loaded
with the wrong connectivity
letter.
It was supposed to be working
in a loaded within organic
literally and up drum hello our
first now your physics you're
planning with that have been
ever populated that Hey what
happened to you what with the
wrong kind of the letter maybe
but
You know there was a fire there
was a truck that caught on fire
and that created an incident so
things happen and just as I
appreciate it John pointing out
because he usually doesn't is
that nobody is predicting a
hundred percent safety so you
have to plan that it's not a
matter of.
If something happens it's a
matter of when something happens
and that's what we have to be
eyes wide open plan for I will
say as far as the Casco.
The nation's entire experience
with dry cask storage is only
about thirty or forty years
that's how long this technology
since since Roger been taken out
of nuclear power plants and
stored in dry cask storage on
site what's being proposed in
New Mexico is a forty year
license without any end in sight
so what we're really pushing the
envelope here as great as those
cast maybe is that we're pushing
the envelope on our national
experience on their lifetimes
except we're gonna do this on a
massive scale thousands and
thousands of sitting in our
desert in a climate in of itself
is a little unique so you have
to factor in.
You know these assumptions and
these modeling with a grain of
salt and also recognize the
inherent.
You know of.
Chance of of problems occurring
and in fact when you look at
other experiences you have to
say that there will there will
be a common fact I'll just close
with this madam chair I asked
the nuclear regulatory
commission for data since they
monitor dry cask storage of any
problems they've had with the
dry cast around the country in
the last ten years they've had
almost a hundred incidents
involving dry cask storage
around the country granted they
were all resolved.
And nothing ended up being
serious but what we're what
we're talking about here again
is on a whole other scale in a
different environment and just
gives you a sense that there is
exposure and we should be honest
about that you know that's all
this bill does is it just takes
an honest look so that we're
looking after our fellow
Mexicans.
Thank you madam chair thank you
center you know I the others
always
you know risk I guess and
everything that we do and I know
three mile island back in
nineteen seventy nine there's
some human donor of all that
incident and thank goodness all
the safety measures did kick in
and and prevented you know
Chernobyl.
Time for the event in a so that
that.
That is comforting it you know
the safety health and safety
mechanisms are pretty intense
they have to be a this is you
said that this is a high level
of material and you know we have
a you know we have a hundred
nuclear reactors around the
country and they provide energy
you know for citizens and spin
around a long time so we we have
to be careful
anyway that's that's that's all
I have madam chair and and
always good to see you there my
by basketball buddy you I'm
ready to put an elbow you know.
Your bring action and dislike
your data may.
Only the Charles Barkley of al.
That's right
thank you.
I'm pretty harmless chair on the
court.
Madam chair I'd like to move to
I do pass for Senate bill eighty
two is amended thank you
Representative Ferrary am I will
just before we take the motion I
as chair chair person here I'd
like to just make one brief
comment which is to say that I
fully support public oversight
over any nuclear.
I think obviously it falls
within the purview of the
federal government to do the
permitting here but I think to
ensure that we are assessing the
science the economics and the
potential impacts to the
citizens of New Mexico it's
really really important that our
state do some oversight and and
look at this and all projects
very closely so I very much
support this bill and with that
we have a motion on the table
from Representative Ferrary for
a do pass as amended this
morning and a second from
Representative as setting Jana
and with that let's go ahead and
take the role.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Thank you Representative
Montoya.
Hello.
Representative has.
Yes.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Scott so no thank
you so much.
Representative Townsend no.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Dixon.
Vice chair Stansbury yes.
Thank you.
Madam chairman the queen yes.
The motion passes with a vote of
five to four.
All right so you have a do you
pass on your bill Senator would
you like to make final remarks
for we adjourn.
Madam chair and committee and Mr
chairman thank you so much for
the discussion today and thank
you for the past we should have
a good day all right and with
that our work for the morning is
done here in house and you need
thank you all for your good work
this morning and we will see you
on the floor this afternoon
thank you to everyone but the
public for joining us this
morning have a good day.
I want.
