Representative Eli.
Representative Fajardo.
Here.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Lewis she's the
in the attendees right now so we
can promote her thank you.
Representative Johnson as
president thank you.
Representative Lewis here.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Andrea.
Your.
Representative twice here thank
you.
Representative night.
Your.
Representative Rehm.
I'm sorry Representative I just
promoted you to panelist
Representative green.
Representative Romero.
There.
Okay Madam chair representative
ream is here thank you.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Thomson.
Your Garrett.
Here and I also see that
representative Ely St Morris
thank you madam chair.
You have a quorum.
You Elaine again shot out to a
lane for holding us together
doing quadruple duty today with
multiple committees everyone
should have received the link to
the share file in there you will
find the list of bills that
we'll be hearing in order today
starting with house bill nine
Representative Herndon there
should be no analysis attached
to the conclusion from
are partisan analysts the
reasoning for that conclusion
but we'll go ahead and start
with Representative heard and we
will we'll do this is basically
will we can pull discussed the
conclusion from from both
analysts and then we'll give the
Representative an opportunity to
defend one way or another that
conclusion and then we'll go
ahead and have a vote and we'll
do Raul a roll call vote on on
each bill so if everyone will
look at the analysis the
conclusion from both analysts
was that this was not germane
will go ahead and.
Send it back to Representative
turned and go ahead in the four.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and and
thank you for allowing me to
appear before you this this
morning and I do appear before
you asking for your support in
determining that house bill Nye
the estimate and should be
considered by the legislature
during the twenty twenty to
legislative session and I point
out that for two specific
reasons House Bill.
House Bill a night very much
aligns with the.
With the.
With house bill sixty eight is
that there are strong
similarities between the two
bills specifically if we look at
what is happening with respect
to the to the two bills house
bill sixty eight which did
receive a message from the
governor focuses part of that
bill on the application of
minors having a gun and so if we
look at the application of a
house bill nine that also fits
within the parameters of the
four corners of the house bill
sixty eight for example house
bill sixty eight provides for a
penalty for the unlawful
possession of a handgun by a
person and house bill nine
assessed as a penalty against
the owner of a gun that is
assessed by a minor when it is
used in the commission of a
crime I point out to you also
that house bill sixty eight
provides that whoever uses a
firearm to create a crime is
guilty of a fourth degree felony
and house bill Nye provides a
list of four to be felonies that
could be assessed against the
person who owns a fire arm that
is assessed by a minor and being
used in the commission of a
crime most importantly as you
look at these two pieces of
legislation I point out to the
committee that on Friday January
twenty first this committee.
Agreed to by unanimous consent
to operate in accordance with
the recommendations in a
memorandum issued and written by
the house of House committee
analysts make endorsing and I
point out to you specifically
that miss Dorsey concludes in
her memorandum that legislation
should be considered germane
under article four section five
B. two of the New Mexico state
to New Mexico constitution if
the piece of legislation under
consideration includes the
substantive topics that are
identified in the in the
executive message so I point out
to you that if you look at the
executive message the executive
message is is looking at.
The criminal.
Criminal activity regarding the
use and possession of a firearm
that is exactly what we're
looking at with respect to house
bill nine so as you can see
house bill nine references a
majority of the substantive
message of house bill of of as
excuse me of house executive
message three so you have to
your your your responsibility as
a committee is to look at my
other that narrow reading of the
message but at the broad reading
of the message and what was the
intent of this message when it
was actually is to so it's it's
not just limited to one item of
whether or not a bill is
creating a criminal intent but
what does happen when we expect
to the application of the bills
are they within the application
of the message that was actually
issued by the governor thank you
madam chair members of the
committee and I will stand for
any questions.
so we have any questions will go
ahead and present that now and
then we can also entertain a
motion at any time.
Representative Fajardo.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Representative I
had a hard time following you as
far as the executive messages so
and the bill that you were
referencing could you please
walk us through the second
message is that you're referring
to and they'll numbers again
please yes the bill numbers that
I am referencing the bill number
that we see the message was
house bill sixty eight sixteen
okay.
Bill I'm sorry.
Refers to increase in the
penalty but unlawful possession
of a handgun by a person.
And what message number again
was at two or three that was
executive house executive
message number three okay thank
you very much I'm going at madam
chairman it I'm gonna take some
time to review that this
questions later but I just
needed to take a look thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair and Representative
Fajardo I just want to make sure
that you know that I DO is house
bill nine thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Nibert.
You can see that Representative
Roberts trying to find the mute
button where he's working.
This challenging thing these
eyes all right there we go
Representative Nibert I had no
one but for some reason our
little different from the the
other a format that we use
Madam chair and representative
of.
Well this committee discussed
the other day was.
Making sure that the bills that
were deemed are germane did not
go beyond the
Passage of the governor
Has sent at all as I under
districts the store since
memorandum.
And in this case it looks slide.
House Bill money.
Is not.
Amendment to the criminal code
it is adding.
An entire section to the
criminal code would that be an
accurate statement.
So madam chair Representative
NABARD one of the that is a
partial correct statement so
what will happen is with respect
to the new material that's
offered under house bill nine it
is at creating the.
The access are whether it is
making unlawful for a person who
stores are maintains the fire
arm that is access by a minor
but right now if we look at
house bill sixty eight house
Bill Sixtyeight itself refers to
the money are having possession
of a firearm so there is allies
similarity and alignment of the
two bills in terms of what they
are going to be covering and
that's the main idea and purpose
behind looking at the message
and whether or not you could be
some similarity.
Madam chair and representative
look to me like the governor was
was wanting some specific
amendments.
And one house bill money that
suits you have a new section of
the criminal court and it's not
an amendment the title is not
what it's a member let it
reflect suits are some new act
I have a read in depth your your
bill so what on what I'm hearing
is that it goes beyond
the reach of house bill sixty
eight about some things and if I
recall the store sees memorandum
correctly we said that if we
have.
If it touched on issues A. B. A.
B. and C. it would be Dave
germane yes A. B. and C. were of
the message but if I added D. M.
D. was not a message that it
would be deemed not direct and
so it seems to be based on what
I'm seeing here for more
balances.
Is that this bill that you're
presenting add something that
was not in the message therefore
under distortions memo what we
adopted if that has something
new and it
We were going to do that not
Germanic and we wanted a pretty
bright line we got it the words
to me like you're R. right off
the bat were were having to
make a determination whether
this this line is exist or not
so it looks to me like both the
majority and minority re wasted
balances reflects that and yeah
that something more for under
our guidance since then we we
ought to do that bodger.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative Nibert
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I I actually
see it
very differently and I ate
There are three things that I
wanted to bring up
and just make sure I'm clear on.
So on Representative on house
bill.
Sixty eight which I'm looking at
right now I'm I'm I'm seeing
that
As requiring
The same component hi I'm
calling them components but
elements of making it unlawful
access of the fire arm by a a
minor and imposing penalties and
your argument is that house bill
sixty eight provides for penalty
for the unlawful presence the
session of Isla and gun.
And house bill nine.
Does.
The penalty against the owner of
a gun that is accused by a minor
and then used in the commission
of a crime.
I'm not an attorney hi I'm not
I'm I'm I'm not an attorney but
in my and then I'm looking madam
chair at the ma'am all
And the memo in on page two
under proposed Canadian policy
says.
It.
That legislation under
consideration includes the
majority of the substantive
topics identified in an
executive message.
It need not include all of the
specifics substantive topics or
identifying features listed in
an executive message to be
considered germane.
I believe
Madam chair representative.
That when you mentioned that it
was house bill money was within
application of the executive
message are related to sixty
eight.
You were drawing the
That connection.
If I heard you correctly do you
mind just re emphasizing on that
portion of your presentation so
I can make sure I understood it
correctly madam chair.
Yes Madam chair representative
come again thank you for your
question so we look at the if we
look at the basic perimeter of
house bill sixty eight it covers
three specific areas one of the
specific areas that it covers
relates to that.
Session of a handgun by a minor
and what that this position that
third of provision of the house
bill sixty eight provides it is
actually increasing the
possession of a of a hand gun by
a child from a misdemeanor to a
felony so but if you look at the
application of house bill nine
it is not going in that
direction it's not creating a
new felony and it's not but it
is operating with in the
confines of house bill sixty
eight as it is present in
talking about the use of a
handgun by a minor so the
similarities with respect to
that come that aspect of both
bills is absolutely alligned and
it doesn't go beyond in terms of
the scope of house bill sixty
eight as it pertains to a minor
because the house bill nine is
to particularly confined within
the application of the minor
aspect of the bill so it it it's
with in the the operational at
our uses of house bill sixty
eight it doesn't go beyond that
because it's talking about a
minor and the minor issues about
handgun so bad alignment in and
of itself makes that message
under.
Message number three from the
governor looking at the
application of house bill sixty
eight alignment with sixty nine
a perfect alignment and a great
way to look at the germane this
of house bill nine.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I am a
representative
did hear you correctly and I did
make my notes and that's why I
bring it back to the oppose
Committee policy that we adopted
and how it is in that for all
the reasons you stated online
and with the and and not outside
and not creating anything on.
In conflict
with the executive messaging for
in my opinion on this this bill
yes most certainly.
The Jermaine and I have no other
further questions at this point
but again because I'm not an
attorney I'm going through it as
we go along with a fine tooth
and listening to the debate a
little bit further but I at this
point all of the arguments that
you proposed present
representative madam chair
I believe makes this bill on
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
Egolf.
Thank you madam chair I'm
curious if we could have either
from.
Staff for from Representative
Herndon.
A little more on do we have a
message it talks about.
Relating to the use or
possession of a firearm that's
we have in mind
it seems like from the COVID
Representative night but
Republican analysts the decision
seems to be heard on whether or
not you are amending a law
related to the use or possession
of a firearm as compared to
creating a crime relating to the
use or possession of a firearm
and I'm not sure I understand
why that
Distinctions being made it's new
Chrysler relates to these
possession of a firearm as
compared to an amended crime
related to the use or possession
of firearms I'm not sure.
why I.
What it is on on that aspect so
there would be the most
appropriate person answer that.
You're at the the basis for that
project.
Representative heard and you
have someone that you'd like to
come before you have the floor.
Madam chair thank you very much
for that and and Representative
and speaker you got thank you
for your question so.
In in making an analysis based
solely upon whether an addict a
new crime was being created is
absolutely the wrong analysis to
be making with respect and
looking at whether or not to
Maine this has been consider
what we're looking at here even
looking at the at the memo that
was written by May endorsing is
are we looking at identifying
features that align with the
bill that was presented upon
which the message was given so
if we look at house bill nine
the message was given on the the
use of possession of a firearm
whether that the use of
possession of that firearm of.
Because some side of the penalty
and then what happens with
respect to the with the person
or the entity that utilizes the
firearms so if we look at the
alignment specifically on the
content of both bills that's
what should be looked at that
but they're not it's a new law
are not a new law that's never
the bases of the page and
germane is is is should be issue
but whether or not they are
aligned with each other in terms
of what they're trying to look
to see and so if I look it house
bill sixty eight it is
absolutely increasing a penalty
for minor who is in possession
of a handgun making them guilty
of a felony house bill nine does
not go to that limit so it
actually falls within the
confines of house bill sixty
eight as the pertains to a
minute and this again I
emphasize that house bill sixty
eight covers three specific
areas one of which relates
specifically to minors House
Bill that range range of I'm
sorry relates specifically to
minors and that relates
specifically to minors and have
an access to a bar on the
alignment is absolutely connect
the dots yes and so I I you know
I I absolutely representative of
respect the analysts but the
distinction that's been made is
not the distinction but which we
would be looking at under the
circumstances of determining to
maintenance.
Okay thank you madam chair.
My initial thought coming into
this meeting was that.
The line would be to maybe
because of the term in that
message but use recession
require are these relating there
to.
It I continue to listen to the
conversation.
Thank you speaker I do not see
any other Representative I just
this service.
Thank you madam chair thank you
observed in the up.
This is similar take.
Of some of the the lawyers
opinions regarding up.
Regarding a house executive
message number three because it
talks about a you know a bill
creating the crime of criminal
threat and amending sections of
the criminal code and so that
was kind of where my brain was
going as well as is it a new
crime is it an amended crime but
but it doesn't it is a site a
particular section of it says
amending sections of the
criminal code.
All regarding the use or
possession of a firearm so so I
think that that
in order to make that
distinction between new crime
amended crime because it doesn't
cite a section I think the the
magic words or use or possession
of a firearm crimes relating to
the use or possession of fire so
that's kind of what I was
thinking thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative see no
further questions do we have a
motion.
Madam chair yes go ahead
we're in rules okay thank you so
I'd like to go ahead and make a
motion to declare the past to
declare that additional house
bill nine is germane within the
arguments completely Germanus
and nothing else thank you madam
chair thank you AC
Representative Chasey I don't
know if you wanted to comment on
the motion.
Just got you you can prevent
discussion after the motion was
taken just I know I've been
trying to get a hold of the
analyses and I haven't gotten
them yet in my email and I I
really I would like very much to
read to have before I vote and
not because and I want to just
tell Representative current and
I'm in support of our bill it's
just a matter of wanted to
follow the correct procedure in
the rules committee so I I am.
I would really appreciate
receiving that in the
in the correct email.
The email that I used for
legislative purposes I just need
to verify thank you.
Madam chair it's it the house is
is in the Here file.
Right I think the little sure I.
That's okay I'm gonna go ahead
and I think both Elaine and I'll
probably send this to you as
quickly as we can setting
doubled as well I'm sending it
to you now anyone else that
needs it while I'm in the midst
of this just feel free to.
All are okay so we do have a
motion on the of for right now
for
Deeming the house bill nine as
germane we'll go ahead and do a
roll call.
Representative chasing.
For now and I'm gonna try to
look at this quickly in the have
you.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo.
No.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative yes.
I'm sorry Representative Madrid
that was a yes.
Yes that's how we're gonna do it
thank you.
Representative green.
And yes also.
Representative Romero.
Yes yes.
I'm sorry Representative Roybal
Caballero yes.
Representative Townsend.
No.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Thanks chair Garrett.
Yes.
Romero your second time yes
thank you all for going through
this process for first time I
believe go ahead and give us the
vote count you only fifteen in
the affirmative and.
Two in the negative.
And we have one to explain their
vote correct thank you madam
chair
can you hear me yes.
Yes I I believe I I argued for
this in the first place that it
appears what we've done here is
that if it's relating to we're
taking a broader term of
relating to the subject matter
and that is
what we did here this is
definitely a bill that is
outside of the scope.
of the message that the governor
gave a because because we're
talking about writing a new
section.
Of Law putting that in place and
I think that probably to the
name to the term Germanus I
think it's accurate
I I hope that there's a
consistency when we look at some
of these other bills I I I
notice the analysis on some
others that are coming up.
even though it did not add a new
section of light related to the
same section law that was in the
message that's that the Democrat
analyst said it was not germane
but I think
under is this.
What we what we just voted on
here I think
Shows what I believe is the
accurate way of handling it
which is if it's relating to
that section of law.
and it is relating to the topic.
Of the of the message
The governor's message I think
this was appropriate action we
took on this and I hope that is
the same action that we that we
consistently do that on these on
the other bills thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative okay so
we do have a due pass as far as
germane this goes so it will go
to the speakers table today
Representative garden
our next bills house bill twenty
five Representative Rehm.
Subject to House message number
two.
For everyone's reference
Representative Rimi have the
for.
Thank you madam chair and
members if we look at house
bill's if we look at the message
it says a bill increasing the
statute of limitations for
second degree murder I'm sorry
one second I I messed up my own
rule saying that we would give
the analysis conclusion as well
before we let you have the four
apologize I'm the democratic
analyst has deemed this bill not
germane and Republic in a
analyst is do you Mr main
servers and a sert interrupt you
go head you have the four.
Thank you madam chair and
members so House Bill Gates
seventy nine is a bill
increasing the statute of
limitations for second degree
murder the only other thing that
is in my bill which is house
bill twenty five is an agreement
from previous years to go ahead
and include trafficking of us of
a controlled substance right now
the second offense is a lifetime
ban or lifetime statute of
limitations and the agreement
was to make it six years now
fits so will of the committee to
take that out we can take that
out.
But that was of the agreement
from previous years and I've
introduces legislation since two
thousand and seven.
But it deals with the statute of
limitations on second degree
murder and I believe that it is
germane with that I would stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative
Representative off.
Thank you madam chair.
So on this one.
I think we're outside the scope
Yeah we've got the first that we
got the second re murder which
is clearly think that portion of
the bill clearly germane.
I think the the last bill that
we had we it and yet whether or
not creating a new section or
bending a section with
terminated that it didn't relate
to the substance
of the change or units of a
section
Yeah I think we just heard
similar Representative Rehm.
Right about yes sections that of
this bill that are beyond the
scope.
It did you don't even relate the
message in there I I would
suggest that.
I'm.
I don't want to do committee
substitutes were amended built
in this committee I would have
absolutely zero Palmer
heartburn.
You determining that a bill that
relates to second degree murder
that you're made but what we're
seeing here is.
The roster Business Education
for first degree felonies and
trafficking for three felony
trafficking part even mentioned
in the message so our last
decision you know it's a related
to the use of possession of a
firearm and that the the
question is does it matter if
it's a new section related to
you to present sure our
apartment but.
Disruption related to you to
possession of firearm I think
you're looking at you know the
ATC of what's in here.
I'm the first retail in a and B.
Trafficking provisions are
mentioned in the message at all.
I'm sorry.
It is partially germane.
Partially not I think Mr
hearings similar comments
Representative bringing talking
about amending forced out so to
me this is a question of.
The procedural decision with the
committee what to do if we want
to entertain an amendment to
this for we would suggest you
Representative ream.
The re introduced a bill.
did you know where the fits
within the scope of the of the
message.
Thank you Representative Egolf
I believe so because we sort of
had this conversation our first
go around on organizational that
we didn't want to do substandard
changes in here that it would
come as it is in this more
procedural so I would rather not
get into you know doing any
amendments to any bills while
we're in here at a time it comes
as is and we analyze as is.
so with that I would
I just like to keep it at that
as a the general trends if there
are you know conversations that
we need to have the money but we
basically don't want to get a.
Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair
You know the reason I voted no
on the last bill was but because
I believe that we on the very
first bill that we looked at we
stepped outside of.
The rules that we set yesterday.
In here we are on the second
bill.
And we.
Where
locked in for.
The lack of a better term at
least I I don't think you can be
partially germane you're either
germane or you're not.
I believe this bill is as
germane as the last bill us.
And
I I don't think as a committee
representing.
The house all of house members.
I just don't think it would be
fair to us to change the rules
at this point I mean we're on
the second bill we were part we
were partially germane last.
I think you know as a speaker
admitted or partially germane on
this one and I I think it is
germane.
But with that said that.
If the.
If the changes were made by the
sponsor.
That the speaker.
This bill automatically go to
the speakers table and not have
to come back to this committee.
Representative Townsend so if it
doesn't have a clear message
from the governor and the.
Sponsor wants to basically deem
it germane it has to go through
this committee to my knowledge
unless of course the speaker
find that the messages is clear
enough that the governor has
sent down that message for that
piece of legislation all and
time and if there's any other
clarification from a better care
what I I I want to but yes yeah.
What's one.
I think it's really important
and if you look at the analysis
on Representative read next
bill.
That I like this one that is
comparable to the house bill
nine.
Right if you read the analysis
from the Republican analysts and
the Democrat.
You'll see that the analysis
Representative Reese next bill.
Which is house bill twenty six
raised the state issued on house
bill nine.
Really which means the question
is.
If the substance is there does
it matter if it's an amendment
to the existing code where the
creation or is it it creation a
new section of.
Eight that is so we have the
amendment versus new question
and yet the question of
substance.
One of the last bill is not a
question of substance the
question up it did you maybe if
they create the new section of
code as amended and section.
That is identical according to
the houses of both.
The democratic and Republican
analysis analysts Representative
Reims next bill.
So it's it's apples and oranges
you can if you're comparing
house bill nine to have well
twenty five at the apple so
we're just if the question is
not does not hinge on amendment
versus new section.
We have the twenty five twenty
five the question in the
analysis is the bill includes
things that are outside the
scope of the message.
You look at the destruction
twenty six the question is not
are there issues outside the
scope question what's again
there is we're talking about new
sections of code first amending
sections of code.
So I in my view.
The next bill is J..
Representative rates for the
same reason that house bill nine
was germane.
House bill twenty five it's not
a question of amending existing
code or creating a new section
of the question is the scope of
the message in the scope of the
bill.
Here are indisputably thanks
included twenty five that are
not in the message from the
governor.
That which.
Not the question of look at what
nine that's a question twenty
six.
So I I don't think it's it's
even close to correct the state
there's a different approach and
that that for that reason is why
am I when we get to that moment
I plan to vote yes on the motion
to have twenty six departure
right because I think it's the
same situation not.
On twenty five we're putting.
Try to trafficking first degree
felony there's no mention of
trafficking is no mention of
course we already the executive
message that goes directly to
the now so we've got to its feet
at the this committee meeting on
Friday.
So what I would suggest is that.
Representative Rehm take the
bill and it deals just with the
definition of second degree
murder.
that you know if we yeah it's a
conversation today we could
probably just have it be
introduced and referred to
committee.
but I I want to be really clear
because this is the first
meeting which were applying the
standards that I think we're
being consistent without party.
Influence that's why I'm telling
everyone had a time that for me
it's only my both that I plan to
vote Representative rejects bill
to be germane for the same
reason four per night.
And so that's that's my thought
on it but I.
I think it's important to try to
do this going forward basis that
is at a party that's possible.
All of this who have struck you
like your let the rest you know
what the feelings are and why
we're holding those views said a
commute make clear that it has
it's not part of the question
simply a question of the
following the rules the the
doctor's Committee.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair I
appreciate that and I would
expect that Representative range
would make those changes and
and would act accordingly I
agree with the speaker that this
has to be done.
as much of a nonpartisan basis
as possible and the.
It will be interesting.
To for me at least to the watch
and see if we can remember that
as we go forward so thank you
very much.
Thank you Representative
Townsend Representative Maestas.
Remains are you still there.
Okay get back on if anyone wants
to go ahead and make a motion
will entertain a motion.
Madam chair I with.
That.
this bill as drafted.
It's not generate.
Okay we have a motion that the
bill be deemed not germane
exceeding Representative Ely
with the second go ahead Elaine
will take role and how we the
last person to.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
You
are.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Martinez.
Yes all.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Andrea.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
No.
Representative Rehm is no ma'am.
That was a no Representative to
bring.
Correct no thank you
Representative address from
metal.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes.
Representative Townsend no.
Representative Kurt.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
For.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair you have thirteen in
the apartment here for in the
negative.
Thank you Elaine so this bill is
being deemed not germane it will
stay in this Committee.
Next we'll hear house bill
twenty six reprimand have the
floor again.
Thank you madam chair and if we
look at
the main message number three
crimes related to the use or
possession of a firearm if we go
to
of house bill sixty eight you
actually find my bill of house
bill twenty five or twenty six
in that legislation.
And with that I will stand for
questions.
Representative Eli to move
things along madam chair I move
away that the bill is charming
and should be for referred to
the speakers table do we have a.
Thank.
So we have a motion I just don't
see any questions go ahead
Elaine we'll go ahead and take a
roll call vote.
Second please Representative
Garrett vice chair Garrett.
Thank you.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Speaker Igor.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Fajardo I'm I'm
citing here the motion so we're
we're really in a yes it is
germane that's correct okay yes
thank you.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yeah.
Thank you Representative Lewis.
Misunderstood.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Andrés Romero
yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Yes.
Sixteen in the affirmative
during the negative.
Okay that goes the speakers
table today next we have house
bill twenty seven.
Representative Rehm.
You madam chair House Bill
twenty seven is a pursuant to
how of executive mission and
message in a bill creating a
rebuttable presumption in pre
trial detention hearings that
would require individuals
charged with certain crimes to
remain in custody until trial.
My house bill six of twenty
seven is very similar to House
Bill five and I would ask that
we go ahead and move it to the
speakers table with that I will
stand for questions.
Are there any questions that the
bills germane chair.
Second.
Representative Eli is there any
opposition to this motion.
Seeing none you do pass to head
to the speakers table.
Next bill is house bill twenty
Representative Rehm.
Reprimand on mute.
I'm sorry madam chair.
This is pursuant to executive
message three.
And at the end it says for
possession of a firearm this is
a house bill twenty eight is
felon in possession of a firearm
and it is contained in the house
bill sixty eight and with that I
would stand for questions.
Seeing no questions will
entertain a motion with that
move it down to me.
And he says it it it it it all
on the also madam chair that
there is agreement between both
analyst this bill is germane
that is correct I apologize
thank you for saying that
Representative this bill is yep
was seen gentleman by both is
there any opposition to the
motion.
Okay we will give that to pass
is representative Thompson on
for house bill four is a searing
the attendees Elaine if we can
let her in.
And I believe money on a and I
and
the C. Taylor are also.
experts so we can let them in as
well and I see Representative
Cook as well in the attendees
now.
Representative Thomson you have
the floor at one second so this
was deemed not germane by both
analysts
Representative you have before.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee so you
have heard this bill before it's
the affirmative consent bill and
we believe I'm working with the
coalition of all kinds of folks
that I won't go into but we
believe that it meets with
message eight in terms of being
a crime prevention measure and
essentially what it is is the
only yes means yes bill to teach
are you in the bowl our post
secondary and K. twelve R. about
affirmative consent setting
affirmative consent as the
standard for any type of sexual
activity kind of laying the
ground rules and and that what
what research has shown in other
places is that this kind of
training reduces
sexual assault dating violence
stalking those kind of things so
with that Representative I have
address Romero is my co sponsor
he may have other comments.
Thank you Representative just to
clarify did you say it was
subject to house message eight
because we we are analysis shows
House message eleven I thought I
said alive I have no idea what I
said I then.
Right now analysts are analysis
rather okay so I I believe it is
House message eleven is where
okay great.
Go ahead Representative.
Thank you madam chair yeah
representative Thompson laid it
out fairly well I think it
covers most of
message eleven and should be
juror will germane on page but
for should be something that we
get through this thirty day
thank you madam chair.
Any other questions.
I'll go ahead and entertain a
motion.
Madam chair if I may just to a
question the message that is
referenced.
It is.
the messages for quote a bill
expanding the purposes for which
it crime reduction grant.
Can be made.
And the analysis says that the
bill does not expand the purpose
for which a crime reduction
grant can be made aware address
requests in any way.
And.
So if you're if the argument
from.
Representative that.
It it it it's okay it's germane
because of the words crime
reduction.
In the message.
madam chair and and Mr speaker I
think that's part of the
argument there also there's a
question of house bill eighty
four on house bill eighty four
is looking at X. at it seems to
be expanding
That poll but which is also what
we're contending that this would
fit right in with with the
contention of for the point of
hostility for.
Well it is you madam chair this
legislation that right strong
support right I am looking at
the analysis.
I'm it gives me pause because
we've just.
Representative Rehm no on a
bill.
Because that provisions that
went outside the scope of the
message.
And.
I feel like.
Directing public education
institutions to adopt policies
and procedures addressing
affirmative consent.
It is very definitely outside
the scope of the message.
And the and madam chair the
rules to be adopted said that if
you have something that is not
included on the message in the
bill that we can get consider
the bill germane.
And.
There's nothing in the message
relating to.
Public schools are serving in
the message relating to
affirmative consent there's
nothing in the message relating
to domestic violence dating
violence.
There's nothing in the message
about public school code.
And I you know I I think it's
important especially on this
first you know first trip out of
the gate.
That if we're going to hello one
representative the bill is not
germane because it includes
matters that are not in the
message yeah we need to be
consistent
Because this I don't think
there's any argument that this
bill
I think it's.
Plainly this this bill includes.
Senator matters that are outside
the scope of the message and we
just hope Representative green
no.
For that reason.
I just think it should be
consistent.
Thank you representative
Representative for heart of.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I'm this is this
is a I am not a lawyer question.
bill expanding the purpose for
which a crime reduction grant
maybe maybe I'm.
Is there is currently a crime.
Or were asked here we're just
trying to create this policy or
procedure can you speak to
somebody expand on that so I
understand how this is trying to
relate.
It is crime prevention
essentially that's how we're
looking at it and with your
permission madam chair I'd like
to ask our expert witness
Alexandria Taylor to weigh in on
this if that's okay.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
representative Fajardo so the
relation of house bill forty
four affirmative consent we
believe this promote if of house
bill eighty four's main purpose
which is to expand crime
reduction measures in our state
I'm house bill forty force
natural connection to house bill
eighty force intent is reflected
in the evidence supporting
affirmative consent as a crime
reduction tool affirmative
consent is a data proven
evidence based crime reduction
tool studies have shown that
sexual assault victimization was
reduced by half when young
people had comprehensive sex
education before college that
included training on affirmative
consent and when we look at what
age PED for just trying to
accomplish much what H. B. forty
four is trying to accomplish we
have in H. B. eighty four a
expanding be crime reduction and
see requests we acknowledge that
house bill forty four fits
categories a and B. and does not
fit category C. for.
Reporter.
Thank you so I am just take I'm
reviewing
house bill eighty four are.
And like I said I'm not.
I mean is it from what I can
tell these are relating to
current crimes I don't see
anything about potential crimes.
I'm.
I'm just at a loss on the
connection I'll be honest it's
it's just I mean I I don't I
don't see this is that your main
I'm going to oppose it because I
just don't see the connection
between existing crime.
Which is detailed in eighty four
and the potential of crime in H.
B. forty four and I just don't
think they can act
It must.
yeah I'm I'm sorry I'm with you
in a far as were as I'm state
and I do apologize but that's
all my questions thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Ricardo Representative
Ely on madam chair
because on the sponsoring house
bill eighty four might be hello
I I don't know this one sorry
our nation what we're trying to
do is have the sentencing
commission expand the scope of
its ability to be able to review
programs so it was pretty
limited in terms of this world
back in two thousand nineteen
passed house bill two sixty nine
which was the first are granted
by rebel and we live in is that
in Judiciary college of
objections we're now expanding
you trust more money's coming
here us so that we know what
programs work and what down and
that was really the purpose of
house bill eighty four so I
don't know that that helps the
sponsor or not but that's really
what I was going course about
the order
I did reset the committee know
what's happening and try to be
fair about it thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Eli
just on that point I'm looking
at page three about consultation
with data sharing agreements and
it is does your bill
Representative Thomson have any
sort of informational sharing or
as far as crime prevention
anything to deal with you know
what would go into some of this
grant opportunity.
Madam chair with your permission
I'm gonna let miss Taylor take
that one.
Thank you madam chair I'm not
sure I understand your question
exactly can you say that again
for me sure I'm just looking at
page through which is current
law I believe in and what the
intention of these that the
crime reduction grant would do
and I'm just curious if your
bill would fit underneath
current statutes as far as how
or why you know evidence based
best practice would be part of
your program do you do data
sharing and is there any actual
connection between quite crime
reduction and the information
that you do share or do not
share.
We do and so it it absolutely
does tight end to the training
to support
the efforts to reduce crime as
we know crime reduction and
preventative measures are
measured out over time and so
the data that we collect is
measured out over time and
house bill forty four does have
a mechanism to collect data over
time.
Thank you for that clarification
I mean M..
Being that this is the first
time we're trying to look at
crime reduction requests and and
how expensive that is with the
new legislation I'm also you
know interested in the ongoing
discussion with this as we move
forward does anyone have a
motion I see Representative Ely
is hand still up I don't know
getting a COVID.
Okay we'll go ahead and
entertainment sure sorry about
that I mental money my apologies
no worries okay I'll make a
motion I will reluctantly move
that the bill is not your mate.
Do we have a second.
Representative Nibert.
Okay.
Is there any opposition to this
motion.
Representative Romero go ahead
and take role at doing.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative.
No
Representative Fajardo.
Once again we're really it's not
germane correct yes is not
germane.
That's correct.
I and I do apologize if you add
that the us gives.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Lewis yes and I
like to explain my vote.
Representative Maestas.
Yes with the merits are are
great.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative you bring yes
ma'am.
Representative Romero.
No.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
I'm I need to pass for just a
moment I'm referring to
something thank you
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Representative Cook yes it.
Welcome.
Excuse me yes I am I'm going to
have to vote yes thank you.
Regretfully yes.
Chairman role metal.
Again the merits are excellent I
wish this had a message but my
test as well.
You have sixteen permanent madam
chair and.
To and the.
Thank you Elaine
This will that house bill one of
I'm sorry house bill forty and
madam chair before you call
that.
Exciting yeah and said thank you
I'm sorry for the interruption I
just didn't want to let the
opportunity pass and I don't get
a chance to speak earlier but I
do want to say that I support
the merits of the bill but to be
in all fairness of our
colleagues I see a lot of folks
shaking their heads um you know
I just want to be as consistent
as possible so I I hope you get
a message and if not I look
forward to seeing the bill in
the sixty day thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Lewis
and my apologies there too so
that house bill forty four will
stay in this committee we'll
move on to that house bill one
of five.
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members this is
pursuant to executive message
number nine and if that message
says the public employees
retiree Act to allow public
employees to return to work four
affiliated public employers
under certain conditions my
house bill one of five is of
Bill endorsed by the invents
investment and pension oversight
committee and it is returned to
work for all
Pair a retired members and with
that I would stand for questions
thank you Representative I
forgot to mention that this bill
both analysts agreed that this
would be deems Jermaine.
Are there any questions.
Representative Garrett.
I move that we need met your
main.
A second that.
Are there any is there any
opposition to the motion.
Seeing none will give it to pass
for at that it's germane
house bill one of six also are
analyst teams that it would be
germane Representative review
have a four.
Madam chair and members of the
committee it is just like house
bill one of five but in this one
it limits it to law enforcement
officers only again this one is
I endorsed by the investment and
pension oversight committee with
that I'll state of request.
Madam chairman the real to me.
We have a motion that it be real
germane is our second.
It.
Representative Egolf okay is
there any opposition to the
motion.
See none it's rolled as germane.
All right way to go team this is
our first official make meeting
and first I think very
democratic.
Application of legislative power
thank you all for participating
today will will not be have and
another meeting until next
Monday as planned and being that
it is a new
Also just please let members
know that they can basically a
center there bills to our
committee myself and Elaine for
for any opportunity to make
something germane or not he did
that today thank you we'll see
you on the floor and madam chair
then the procedural question
just before the Representative
up I'm is that if we have a few
Sanchez still on the line
I I presume that you're you'll
be sending data committee
report.
Okay.
So should just for members no.
That these bills don't like.
We don't have studied it is
going to transport these bills
that you're stable you're
committee report.
So we'll be working as quick
work and thank you that's
correct thanks Representative
Egolf we'll see you on the floor
this is burned.
