But the members without a
recorded response.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon is here
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative black.
Representative.
Representative bone because here
Representative.
Brown present Representative
Brown is here Representative
Cadena.
Representative Chandler.
Here Representative Chandler is
here Representative Chasey.
Present Representative Chasey is
here Representative Cook.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder is here
Representative easy L..
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo is here
Representative Ferrary present
Representative Ferrary is here.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Gallegos
Representative Gallegos is here
Representative Miguel Garcia.
This and that Representative
Miguel Garcia is here
Representative Garrett.
Here Representative Garrett is
here Representative Harper.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herndon is here
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Here Representative Hochman
Vigil is here Representative
Johnson.
Representative Johnson is here
Representative Lente.
Representative Lente is here
Representative Lente is here
Representative Lewis.
Here Representative Lewis is
here Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Lundstrom is here
Representative Maestas.
Representative Maestas is here
Representative Matthews.
Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen is here
Representative Roger Montoya.
Here Representative Roger
Montoya is here Representative
night for.
Representative Andrea Romero
Representative Andrea Romero is
here Representative G. Andrés
Romero.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Here Representative Rubio is
here Representative Sarinana.
Representative small.
Representative small is here
Representative Strickler.
Representative Strickler is here
Representative Trujillo.
Representative G. Andrés Romero
is here.
Representative Cadena.
Here Representative Cadena is
here.
Members roll call is closed we
have a quorum.
Please rise for today's
indication.
Offered to us by the.
This by the general.
The gentleman.
From.
Cool thanks Gerry Harding way
was us and we go and you
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you dear lord for all the
blessings you've given us in our
lives for the blessings you have
bestowed upon the state we ask
you this morning that you give
us patience that we can
understand what one other has to
say on the issues that come
before us.
We pray that you give us wisdom.
We pray that you help us to make
good choices.
For the issues that affect the
people of the great state of New
Mexico.
In Jesus name amen.
Thank you gentlemen would the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson please
lead us in the pledge of
allegiance.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane please leave
this insulating New Mexico's
flag.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Good morning Mr speaker and good
morning members Mr speaker I
move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered.
Good morning everyone.
Mr speaker.
One second gentle lady.
The gentle lady from.
Thank you Mr speaker good
morning to everyone in the
chamber.
Mr speaker I move that house
bill forty eight the withdrawn
from all committees and be made
the next order of business a
request a roll call vote for
this motion is necessary.
Because this legislation which
excludes social security
benefits for New Mexico's
personal income tax has
bipartisan support in the house
and is one of the governor's
priorities which the house GOP
caucus has been added advocating
for for a number of sessions.
Although house bill forty
received to do passed from the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee on
February first by a five four
vote.
we believe this must be ahead
now the bill is scheduled to be
held next to the house taxation
and revenue committee but time
is very limited in a thirty day
session to consider all of the
budget tax and other priority
issues therefore to give house
bill forty eight a reasonable
chance of passage in the
remaining fourteen days of the
session we must withdraw the
bill from all committees now and
bring it up for immediate
consideration.
Under the version of the fiscal
year twenty three budget that
will be debated today there is a
four hundred million dollar tax
cut zoom in fiscal year twenty
twenty three.
And the cost of house bill forty
eight is a hundred eighteen
million so there are sufficient
dollars in the upcoming state
budget to pay for this bill bill
again I just for roll call vote.
Generally is a take that motion
may ask you to you'll have a
roll call I can ask you to pause
on that so because we're in a
new member of the would.
I think that's appropriate since
we have in here I'd like to get
sworn in and then we can go back
to motion with appearance yes Mr
speaker that's fine thank you
for that.
Okay members I have been
notified of with the appropriate
paperwork from the Bernalillo
county commission.
to the point that I can take
note of the appointment of our
dealer Cruz to the house of
representatives from Bernalillo
county.
District twelve welcome.
Representative the cruise would
you please rise.
And would you please raise your
right hand.
In.
Repeat after me.
I do solemnly swear on the phone
for that I will support the
constitution of the United
States will support the
constitution of the United
States and the constitution and
laws of the state of New Mexico
on the constitution and laws of
the state of New Mexico that I
will true faith and allegiance
fair to the same from from from
the justice thing.
And if offend them against all
enemies whatsoever funding from
them against all enemies
whatsoever and that I will
faithfully and I will from from
and impartially and impartial
discharge the duties of my
office confirmed to duties of my
office as a member of the house
of representatives of the member
of the house of representatives
according to the best of my
abilities according to the best
of my abilities so help me god
so help me god welcome aboard
graduations thank you Mr speaker
thank you all.
Representative you to please
continue to stand so that the
chief clerk and administer the
oath of ethical conduct.
Good morning welcome.
So please repeat after me.
I Representative R. Dilip Cruz.
Going to raise my hand group
please.
Representative or deliveries.
Duly appointed member of the
house of representatives reform
through the house of
representatives from district
twelve for district rural.
Do hereby recognize do hear one
recognize the irrefutable
principle from referral
principal.
That a public office the public
trust for the public folders the
public first and do solemnly
swear that tools for that.
I shall faithfully support
on for free for review boards
the United States constitution
members through the constitution
and the constitution of the
state of New Mexico and the
constitution of the state of New
Mexico.
I shall discharge folders stored
with integrity with integrity.
And ethically the high
responsibilities for creating
the high responsibilities placed
upon me thanks upon by the
constitution or the constitution
of the state of New Mexico the
state of New Mexico and the
voters of my district and voters
of my district.
I shall abide by the spirit from
Bernalillo burn this group as
well as the letter of those
house rules rules rules rules
rules pertaining to ethical
conduct return to article
conduct.
I shall not use my office from
my office for personal gain for
personal dream Ezzell
scrupulously thanks for.
Avoid any active impropriety
returning of the room for
funding for any acts that gives
the appearance of impropriety
for New York to give the
appearance of impropriety.
Welcome to the house of
representatives thank you for.
Okay generated just visited with
the leader Townsend we've got a
number of members that have
certificates for teachers that
are here today movie schools
we're going to do that so that
our guests in the gallery can
be recognized before we go to
your motion
we will come back to your motion
that I think just as a courtesy
to our guests that are here we
should have them recognize first
and then we'll go back to your
motion okay.
so I will start with the
gentleman from.
Leave Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker.
All rights to.
Sure.
Response of the elementary
schools.
Outstanding accomplishments of
the schools that have been
changed.
Triple.
In the hopes public school
system.
Is a valid entry in Farmington.
In the state hello mentoring.
I just can't catch them.
The school district.
Of all.
Ordered.
Recognition.
In the national.
Representative schools.
This award was earned and I'm
going to emphasize earned not
given.
Because it acknowledges
outstanding contract moves
towards academic excellence.
Programs in closing achievement
gaps now always present.
The court.
Three one this.
Award was recognized at school.
And I can testify to the fact.
That facility was spotless.
There was pandemonium.
In the homes.
For.
There was quiet attentiveness.
When they were cited for the
awards ceremony.
It looked to me.
Am I one of our most.
In which to learn.
These.
We've heard Mr speaker.
Over and over again health
Mexico schools ranked fifty in
the nation with respect.
To the quality of education of
our country receiving our
content.
Thanks for in schools in
particular and I suspect many
others in the state.
Or trying and in six setting.
In making a difference and with
that Mr speaker I would like to.
Other representatives that would
like to make Madam chair and a
gentleman before I do that I
want to read off a list of folks
are in the gallery and asked
them to stand up and let us
welcome them.
from mesa Verde elementary in
Farmington
from Coronado elementary in
Hobbs and for misty day
elementary in misty day we have
Laura auto principal Coronado
elementary school as well as
Candace Castillo a teacher there
given the heights and as the
president of the school board
then in Hobbs that penny
Appleton the vice president of
the school board and school
board members joke are on and
Terry o'brien and then from
misty Daly Menteri we have
superintendent Travis Dempsey
Laura Salazar Florence and the
president of the school board
the vice president of the school
board Danielle Castillo we have
the secretary the school board
quality of Rodriguez and member
Arlene mobile and from
the recipient the Terry H.
Terrel H. bell award for
outstanding school leadership
for twenty twenty one we have
Angela Marie said budget from
ski to elementary school we also
have someone who's here to
support and his colleagues Kevin
Mitchell for the Gallup became
the county school district and
we have the board of education
central consolidated school
district would you please all
rise and let us welcome you to
the house.
And we also had guests of the
Jennifer once in case they can
still hear me all of the kids
are still in your shot from the
Loews learn the school district
we had the superintendent Dr
Arsenio Romero and school board
members Tina Garcia Bruce
Bennett and Reagan Espino stuff
so welcome and hopefully you can
still hear me or at the very
least the gentleman from the
let's see I can go back to the
webcast and and showed to them
back home to remember and I'm
talking eleven forty one that'll
help you find it on the.
On the webcast gentleman from
San Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I'd like to take the time to
recognize school in my district
actually a school that my
grandchildren attend and that's
a mesa Verde elementary in the
Farmington miss meniscal school
district is once again as was
mentioned a severity as one of
the three New Mexico schools on
twenty twenty one by the
national Blue Ribbon schools
program.
And this recognition of of.
A severity.
is based on their overall
academic performance closing
achievement gaps among all
students a severity creates an
environment committed to
educating all children by
facilitating academic growth and
social growth working very
closely with parents and
students for success.
The severity is a high
performing school and cold
encouraging culture celebrating
student growth and personal
achievement congratulations to
all Blue Ribbon schools but
especially to mesa Verde
elementary in Farmington school
district.
Thank you the gentleman from
once the Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman yield these.
I just want to say that for
congratulate all of my photo
educators out here I know that
many of you are here for the
school board association we also
had recognize our Blue Ribbon
schools and as a twenty nine
year at your educator I just
want to I know what it takes I
want to thank you with that what
you've done for the lives of the
students in your community and
for your commute is also wonders
but you know how much we deeply
appreciate all of your efforts
including during this difficult
time so.
We just want to make sure that
you are recognized for what
you've done the guys are truly
truly making a difference in our
communities in our state and in
our future.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen the
generally Representative editor
of thank you Mr speaker and
thank you Representative Scott
for consigning this was me in
recognition of Coronado
elementary school I'm very very
proud of our school systems in
Lee County.
And the achievement specifically
the Coronado elementary school
has has done with this in such a
trying year to to achieve this
and
This excited to be part of that
and very thankful for school
board and for our representation
here today hopefully our
superintendent makes it tonight
and has safe travels thank you
all for all the school boards
for your efforts thank you.
The gentleman accident with you
Representative Lara thank you Mr
speaker.
I would I'm honored today to
speak about Angelus of RGO and
to Mr delimiter School Comiskey
delimiter School of was in my
legislative districts it's kind
of bittersweet to visit it would
no longer is but guests in as a
whole so is and I would like to
see specifically mention that
mosquito of entry fee is a one
of the more rural parts.
Of of Gadsden and and a bunch of
my of my legislative district
and it is amazing what the
principal has been able to do
that miscue Development tree to.
Came in.
Do to gain and to work towards
gaining this this honor of
having a Blue Ribbon school.
There's good that we have good
families excellent students
excellent teachers and I think
this is something that really
really should be celebrated and
I wanted to recognize up I also
want to recognize the leadership
of the school district as well
as our school board it takes a
village everyone needs to work
together to the towards this and
this this honor and this award
is not only for the school but
for the community and the
district as a whole and and with
that Mr speaker thank you very
much to all the hard work that
my friends and colleagues do and
gas and in different school
districts thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen let's go
get.
In Farmington and misty day in
mesa Verde informative.
This morning.
In the gallery.
Do we have someone here from
Roswell independent schools.
Yes welcome.
Hope Morales welcome to the
house.
Okay.
So I think we're ready to go
back to the gentle lady from
Eddie no the gentleman from
Chavis Eddy and Otero thank you
Mr speaker and I just.
Rise and salute.
The success of the school
districts and these teachers.
And that when we have something.
like they have demonstrated that
works so well it ought to be
replicated across the state.
We have to talk too much.
About the failure of our
education system.
And.
Probably not enough about the
success so I just want to rise
today and salute the successes.
And asked the state to replicate
what works.
Congratulations thank you very
much.
The gentleman from grant
Representative Terrazas thank
you Mr speaker I want to we have
some some some guests here is
kind of nice that I have
somebody from the Grant County
area of people from our
corporate school district board
member Serena Google Frank
Cordova I think a little more
enough and also from the large
brick school districts Jon
Plowman and those are the came
over to visit me and and have a
talk with me and and sure there
needs.
We are Mr speaker
I think what I have five kids as
of stole the body before.
And let me tell you during the.
When the kids were in were.
Hell that the offer they can go
to school they had to stay home
let me tell you we appreciated
our teachers so much and we
sometimes don't recognize how
much they do for us and how
important they are and so I just
want to thank every educators is
here for your contribution to
our children and to our
education of our future thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentleman.
Okay so we'll go back there is a
motion from the general any from
any.
the motion is to remove to
withdraw
House Bill.
Forty eight forty eight from
committee and.
To make it the next order of
business the gentle lady's ask
for roll call vote will have
that vote yes in the bill will
become the next order of
business in the house of no and
will stay.
In committee.
The vote is now speaker if I may
I do have a is wonder
miscellaneous and I would like
to just make a few comments as
to why bringing the motion.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I feel very strongly about house
bill forty eight and the need to
live this tax burden off of our
retirees who are receiving
social security benefits.
They worked and toiled and
labored all their lives.
The government took money out of
the paychecks dot been taxed at
that point hello that for them
for their retired years active
Mr up to because the rules
require that the debate not
discuss the merits of the bill
the the the the debate the focus
solely on the procedure of
removing it I could recognize
the parliamentarian who could
cite the rule if you'd like or
we could just proceed with the
comment about
the process of removal but we're
not to discuss the merits of the
bill.
Mr speaker
I know that Representative from
San Juan probably can amplify on
this but I'm really it just
wanted to explain the reasons
for the motion.
And I will try to avoid the
merits per se on the bill but
there's a reason I'm doing this
and it is very important.
Okay generally as I said you can
the debate can according to our
rules press of recognize
generally percent be briefly so
she can quit the rule to
assemble.
informed about how the debate
can proceed generally for Santa
Fe thank you Mr speaker so
section of for ninety one on
withdrawing proposals from
committee in Mason's discusses
that it's not in order to
discuss the merits of your
proposal for of a proposal upon
a motion to discharge a
committee or withdraw the
proposal from committee debate
in such cases much must be
confined strictly to the purpose
of the motion for this for if
this were not true the merits of
any proposal could be endorsed
under discussion merely by such
a motion to withdraw so there
for the a motion is is solely of
what's available for debate.
Really from it is yes thank you
so much for reading that I'm
quite aware of the rule I just
read it myself but if I could
just just take a moment Mr
speaker to explain the reason
for the motion and the reason
for being done now I think that
is germane.
If I may proceed Mr speaker
thank you.
So we're going to be hearing
House Bill shortly the budget
bill for fiscal year twenty
twenty three we have billions of
dollars of additional revenue
this year.
And it's just absolute critical
that as we send the budget over
to the Senate that we.
Have a the record from our
chamber that this is a.
A tax relief that's long
overdue.
Mr speaker
It is so important especially
now because.
We have waited forty years.
To this day from the time the
tax started in New Mexico
started adopting it
back then the trigger the
threshold was twenty five
thousand dollars of social
security income generally above
which I'm very sorry but you're
discussing the merits of the
bill you're discussing income
triggers you're discussing the
tax policy yeah I I want to make
sure that we're hearing to the
rules the debate the year
engaging right now would be
appropriate if we were debating
the bill but we're not we're
debating whether or not to take
the bill from committee and make
it the next order of business so
you know I I don't want to.
over do it here but if please if
you would.
Can find the debate to the need
to address this.
Bills the next order of business
you know why you think the
committees the the tax committee
you know is unable to consider
the bill we are I don't know
what your reason would be but if
we keep it to that that I've
certainly would appreciate it if
you can stay in the role thank
you Mr speaker so let me back up
just a little bit then
So the motion is is very
critical at this point time
because we are past the mid
point of the session of there
are a number of bills doing the
social security income taxation
that are working through but we
don't know how the outcome will
be in the committee's hearing
them and so I just think it's
important that we bring this to
the for today and and get the
the body to go on record as of
either for or against this
motion and so with that Mr
speaker I'll turn it back over
to you the vote
is is a voting yes and we will
make the motion emotional beagle
Kerry and this bill house before
you with the next order of
business.
I know and it will stay in
committee with us roll call vote
the vote is now open.
But the members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes no
Representative bash.
Representative bash.
Your muted.
Sorry no Representative bash
votes no Representative bone
Kauffman.
Now Representative will go votes
no Representative then a.
Representative Cook.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Harry Garcia both
no Representative Miguel Garcia.
Regrettably
Representative Miguel Garcia
votes no Representative Harper.
Representative Lente.
No Representative Lente votes no
Representative Lujan.
Representative Roger Montoya.
So regrettably as well no
Representative Roger Montoya is
a no Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is no Representative Rubio.
No Representative Rubio votes
no.
members the gentleman for doing
in a Representative Madrid
informs me that the
his have pushed the wrong button
at his desk.
this is been a frequent thing
we've allowed members to.
Change the vote before the vote
is called I'm not done so.
gentleman Representative Madrid
how do you wish to vote.
No.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of twenty two in the affirmative
forty two in the negative the
motion fails.
The gentleman from Bernalillo Mr
speaker to speaker for
generating do I still have a
four.
I think so.
Thank you very much
As I said I feel very strongly
about the motion to withdraw to
move this along in the process I
am rather disappointed in the
outcome of this vote but it does
not change the fact that the
social security tax relief for
specially are middle class we
don't do much for them this is a
vital issue for the session and
I hope for a better outcome in
the taxation and revenue
committee and further on down
the line thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlelady the
gentleman from Bernalillo
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation no
objections so ordered.
Gentlelady from McKinley and San
Juan members are going to go to
item number three.
With the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three on final
passage has been taken.
The gentle lady to explain it
all thank you Mr speaker and
good afternoon members it's
certainly a special privilege
for me to be here this this
afternoon to talk about why I
believe we is the only reason we
should be here during a thirty
day session and that's the
general appropriation act as it
states is in our constitution a
thirty day session is all about
budget Mr speaker and members we
are a an interesting state
because we're one of the few
states and I believe maybe the
only in the country that
actually has a two budget
process with the legislature
prepares a budget in the interim
as well as the executive so we
come together during the actual
legislative session to merge
those two pieces of work and the
result is the house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill to in the twenty twenty two
general appropriations act Mr
speaker and members you should
have three documents in front of
you the first is the actual
bill.
And the bill has the.
Index I page numbers section for
and so forth the second document
you should have in front of you
is the FIR.
It gives you a full overview of
the fiscal impact report found
the last document the members
should have Mister speaker he is
the key hearings issues for for
the budget so hopefully
everybody has those documents
and if you don't please raise
your hand will make sure the
staff gets it gets that to you
we have an opportunity to read
these things.
Mr speaker of and members of the
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two and three makes a
reoccurring general fund
appropriation for FY twenty
three of eight point four seven
billion dollars that's a
thirteen point eight percent
increase from FY twenty two.
Total reoccurring appropriations
are within point four percent of
the LFC and Executive
recommendations House Bill to
the subs to provides an average
compensation increase of seven
percent for all state and
education employees brings the
minimum salaries to fifteen
dollars an hour.
Fully funds Medicaid back fills
use of one time federal funding
and investing keep public safety
health care and family
initiatives House Bill two
leaves approximately four
hundred million dollars inside
of this framework for the tax
related initiatives
And in addition Mr speaker and
members and it allows for a
thirty percent reserve level I'd
like to ask madam speaker that I
be allowed to yield to some of
the members of this morning just
to speak about some of the
specific issues inside the
budget this is a team sport
Madam speaker and members not
one person can do the budget
alone and I want to thank
everyone everyone of the members
for their hard work during this
session.
And for their time and
commitment lot of times madam
speaker and members of HFC would
be the last committee of the day
to stop its work that we were
still cranking.
it is a very heavy lift for
everybody.
And we never had anybody miss.
I don't think and I sincerely
want to thank you for all of
your work Madam speaker of the
members that I've asked to say a
few words are in the following
order by chairman small
Representative Sweetser
Representative Anderson
Representative Dixon and I'm I
will close with a few of the
of the opening remarks and then
we'll go to questions better
speakers of we could
Representative small.
And then from Dunya thank you
very much madam speaker thank
you madam chair for this.
As you said tremendous honor and
the opportunity madam chair and
madam speaker to serve under
your leadership with your
guidance and ensure direction
madam chair and madam speaker I
want to speak briefly to our
investments in rural economic
development especially in the
areas of natural resources
including work with our natural
resource agencies and also to
talk about a little bit Madam
speaker madam chair our
investments in higher education
and the same briefly how some of
these things really we went
together.
Madam chair Madam speaker.
I think what I want to start is
actually picking up from the the
special session madam chair
excuse me madam speaker madam
chair as all the members recall
in the special session with
overwhelming support we
dedicated three point five
million dollars to orphan well
clean up that went to the Energy
minerals and natural resources
department at the time madam
chair and this was really at
your direction and with your
foresight we look for this state
investment to yield job creation
benefits with folks plugging
wells environmental benefits
because of orphan oil and gas
wells are bad for everyone
especially the folks in those
areas the industry in that area
and because it set us up with a
bipartisan infrastructure law so
madam speaker madam chair it
should be no surprise and in
fact the very welcome that the
state is now receiving nearly
forty million dollars one of the
first to warranties for the
federal funds to clean up those
orphan wells.
Madam chair transaction madam
speaker madam chair.
We're making those sorts of
investments across the natural
resource agencies including with
a sixteen percent increase for
New Mexico Environment
Department including to help
with cannabis regulation what
the climate bureau that's going
to look at
Most especially the new and
emerging technologies like
hydrogen and others that are
decarbonisation and job creation
madam chair members Madam
speaker there's a twelve percent
increase to the energy minerals
and natural resources department
that's the support folks like
the oil conservation division
people right on the front lines
helping to safeguard the health
and safety in New Mexicans and
madam speaker madam chair those
are the folks who make sure that
permits are processed quickly
and efficiently and that
industry has clear rules of the
road to operate.
Madam speaker madam chair we
have a twenty percent increase
let me say that again a twenty
percent increase to the office
of the state engineer as we know
in New Mexico I was the the
water is life we're replacing
the use of one time trust funds
with general fund revenue
something that I know madam
speaker madam chair our departed
the the member was left this
body from up and and San Juan
Representative bat former
representative bandy made a
clear priority for taken a huge
step forward Madam speaker madam
chair in doing that today and
like with the example of the
orphan wells for using some of
the federal nonrecurring revenue
in this case of over thirty
million dollars to have a
drought resilience Fund that is
going to support.
All New Mexicans but madam
speaker madam chair will support
most especially our producers on
the ground in the middle Rio
Grande in the pay goes in the
lower Rio Grande who are very
likely to face an exceptionally
challenging year of drought we
don't want folks to go broke as
everybody else goes dry and so
madam speaker madam chair I'm so
proud of that you and the
committee have put together a
budget that dedicates over
thirty million dollars in
conjunction with the twenty
percent increase to the office
of the state engineer to respond
to our water needs.
Madam.
Speaker madam chair.
We're also taking huge steps in
our rural communities for
putting ten million dollars to
our associate of the
conservation districts they
leverage four to one.
Resources from the federal
government so that three point
five getting us forty we're not
quite to that level but we're
darn good and these are the
conservation districts that are
all back home for the first time
in this body's history at least
since I've been here since
before that Madam speaker madam
chair we're sending them ten
million dollars of general fund
based upon incredible guidance
from our committee said those
dollars have to be state dollars
and if you do it you're going to
help producers on the ground
you're going to help our
environment you're gonna help
species you're going to help
habitat in this budget we have
that doesn't stop there though
madam speaker madam chair
briefly we're seven million
dollars is going into our
revolving projects fund for
watershed treatment that means
folks are going to be working in
our forests creating good jobs
helping safeguard our
environment guarding against the
catastrophic risk of fire
that seven million dollars it's
going in there the session Madam
speaker madam chair.
I skipped over a few when it
comes to water the fact that
we're putting well over another
thirty million dollars into
things like river stewardship.
Water projects around the state
of statewide that are going to
help get infrastructure built on
the ground to safeguard
increasing drought
the water supplies for
communities for agriculture and
for our environment.
Madam speaker madam chair I now
want to jump briefly over to
higher education on the forestry
side we're setting up a first a
state partnership with four
different institutions to lead
that forestry work so you can
grow up madam speaker madam
chair you can work in our
forests doing good work
harvesting that would that needs
to be harvested you can go to
school Madam speaker madam chair
and now have a degree pathway to
keep that work going not to
leave to another state but the
go right back home and work in
your in your community that you
grew up in
Madam speaker madam chair that
comes on top of the three
percent hi Angie increase to our
higher education institutions.
Class madam speaker madam chair
fifty million dollars in grant
matching funding this means our
institutions as we all talk
about New Mexico any of the
institutions they now have a pot
of federal of of state money
that they can match to federal
grants they can work with other
institutions in the state to
bring dollars to their
university jobs to their home
hometown and to power forward
madam speaker madam chair the
research and innovation that can
drive the state forward into a
more prosperous future that
fifty million dollar fund is so
exciting we have fifty three
million dollars Madam speaker
madam chair in addition to over
a hundred and forty million
dollars they go into our
scholarship funds combined with
the over fifteen million that
went into the nursing
scholarships.
Basically madam speaker madam
chair we're going to be able to
tell New Mexicans if you want to
become a teacher.
If you want to become a nurse if
you want to go into some of
these professions that serve
fell in New Mexicans bring good
paying jobs here let you have a
family keep your family in New
Mexico we're gonna work with you
to do that debt free Madam
speaker madam chair with the
over two hundred million dollars
that are going into college
affordability and scholarships
on top of the tens of millions
that are going into these some
of these hi
emphasis areas like teachers and
like nurses madam speaker and
madam chair.
I think the those give us just
beginning to touch the surface
Madam speaker madam chair
actually while on the subject of
higher education.
We're putting over two point one
million new dollars into New
Mexico State University in the
department of agriculture that
doesn't go to Los crucis Madam
speaker madam chair that goes to
our agricultural research state
stations all across the state
those are in the city those are
in rural communities from
Clayton promote to corona and
others.
This two point one million new
dollars is much needed to
renovate to make sure that they
have the infrastructure that
they need and the support folks
who want to continue on the
proud agricultural traditions
that we have Madam speaker madam
chair in that higher ed and that
rural and natural resource
bucket there's another million
dollars that we're very excited
to put into weather stations
members have talked about the
importance of weather stations
in fact we heard that in
committee this morning and house
agriculture in the state kia's
that weather stations help the
entire state and they help
producers perhaps most of all in
these trying and drought ridden
times to get the insurance
payments that they signed up for
Madam speaker madam chair with
the money and H. B. two other
efforts HB to junior we're going
to fully fund that we're going
to have recurring dollars there
those payments are not going to
go messed after this budget and
the work that gets done in that
area madam speaker madam chair
we're putting in five million
dollars for our sake is.
Heard time and again that the
traditions and the knowledge of
the work that go into a state
kia's that's not a thing of the
past Madam speaker madam chair
that's how we power forward into
a very challenging future for
dedicating five million dollars
madam speaker madam chair into
our sake is statewide and and I
think in a way that folks in
this body can be proud of folks
in our communities and
especially in our rural
communities can be incredibly
grateful for I want to wrap up
madam speaker madam chair as you
know I could keep going I'm so
proud of this budget but I do
want to wrap up.
We're putting out on speaker
madam chair over ten million
dollars in the community energy
efficiency on the coldest day in
twenty twenty two for New
Mexicans were setting aside over
ten million dollars combined
with over twenty million dollars
in the special session that's
going to make sure those New
Mexicans can spend their money
at a local business maybe start
their own business they don't
have to spend it on home heating
or cooling madam speaker and
madam chair.
When we take this together we
have the largest investments in
our rural communities connecting
to agricultural natural
resources investments I
certainly ever seen and never
been part of not only is it big
dollars it's well guided dollars
based upon really expert input
on the right places like the
association of conservation
districts like
The.
Other cultural research stations
for drought mitigation and the
like that with that we have
risks heard are very important
for progress going forward so
madam chair madam speaker I am
so pleased to get to talk
briefly about our natural
resource investments historic
investments that are creating
jobs safeguarding the health and
safety of New Mexicans.
Building a stronger rural
communities giving folks a
pathway from when they grow up
they go to school they come back
home they stayed home there is a
pathway for them in this budget
to have strong.
Thriving communities to support
their families and to make New
Mexico a better place and I
can't think of anything that
makes me prouder to say that I'm
in full support of this budget
thank you madam speaker thank
you madam chair.
Gentlelady from grant Hidalgo
Luna counties thank you madam
speaker and thank you madam
chair for a little bit of the
opportunity to talk about our
public education budget Madam
speaker madam chair as you know
I serve on the house Education
Committee and the Appropriations
Committee and then this interim
you appoint me to co chair of
public education subcommittee
and I will tell you we heard
from families we heard from
teachers we heard from
administrators and we listened
and this budget reflects
policies and initiatives and
priorities that we heard all
interim long so madam speaker
madam chair I'm just proud to
rise and save for those who may
not realize it this budget
includes three point eight seven
billion dollars for public
schools I was talking about
earlier today and I said let me
let me say that number one more
time three point eight seven
billion dollars for public
schools madam chair madam
speaker I think you called it a
historic budget that is a
historic investment in New
Mexico children that's to help
ensure every child in New Mexico
can thrive it is at twelve point
three percent increase in public
education and I'm just amazed
that we have the opportunity to
do that.
We're putting seven percent
raises for teachers and
educators because we keep
hearing the pipeline is broken
people don't want to go into
education because they can't
afford it we are trying to make
certain they can afford it we
are investing in those teachers
and it really does matter six
million per stipends to students
teachers for time spent teaching
in New Mexico public schools so
they can teach they can learn
while they're doing their
student teaching instead of
worrying about also having to to
pay their bills five point five
million to the teacher
residency Fund twenty million to
the teacher preparation
affordability scholarship fund
and then five million to the
teacher loan repayment fund.
It might if in my humble opinion
Madam chair madam speaker we're
putting our money where our
mouth is because we have heard
over and over and over again we
have got to invest in that
teacher pipeline we're also
making groundbreaking
investments in native schools
students and teachers to provide
high quality culturally
appropriate education including
Madam speaker madam chair
fourteen point nine million
dollars to the Indian education
fund.
Talk about investing in what
makes New Mexico New Mexico
forty three million for
culturally and linguistically
appropriate instructional
materials we are investing in
school transportation early
literacy initiatives and
interventions for at risk youth
on and on one hundred nineteen
million to support K. five plus
programs twenty one million for
school districts and charter
schools.
We are working to make sure
children across the state get
the quality education they
deserve and I just want to let
anyone listening in this body
and and that home realized we
heard you you have told us over
and over and over again where
the priorities for education
need to be and we heard you and
we incorporated them in this
budget madam chair members
because you know we even made
changes last minute changes when
we heard from people saying no
we don't do this do this make it
incentive based make it make
people want to do these kinds of
initiatives and that's exactly
what we're doing.
He called it a historic budget I
called it a historic investment
in our future for our children
we are making a historic
investment in our future because
we're investing in our children
so I greatly appreciate Madam
speaker madam chair the
opportunity to talk about this
public education budget it is
historic it is an investment in
what we know will move New
Mexico forward so thank you for
the opportunity thank you madam
speaker.
Gentleman from Chavis Lee Ann
Roosevelt County.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I have the privilege
of writing eight General
probation act.
Under three chairmen.
Chairman Tom brown chairman John
Marchand and in the last four
years chairman Patty laws for.
I won't dwell on the fact that
the Feds has gotten bigger but
none the less what has not
changed is we have a balanced
budget a balanced budget it's
eight billion four hundred and
seventy million dollars and I
salute.
Madam speaker the chairwoman for
her guidance in bringing a very
complicated funding bill to the
floor today.
Madam chairman I've been asked
to to touch briefly on the
important area of compensation.
Compensation for over eighty
thousand.
Employees in state government
education higher education.
We are in this bill included is
a seven percent.
Compensation increase of course
throughout that is funded that
doesn't mean that every single
funding is going to result in
that because higher education
for example is is governed by
our board of regents school
boards thankfully are still
governed by our local school
boards but none the less the
money is there for seven percent
plus at least fifteen dollars an
hour.
And that is the accomplishment
that you see in.
House committee the house
appropriations and finance
committee substance for house
bill two.
So it is.
That point madam chairman the
although this is the biggest
budget it remains a balanced
budget with thirty percent were
services a chairwoman has said
and I believe a this is a.
Assessment Mexico in fiscal year
twenty twenty three on a course
for a very.
Very good here I think will
stand here a year from now on
the halfway through and
realizing that this budget is
doing great work on retention
attraction of employees for
short throughout the work force
we heard that all and I'm
session.
Committees relative to nurses
law enforcement on debt insurers
on and on and on so let's see if
we can achieve the improvement
that the committee has set out
on today thank you.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker and
madam chair I would like to
highlight some of the provisions
in the budget that relate to
public safety and criminal
justice
Madam speaker and madam chair
over the past year members in
this body have been talking
about ways to efficiently and
effectively improve public
safety both through legislative
finance committee meetings and
analyses.
Other interim committee meetings
and in Albuquerque for those of
us in the metro area
participating in the Albuquerque
metro crime initiative Madam
speaker and madam chair.
This budget what I am most proud
of is that it addresses public
safety and crime in a very
comprehensive manner it looks at
the entirety of the system from
prevention treatment employment
re housing reentry and
everything in between and so I
think it's really.
It's an impressive document.
Madam speaker and madam chair
this budget will move the needle
to measurably improve public
safety in this state.
What I'd like to do Madam
speaker and madam chair is
highlights some of the specific
items in the budget that
Prioritize treatment improved
policing.
Increase coordination and
cooperation among law
enforcement and other agencies
increase resources for courts
and pre trial and address
victims and community needs.
Madam speaker and madam chair
the first area is prioritizing
treatment and we know that this
is one of the best ways that we
can improve public safety.
Madam speaker and madam chair
this budget increases are
behavioral health workforce it
invests in evidence based and
trauma responsive behavioral
health and child welfare.
It expands the crisis response
system and uses evidence based
behavioral health care.
We're expanding community
schools and reinvesting into
corrections programs.
Madam speaker and madam chair
we've also focused on ensuring
swift and certain justice one of
those ways is improving
policing.
Madam speaker madam chair in
terms of improving policing
we've looked at several
different things and those are
reflected in the budget we're
we're investing in recruiting
new law enforcement officers.
We're putting money into retain
law enforcement officers.
Madam speaker madam chair we are
also training and equipping and
supporting our law enforcement
officers.
Madam speaker madam chair we are
increasing cooperation and
coordination among state
agencies and we are doing that
by expanding the crime reduction
grant program.
Or expanding the criminal
justice data integration work.
Madam speaker madam chair we are
also supporting our judicial
system by ensuring that our pre
trial services have funding for
twenty four seven monitoring of
individuals.
We are also including a raise.
For our judges a seventeen
percent raise and.
A nine percent raise for all
court personnel.
Finally Madam speaker and madam
chair I'd like to highlight some
of the provisions that address
the victim and community needs.
there is a substantial increase
in funding for a statewide
violence intervention program
there is an increase in funding
for sexual assaults programs
investiga violence programs
human funding for survivors of
human trafficking.
You agree employment and
apprenticeships and job
challenge academy for at risk
youth so madam speaker and madam
chair I would just like to
conclude by saying that I think
this is a comprehensive approach
to addressing one of the largest
and most pressing issues in our
state thank you very much.
Gentlelady from McKinley and
someone.
Thank you madam speaker I'd also
like to just make some final
comments before we go to
questions from the members and
that is in regard to the way the
committee had appropriated the
federal funds as you may recall
members during the special
session there is a small portion
of the federal funds allocation
that we did approved that was
signed into law last December I
want to draw your attention to
the F. I. R. on page two and if
you look at section ten under
non reoccurring other special
appropriations.
you look at the call of the
state's general fund and you go
all the way down to eight
hundred and thirty four million
dollars that's a combination of
general fund nonrecurring and
the arpa funds and if you recall
during the presentation in
special session I talked about
how funds are integrated and
that it was be much more
responsible to wait until the
thirty day session when we had
all of our information our new
consensus revenue information to
be able to to set the spending
pattern for this so if you look
on the bill page two fourteen is
where the other special
appropriation start unless
otherwise indicated the
following amounts are
appropriated from the one
billion sixty nine million one
hundred seventy five thousand
dollar transfer to the
probation contingency fund of
the general fund so we had we
have a lot of discussion about
that during the special move
that funny and that funding into
the probation contingency fund
now it's spread throughout the
budget so with that madam
speaker would stand for
questions.
The gentle lady there is debate
on the bill the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much madam
speaker does the gentle lady
from McKinley County I'd be
happy to yield madam speaker
thank you madam speaker thank
you the lady from McKinley
County I I want to also take a
moment to highlight some of the
process that we went through and
putting together house bill to
the appropriations bill
generating is it true that you
became a travel to Albuquerque
to speak to the Albuquerque
delegation about some the most
important pressing public safety
issues Madam speaker yes
Representative and madam speaker
gentle lady from McKinley County
we've met on this issue several
times and crafted
appropriations bill that would
address some of the most
pressing public safety issues
including those that that our
address treatment and also the
hiring and retention of police
officers is that correct Madam
speaker gentle lady yes that's
correct thank you madam speaker
and gentle lady and so focusing
first on the public safety and
of it is it true that we are
making through house bill to the
historic once in a lifetime
investments in public safety
issues and measures madam
speaker gentle lady absolutely
as as was indicated by
Representative of Dixon I am
absolutely sure that this is a
major game changer Madam speaker
thank you madam speaker gentle
lady and if I may I'd like to
reiterate some of those once in
a lifetime investments made in
public safety just to make sure
that the public knows what an
opportunity we are taking with
this budget as it passes out of
this house Madam speaker gentle
lady nine million dollars an
additional nine million
additional dollars for violence
intervention programs this is
especially applicable to the
area where I represent an
Albuquerque metro eight million
dollars for police recruitment
bonuses to the department of
finance administration four
million dollars for pre trial
services which include twenty
four twenty four seven coverage
many people don't know madam
speaker gentle lady that many
folks that are on.
On monitoring programs such as
an ankle monitoring program
we're not being monitored twenty
four seven so this historic
investment would allow for
twenty four hour coverage it
should really help with the
recidivism cycle then speak
speaker gentle lady and also
formally dollars for evidence
based policing training so I
think it's really really
important to highlight some of
that then speaker gentle lady I
also want to talk about the one
point seven million dollars for
the violence for spending a
violence intervention programs
and also
three point four million for the
department of public safety to
implement an intelligence led
policing and public safety
system with an additional one
million for training initiatives
and to establish a law
enforcement assisted diversion
program for state police this is
also incredibly important madam
speaker gentle lady so that were
just policing smart not just
throwing money at the problem I
also want to highlight there's
also nonrecurring appropriation
to stand up
Law Enforcement tension fund
which is also subject to
additional legislation H. B.
eighty six but really what I
want to talk about Madam speaker
gentle lady is once in a
lifetime investments in mental
behavioral health many members
of this body know how important
that issue is to me and how I
think it's incumbent upon every
single one of us to fight for
additional access to mental
behavior health services because
that's gonna be the one thing
that really addresses the
generational trauma that leads
to the recidivism cycle and are
the issues are experiencing the
state through for public safety
so the madam speaker gentle lady
it's it's also really important
to note that we are investing
seventy two point three million
dollars I'm going to repeat that
seventy two point three million
dollars a nonrecurring and two
point four million dollars in
recurring funds to increase
behavioral health workforce to
increase behavior health
workforce expand behavioral
health care resources and
improve crisis response this is
huge
as long as I've been here in the
roundhouse on the speaker gentle
lady we've always been talking
about.
Increasing access increasing
workforce amendment to
behavioral health this is what's
going to allow us to continue on
with Kerr to make sure that our
collaboration is occurring so
when folks are beginning their
issue their journey with mental
behavior health care they can be
taken care of every step of the
way so that they don't end up
falling back into a broad crime
cycle or the end up following up
victims again to substance use
disorders which we know have
claimed several lives throughout
the state the last thing I want
to talk about madam speaker
gentle lady is the
implementation of the nine eight
eight system this is a crisis
line for mental making for those
in New Mexicans who are
experiencing a crisis with
mental behavioral health this is
different than the nine one one
system Madam speaker gentle lady
and that this will lead someone
who was a currently experiencing
a mental behavior health crisis
to speak with someone trained in
the ability to talk them down to
walk them through so that they
don't end up being a danger to
themselves or anyone else this
Madam speaker gentle lady is how
we are going to combat the
public safety issue in New
Mexico this is not just about
three strikes laws and and and
keeping people in prison where
they don't have an opportunity
to rehabilitate and live a
healthy and productive lives
because in New Mexico we are
about allowing every Mexican a
chance to be able to do that so
thank you very much bye Madam
speaker gentle lady I think this
is a fantastic budget I was so
so proud to be part of the
process of crafting it and thank
you so much for all the hard
work.
Thank you there is further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Sandoval County thank
you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan yield I would be happy
to yield.
Speaker gentle lady I I Google
thankful for before I start
asking questions I I do think
it's important.
Madam speaker gentle lady to
give a shout out to your staff
who are just excellent I mean
really unbelievably hard working
thoughtful brilliant I really I
really want to just take a
moment and thank you and thank
your staff I know the committees
done hard work but I don't want
to overlook their efforts.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
I think I'm I'm thinking that
the philosophy of finance in
this building is first when
you're sending out money when
you're financing programs to
have performance measures to
know what the goals are would
that be correct madam speaker
gentle lady Madam speaker
gentleman yes that is correct
and madam speaker gentle lady
what why is that why is it
important to have goals.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman's primarily because we
want to understand what our
return on investment is that we
want to have goals for the
departments to work toward so we
can report back to the public
exactly how we spent taxpayers
money.
Madam speaker gentle lady in
order to do that.
I take it that as you're sending
out money you expect the
recipients of that money to
provide you with data in real
time so that you and your staff
and your committee can evaluate
that data is that correct Senate
speaker gentle lady Madam
speaker gentleman yes that is
correct and madam speaker gentle
lady is that a philosophy of
your committee and Legislative
finances to insist on that.
Madam speaker German absolutely
Madam speaker gentle lady I I
want to point out to the body.
That on the policy side back in
two thousand nineteen
Representative Nyberg then
Senator rule of the new and
improved parliamentarian and new
rules chair Representative
Romero we were involved in a
bipartisan effort.
To do that to help the
appropriation process in the
criminal justice field to insist
that when we send out money that
there be performance measures
goals and that the the
recipients of that money.
Provide us with data in real
time so that we knew that they
were meeting those goals.
One of the reasons that so
important I think and we'll see
if the chair agrees with me is
because we there are lessons
learned from that.
So for example if you have a
criminal justice program in San
Juan County that works you can
apply those lessons and saying
another part of the state or it
doesn't work you can cut off
that funding and say yeah let's
not do it that way word some
variation on that theme is that
a fair way Madam speaker gentle
lady to express that.
Madam speaker gentleman it is a
fair way particularly when we
are speaking of criminal justice
from a systemic point of view
when we're looking at the entire
system.
And madam speaker gentle lady
you the almost read my mind
because that's exactly what
we're talking about we're
talking about a system you can't
just to find money to one
portion of the system
without impacting other so you
have for example you know you
have the dust but you also the
public defenders of the porch of
correctional audio correctional
officers you have behavioral
health the Representative
Hochman Vigil talked about and
everything in between is that
what you're talking about a
systemic system madam speaker
gentle lady.
Matt madam speaker gentleman yes
and that would also include the
entire correction system.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes
and if I left that out to him on
the I think that's right
so madam speaker gentle lady as
you're looking at this does all
the innovation them come from
the state or can we delegate
some of this to local
communities can they come up
with good ideas as to how to
fight crime and reduce I
included prove safety in our
communities better speaker
that's a very good point
gentleman this does allow for
local participation particularly
when you're looking out police
officer requests in this budget
we have twenty five million
dollars set aside for those
communities that feel that they
have that need not every
community does but there are
certainly some that do as well
as other programs that can be
absolutely access from the local
level.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady one of the things that I
see is the crime reduction
program would specifically goes
to local communities still
applying for grants and then
them being evaluated to make
sure that they're meeting the
performance goals and that
they're providing data in real
time and that that date is an
evaluated to see the
effectiveness of the program
does that by express that
correctly madam speaker gentle
lady Madam speaker gentleman and
that is exactly the reason it
goes to DFA it goes to the
department of finance and
administration they are experts
in making sure the funds are are
of delivered out to local
governments they understand that
system and they're set up for
that purpose.
And I also see the gentle lady
I'm sorry madam speaker gentle
lady
and item twenty four we we have
this chichi on the criminal
justice the trucks about
increased cooperation.
and coordination among CJ which
has been stand for criminal
justice partners why is that
important Madam speaker gentle
lady
Madam speaker gentleman what
we've what we've tried to do
this budget and we heard you and
I may in the particularly the
group out of Bernalillo county
that this is a systemic issue
and that we have to everybody at
the table everybody needs to be
rowing in the same direction but
we need to understand what those
needs are from each one of the
individual partners it's kind of
like the Madam speaker gentleman
like the United Nations you have
a whole bunch of countries that
participate but that doesn't
mean that they lose their
individuality.
That is the gentle lady as part
of that is important they share
data among each other is that an
important component of that
cooperation in this criminal
justice system madam speaker
that is the core of this
information and data is the
court for measuring.
If you can't measures if you
can't measure something you
can't manage it and that is a
fundamental fundamental called
tool is that you have to
understand where you're at and
what your goals are going to be
as you move forward.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
is all the questions I have but
I I do want to say that on the
criminal justice fund the way
that we are really going to get
at crime is by spending money
wisely and with real
accountability and ensuring
cooperation from all of the
participants of the criminal
justice system and I so
appreciate the thoughtfulness
that went into this budget with
respect to the criminal justice
system I congratulate you the
committee and the staff thank
you madam speaker thank you
gentle lady.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Chavis at in a
rural counties.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam speaker I'm sorry.
And thank you
Chairman Lundstrom for your work
on this budget process.
I have a series of questions.
Some may be a little pointed but
they are not personal.
But I think.
I must point out a difference
of.
Of ideas.
madam speaker I yield.
I'm glad thank you very much.
There's been quite a lot of talk
today about.
Initiatives with that are within
HB two.
Many of my that I agree with.
But I wondered I wondered if you
could show me.
In the body of the.
Bill.
For those specific
appropriations are.
For bills that have not yet
passed.
But initiatives that need to.
This bill is supported.
Thank you Madam speaker and
gentleman I'm going to first
start with those so one time.
The special appropriation on
section ten.
If we could madam speaker and
gentleman.
We started out with the amount
that's on page two fourteen.
It then goes into some of the
very specific Hines of
appropriations to fit to fifteen
page two fifteen.
Goes into the department of
finance and administration just
as an example we've heard
discussion around economic
development initiatives if you
look online twenty page to
fifteen to the economic
diversification and climate
resilience Fund contingent on
the enactment of the bill.
That bill has not passed yet
we've.
But it is in there.
Should should be signed into
law.
We can so we can flip the page
and of madam speaker gentlemen
to page two sixteen.
Where we're looking out to the
department of finance and
administration for evidence
based criminal justice reform
efforts and police recruitment
bonuses online I of page two
sixteen.
You can see a series there madam
speaker gentleman's of all those
different initiatives that were
that were referred to by
Representative Dixon and wrecked
Representative Hochman Vigil.
another idea
examples on page two seventeen.
Department of finance and
administration line twenty two
the venture capital program fund
contingent on enactment of house
bill one oh four for similar
legislation that gives you an
example madam speaker
gentleman's if you if you have a
specific one you want us to look
for we're happy to do that.
Madam speaker.
It was two point said that I
want to.
Expose or talk about in the
process.
One is.
You mentioned.
Early on and I think it was
Representative
from Bernalillo that mentioned
that there had been a group gone
to the delegation Albuquerque to
talk about crime.
In that
In that effort was any of the
representatives on the side of
the aisle incorporated in that
discussion.
Madam speaker of gentleman you
know I was an invitee to that
group I'm trying to remember who
all is a work group out of
Bernalillo county of of
representatives didn't remember
any senators I would have to.
Madam speaker gentleman I'd have
to turn to Representative the
law who actually invited me and
I don't see in here but we can
ask you.
Okay I ask of the two
representatives on the side of
the aisle if they.
Had any input into that and.
And they did not
And one of those was a career
law enforcement.
individual who I think could
have brought a unique.
perspective to it and and I
would hope that in the future
that would happen.
The other thing that I think.
I must ask and and must say is I
was impressed and.
And thankful that you did
something this year that has not
been done before and that was
your catch up clean up
committee.
That to
That has normally been hailed in
Republican and democratic
leadership's.
Has been
Not transparent in my opinion it
wasn't opened all members and it
was an open to the public but
this year you did do that and I
appreciate it I think that is a
step in the right direction and
I hope that continues and so
madam chair I I do appreciate
that and I thank you for that.
With that said Madam speaker.
That clean up process is a
process that.
I mean is typically referred to
as a member at.
And that is a process within the
probation group for the
committee where members are
given on the the special
privilege for.
Of.
The ideas of appropriations
possibly initiatives.
And I was wondering if.
We could have or do you know
what the break down of those
initiatives were.
To each party.
Madam speaker of gentleman we're
going to big around here see
what we can say find in our work
papers but I I would like to to
make a comment about the Senate
speaker gentleman the capture of
clean up work group.
Is.
About what we missed with agency
hearings one of the directives
that I had given the committee
at the very beginning Madam
speaker gentleman's is to take
copious notes of what you hear
in each one of the sub committee
meetings or one we're receiving
information from the analysts.
And there are things that that
happen that way the things that
have slipped through the cracks
and there's one in particular
that I have imagine you're gonna
ask me about but that we
completely missed.
But when you're dealing with an
eight almost eight and a half
billion dollar budget in a very
compressed time frame.
There are things that are out we
have to work on in catch of
Plano.
So it's not necessarily member
adds as much as it is agency
issues that come forward to us
and I've got it in front of me.
for the HFC madam speaker
gentleman's catch up clean up.
We had the HSD code two hundred
for the district courts that was
including a high higher the
higher rack of between DFA and
and LFC for district four eight
nine
For the district attorney's for
of.
area one the first second fourth
seventh and tenth.
we had
the higher rack in general for
the old AODA under tourism.
Ross the board was an increase.
And that was primarily for of
PSP B. which is employee.
we had an increase of four
energy minerals and natural
resources for operations.
There was an increase for the
office of African American
affairs.
We did of the DD PC halfway
between LFC and exec racks so
certainly I'm happy to share
this list madam speaker
gentleman's just to give you a
sense that this is a main things
as simple as an extra million
dollars to do Mexico state for
weather stations.
So these things are for
everybody I mean when something
like that comes forward that's
for everybody.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady I agree with you as many of
those things are for everybody
and and.
And I have.
No real issues are.
Let's get to member adds.
Is there a specific list for
individual.
Finance Appropriations Committee
members.
For initiatives that they put
into the budget as an
individual.
Madam speaker gentleman.
One of the ways that we deal
with member at odds is through
junior.
Which we've collected all that
information that's being built
in is our amendments to the
Senate bill when it comes over.
I have not been privy to all of
those things.
We're not supposed to have
hearings until Saturday on that
stuff so I'm not sure what
everybody is put in but that
would be the very specific kinds
of member adds that
we have David thank you that's
just provided to me Madam
speaker gentleman things like to
the office of state engineer
water data contingent on
legislation.
The environment department
environment department uranium
mine remediation and cleanup of
for Pat tribal libraries but I
need to say that this is the
catch of cleanup list and the
whole committee votes for so
when this is brought forth as
one of the sections of the bill.
Everybody votes for it and I did
not have is a miss madam speaker
gentleman I kept a listing of
every size of how everyone voted
for each section of the bill.
And I didn't have anybody vote
against that section.
Thank you Madam speaker and
gentle lady and and I get that.
My point is that I think has
been.
traveling.
To me and I think to many.
Members in the house on both
sides of the aisle.
Is that those member adds
Come forth from.
appropriation members
predominantly.
Committee chairs.
Leadership.
And.
It has always been troubling to
me that.
And now we're sitting in
Judiciary you don't get the
extra law.
in.
Tax you don't get Hey
additional.
Tax exemption.
And this process.
I wish it had more.
Transparency where people knew
that.
Exactly.
And I know you're going to tell
me it's in the budget.
I get it.
But as.
My friend from Travis county
said it's a difficult process
you guys beyond in the committee
and staff spans months of hard
work put it together.
And this year for the first time
which I appreciate we got forty
eight hours normally we get the
bill and we vote on it on the
same day.
And I a
I I hope that the that your
efforts.
To be more transparent to have
more all of your meetings.
open to the public.
Archive.
Would would occur.
Madam chair this budget has.
This is the most money ever
appropriated for the state of
New Mexico.
It also has.
The highest recurring budget.
I believe.
That has ever occurred in the
state of New Mexico do you
believe it is sustainable.
Madam speaker gentleman I do we
do it and as part of the
appropriations process we go
through an agonizing process of
consensus revenue building.
We go through stress testing.
We are very very close to how
the economy is moving and at
this point at least for the few
out years that we're looking out
it is sustainable but that Madam
speaker and gentleman is the
reason we have such a high
reserve the reserve provides a
cushion.
Should we get into some kind of
trouble like we did a few years
ago.
Oil and gas for a particular oil
prices dropped we have those
funds available for us.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
I
I do appreciate the increase in
the level of reserves.
I am concerned that the level of
spending is not.
Sustainable.
I don't think we have a good
handle get on the impact of the.
Federal money that has flowed
into the state of more than
twenty million dollars.
And I don't know that we know
the impact of the absence of
that twenty billion dollars what
it's going to do.
With respect to the education
budget.
Of which is.
Forty five forty six percent of
the total budget.
Do you believe.
You have adequate safeguards in
there so that we know that.
This increase of spending is
going to.
Have results that are tangible
and that we can measure.
Madam speaker.
madam speaker gentleman's.
We've put together.
In this public education budget.
Has been focused on.
Resolving some of the issues
that were reserve refer that
were raised with the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit.
In that lawsuit a number of
things were identified for
correction.
And you can we can find a direct
correlation of what our response
is and what we are proposing to
fund to try to resolve those
issues.
Not only that but we're allowing
for quality teaching
and extended learning time
through our pay structure.
We have got a number of
initiatives that we've put in
that
has been agreed to I many of
those in the education community
around the public education
secretary.
And it goes across the board
with pay raises increases to at
risk index more money into K.
five plus
increases to the three tier
minimum teacher salary.
certainly the help with the
impact aid that happened last
year.
it's structural instructional
materials has gone up mentorship
thing at risk interventions
early literacy and it goes on
and on these are the things that
were identified through that
lawsuit.
A number of public hearings that
we feel will get us where we
need to be and of.
Will show major progress.
Gentleman I'm sorry to interrupt
there has been a request for
members to remove their jackets
see no objections so ordered.
Please thank you madam speaker
I hope that Dr
Hi I look at what we through and
to education last year which was
my memory I was about six
hundred million dollars most of
it went to tier races in the
last.
Sixty day session.
And
The six and six hundred million
or close to it and I a
And I am a proponent of that I
think the.
Not only has the state.
Failed.
As you and I have discussed
miserably in their personnel.
Department.
of of state employees.
You cannot attracting key.
Quality employees.
If you are not competitive.
And trying to catch up every
five or six or ten years is
detrimental to the to the.
People.
It's a detrimental to the
process but because just like in
the state police budget.
there's about
Ten percent increase I believe
in the that level percent into
that.
Which is a pretty healthy
increase most of the state
patrolman.
Who are protecting us right now.
It just shows that they have
been.
Behind the the curveball for a
number of years.
And now we're going to do the
best we can to catch up.
Of which we should.
But the budgeting process is.
Should be to where it continues
to attract maintain.
And pay people based on their
performance so I would hope that
the state personnel offices less
than and they.
Proceed accordingly.
The higher ed budget that was
about a three percent increase
in that I think based on my
recollection is.
That New Mexico puts in about.
Fifteen hundred dollars more
than the national average in the
higher ed is that correct steel.
madam speaker gentleman from
your time on probation that's
correct.
Madam speaker
Gentle lady if you ever want to
learn state government.
There's not a better place to
do.
Hi of.
I think.
Much work has been done in much
work needs to be done.
In order to.
Make the process more
transparent.
To make the process more
schmooze.
I was always and I know many
members are with all done it we
we
We've all set there for.
Ten days typically and on
through each department.
And it's almost a the meeting
process do you.
We look at their proposals you
look at the executive and look
at the LFC you choose laughter
ride.
And that's it's it's hard to
have much more influence in the
process and that.
The lady I I a of.
I do thank you for the work
that's been done it is it is
I know it's hard work and I know
you take it a personal.
And and I don't regret that for
a minute.
But I would tell you that
clarity needs to be brought to
the process I think it would
bring you much of.
Admiration and recognition if it
didn't have to be forced through
quite like it does today thank
you very much madam speaker
thank you gentle lady.
Thank you there is further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Maestas.
I
you madam speaker with the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan yield.
Madam speaker I'd be happy to
yield.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you generated from San Juan
McKinley I just won a prize in
the strong support and
tremendous joy from from the
work that has been done here
leadership in particular madam
chair Madam speaker and and and
the and the year long work that
has transpired we're we are in a
completely different world that
we were from April of twenty
twenty.
when the pandemic hit the
international community and we
had to come back and cut budgets
in in in fear of of an economy
just going just bottoming out
that is not the case that is not
the case there is robust revenue
streams coming into the state
And that kind of me that that
that with the smart storage of
all of us can only grow.
And so this this budget has the
highest reserves we've ever seen
and so it is sustainable
sustainable size want to make a
couple comments madam chair of
delay from McKinley San Juan I
know folks want to want to speak
on that but I just want to.
What was said by the gently from
Bernalillo and the the gentleman
from Santa Bernalillo with
regards to which for with regard
to fighting crime because we
fight crime with house bill two.
That is how state government
fights crime in house bill two
and and this is the strongest
crime fighting bill.
I pricing it appears the courts
the courts are not criminal
courts.
Is there efficiency and
responsibilities with the eleven
point two million dollar
increase.
In their budgets the district
attorney's about fourteen
outstanding.
Supporters of elected prosecutor
statewide have a six point two
million dollar increase in their
respective budgets of course you
have to have the three like it
still has to be even the public
defender department will get a
three million dollar increase
which is a five point one
percent increase the dust if
it's about a six to seven
percent increase in the courts
about the same one point madam
speaker gentle lady from
McKinley San Juan is the
department of public safety.
That oversees our public safety
institutions including the state
police department fourteen
million dollar increase.
in the department of public
safety ten point eight percent.
The Senate's budget.
primarily for state police.
and the jobs that they do and
maybe even more importantly.
On the love and respect this
budget gives to crime victims
victims of sexual assault
homicides the crime victims
reparation commission.
Increasing its budget twenty
point four percent.
Without one of the largest
increases in and out and all of
our state agencies twenty point
four percent.
For costs incurred by being a
victim of a horrible crime.
The last.
Lastly madam speaker gentle
lady.
That's what my remarks are here
someone four hundred fifty
million.
Her bill will use it all and
lastly what's what's.
Is this truly improves public
safety I mean it prioritizes
treatment.
Violence prevention.
prioritizing violent offenders
Commission violent offenders
over low level offenders.
It supports improving policing
including an increase of the law
enforcement academy to ensure
swift and certain justice we
solve crime by speeding up the
conveyor belt of the cripple
just system.
Accountable as quickly as
safely as possible for W. for
seriously violent crimes victims
will not come to court to sit in
that chair terrified by the
trauma from being a victim of
violent crime and testify
against somebody list they have
a relationship with the DA's
office of relationship with the
victim advocates that work in
those systems are you there for
the state or in the nonprofit
sector
and we can if we can effectively
address the needs of victims.
As well as a as well as it cause
them to be strong witnesses in
our criminal courts with regard
to law enforcement about us
because lady from San Juan
McKinley.
Is recruitment so that New
Mexicans want to be police
officers here in New Mexico the
training they have twenty first
century training to be the most
well trained police officers in
the country we have those
resources at our disposal in the
assistance to the courts and
local communities of the twenty
five million dollars a
nonrecurring funding over the
next three years for evidence
based couple just reform efforts
in policing recruitment and
training nine million additional
dollars for violence
intervention programs.
An additional dollars for police
recruitment bonuses when they
had about five ten fifteen
especially twenty a threshold
wanted to remain on the force
and so these bonuses are
appropriate and long overdue
four million dollars for pre
trial supervision services
because I know we want to hold
folks when they get arrested but
you can't hold everybody there
released on pre trial
supervision we have to increase
that supervision.
The time it and it includes
twenty four seven coverage of of
of those that have the highest
probability of receiving and
four million in evidence based
police training through DFA it's
just tremendous the work that
was done in the in the public
safety round I just want to
thank everyone who put time and
effort into these conversations
over the last year lastly madam
speaker gentle lady from
McKinley just on one just a
general statement
We said we set up throughout
throughout of the leadership
throughout our local newspapers
throughout well to do folks not
so well to do folks is this
poverty mentality in my opinion
of saving money saving money for
one when the school on the when
the sky falls.
The money in the mattress
putting more money in trust for
future generations and then
about three or four percent
every year instead of taking
that money and spending it on
early childhood education
spending on K. twelve education
for college for those who wish
to attend community college and
four year colleges so that we
can create a new future we can
grab are the destiny of New
Mexico and this budget is a
strong message to move in that
direction this is tremendous
what this house is done with the
predecessors on on house
appropriations of done
and and and and and legislative
finance committee so it's just a
it's a great day I ask everyone
to support this budget because
we can the best thing we could
do for people is have a
functional government the
functional government that is
fully funded educational young
people in modern ways the
technology is that diversity in
the classroom I moved to Mexico
to a bright and beautiful future
so just want to thank you madam
chair but I'm speaker madam
chair gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan thank you.
Thank you there is for the right
further debate the gentleman
from Lee County Representative
Scott.
Thank you madam chair.
Want to store the gentleman
yield to the gentle lady yield.
I'd be happy to
go ahead.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'd
like to start with just a
general.
Comment on the process.
There is a.
Substantial minority of the
people in this body that have
the needs and so on this
document.
Six to eight inches to.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
spend and over
dollars.
In just
the last hour of this debate
look through here and found a
number of.
Significant volume of dollars.
Which I have a question.
And course the first forty five
minutes of this.
Bill presentation was editorial.
Not really debate.
So.
Representative asked to stand.
A lot of taxpayer dollars on the
basis of very little information
in store.
Fifty million dollars in here
and this is just one example of
madam speaker and gentle lady
fifty million dollars in here
for a venture capital fund.
Now.
Sure I will tell you that
Senator capital is incredibly
risky let me ask don't want
already support with some small
percentage of our permanent fund
revenues Senator capital.
Madam speaker gentleman yes that
is correct there is a small
portion that is used for that
purpose in this case madam
speaker gentleman this is a
recommendation in terms of the
economic development pace that
we worked on during the interim
and is seen as a very important
economic driver of for the state
of New Mexico.
Can appreciate.
The risk to.
Of politically directed
investment.
One.
That most of it will not be
coming back to the taxpayer is
huge.
It didn't take but a few minutes
to fund this first example.
Thank.
Senate bill one twenty two of
fifty five dollars and economic
development money used to be.
Completely without objective
open ended.
For more specifics that you
could find.
Madam speaker gentleman as the
language in the bill says we'll
start with the first question on
page two seventeen line twenty
two to the venture capital
program fund contingent on
enactment of house bill one oh
four so the detail of the bill
and where the discussion and the
process of programming is with
us it's part of the legislative
process Madam speaker gentleman
so in this case if house bill
one oh four doesn't pass the
money is not used this way.
Madam speaker gentle lady I got
the.
The house bill one for.
Which will likely pass this
body.
Is politically directed
investments very high risk.
Miss opportunities for.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
That's not something we would.
Why not floating on an ocean of
money which I agree with.
Madam speaker gentleman if we
were floating on an ocean of
money we would be back to very
basic.
Support for state agencies
that's not the case madam
speaker gentleman's the cases as
the economy has provided to us
funding that is desperately
needed for programs that the
people of New Mexico one Madam
speaker gentleman in this case.
We're also not only trying to
set.
Strong budgets for each one of
the agencies were also trying to
stimulate the economy and that's
done in different ways madam
speaker gentleman's this is one
of those ways and is contingent
upon the passage of the bill
which means madam speaker
gentleman is more than just this
chamber.
It's the Senate and it's the
governor.
So those who would not agree
with this bill have lots of by
to the apple to bring it down.
But it in my opinion madam
speaker gentleman's is no
different than a bill that I am
caring.
And that's regarding hydrogen.
And the establishment of
hydrogen hubs if that bill does
not pass the money that's been
put into this budget will not be
spent it'll go into the reserve.
For journalists will very much
appreciate that and we're gonna
have a whole another debate on
hydrogen when it comes to the
floor.
Just.
As one last comment.
A portion of the function of the
state.
To be for full.
Account public safety schools
and roads in this budget.
One engine is very very very for
field.
From those four basic functions
and it is completely.
A consequence of the money that
we have available which I
believe a significant portion
will be squandered as a
consequence of the spending
proposal.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
thank you for your answers.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam speaker had does
the gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan yield I'd be happy
to yield madam speaker thank you
madam speaker and gentle lady I
want to first take a moment to
thank you and your committee an
incredible LFC staff for the
work that they do I mean I see
director Avid with US Mr Valdez
I see Charles over here I mean
we we have an incredible team
and and you know as a I was
privileged to be on the
legislative finance committee
for a couple years and the.
Many of those committees were
some of the most memorable that
I've had in my ten years here
and I really am grateful for the
the hard work that they do and
and Mr gently I agree I think
it's actually much harder in
years where there is plenty to
figure out of all of these
amazing proposals that are out
there what can we actually fund
and what we need to be careful
with that we don't over finder
what we save when when it's more
challenging when we did we don't
have funds.
it's easy to say no to everyone
and then try to go and figure
out you know what what is
possible to Qatar suite Senator
generally I just want to thank
you and and your to the
committee and every all the
staff LFC especially.
you do great work and I'm I'm
grateful for for what you've
done.
spiritually I also want to
mention last year we we actually
supported the budget and voted
with the budget we do not have
two budget that time the Mr
gently that was because will
really two things the first was
the increase in spending on we
thought was a little higher than
we wanted but still within a
sustainable range.
And the second.
Was that we wanted to send a
message that as a legislative
body really agreed.
The the constitution dictated
that we should be the ones
appropriating funds ****
executive and so
I services there are times when
we work together and support
each other in that way and then
I say so gentle lady for for
that partnership last year Madam
chair I know comes as no
surprise
there are we will have a.
the substitute teachers in order
to improve the debate short hi I
I don't plan to be here for very
long
debating this bill this is the
substitute Representative spent
a couple reasons why we for we
need to do that and then talk
about what this when I move this
I still talk about what it does
so thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so.
The same.
The biggest red flag is miss
generally credit if I'm wrong
but we're looking at basically
just thirteen point eight
percent increase in worker
spending from last year is that
correct Mr generally madam
speaker yes that's correct thank
you Mr gently I appreciate that
and one engine red flag is my
understanding is the total
increase in recurring revenues
and that we are going to realize
projected realize next year is
only ten point eight percent Mr
generally is is that correct.
Mr speaker excuse me madam
speaker gentleman's now what I
remember is point four from what
the LFC and exec all frameworks
were but let us check please
thank you.
I miss madam speaker gentleman's
I've been told that the spending
growth for reoccurring is the
thirteen point seven I think it
was.
Yeah so so Mister generally let
me just make sure I understand
that correctly so we're
increasing spending by thirteen
point seven percent projected.
Coming revenue for next year is.
Madam speaker gentleman we are
pulling that information as you
ask thank you.
All right miss madam speaker
gentleman the reoccurring
revenue growth is twenty one
percent.
Mr generally I'm.
I'm not sure if that's right is
the number that we have been.
Looking at is ten point eight
percent reoccurring.
That might be.
Including recurring and
nonrecurring.
madam.
Speaker.
Gentleman
I don't know that you have your
volume here LFC volumes in front
of you if you do
this is volume one if I could
get you to turn to table three
page one eighty two.
Can page one eighty three.
Madam speaker gentleman the
revenue growth.
Is ten point nine but the new
money over this year's is twenty
one percent I wasn't clear I
apologize miss jali thank you
I'll make sure that we
I mean numbers we can all agree
on right so this because really
I appreciate that we're we're
we're setting the foundation
here properly thank you for that
so.
With.
Interest revenue recurring
revenue of ten point nine
percent.
But we're increasing our
reoccurring spending by thirteen
point eight percent that's
that's where I have some concern
right we're we're increasing our
switch from spending more in our
Revenue recurring revenue I by
three three percent that that's
that's my concern.
Madam speaker gentleman's one we
have a twenty one percent growth
over last year I feel Madam
speaker gentleman we were
actually fairly conservative
because we got had it much
higher using the twenty one
percent of growth over last year
instead we kept it to thirteen.
I.
I completely agree on that and I
could see how folks would come
to that conclusion but let me
just go over a little bit of the
history
I mean I've been here for only
ten years you've been here for
much longer I've I've seen ten
big cycles in my ten years and
so we have to go back very far
which is go back to fiscal year
nineteen.
The recurring spending increase
of the general fund in two
thousand nineteen was ten point
eight percent.
Twenty twenty the general fund
recurring spending increased to
twelve percent.
Now in twenty fifteen to twenty
twenty one before the COVID
issues showed up we.
We also had a spending freeze of
seven point six percent from you
at all that together I mean
we're former us actually three
years were Roadrunner one twenty
percent increase I had to come
back to the the pandemic and
actually we cut spending by
about three percent.
In addition last year we
increased spending by five point
one percent and this year we're
looking at thirteen point eight
percent and so what I'm trying
to say here is we.
We say our spending oscillate.
In and I think it makes much
more sense to have more of a
gentle curve we talked about in
the past how.
The right number of looking back
thirty years.
For spending increases we never
have to go back and cut spending
enough to take money from K. to
twelve schools is roughly three
and a half to four percent.
And other senators aplenty maybe
do a little bit more of a
messenger.
So you're saying that you feel
like this is a conservative
increase.
Jennifer was a conservative
increase to million I'm also
seeing red flags we don't know
what's gonna happen next year
with the economy with inflation
and all of the rules or drill
drilled and prepared before
present Budget Office are done
producing we have no more I sent
lots of risk in the future
speaker and gentle lady so that
address concerns.
and also Mr Dooley.
I understand that the proposed
budget in front of us.
Salim taps into reserves roughly
a million.
who's that here.
In a roughly a million yeah.
one hundred and three million
dollars that we.
Three hundred.
For the third.
Yes there is I apologize is
looking at the the wrong number
but we're if I'm right roughly
three hundred fifty million
dollars.
Senator always one is coming and
we also depleted our reserves by
three hundred and fifty eight
million dollars of mine and I'm
looking at that number
correctly.
Madam speaker gentlemen I'm
gonna have to have you explain
that because I don't think
that's the case.
So speaker and gentle lady.
My understanding is that.
We have several council we were
spending from right we have the
reoccurring we have a
nonrecurring we have all of the
funds
when you add all that together.
The projected reserves that we
would have gone without.
Just spending the nets they're
increasing for actually spending
down three hundred fifty million
dollars that would have gone
treasures and some that's in
reserves.
madam speaker we are going to
look at that because we're not
following that logic I apologize
for maybe I'm not hearing it
correctly madam speaker
gentleman but I'm not following
on that.
Mr jelly that is just fine.
I'm just looking at the FY
twenty two estimates total
appropriations and under
transfer to or from operating
reserves it shows a transfer
from operating reserves of three
hundred and fifty eight million
dollars that that's all I'm
looking at.
Madam madam speaker gentlemen
I'm looking currently at the
general fund financial summary.
And I'm looking at the estimate
for FY twenty twenty three and
what we see.
Is a surplus of a hundred and
seventy four thousand Madam
speaker jelly that's yes I'm
right next to that so if you go
right we'll be right to the left
we're sorry if you go to the
left from that the FY twenty two
estimate is a minus three
hundred fifty eight million
dollars.
madam speaker gentleman that's
all nonrecurring funds.
Thank you madam speaker and and
gentle lady so that are total
transfer from offering reserves
that's three hundred fifty four
eight million choose is from
nonrecurring.
madam speaker gentleman that's
correct okay Mister Dooley
that's that's fine in my mind
whether it's recurring or
nonrecurring it's still showing
that were transfer money out of
the reserves.
Senator okay now I'm tracking
with you thank you.
Your ability I.
So so they're just some concern
right I our reserves are really
our rainy day fund I think we've
improperly named are permanent
funds.
The rainy day fund that's not
true approve under endowment
fund.
It's our reserves that are the
rainy day fund.
And I just it doesn't because
we're dipping into that when
really the only thing rating
right now is money.
so so those are the reasons why
generally and and our.
A speaker gentle lady I'd like
to speak for just a little bit
about an alternative budget.
It is bigger then make a comment
on that thank you hi I'm looking
also at the estimate FY twenty
two and if you look at the
ending balance for reserves it
was thirty point eight.
And for FY twenty twenty three
is thirty point three.
Just like to make a comment on
the three hundred fifty eight
thousand.
That is dipping and for non
rickets non reoccurring money
for non reoccurring purposes I
just wanted to make sure the
body was clear on that thank you
madam speaker thank you madam
speaker and gentle lady that's
that's that's great to know that
it's not reoccurring that's just
a one time to thank you.
with that soon
Madam speaker I would like to
move house for Committee
substitute for House
Appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three.
Generally please read that to to
number.
Madam speaker I'm looking at the
Bill and I don't know if I see a
number because of the structure
of the council of the.
Yeah and and I just got
transportation there is no tool
to number because this was
drafted by legislative finance
committee.
Legislative Council.
Thank you gentlemen I I
understand that.
That floors of has been passed
and the chamber but it is not
yet scanned and uploaded to the
website.
Other than the.
We're gonna have to pause for a
second.
We're gonna have to pause for a
minute for to be uploaded.
We'll let you know when that
happens.
Madam speaker I'm fine with
that.
I'm no problem.
Speaker if we pause or we also
applies to clock.
I want to take away other
members opportunities to debate.
We will possible.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you.
For you are.
Okay.
That's right.
Okay.
More time with the one.
Okay.
I I couldn't.
I couldn't agree more.
And.
Are you briefly this morning
Reminds me of our I pocket
gentleman I understand that that
has been uploading the public
can now see it will you please
explain the floor substitute.
Thank you madam speaker and
Members of the body for your
patience I'm gonna check to my
commitments to keep this short
I'm gonna try to spend about
five minutes talking about the
substitute.
And and then I'll of course I'll
be happy to yield for for some
comment but I just want to ask
Miss to understand that this is
not going to be adopted and that
we don't need to spend all of
our time talking about this when
we have the actual bill that's a
gentle lady the chairs worked on
that too
should be the the focus of this
debate some digging to that
commitment madam chair.
All right so this for
substitute.
in hospital to we have roughly a
one billion dollar increase in
recurring spending and a one
billion dollar increase in
nonrecurring spending so a total
of two hundred billion dollars.
As I mentioned leading up to
this debate I think tapping into
reserves having a recurring
spending greater than or
recurring revenue.
And and generally just being
much higher than historically
we've seen it is prudent fiscal
policy to increase our budget
by.
This substituting cuts that in
half.
So this is a seven percent
increase in spending
And.
What this does is.
Just a very high level summary.
We reduced
taxes on New Mexico working
families and small businesses by
about eight hundred million
dollars with the from the budget
for that.
And and I just want to talk
about that for one second
because you all know this is
near and dear to my heart.
I have been told during times
of.
Budget crisis that we can't do
tax reform because what if the
money doesn't show up.
And it also would not until
during times of budget surplus
that we can do tax reform
because we have priorities and
things we need to take care of
and we can always do that next
year so madam speaker jelly.
We take this but a substitute.
Pretended to make meaningful
changes for New Mexico families
and I'll talk about that here in
just a moment.
We also take steps to hold state
spending on management level.
And then all of what we talk
about that here in a little bit
as well and also increase
reserves.
by about a hundred eight eighty
three million dollars a modest
increase in reserves.
And then.
Sure that not occur spending
including and spend our funds.
It's provided more consistently
with the priority for New Mexico
working families first instead
of government first.
One of the Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's really the same of.
Of the substitute you'll see
that we do not to increase state
budgets.
As much.
Instead use that money to help
New Mexico families.
so Mr speaker and generally
just.
Are requests for some high high
level.
details Senator for cancer for
public education.
We.
The seven percent raise for
teachers and other school
employees.
Also to the street here teacher
salaries to fifty thousand fifty
thousand seventy thousand match
the governor's proposal.
also wondered why one percent
increases required by some of
the forty two.
We do a five percent increase
the categorical so three percent
increase to related programs the
public education department it's
a two percent increase so not as
much as possible to but they're
still going increases.
Education another priority that
we have built we all agree on.
We get a ten percent increase in
financial funding other
categorical so.
before staff increases
and then higher education but
also it's a two percent
increase.
so again not not quite as much
as hospital to right we're we're
doing half the spending but
still for that this is a
significant priority.
Medicaid.
To address a significant part of
the potential lapse in federal
match with reoccurring money
within a lot in a nonrecurring
money because we still don't
know when exactly we're gonna
find out whether it's a.
were no match for Medicaid or
not
but we can now we can tell you
that was without spending
fourteen percent.
at forty percent levels can also
get a two percent increase to
Human Services three percent of
the Courts to percent increase
the district attorney's two
percent opposed offenders.
Supercenters engineer three
percent to the part of health
ten percent to the public.
To public safety.
to maintain funding for the
livestock board.
and.
Yes try to finance four percent
increase.
for the county governments to
transport state prisoners so a
lot of these.
Are identical to were similar.
You too much and house bill two
or slightly lower last.
The big difference here is all
other state and and agencies we
hold them at current funding
levels will increase in state
agencies provide what I think
that that's okay.
When we look at.
Funding increases his department
since two thousand nineteen and
I just have a few here.
Representative thousand to.
What are tourism their budget
increased by twenty two point
five percent.
economic development apartments
thirty one point one percent
increase.
DFA seventeen point four percent
increase.
Originals natural resources
seventeen point nine percent
increase in violent Department
forty point six percent increase
control FIR is eleven point two.
Asian licensing five point
three.
I mean I I could go on.
governor's office you know fifty
seven point nine percent.
but we've done a lot of work
these last couple years to
increase government spending
towards government agencies.
And I would hope that they're in
a good place.
And and so that's why I would
like to focus instead of
increasing government agencies
budgets on helping working
families in.
Sako.
Right now a little bit more
this morning the budget for
thirteen point.
Thirteen dollars fifty cent rate
Please.
There's one here for the seven
percent pay raise for all public
employees.
using the same sports that
hospital to address three
percent increase in April.
to
twenty twenty two number four
percent in July of twenty twenty
two
five percent state agency health
premium.
increases house bill to increase
the Chernobyl appropriations
we've done.
And so total spending is roughly
five hundred twenty four million
dollars a seven percent
increase.
All quickly talk about
nonrecurring.
In order to funds and and then
I'll stand for questions so
nonrecurring.
we have again very similar but
we do provide a higher sixty
million dollars to the next part
of transportation for all
projects reform nonrecurring
money they were blessed with
right now infrastructure
infrastructure roads roads.
We also the forty million to
and your team for local road
projects associate was an in
house bill two.
Troubling for Human Services
Department for hospitals
response.
this is a something that works
at about two sixty million
dollars to rebuild the veterans
home.
Fifty million dollars higher
education state matching funds
for federal funding it's a great
a great programmer since that.
That's a little bit less than
was in house bill two but almost
to the exact match that's a
great thing in the budget.
Turner for Mr off of the Courts
certain for superintendent
insurance.
here something new as well that
we feel strongly about twenty
five million.
Of the public safety for New
statewide anti federal program.
We've we've heard from our
communities from law enforcement
the federal is really of the
scourge of our time and so this
could be a help to address that.
and then there's others insured
as well that I won't
you know there's you know six
more dollars for state engineer
for getting the tobacco
settlement those kinds of things
but.
Nonrecurring spending is.
Five hundred and fourteen
million.
in the property however funds
the last.
The last part of of this budget
to.
You know we a hundred and five
million dollars into Lida Indian
market for rural New Mexico.
Trump for anticrime grants to
local government
and retention recruitment for
law enforcement officers.
another fifty million to ten for
local projects Representative
five million to DOT for major
highway projects.
Fifty one for the lottery
scholarship.
Ten million dollars to workforce
solutions to many ways from
abuse the new implement benefits
processing.
And and and other dollars that
we're going to but we and we
appropriate a total of seven
hundred twenty three point six
million dollars of the opera
funds.
So
that's only only appropriations.
the.
The remaining eight hundred
million dollars I talked about
that we reserve for.
Tax reform.
We propose reducing the gross
receipts tax rate by a half of a
percent instead of the twenty
two I that was suggested earlier
that cost roughly three to two
sixty million.
Addressed G. R. T. permitting
completely completely address
the business to business
professional service G. R. T.
issue and it's about a hundred
ten million dollars so something
we've been all talking about and
working on for for years I
mentioned earlier my frustration
well we're gonna take care of
it.
we also include enough funding
to a sense of security benefits
from state income tax Senator
total budget for student tax
with the three hundred as are
certain thousand dollar
exemption and one time tax
rebate for all families with
incomes up to one hundred
thousand dollars.
And that includes two hundred
ten dollars per individual so a
family of four would get a four
hundred
and forty dollars tax rebate
so really trying to help with
this plenty set up our tax code
to be in a good place to help
families and small businesses in
New Mexico.
And then the rest of the last
thing I'll mention about the
bill.
Remove nearly all of the
language dictating to our local
public schools what they must do
to receive this funding.
and removes these mandates from
Santa Fe would support.
Education the power of education
back in the hands of the parents
and not in.
Bureaucrats or or folks that are
it's a miles away.
I mean I really believe and I
have four children I really
believe it's one of those who
were impacted most by COVID.
And we do know we have an
education crisis here and I
think.
We need to have a representative
Mexico and change how we're
doing things in and what better
than to give the power back to
the parents.
So with that.
Madam speaker in and body I
will.
For any questions.
Thank you gentlemen gentle lady
is this a friendly floor
substitute.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen of.
Justin what I've heard and I and
I do forage before I I say this
I I want to thank the gentleman
you know there is some good
ideas.
Hi
Appreciate the work of the other
side of the aisle on this.
It helps us because some of the
information that's been provided
today goes back into our process
is we're looking at it during
the interim.
And I and I sincerely appreciate
the.
I would have a lot of questions
and I know the gentleman didn't
want to take a lot of time on
this but at this point I I don't
see this is a friendly floor
substitute.
But.
I do want to say I want to thank
you for the work.
I want I want to thank you for
your thinking on this because
this is an easy.
Thank you.
Thank you generally the Is there
debate on the floor substitute.
The gentleman sent from San Juan
County.
Thank you madam chair does the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
yield.
Speaker I yield.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman
I appreciate of this I I
appreciate the opportunity
for.
several members on our side to
be able to have at least an
opportunity to see of a bill
that has a lot of the priorities
that that everybody jointly in
this chamber hold
but
Madam speaker and and gentleman.
I think there.
has been over the years
expressions from from members on
on both side of the aisle about.
About our process and I and I
think the the the the real.
Session here and and I I know I
had a debate with the chairman
and and or had a discussion of
what we're debating another bill
another committee that I serve
on and the chairman of stated
something that I agree with
which is the majority of the
members
in the chamber.
Don't have any real
opportunity to help form the
budget and so and I and I know
why the couple years ago when
when when the minority and and
and Representative Harper you
introduced.
Hey a substitute a budget like
you are today.
And there was a question about.
How you know how how did you
come up with this budget and how
did you and we use the same
numbers that actually that the
folks of the staff
In the LFC David Abbey and and
Charles put into this and we
just use that same information
but.
The.
The question I think on our side
a lot of times is there's a lot
of good things madam chair in
your budget there's a lot of
things that everybody in this
chamber agrees on.
And and there is an opportunity
because of the money that came
in this year.
The problem that I think that we
have on on this side of.
Representative
We.
I have seen in the past we've
talked about that big up and
down and the concern I think on
our side and I and I said and
correct me if I'm wrong but the
concern that right now our
budget.
With one time dollars is really.
Hi.
We're talking eight billion
dollar.
Budget.
Thank you can
madam chair Madam speaker.
And Representative Harper.
I am looking at a lot of those
dollars coming from really high
oil and gas prices the prices
right now.
But also the.
Federal dollars that are here
because of COVID Warner and do
you expect that the Madam
speaker and and and
Representative do you expect I
was of those.
Dollars to just continue coming
in from the federal government.
So madam speaker and Jennifer
San Juan you raise a great point
which is a large portion of this
increase.
They were saying I mean
obviously a large portions from
the oil and gas industry right
we get roughly forty percent of
our revenue from that industry
but also we're seeing a large
increase in G. R. T. in income
tax because of the federal
distributions.
John was a COVID a pandemic soon
to be epidemic is yes and and
we've already single starting to
taper off.
Your so I I do not believe that
we will continue to see that so
I I'm sure hope that
or or appropriators in our folks
that are part of the the the
Craig you know revenue
estimating group are taking into
account that we're gonna see a
big dip.
In G. R. T. in income taxes
because we're no longer
receiving work thousands of
dollars each household and
comment stimulus payments and I
was thinking about madam speaker
and and and gentleman
in looking at that
no.
I think are the big concern I
think you expressed and once
again correct me if I'm wrong it
is about the recurring dollars
it it's I think it's probably
irresponsible to have these
dollars coming from the federal
government and we don't spend I
think we do have needs all
across our state that we do need
to spend those dollars but that
the consequence of Madam speaker
and gentleman with spending one
time dollars and increasing
recurring budget what what are
the consequences that Gemmer
asset management and John from
San Juan has a thank you again
for the question and and I'm
just concerned that.
You know we got a pay raise.
But we're spending more than we
got our pay raise and so what
that means is eventually react
to go and cut things are better
pull things back.
Mr leader gentleman Madam
speaker and gentleman I I was
here when we swept the balances
from our K. through twelve
public schools and that was a
creative credibly painful from
everyone involved wanted to do
it.
but we put ourselves in a
situation where that was one of
our few remaining options.
and I I just think if we were
just a little more disciplined
and and exercise a little more
self control and we're always
looking for the next election.
For the.
Could do a much better job of
making sure that the rest of New
Mexico are working families of
New Mexico on impacted the way
they are now we have
oscillations in our Revenue.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman you mentioned a little
bit about the rebate in your
substitute back to the folks in
New Mexico I think that's one of
the things that one of the
biggest criticisms that I hear
when I go home is why is it that
the legislature.
Feels like they are better
prepared to spend my tax dollars
than I am.
That's a that's the number one
criticism I get is.
Money goes into Santa Fe.
And it doesn't come back and so
madam speaker and gentleman I
just appreciate the opportunity
that that your substitute gives
me and I think so many of the
folks on this side of the aisle
an opportunity to be able to
vote.
For a budget that I think has a
major things that both sides of
the chamber
agree on.
And it gives us an opportunity
to to exclude maybe some things
that we see as a as a bad thing
which is just growing as you
mentioned that so many of the
departments that grew twenty
percent to fifty percent in the
last several years and we see
more growth we see in this in
this budget.
And it's just always going to
happen you have these the
different apartments that are
gonna come to LFC during the
interim and none of nobody's
gonna ever say no give me less
money on how we see if you look
at those.
The expenditures out of those
departments.
The last year the dollars that
reverted back to the budget
because they were unable to
spend those dollars.
But yet they come in and ask for
an increase and madam speaker
and gentleman I think another
thing that is at least for
myself and I know members on on
the side that have expressed an
issue with the budget of so many
things in the budget.
That haven't gone through the
legislative process yet there's
money put in there for bills
that are still working their way
through the process.
And madam speaker and gentleman
it's just appear sometimes as if
items that end up in the budget.
Have already.
Been provided through the LESC
process before we ever came here
and that money goes in there and
then we're expected to fund it
because what we hear a committee
is all the money for this is
already in the budget that was
before anybody in this chamber
was able to that the legislation
or even consider it it's just in
there and and and and and a
budget here like this without
those items even necessarily
being put on the call but
because they're in the budget.
There they are so I I believe
that's a problem Madam speaker
and gentleman and and just one
last thing about it would you
want to just respond to that
okay and one last thing.
I think I'm gonna I think there
is a process that we can go to
in the future.
And I would love to have this
discussion I know that there's a
could there's an a memorial to
look at the the budget process I
I would love to see something
that happens in the city that
doesn't happen here usually I
don't want to copy what's
happening in DC Representative
but in DC.
Before.
The process begins for what
would be share our legislative
finance committee before that
the entire legislature the
entire house chamber.
Goes through a process it
through and through this through
being in session they go through
the process of having a budget
resolution.
And so the parameters around the
budget.
Every member of the house
chamber.
Gets to have a voice prior to.
In the budget process starts
moving forward and then from
there it looks exactly like our
process it goes through
of the the the departments that
work for the legislature and for
this they start working towards
an end product and then we get
to vote on it but many folks
today.
Your the the the substitute that
you brought forward today that's
the first time that most of the
people the chamber were able to
see it.
In the same regard.
The actual budget that will pass
out of here today.
Most of the people in this
chamber have not seen that
before today not in this for
maybe portions of it.
This is not a good process and I
think madam speaker and
gentleman
I would love to see the process
changed but until then I
appreciate you giving me the
opportunity to be able to vote
for something that really shows.
Remember my folks what the
values that I hold our staff
when it comes to spending
dollars and I and I I thank you
for bringing that for today
thank you madam speaker.
Thank you Mr thank you
gentlemen.
Is there further debate.
I'm not saying I'm nineteen and
the gentleman to close thank you
madam speaker I appreciate the
option to close before the
tabling motion
I just wanted to make.
The CENIC some people.
Madam speaker was a body very
much want to sing the
legislative finance committee
staff for helping us it means so
much that we can rely on you all
not just for help here but for
objective.
And and and and as non political
as possible help answer your
questions and drafting our
budget means a lot so we we want
to really thank you from the
bottom our hearts I also very
much like to thank
Rick may
We love having you here with
thank you we thank him for his
help.
And finally I'd like to thank
the generated from McKinley and
so on.
I very much appreciate the
compliment I want to compliment
to I appreciate the great order
and the wearing of of different
priorities the the challenges
that you your committee and the
LESC staff face and and I
appreciate and respect that from
you madam.
A chair.
And with that Mr speaker I was
moved to a the floor leader okay
the motion is to adopt for
substitute all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All this was a.
This close but the motion failed
gentleman thank you I think it's
a little bit of private of the
chair thank you for what was a
very thoughtful and considerate
and
enjoyable debate to listen to so
thank you Sir thank you Mr
speaker there's further debate
the gentleman from Dona Ana
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr speaker will gentle
lady LA I be happy to yield
Mister speaker.
Thank you to all eighty as a
member of the house
appropriations and finance
committee I understand all the
hard work that goes into this
and I would like to acknowledge
the chairwoman's efforts as well
as the staff's efforts I learned
a lot and I know I will continue
to learn but I do have some
questions around public
education.
So I know we're making a very
large investment of public
education and what I would like
to ask you
gentle lady or if you could
speak about how this investment
applies to the Martinez Yazzie
litigation.
Thank you Mr of Mr speaker and
gentleman.
What it does is a.
We have several different items
Mr speaker gentleman in both
recurring and non recurring that
we feel ties back to those items
that were identified in the
martini up of Martinez Yazzie
lawsuit and Mr speaker gentleman
it starts was things as simple
as educator across the board
raises is making sure that we
can retain our educators and
that we're attracting educators
into the field.
We're also looking at out of the
increase to the three tier
minimum salary increase.
Of we'd also have included the
opportunity for extended
learning time programs for those
districts that would choose to
do this.
also looked at K. five plus and
E. L. T. P. salary increases.
Institution instructional
materials we've increase that
we've increased mentorship.
at risk interventions early
literacy of things like that Mr
speaker gentleman.
Thank you gentle lady in a those
are believed to be very
essential to to our efforts to
opt to not only comply with the
with the court order but also to
give our students a better
footing in a in a better
opportunity in our schools
because as we all know public
education the great equalizer
and we need to maintain and
And look forward to the funding
is a very good and legitimate
projects one one other thing Mr
speaker gentle lady
Hi how do these efforts for how
these efforts gonna help with
recruitment and retention of of
highly qualified person.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I think what this does
particularly when we're looking
at salary increases and putting
more money basically into the
districts what that does is that
helps with retention and I think
once you've got a strong
retention what that does is
attract people into the field
because people then see Mr
speaker gentleman that this is
something that they want to do
that they want to be involved
with it and then make the
commitment to stay.
Thank you are deleting Mr
speaker one one last question so
how would this Mr speaker gentle
lady how does this framework
that we work for how does how
does it allow local school
districts local school boards to
decide how they want to
implement these programs so
there is flexibility.
Yes Mr speaker gentleman they do
and particularly when it comes
to the extended learning time
programs that is not mandatory
Mr speaker gentleman that is the
decision of the local boards.
Thank you gentlelady in thank
you Mr speaker as we all know
that that flexibility is very
important to our local
communities because we know what
our needs are in our local
communities and then we can take
care of our our our our students
and our in our in our schools
and in thank you very much
deleting thank you Mr speaker
that's all I have.
Thank you gentlemen that there's
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Thompson's on the chamber Mexico
the gentle lady from granted all
go and this year.
Thank you Mr speaker with a
gentlelady yields and be happy
to yield Mister speaker thank
you Mr speaker and thank you
gentle lady and I I to just want
to thank the Legislative Council
services our finance committee
and the LFC staff L. E. S. C.
staff for all the hard work they
put into this I I know they the
the members of that committee
spend more time and interim
committee and coming up here
before session starts there's so
much extra hours that are put on
and I just I want to thank
everybody for that and in in
pass infirmities I've I've
served as an alternate and it is
it's quite a lot of time
commitment traveling and I also
want to commend the the
chairwoman for her commitment to
travel around the state so that
we can see first hand what's
needed in local communities and
so that we can get so that folks
are able to participate and this
year Mr speaker and Madam chair
of what I know you guys travel
to a lot of places with where
was the place that you have not
been before were you saw was
what was a commonality that you
saw needs across the state.
Thank you Mr speaker and I want
to thank the gentle lady for
that question
it is incredibly important and
that's been the.
The guidance that I provided to
the committee that we will
travel
we've gone to Los crucis we went
to rural does so we went to the
to my area we've been inTaos of
in just a number of places we
tried to divide the state up and
what we hear consistently our
first we start with community
needs and then we get into
agency concerns of there was a
lot of discussion Mr speaker
gentle lady around health issues
there was a lot of discussion
around education issues a lot of
discussion around higher read
issues of social service issues
there was tremendous a
discussion around the need for
infrastructure whether it's
airports our roads so I I I want
to thank you for raising that Mr
speaker gentle lady because we
spend a lot of time on the road
we are one of those committees
that is out there we travel and
we were inside that community
thank you Mr speaker and and
thank you chairman for that and
I I definitely think that
something I'm hearing is I'm
going across the state is to the
things that that I think are
really really important
infrastructure investment and
with this type of a surplus this
type of opportunity make
investments and and and
infrastructure that many rural
communities would never other
otherwise be able to complete
projects I feel a little lost
because of the you know we don't
see this budget until today you
know we were told that our
capital outlay is around one
point eight million I don't
maybe that's the solid figure
could be moving that
demonstration projects and all
of our communities far far
exceed what we're able to to
Fund but for some reason not all
the capital money is being put
to the to the role of the
legislators I understanding
unusually large amount is being
held back by the governor could
you explain that to me for the
executive to decide.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and I did want to mention also
to one of the key subcommittees
that we had this year was a
subcommittee regarding the
veterans home in tier C..
That project was initiated by
Representative Harry Garcia.
When he brought that to our
attention we sent propose a
subcommittee.
Right several times to actually
get in to the facility and due
to to to I believe it was COVID
issues the committee was not
allowed to go in.
I believe that the committee
traveled was at three or four
times to go and visit that that
facility.
And finally Mr speaker gentle
lady they were able to get it.
There was money put in in the
special for that facility
but if I want you to know Mr
speaker and members that there
was a small group of people
subcommittee from LESC and LFC
staff the travel down there four
times.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you chairman thank you so much
for bringing that up and I want
to thank you for the invitation
that was extended to myself and
to Senator Diamond to
participate in those and if you
are the only ones who aren't
allowed in it to go over here
almost a year and a half before
I was able to go in and and.
Fund the veterans calls.
Over forty five veterans died
during the COVID.
They had critical needs that
went on that and I'm so proud of
the members of this committee
that is not a partisan issue our
veterans deserve better and and
I'm so grateful that we were
able to express those concerns
and that you quickly responded
in the members of the LFC that
is it is it is it something we
should celebrate and in this
chamber and in the state because
it's it's long overdue and
there's a point when they're
just gonna shut it down.
Is going to shut it down and you
guys stop that we stopped it
together and I I really do
appreciate chairman Garcia he's
not in here but I really do
appreciate his efforts and and
the efforts of other members on
the committee and I'm also
really grateful that
Representative Gail Armstrong
will now be representing the
area that includes the the
veterans hospital the the
veterans center and I know that
she'll carry that advocacy on.
We talked about infrastructure
Mr Chairman representative the
other thing that I'm hearing
across the state is a cry from
parents.
Parents.
Were multi cultural multi racial
they're all across the state
saying that they want their
voices heard.
At R. Elia State committee in
terms of public comment.
Parents would come and say.
I'm a police officer and a
minority in my fifth grade
student was told that I'm a
racist.
It's simply not true I love I
love our pledge.
Is he a similar perfect
friendship among United
cultures.
And so
very concerned about some of the
language in the bills that were
passing in the past and some of
the language in the bills that
appropriated house bill two what
will it when you look at the
procreation it's not specific
but when you look at the bill
that's attached to it it's very
specific and so I do have an
amendment and this is in
response to the cry of parents
across the state and I would
like to introduce a an
amendment.
so Mister speaker I would like
to move house floor amendment
one two appropriation and
finance cubs Committee
substitute for House Bills two
and three.
And I'd like to have a roll call
vote will
Julian please reforming the to
to number a few minutes point
two two two four six eight point
one.
Very good delays move the
foreman gentlelady to explain
this is an amendment I'll just
read it the public education
department shall not approve the
operating budget of any school
district or charter school that
during the twenty two twenty
three school year offers courses
related to any theory or
ideology that espouses the view
that one race is inherently
racist sexist one tension only
earning virtually oppressive one
spouses of you that one race is
inherently responsible for the
intentional or independent
oppression of another race.
Over the last two years R. K.
through twelve students they
become the sick as they've ever
been the house medicated they've
ever been there are motor there
were suicidal.
They've spent more screen time
than ever before.
They've lost social engagement
like never before and they have
an overall sense of isolation
and confusion this is from our
recall reporting and Mr chair Mr
speaker and madam chairman I
think this is exactly the wrong
time.
For us to add any sort of
curriculum or any sort of
language that would suggest that
based on something they have no
control over.
The biological sex or the gender
race they are inherently racist
sexist or intentionally and hit
with oppressive and Mister
speaker madam chair and stand
for questions.
Okay so we're gonna do is we
have folks up on the board for
debate on the bill this folks
that wish to be the amendment
please you to raise your hand on
zoom in the board operator let
me know or stand up.
I see no debate.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
speaker I move to table the
amendment Mr speaker I was
standing.
Our standing for debate okay
well.
No you were you were doing
anything indicate to me you
wanted to debate anyway but
nevertheless Jennifer San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker
the gentle lady from grant a
logo and Sierra counties yield
thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the majority minority whip from
San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
this issue the way you describe
it affects my family directly.
speaker gentle lady.
My children.
And my grandchildren.
Are Hispanic and native American
and what I live of Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Is.
We have the largest native
American population in the
state.
In a round of San Juan County
and then bordering us is really
the county and out that border
is the hickory a patchy tribe
and.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
This is this is something that
gives me real heartburn.
That.
One group of children.
Being taught.
That they need to feel feel
guilty.
For what I believe is a racist
statement which is.
That they're in a superior
position.
Because their Anglo.
That is inherently racist
statement.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
because somebody is of European
descent.
That they are in a position of
superiority.
Think about it the over the
years what has become called
institutional racism start out
of started out years ago as a
discussion of white superiority.
What we have now embraced.
The discussion.
That that is exactly correct and
the folks.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that.
My family.
Has.
Of what in the early civil
rights.
And among Hispanics in the
state.
I have now the the movie has now
embraced the language that.
People of European descent are
in fact superior because that is
what.
C. O. to essentially the same.
That is essentially what
institutional racism is saying
is that.
One hundred.
Is in fact Superior.
And that another group of
children need to be taught Mr
speaker.
That.
They are in for the in fact need
to be angry for being an
inferior position.
That is a problem.
I don't believe that that is the
case in New Mexico and miss
madam speaker gentle lady you
you you mentioned our our pledge
The New Mexico flag.
The seasonal of perfect.
Friendship among United cultures
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
And.
To this to this budget is to
ensure that we don't teach
something that's at odds with
our very.
Salute to the New Mexico flag is
that correct the speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker and gentleman in
part yes we are also strongly
Catholic and Protestant state
and we believe that you know
according to scripture we all
come from the same man and we
all come from the same father so
we are made from one man every
nation every man kind live on
all the face of the earth having
determined their appointed time
and boundaries for their their
inhabitation and so I think it's
it's a worldview that we share
in many ways.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
does your legislation state.
That the atrocities that have
happened in history.
Cannot be taught Mr speaker and
gentleman no not at all this
this is about.
What our children for the last
two years have been subjected
to.
They've been isolated.
They are.
Spending more screen time than
ever before they're sicker than
they've ever been there market
market medicated more suicidal
we've had dramatic increases in
child abuse neglect dramatic
increases in homicide.
They lost their social
engagement and this is the
opposite direction to tell them
that they're oppressed.
For that just based on their sex
or their race that they're
inherently oppressed or
oppressor.
Speaker gentle lady you
mentioned that you mentioned the
words of the Bible there and
where we all come from and who
all gave us life the speaker and
gentle lady are you aware of the
scripture that states.
That.
The sins of the father cannot be
held against the sun and that
the sins of the sun cannot be
held against the father.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Is that.
What as we understand and in
some of the
documents have gone out from the
public education department to
be taught is that.
To some degree we need to look
at one group.
Not that there.
The the not not that their
ancestors did things that were
atrocious not to say that there
wasn't bad behavior among.
Among those groups of people but
that out of that came comes
continuing oppression.
Mr speaker gentle lady is that
continuing oppression what that
idea of continuing oppression is
that what you're legislation is
saying should not be taught in
schools Mr speaker and and
gentleman from San Juan County
I'm not trying to specify or
define anything beyond the fact
that the children.
Of New Mexicans feel our
children our grandchildren.
Who are do not determine the sex
their their biological gender
they do not determine the race
they do not determine the
circumstances that they are born
into.
And they should not be told
based on those circumstances
that they can't control that
they are intentionally or
unintentionally oppressive.
And that one race or sex is
responsible for intentional or
inner current oppression of
another race I'm not asking that
history be changed we need to
speak the truth of history and
celebrate we've moved past those
things in the progress we've
made and even in knowledge
additional work that needs to be
done but to tell a young child
has gone through.
Two years of being the sick as
they've ever been those
medicated that other than the
most suicidal they've ever been
spent more time on the screen
and less time in social
engagement and have an overall
sense of fear and confusion we
do not eat at this it should not
be added thank you Mr speaker
and and gentle lady I'm gonna.
Look forward to to voting for
your amendment in part because
as I stated that I'm not just
talking about my children not
just my grand children who are
in school today.
I'm talking about.
I'm talking about.
The majority of the state it is
amazing when you talk to the
different pueblos and and and if
they have in the Navajo Nation
of the in the in the Apaches
how.
Read these cultures are.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady.
I want my grandchildren who are
my my children who are quarter
Anglo.
To think that that side.
And that side of the family is
oppressive and racist that's not
what they has not the experience
they have with those relatives
or look at their Hispanic.
For native American side which
is you know they're quarter
Navajo and and half Spanish.
That that that is a victim that
is a position of victimhood.
Speaker and and gentle and
gentle lady.
The idea.
Of trying to push on to our
children and our grandchildren
the idea that they are victims.
And have no control over their
life.
Speaker gentle lady I think
that's abuse.
I think what you're doing is you
are setting a false glass
ceiling over those children.
And some of speaker and gentle
lady I encourage the body.
To vote for your amendment to
ensure that we are not sending
our children of all people of
all the people who do not seek
color.
Of all the people.
To introduce something that
focuses on.
A dividing line.
Of.
race.
Language accent city.
Culture.
To put that dividing line in
place and it instituted in in of
all things.
You know our our our our how we
spend our money and and what
we're going to fund Mr speaker
and gentle lady I I just I I
cannot abide that.
And I and I know folks that I
hear from many of my family who
are still distant relatives that
are cousins that are still that
are that are still members of
the Democrat party is I see many
more of them coming offer
the idea.
That that.
Somehow.
Just by merely being a minority.
That somehow we're disadvantaged
I think that's offensive and to
have that type of language in
our schools has got to that has
got to stop and so Mr speaker
and and gentle lady hi I look
forward to supporting your
amendment.
There is for the right before
you go on gentleman from San
Juan would you kindly
for the sake of the body review
rule seven dash nineteen.
Which is approved the beginning
of the session and don a
facemask as the rest of us are.
the gentle lady from Sir Mr
speaker point of order.
Mr speaker in your absence we
had several members on on.
Several colleagues that as ages
to debate this morning took the
mask off.
And so I'm just wondering if
there's going to be a petty
quality here somewhere thank you
for joining us on a point of
order and.
Logo on the gentle lady.
The generator Santa Fe
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker I generally
do you use your time thank you
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo Sandoval in
Santa Fe thank you
Mr chairman and representative
of I just gonna make a really
brief statements and we have to
move along.
There was a interim committee an
education that I went to to go
speak about what they use the
word disruption of America by
Hispanics and I'm very much
against that wording I don't
want to divisive language so I
went out and I spoke to
various Hispanic Democrat
organizations and they are
furious about this language so
on what you know when it came to
speak about that it wasn't just
me I was also speaking for
Hispanic Democrats across the
state of New Mexico then in our
new social studies program
they're going to use the word
disruption of America by
Spaniards and I think that is
very divisive language be using
so I just want to make that very
clear that there is a lot of
Democrats the Hispanic that
opposes so thank you for being
for this ammendment thank you
all my time.
Is there further debate.
Gentleman from Bernalillo is
Instagram to table the
amendment.
Well the motion is that there
has been a roll call vote
requests.
The motion is table the
amendment if the motion passes
the amendment will be tabled
vote of.
No and we'll be back on debate
of the amendment.
The vote is now open.
Yes.
The clerk of the members without
a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Anderson.
Representative.
Debbie Armstrong Deborah
Armstrong.
Yes to table Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong votes yes
Representative bash.
This table Representative bash
foods yes Representative Buka.
Yes Representative Google both
yes Representative Cadena.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes I Mr member
Representative ease L..
Representative and then this.
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Lewis.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Is excuse Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Table Representative Roybal
Caballero is yes Representative
Rubio.
Yes to table Representative
Rubio is a yes.
Forty two in the affirmative
twenty two in the negative the
house floor amendment has been
tabled gentle lady used before
thank you Mr speaker.
There's further debate serve.
Those keeping track at home.
We are back on debate of the
bill there's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker will my
neighbor please yield I'd be
happy to yield Mister speaker
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady Fund is this the perfect
budget no I didn't get
everything I wanted so but it's
a really really good budget and
I'm gonna tell you a few of the
things that I I especially like
about it.
I'm the one point three billion
in general fund revenue for
Medicaid.
And that and that of the twenty
eight million in state funds for
hospital and nursing home labor
costs and remember that I'm not
sure what the match is right now
but we get about three cents on
the dollar for so for each of
those dollars is triple.
And then
fourteen point four million to
provide postpartum health care
for a year after delivery how
exciting is that that we can I
think about the mom in New
Orleans it County who who got to
our with sand and called out for
help and we failed her
this this can help prevent
situations like that those of
you who have been mothers are
mothers know how really hard
that first year is and so this
will help help take care of the
health care needs of women after
they've given birth.
Four point two million to help
lose the healthcare workforce I
know you've all heard this
before particularly on health
and Human Services Committee but
Mexico had a health care
shortage before the pandemic.
And we've lost a lot of health
care providers who got fed up
with being treated like dirt who
died.
Can not possibly do that work
because they have someone at
home that can't get the virus so
this will help us to to rebuild
our health care system.
Additional support.
Give me support for behavioral
health including twenty million
to develop providers we've been
I mean our health our behavioral
health system was gutted in two
thousand thirteen thirteen and
we've been working for a decade
to try and fix it and we're
still not there this twenty
million will help us.
Four million for the new nine
eight eight crisis now hotline.
Someone talked about the suicide
rate this this is to help with
that.
the department of health budget
increased by eight point seven
percent twenty seven point six
million
I'm gonna save the best for last
I'll skip over that
CYFD has a seven point five
percent increase which is great
and it's for evidence based
services such as early
intervention which I've done for
years intensive case management
wraparound services and other
things that will help
help our families who are having
a hard time and protect our kids
early childhood two million for
home visiting one point four
million for tribal early
childhood services one million
four workforce supports for
childcare work early childhood
workers.
We need a new microphone thing
might terms get tied.
So I saved the best for last.
The DD waiver.
That's why I'm here I started
fighting for people on the
waiting list for the DD waiver.
Probably thirty years ago I
started fighting for this and
this budget actually I got a
text from the director of the
developments disability services
division and they are working on
allocating twelve hundred.
People we are going to end this
thirteen to fourteen year
waiting list in three years we
should be incredibly proud of
that there are families in New
Mexico who have been holding on
by their fingernails literally
with that with the child with a
disability and this finally I
mean this is this is like a
dream come true to me and to a
lot of you in here too that's
one thing that we have heard
about through the years if
you're new you've heard from
families in your district if
you've been around for a long
time you've heard from families
in your district so to wrap up
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I served four years on probation
I know they work their **** off
and can we please give them a
round of applause.
In this the staff is wonderful
and hard working and I am proud
to vote for this budget thank
you madam chair and Mr speaker I
mean.
The gentle lady.
Thank you generally there's
further debate the gentleman
from Bernalillo Cibola making
agora San Juan evidencia
Representative Harry Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
madam chair be jail to me I'd be
happy to yield Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker madam chair
of madam chair this budget
touches on the education higher
education transportation public
safety public health behavior
health of crime reform of junior
citizens and veterans is that
correct madam chair.
Mr speaker that is correct.
Thank you madam chair you know
madam chair Mister speaker in
all of the.
To be.
Part of the process of this
It's a new to the state of New
Mexico chair Mister speaker.
Madam chair I am particularly
proud of the money was set aside
for the new vision.
School madam chair could you
please touch on the ball.
Because of this of eternal New
Jersey.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
You know that would but I
understand that this this
veterans facilities over almost
a hundred years old.
It's one that is in dire need
for repair.
And I want to thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman for
leading the charge in
recognizing what those veterans
needs are we selected as as a
first choice the members of that
are veterans on the LFC to join
you.
to visit the the visit the
facility along with our LFC
staff in determining what needed
to be done.
And others Mr speaker kind of
jumped out there in front of but
at the end of the day that was
an LFC subcommittee I went down
there to the evaluate that
situation it's badly needed it
needs a complete overhaul and we
think that we've got a pathway
to get there.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker of Madam chair of
federal match to this morning
when we're putting in for the
senators on bottom.
Mr speaker yes there is for.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker all.
You know what what down there
the fifth time I went on there
the funding industry it and I
will with the secretary of
regional sure this is
We can only find it in me and
then I'd for the facility madam
chair orange street the purpose
is in dire shape have you
rebuild you know I spoke to all
of them of patients for prize
for their work on their in
their.
They are not very happy.
Additions unlike Representative
dollars should earlier in all we
lost twenty four twenty five
energy table with the
disabilities in dire shape of a
building on I would be basically
a Madam chair Mister speaker and
madam chair Mister speaker I
would like to on behalf of the
dissident installers which are
Representative Alcon
Representative Randy Crowder
Representative David Rowe sure
non and myself of
thank you thank you for the
support to shorter Veterans it
is very very important that we
all take care of these problems
Madam chair and Mr speaker
that's all I have thank you for
our committees the.
Mr the debate the gentle and if
done in a Representative
Ferrary.
Who is not here the gentle lady
from a terror Representative
black.
Thank you Mr speaker visit
gentle lady peeled I'd be happy
to yield Mister speaker.
Thank you gentle lady and Mr
speaker I first off I want to
express my thanks to you and
your committee for all the hard
work that you all have done on
this
Speaking to Representative
Garcia's comments on the
veterans home I I think that's a
very important thing I know when
the the military Veterans
Affairs Committee actually
visited of.
The tier C. area we were not
allowed in either and we were
trying to get a tour that
facility as well so I'm glad
that that your subcommittee
finally got that done so thank
you madam chair
you madam chair I would like to
propose an amendment.
I think it's being passed out.
Because then thank you.
With senator John Kerry do you
have it.
I.
No it's still.
Okay Jennifer curry we did
forget about you.
Mr speaker I think there is a
paper shortage.
Sure some of the.
I don't want.
Originally from current look at
you okay.
gentlelady from Otero would you
please read the two oh two
number from the bottom right of
the amendment thank you Mr
speaker I would like to move
house floor amendment help.
Sorry just to own up to number
point two two one eight six four
one.
Point one sorry let me start
over point two two one eight six
four dot one seven.
I'm just getting.
And so the generally to explain
you mentioned.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady it's a pretty simple
amendment what I basically would
like to do is I would like to
add in on page one ninety three
of between lines four and five I
would like to answer the
following.
perforation to the department of
public safety for twenty five
million dollars to help.
Implement a statewide anti
Fenton Fenton all program to
reduce crime.
Okay
I'll go to the gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan is this a
friendly amendment and why or
why not.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady
I believe that this would not be
a friendly amendment for a
couple reasons we do have of
tremendous amount of money
already in the in the bill
that's being proposed this may
be seen as duplicative and also
it brings our reserve the low
thirty percent.
Okay is not for the moment is
there debate.
the gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I'm not move the
amendment yet issue had.
Can I get a roll call vote on
that Mr speaker please sure
speaker I move to table the
amendment will.
The.
The motion and the motion is to
table house floor amendment
proposed for the gentle lady the
vote of yes the amendment will
be tabled are of no will be back
on debate of the amendment the
vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes to table Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong votes yes
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative bash votes yes
Representative Buka.
Yes Representative bone levels
yes Representative Cadena.
Representative ease L..
I think we're farther along
remember me.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes representative Lente
yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
The table Representative Roybal
Caballero votes yes
Representative Rubio.
Yes to table Representative
Rubio votes yes.
The road is closed by a vote of
forty three in the affirmative
twenty for the negative the
proposed amendment has been
tabled.
Generally do you still have
before thank you Mr speaker and
thank you madam chair for all
your hard work I am disappointed
that the vote didn't go that way
New Mexico lost three hundred
for people to fentanyl overdose
last year.
That's a few too many in my
opinion
Albuquerque's growing crime
problem is a direct result from
the federal that's going on
there so I I think that any
amount of money to help the
department public safety.
Is the more is better than that
thank you.
Here is for the right
gentlelady from Dona Ana
Representative Ferrary you're
next on the list.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please yield I'd be
happy to yield Mister speaker
thank you
The lady I just wanted to thank
you and the committee.
for addressing all of the needs
that the food farming hunger
coalition and coccus brought to
your committee and I think a lot
of the things were address and
we're really appreciative for
everything.
Excuse me I was running.
For addressing all of the needs
for you know providing food the
networking that's needed to get
food security to all of our
state and to support the
programs the food banks the
farmers and ranchers the home
grown and getting to the schools
and seniors so I really
appreciate everything you all
did and so does the state of New
Mexico thank you.
The general earlier
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please you'll be
happy to yield to a major for
later places on that or
additional we got some guys who
are defeated on zoom so as to
point out the thing I'll keep
talking so that we can hear
you're saying as long as it
takes you to go on mute.
Hopefully those just talking
and.
Not something else.
Okay.
Crisis averted generally you
have the floor.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentlelady yields please I'd be
happy Mr speaker to yield to the
majority floor leader thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
first of all thank you for all
of your hard work and your
committee and your staff for all
of the hard work that you wanted
to look up.
For the sake of maybe some of
the newer members but especially
for the public watching as at
home could you describe a little
bit the budget making process
for us.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen the budget making
process is technically a year
round process yet for us in the
legislative body it is a process
that starts in the spring with
the LESC committee and also with
the L. E. S. C. committee as
they're working on education
initiatives.
We work all summer and into the
fall.
we start actually building the
budget for consideration in
November and December.
Then we have the two of
recommendations from the
legislative finance committee
and also from the executive that
come to the house appropriations
and finance committee.
So it is a year long process we
build it based on a consensus
revenue reports done by both the
Legislature provided economists
DFA economists and tax
economists they all come
together and let us know how
much money we have to spend.
Thank you Mr speaker and a good
thank you to lady that is I
think one of the most important
aspects of this process how
methodical by a lengthy process
it is a very transparent
processes and I'll keep saying
that because in fact over the
course of my time here in the
legislature
I seen the processes become for
more transparent.
I had the great pleasure Mr
speaker and gentle lady of
serving on the legislative
finance committee for a couple
of terms it and I can tell you
for those of you who have not
been privy to the oracle have
not been able to participate in
that work it is work that
happens throughout the interim I
I think you probably you all
meet probably away for a week
every month at least the sort of
the Monday usually on a Friday
you are meeting all over the
state.
I think a lot of us put a whole
lot of miles on our vehicles
certainly this year when we were
back in person and in those
communities Mr speaker gentle
lady
you don't hear from our
economist we do hear from
executive agencies more poorly I
think we hear from the people on
the ground.
And Mr speaker and agility I
think that that is one of the
most special.
Things about this budget making
process is that you do literally
take the show on the road can
you go to the communities that
are most impacted by the
decisions that we make here in
Santa Fe
speaker and gentle lady or
budget this year totals roughly
eight point.
Four billion dollars of the Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Absolutely.
Watchman increases out from the
previous year percentage wise.
Mr speaker of the gentleman it
is in new revenue over last year
is twenty percent.
Mr speaker the gentle lady would
you agree that this budget is in
fact making transformative
investments in communities
across the state of New Mexico.
Mr speaker gentlemen I
absolutely believe that and if I
could just to allow me to have
just a little time on one in
particular.
We set up our subcommittee to go
and visit the veterans on that's
in a small community tier C..
And what we heard as a
subcommittee was the community
was worried about this facility
actually moving out of a rural
place living in Albuquerque.
And we had committed that it
will stay where it is that it is
part of the fabric of that
particular community well we
wouldn't have known Mr speaker
gentleman that they felt that
way unless our subcommittee led
by Representative Garcia I think
Representative Crowder and
others were on that we would not
have known that unless we went
out and listen to what they had
to say.
Awesome way when we were down in
Los crucis and we were at
Open an old agency C. and we
visited former state
representative John Paul
Taylor's home that is now going
into cultural affairs as a
museum that we actually got to
see the and we got to see how
the people in the community felt
about the I mean that is who
they are that's the heart of
that community.
And so forth I could give you an
example for everyone of the
communities that we visited and
you see that reflected in the
budget Mr speaker LAT you also
came to my community you came to
Albuquerque New Mexico with
several of us on the issue of
public safety and I I deeply
deeply appreciate the time that
you and your staff made to hear
of our concerns and.
Have it be reflected in this
budget speaker of the lady I I
wanna I wanna close just by sort
of closing the loop here but
we're looking at
massive investments in public
safety we are taking the issue
of public safety seriously not
only are we investing in in in
ensuring that criminals are held
accountable in the court system
works to ensure that those folks
are held accountable we are also
investing in preventing crime
things like the violence
intervention program Mr speaker
is a lady are a game changer and
guess what the current problem
is not just in Albuquerque it's
all over the state these
investments are truly statewide.
Speaker gentle lady you need to
this budget process
transformative investments in
energy in transition in energy
transition strategies to address
economic development and
climate.
That is something that we need
to be talking about for the next
two weeks and beyond because no
budget.
Crafted by a legislature here in
New Mexico has ever reflected
those values as as well as this
budget reflects that health care
we heard a couple of different
members here on the floor talk
about how transformative it is
to finally have the DD waiver
list for years.
I I've heard of this being a
problem since long before I came
to the legislature and finally
Mr speaker delete is budget will
accomplish that of course
infrastructure projects we've
got over two hundred million
dollars going to communities
across the state to invest in
our infrastructure to put people
back to work.
And let's not forget the forget
about our rural communities
we've got forty five million
dollars and speaker the lady
going into regional recreation
centers two million dollars for
the Land Grant assistance for.
Which I I will a couple a couple
colleagues and I traveled to
some of the land grants they
have been trying to get this
done for years and here we are
Mr speaker and a lady on the
cusp so with that gentle lady
again thank you for your work
thank you to all of your
committee members thank you to
your staff for building truly
the people's budget thank you.
Thank you German gentlelady from
Diana.
Mr speaker it not being three
hours I
I went to cease debate was a
favor please signify by saying
aye.
This was a.
Guys have it.
Gentle lady to close.
Thank so I said that like a
question generally to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
would like to take a moment to
thank the body I want to thank
everyone for the questions that
were asked today I think they
were all very relevant it is a
big document it is a lot of
money.
But I also wanted to let you
know that it touches the lives
of every New Mexico and
here in our state we had
tremendous work by the committee
tremendous work by the staff
there's a lot of things I could
say but I know everybody's tired
Mister speaker looting our staff
in my myself but with that being
said I'd lie I now move a do
pass on house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
house bill two and three.
We are on final passage of house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three the vote is
now open.
A lot of electronic portion of
the vote is about to close.
The clerk to call the members at
a recorded vote Representative
upon.
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong yes Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative Boca.
Yes Representative will go votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes representative Lente
yes Representative mandate votes
yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Rubio yes
Representative Rubio votes yes.
Those are close by voted fifty
five.
Roger Montoya is here I've been
waiting to get reinstated very
good have yes.
In bang the gavel.
Representative the
Representative Montoya votes it
Roger Montoya vote yes for the
voters are closed we would fifty
six in the affirmative thirteen
the negative house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three has passed
the house and use a private of
the chair with the members of
the house please join me once
again.
In a round of applause to thank
the appropriations committee and
most importantly the incredible
staff from the appropriations
committee and the LESC.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Okay members we have a little
bit of housekeeping to do some
messages maybe some committee
reports.
So
will do that also.
In anticipation the slight
possibility that some members
may be departing I just want to
give a preview of the schedule
tomorrow will come on the floor
ten thirty to participate in
American Indian day in the state
house we will receiver marques.
From the chair person of the off
of the council of governors and
president of the Navajo Nation
and from a representative from
one of the Energy nations.
And that's important event each
year so we'll look forward to
doing that at ten thirty we will
then do some third reading we
will
Tomorrow on third reading we
will do the bills are items one
and two on the third reading
calendar.
will take years and housekeeping
they will have committees in the
afternoon
on Saturday.
The house will committed to PM
on Saturday afternoon we will do
third reading there will be no
meetings of the house on Sunday.
And we'll come back on Monday
beginning next week we will
resume our practice of having a
morning.
Session then committees and an
evening for session for third
reading we will be basically the
last ten days of the session at
that point so please be ready to
be here each day through the end
of the session with two four
sessions per day as we've done
for the last several years.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
With speaker I do have a quick
announcement
today we are celebrating
Representative Roger Montoya as
birthday and he's not here in
person but he's on zoom so maybe
if everybody can join us and
senior little Happy Birthday
song from so we could hear it
all the way home.
Have you deleted it saying Hey
you.
David to move you up the
raw June.
Be able
to you.
In order thank you so much to
the this body the outpouring of
love and support has been really
really touching I miss you and
I'll be back soon maybe
tomorrow.
Thank you so much again.
Very good.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr leader I think it was
because of the go to the next
order of business committee
reports no objections so ordered
the clerk to read.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee team has been
referred house bill seventy one
has had it under consideration
for Sam's recommendation I do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
The unanimous consent of the
converter together act on the
single vote reflected the
generals of the rectified
individually or you know checks
it's where to click to read.
House Bill AT to do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair.
Move adoption adoption a
favorable committee point and
house bill seventy one eighty
two all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was me reporter dot.
Mr speaker transportation and
public works public works and
capital improvements committee
to is been referred house bill
one seventy one has had it under
consideration for thing with
recommendation that a do pass an
answer for the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted on had a
couple good chair.
What option.
We are adoption of a rural
commuter port on house bill one
seventy one all those in favor
please signify by saying hi.
This was a three point out that.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to is being referred house bill
seven has had it under
consideration point they with
recommendation that do pass as
amended in answer for to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
on Tania Maestas chair unanimous
consent of the committee puts it
together acted upon a single
vote reflected the generals of
their act on individually
hearing objections worker to
read house bill one forty eight
do you pass and then set the
taxation and revenue committee.
House bill one sixty do pass and
then to the appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one twenty nine do
not pass the house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill one
twenty nine report without
recommendations and thence to
the taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill one forty four to
pass and then so the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
respectfully submitted Antonio
Maestas chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we're
adoption of favorable committee
reports on house bill seven one
forty eight one sixty and one
forty four in and favorable
committee report on house bill
one twenty nine but if reporter
that recommendation on commerce
and economic development
committee substitute from the
one to nine all those in favor
please signify by saying hi.
This was a three point four.
Mr Mr speaker your edges Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee to Mr
referred house bill one twenty
seven has had it under
consideration for thing with
recommendation that it to pass
and is referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair that
us and we are not option of a
favorable committee report on
house bill one to seven all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye all those those in a
committee point about that.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too has been referred
house bill fifty five has had it
under consideration point that
with recommendation that a do
not pass but that house
Judiciary Committee subsidy for
House Bill fifty five two passed
Representative Gail Chasey chair
unanimous consent of the reports
for together act hundred single
vote reflected the generals in
Iraq to provide individual here
in objections were required to
read.
House bill seventy nine to pass
and then city appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one thirty two as
amended to pass as amended.
House bill one fifty one.
Do passed as amended and thence
to the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Gail Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee reports we are honored
option of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
fifty five but a favorable
committee report on house
Judiciary Committee says to
friends with fifty five and
favorable committee reports on
house bill seventy nine one
thirty two was amended in one
fifty one all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
This was a reports are about to.
Mr speaker echo culture thanks
thank you as and water resources
committee to is been referred
house bill one zero eight he has
had it under consideration for
some of the commission that do
pass and then served
reverberations of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Derrick J. Lente the chair of
them's consent of the committee
pleasure together to the phone
with a single phone line
reflected the journals of
erected upon individually turn
objections ordered clerk to say
click to
read.
House bill one twenty one do
pass.
And then see appropriations and
finance committee house bill one
thirty one D. pass and then city
appropriation of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Derrick J. Lente the chair.
The speaker move adoption we are
and option of favorable
committee reports and house
bill's one weight one twenty one
and one thirty one all those in
favor please signify by saying
hi.
All this was a reports are
adopted.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr Gramm of that we go
to the next order of business
messages.
No objection it is so ordered
her to be House executive
message number twenty seven dear
speaker Egolf and members of the
House pursuant to article four
section five B. to the New
Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of house bill one
eighty a bill repealing section
of the revised uniform law on
senatorial acts regarding the
inspection of public records act
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
Message of inter.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill four as
amended and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
Distributor.
I.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation
interjections ordered.
Click to read.
House joint resolution fourteen
introduced by Representative
Herndon right that it's
secretary Helen.
Senate bill four.
Introduced by Senator Duhigg and
Representative Chandler and act
relating to public works
specifying the prevailing wage
rates in prevailing fringe
benefit rates are to be
determined annually by October
first to take effect next
January first providing that an
appeal to determine prevailing
wage rate for prevailing fringe
benefit rate does not state
implementation of the right
unless modified by a final
decision or judgment for upon
order of the court Senate bill
four introduced by Senator
Duhigg and Representative
Chandler one ounce Senator for
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business lost very
no objection it is so ordered.
Gentlemen members of the house
we have I think Representative
Santa Fe I think it's your a
light in the the gas is being
emitted is throwing me off I'm.
Sure within that
House Bill.
House bill one eighty.
The related to the notarial
officers is germane pursuant to
house executive message twenty
seven.
Sanchez the new total D. B.
house bill one eighty is germane
pursuant to house executive just
twenty seven.
I ordered removed from the rules
in order of business committee
printed and referred to the
consumer Public Affairs
Committee then Senator sherry
house bill one eighty.
Remove from rules printed and
referred to the consumer Public
Affairs Committee that's
Judiciary.
We have house bill ninety nine.
Representative Lane.
Who is not here.
House bill ninety nine had been
referred to the Appropriations
Committee at the request of the
chairperson of the committee I
am dropping the referral to the
appropriations and finance
committee house bill ninety nine
a price the chair of the
appropriation either referral
Representative lanes building
Appropriations Committee is
dropped.
members revenue of course we
have a new member we all welcome
Representative a cruise to the
house.
He needs to be appointed to
committees.
Representative Cruz will serve
as a member of the house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
and the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
Representative in the cruise
will serve on house
transportation public works and
capital improvements and.
Our labor veterans and military
affairs committee he also will
serve on in rolling and grossing
Committee Hey.
Because every with the departure
of former representative that it
just we have a vacancy in the
chair position of enrolling
engrossing a and because it's
his birthday today the new chair
of the rolling engrossing
Committee a is Representative
Roger Montoya.
Happy birthday.
We also need to vice chair for
the health and Human Services
Committee.
Percent of Karen bash will be
serving as the vice chair of the
health and Human Services
Committee at is so ordered for
all the.
And are there announcements.
Representative Harper.
Jennifer was awesome thank you
Mr speaker your house taxation
and revenue committee will meet
tomorrow Friday at eight thirty
note the change in time eight
thirty member states no
gentlelady we're Leo
representative Thompson thank
you Mr speaker I will and and
don't yell at me because it's
the only today I only learned
about it tomorrow is where red
for American heart association
and just thinking of us Senator
Ben ray Lujan sass stroke face
drooping arm weakness speech
difficulty it's time to call
nine one one thank you Mr health
and health leads tomorrow at
eight thirty.
Members take note the gentleman
for Leo Representative Romero
thank you Mr speaker your house
Education Committee will meet
tomorrow at nine o'clock so a
time change nine o'clock
remember the New Mexico school
board association is going to be
having a breakfast and has
invited us from seven to eight
o'clock at the Eldorado so we
will meet at nine o'clock and we
have a couple bills scheduled
thank you Mr speaker every
single gentlelady from you
Representative Ferrary thank you
Mr speaker your consumer public
affairs committee will meet on
at three forty five about
fifteen minutes from now and
when we end thank you members
take note are there other
announcements.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis thank you
Mr speaker tomorrow will be
Indian day at the New Mexico
legislature so we welcome our
tribal leaders even though we
have restrictions they can come
and sit in the gallery and we
look forward to hearing from
them an indication to that we
have House government elections
it Indian Affairs tomorrow
beginning at eight thirty AM.
Members take note.
Are there other announcements.
the gentleman from Cibola and
McKinley Representative Alcon.
Mr speaker labor or better and
veterans and military affairs
committee with the the thing
that that we have thinking that
if after we get off our members
take note.
Are there other announcements
the gentle lady from Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker it is a
cold and snowy day today and so
I have a quick question for you
what's your question gentle lady
what do you call a snowman with
the temper tantrum.
More in.
Russian gentlelady would you
call it the summit with the
temperature a meltdown.
I feel are essential to the
sorry for the snowman.
In rural.
The and the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker they can
members I move that the house
stand in recess until ten thirty
tomorrow morning is it takes the
motion.
Thank you members four a good
day's work thank you for those
who join us in the gallery
please be sure to watch our
working committees this
afternoon.
Remember starting at ten thirty
AM on on our usual eleven thirty
so please come prepared to honor
our honored guests in the house
tomorrow enjoy the rest of the
afternoon evening house in
recess until ten thirty eight AM
tomorrow.
I.
I.
Well now we.
With.
Thank you.
I thought he was really.
The.
Twenty eight percent was a show
stopper.
Hi I.
All really.
Well.
In.
