I'm here.
Representative Ortez.
Here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Here.
Representative Townsend and.
Here.
Vice chair Sarnia here.
Chairman.
Your.
Mr chair we have poor.
Thank you welcome everyone on
the committee and will to
members of the public.
This is the House Energy
Environment natural resources
committee well we have three
bills on the agenda today we
will only hear the hydrogen bill
so if you are here for house
bill one twenty five
sustainability impacts for the
aids for House Bill one twenty
seven story to certain
radioactive waste all those
bills will be rescheduled for
another time so we can focus on
hydrogen Bill.
before we hear the presentation
of the bill is there any
questions or comments from the
committee.
Announcements whatever.
We will be meeting on Saturday.
At nine o'clock we're still
working on the the court the
court room that will be meeting
in the will be virtual but there
is a
The screen set up in one of the
rooms in case people want to
tenant person.
I generally I think the zoom is
a pretty effective way to
attend.
so I'm not sure what room it
will be in the I had to speak
hearing.
House joint stress Aleutian to
which is the are all rights
amendment and house bill six
which is the clean future act.
today we will that the plan for
today is we will do it the bill
or will be presented by the
Sanchez.
After that we will go to the
public we're going to allow
ninety minutes for public
comment.
We'll start off with those in
support of the bill and will
have forty five minutes for that
and then we'll go to those in
opposition will have forty five
minutes for that each member of
the public in order to allow as
many as possible to speak
will be given a minute to speak.
And of course we will be.
respectful in our comments.
Okay the chase
okay in the.
With that I think we're ready
for the presenters to percent
bill chairman Lundstrom.
are you present a bill or you
know all I'll turn it over to
our presenters about that
already thank you Mr chairman
good morning Mr chairman and
committee members ladies and
gentlemen it's a privilege for
me to be here this morning along
with my co sponsor
representative small we also
have of the cabinet secretaries
are canny and Schardin Clarke to
help us with technical questions
and secretary can you may also
want to make a few comments Mr
chairman and committee of also
adds to the Legislative Council
staff drafter chase van border
to participate with us today
just to help us move through the
bill quickly it's a fairly
robust bill and we may need some
help and just moving through
quickly.
Mr chairman I'd like to start by
saying this bill is a result of
months of work between the
executive branch of the
legislative branch and I'd like
to say it's a positive example
of collaboration.
It also gives New Mexico the
opportunity to lead the country
with hydrogen.
Just like with the Iditarod if
you're not the lead dog the
scenery never changes.
I served in the New Mexico house
since two thousand one and I
believe I've been in front of
this committee maybe once
generally I don't carry energy
related legislation cause my
wheel house is the general
appropriations act.
However due to the importance of
this energy opportunity and the
potential positive economic
impact for my part of the state
I was compelled to get directly
involved.
I'm planned to give some opening
comments I'd like to ask that my
co sponsor Representative small
down make some comments also.
In twenty nineteen at the urging
of governor Lujan Grisham the
legislature passed the energy
transition act it was a historic
measure intended to move the
state toward a zero carbon
emissions future this major
environmental piece of
legislation was held locally and
nationally as a measure to
address the challenges being
presented by climate change.
However all parties recognized
that this transformation in the
power supply market away from
coal to clean energy will be
difficult and positively very
costly.
The hydrogen hub Development Act
provides for both reducing
carbon emissions and economic
growth.
Mr chairman and committee the
federal infrastructure
investment and jobs act of
twenty twenty one was signed
November fifteenth which
includes eight billion dollars
for federal fiscal years twenty
twenty two through twenty twenty
six to be distributed as grants
to for hydrogen of demonstration
projects to be selected by the
United States department of
energy House Bill for which New
Mexico in position to compete
for one of those four clean
hydrogen hubs.
By establishing a public private
partnership structure that can
be responsive to private
interests in developing a
hydrogen hub or hubs in New
Mexico.
In addition Mr chairman and
committee the Economic
Development Department of the
state of New Mexico believes the
hydrogen economy should be a key
component of New Mexico economic
growth strategies in the EDD's
recently real relates to twenty
year strategic plan green and
sustainable energy including
clean hydrogen is named as one
of the target industry the state
should be actively pursuing to
diversify and grow the economy.
Hydrogen is widely regarded as a
critical.
Step toward transition from
caught a carbon intensive
energy.
Environment so that Mr Chairman
on to the bill itself.
House bill for the first
fourteen sections of house bill
four constitute the short title
hydrogen hub Act it's a self
contained act providing for
private public partnerships to
establish need to establish
Geographic hydrogen hubs and
assist in the development of
industry within such hubs
section fifteen through
seventeen provide for income tax
credits and deductions from
gross receipts taxes and
compensating taxes for hydrogen
related development section
eighteen imposes new hydrogen
related duties on the department
of the environment section
nineteen exempt hydrogen hub
projects which will be
undertaken by or with the
assistance of private enterprise
from the procurement code and
finally Mr chairman sections
twenty through twenty one and
then to current law to ensure
electric power generated through
hydrogen can be included within
entities renewable energy
portfolio and therefore be
marketable the hydrogen
Development Act is primarily an
economic development bill and
taking advantage of
technological developments in
the production and use of
hydrogen the act provides
economic incentives through
grants loans revenue bonds and
public private partnerships that
initiate specific projects to
generate hydrogen for use in the
production of electric power and
for auxiliary industries such as
green cement fuel cell
production and vehicle feeling
such projects will generate new
employment opportunities and
broaden the tax base of the
communities of which they're
located the production of
electric power using clean
hydrogen as a feedstock will
also lower the carbon footprint
of electric power generation
with that Mr chairman I'd like
to ask my co sponsor to talk
about the environmental
protections emission controls if
you would Representative.
All.
Thank you so much madam chair
Mister chairman it really is an
honor and a pleasure to be
before you and your committee
today
Mr chairman course I have that
really treasured experiences
before this house energy
committee because this house
energy committee has been a
leader in helping New Mexico
confront the climate change
crisis that we see support and
explore and innovate in clean
energy and low carbon solutions
and and really unique times in
our state's history like with
the produced water act and other
important pieces of bipartisan
legislation seen ways to bring
different stakeholders together
so I I'm really getting very
pleased to be here today and
This is one of the key reasons
I'm here Mr Chairman in addition
to the vast economic development
opportunities that promise tens
of thousands of jobs billions of
dollars of federal investment
and untold more investment from
the private sector is because
pure and simple we can not meet
our decarbonisation goals as a
state without hydrogen hydrogen
is a key part of this strategy
as the madam chair acknowledge
at a state level at a national
level and an international level
this is a solution not for
everything but for some of the
hardest to decarbonise areas
sectors of our economy and at
the same time some of the
fastest growing sectors of our
economy so when we a knowledge.
That it hydrogen is a part of
the solution which the entire
world is doing in committing
hundreds of billions of dollars
to this decarbonisation push
then in a responsible manner we
have to look at
all of the inputs the lifecycle
emissions and to be very
diligent and I'm so proud that
house bill four reflects a
comprehensive effort upstream at
the point of production.
To do just that to account for
life cycle emissions to meet or
exceed Mr chairman I'm very
clearly here to meet or exceed
the federal standards that the
by the administration with
overwhelming bipartisan support
said in the bipartisan
infrastructure law for these
standards from that so called
well to gate otherwise life
cycle emissions and to look to
decrease those emissions over
time to have a very strong caps
just as we get started to keep
those emissions.
As low as possible and to
actually help New Mexico as a
very large fossil fuel producing
state not only lead our region
Mr Chairman not only lead our
nation but in fact begin to lead
our world and showing how we
reduce emissions even while we
meet the growing energy needs
that the energy transition
Is demanding we meet last we
face incredible social
consequences so Mister chairman
briefly I just want to summarize
that in the power generation
sector again we meet the and
exceed the federal standard as
the federal standard goes up
house bill four demands that New
Mexico follow that federal
standard and not ever be below
it as some of the federal pieces
are being developed we ensure
that New Mexico environment
department has a key role and
must engage on what the upstream
emissions are for any feedstocks
and to keep those emissions low
at below
thresholds
that's not a voluntary thing
that's something that's required
with the New Mexico environment
department as secretary Kenny
can go and I'll turn it over to
him madam chair.
as secretary Kenny can detail
there is a very extensive
program.
With the approach to
incentivising hydrogen in the
most difficult to decarbonise
areas of our economy
And I would turn it over to to
secretary penny briefly Mr
chairman to detail those areas
thank you very much madam chair
and thank you so much committee.
Secretary K..
Thank you Mr chairman and just
to make sure you can hear me.
Okay Mr chairman thank you for
having me in front of the
committee today
and I can I make I just a couple
remarks and then go into the the
table Mr chairman.
Okay that's fine I don't.
We we don't have screen sharing
in the committee okay.
All right Mr chairman thanks I
will talk through some of the
incentives briefly as we go
throughout the bill I guess
we'll go to the more the Mr
chairman let me just that maybe
just a few remarks here.
and I will be brief so Mr chair
members the committee the
administration's really proud to
work with the sponsors of the
bill as well as the stakeholders
many of which you'll probably
hear from today and make no
mistake that the hydrogen
economy is here you heard both
chairwoman Lundstrom and
Representative small indicate
that but let me just be clear
that I twenty thirty in just
eight years the hydrogen economy
is expected to grow to three
hundred billion dollars
worldwide and this growth is
going to happen not only
worldwide in the United States
around New Mexico and in New
Mexico this growth by twenty
thirty is also happening during
the decisive decade on climate
change so Mister chairman
members of the committee we have
an expanding hydrogen economy we
have no time left to act on on
climb it and therefore we need
to run towards our
electrification goals of wind
and solar other expensive
investment which we've been
doing this administration but
that's simply just not enough we
can't leave any emissions behind
we can not afford to leave any
emissions from any part of our
economy behind when it comes to
decarbonisation this bill does
just that it lets us shape
hydrogen economy we want to see
in New Mexico instead of simply
saying no to the hydrogen
economy in the types of jobs
that would bring to our state so
this session is is decisive just
like the decisive decade were
and we can say yes to hydrogen
and supports our climate goals
or we can say no to hydrogen and
and go with the status quo.
Companies all around the US are
noticing what we're doing the
vision that we're presenting.
You can go to our website just
to name a couple one seventy
four power global global and
over on fuels have both
indicated strong support for the
bill as well as many other
companies these are companies
that are investing in what we're
doing here which is what running
towards zero carbon hydrogen
economy zero carbon hydrogen it
is better than bluegreen and
other types of hydrogen we're
setting and destination in this
legislation that no other state
in the US has thought to do and
we're getting positive response
from industry get there so we're
incentivizing low carbon
hydrogen as means to helping our
workforce transition to that
destination returning and it's
important eight again highlight
Mr Chairman is a closes out that
we're not going to reach our
climate goals by twenty thirty
or twenty fifty without bringing
the hydrogen economy and shaping
if we want we want to see in New
Mexico so this is our
opportunity to add to our clean
energy portfolio as opposed to
slow down on our clean energy
portfolio
Mr Chairman at this point would
you like me to highlight some of
the tax incentives and well.
The secretary Cheney that would
cause.
Okay and Mr chairman members of
the committee and for those
watching on the environment
department's website we have a
A chart that is helpful to
follow along one.
And that chart Mr chairman
certainly isn't out like this
the most incentive type of
hydrogen in the bill is who are.
What we call carbon negative
hydrogen Mr chairman members of
the committee members of the
public you can think of negative
carbon hydrogen as being
something that methane from the
decomposition of biomass in
which we capture and collect
that methane and convert it
through renewable energy to
hydrogen I would be a carbon
negative type of example
so active culture biomass
anything that is not an
extracted type of hydrogen
extracted methane one of the
greatest.
Incentive and those incentives
are around R. thirty kilograms
thirty cents per kilogram
hydrogen produced with a hundred
percent deduction of gross
receipts in compensating Tax
regarding that destination Mr
chairman and members of the
committee towards that type of
hydrogen.
From there everything scales
down and it scales down Mr
chairman members of the
committee
to what we would say is
hydrogen that is has a carbon
intensity of less than four
kilograms of CO two emissions
per kilogram of hydrogen
produced let me just give you an
example that is sort of the best
in the world and someone exceeds
the notion of blue hydrogen but
it really pushes the the
technology to be as efficient as
possible and Mr chairman members
of the committee that type of
hydrogen is about at the low end
about five cents per kilogram of
a hydrogen produced
questions particularly in the at
a production tax credit and
about thirty three percent gross
receipts in compensating Tax.
On that side.
So Mister chairman there's that
again the tables helpful to sort
of see how the incentives lay
out both within a hub and
outside of the of the across the
entire state and with that Mr
chairman it I'll I'll pause
because they know.
Time is always of the essence.
Thank you Secretary Kenny
Representative small did you
want to this for two on the
other sectors.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I I do want yes please if you
want to go to support we can.
I know that
secretary Keyes secretary
cultural Propst and secretary
Woodley with the with all also
like to speak in support Mr
Chairman.
Okay let's do that Secretary
keys.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I don't
often get to come in front of
the house energy so it's a real
pleasure to see all of you I
think it's pretty unusual for a
single piece of legislation to
have so much economic potential
H. B. for actually sure in a new
and innovative industries into
the state New Mexico has already
made so many strides in energy
transition with development of
wind and solar these projects
are really creating hundreds of
jobs and helping to sustain the
tax states in smaller counties
hydrogen is the next spoke to
this will as we develop New
Mexico into a clean energy
superpower.
As chairman Lundstrom referred
to the EDD recently completed
twenty year strategy calls on
policy makers to target job
rigid industries that can
diversifying new Mexico's
economy and sustain and more
skilled higher paying workforce
and what we've been seeing
during this pandemic is that
these initiatives need to
actually reach all corners of
the State.
And this bill does that.
It can be especially important
for some rural communities where
economic development has been
more of a challenge a hydrogen
economy as enabled by this bill
is exactly the type of economic
diversification that we need.
With this administration and the
legislature's decision on where
to focus additional state
investments we want sectors
where we actually have an
advantage where we actually have
a head start we do this because
we don't want to go down a
rabbit hole and we wanted to see
return on investments so New
Mexico can compete and this
hydrogen area and we can when we
have the workforce the skill
sets needed from the renewable
sector and oil and gas is so
easily transferable we have the
existing infrastructure
including pipelines interstate
highways rail and New Mexico as
you all know is the distance
from the port of Los Angeles and
Houston so this really makes our
state the ideal location for
hydrogen fuel production
distribution and fuelling access
to critical markets in Texas and
California.
And the third thing is we have
the partnerships we are the only
states with two federal
departments of energy research
labs with hydrogen research
going on now and more coming
with the recently signed MOU
between the state and Sandia and
land all.
The I administration is
investing eight billion dollars
in hydrogen hubs around the US
these are locations that
produced support transport and
consume clean hydrogen.
And in twenty twenty one the
hydrogen council estimates that
five hundred billion dollars in
spending on hydrogen related
projects around the globe will
be it will be five hundred
million in twenty thirty.
So New Mexico's had started
hydrogen as is about creating
jobs we have a company here
called bail tax some of you
might have heard of it and it is
a global leader in New hydrogen
technology and they currently
employ over a hundred people
there are dozens of companies in
the states getting this done now
will distinguish New Mexico and
give us a competitive advantage
so that we can use this
innovative technology to grow
the economy and create jobs.
New Mexico has a history of the
nation we're seeing that now
with new companies coming to the
state and aerospace and
bioscience and manufacturing and
energy and if we don't set the
tone right now.
Companies will want to come.
If we do nothing if we refuse is
to incentivize companies to come
here they will go elsewhere
that's really just how
competitive it is in business
right now and New Mexico cannot
afford.
Not anymore so thank you.
Thank you Secretary Keyes
secretary probes.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee on Sir cultural
props with the energy minerals
and natural resources department
our climate change task force
which secretary Kenny and I co
chair is making huge progress on
reducing greenhouse gas
emissions but we know that we
have a long way to go to meet
are scientifically driven
targets hydrogen promises to be
part of the solution especially
for some of our hardest to
decarbonise sectors this bill
provides the highest level in
the incentives to companies that
emit no carbon dioxide when they
produce hydrogen sending a very
clear market signal about where
New Mexico has had it that's why
we think this is so important
thank you.
Thank you Secretary Propst
secretary secretary Schardin
Clarke.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee it's
pleasure to be here with you to
talk about the hydrogen hub
Development Act this morning
house bill four creates targeted
tax incentives that will help
position New Mexico at the
forefront of the clean hydrogen
economy creating clean energy
jobs revenue diversity and
investment in New Mexico in
addition to helping meet our
emission targets and climate
goals these targeted tax credits
will temporarily support this
nascent industry until it can
stand on its own all tax
incentives in this bill sends
that within ten years.
Perhaps most importantly this
bill will steer hydrogen
Development in New Mexico to be
the cleanest hydrogen possible
by failing to incentivize clean
hydrogen I believe that New
Mexico would miss an opportunity
to ensure New Mexico's industry
focused on those technologies
that emit the least carbon
possible and although this bill
scoring incorporates only static
Revenue impacts we also know
that economic development
induces multiplier impacts for
both state and local governments
new jobs created in the hydrogen
economy will result in higher
wages and those wages will be
recirculated back to local
businesses contributing to state
and local G. R. T. statewide.
Last this bill will send the
state a serious signal to both
industry and the federal
government that New Mexico is
open for hydrogen and we are
serious about becoming a world
class hydrogen hub thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you Secretary Stewart
secretary PED.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee in you know
there's a lot of opportunities
that I see ahead of us with the
hydrogen and and the
agricultural economy if you
think about New Mexico
agriculture where dairy state
we're known for our plans we're
famous for our chili we have an
emerging and growing hemp
industry up and we've got you
know we're fourteen to the
nation and beef cattle
production when you think about
all the other opportunities out
there in the timber and and
watershed and we create a lot of
bio mass and that we have
already facilitated meetings
with the hydrogen industry and
and are very producers over
opportunities to come the
technologies are evolving and
and and in many cases already
here to add and diversify the
income on these on these
agricultural operations and
folks that's what we need you
know added cultures a tough
economy and that when you can
take low value bio mass and turn
it into a higher value
commodity.
Two products projects like this
in products like this an
industry like this
it's going to be a game changer
down the road for our
agricultural industry and and I
think it's time to look at those
opportunities I've I've done
some research and looked at it
across the world and and there's
other countries that are doing
that there's companies that are
are have already it created the
hydrogen that running fuel
driven vehicles and tractors and
whatnot so.
I think there's a great
opportunity here and and I hope
we take advantage of it thank
you.
Thank you Secretary with the
Representative I believe that
was all the cabinet secretaries
the we're on this panel also is
that correct.
Mr Chairman yes that is correct.
Representative small do you have
additional comments.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
we're in a good place to go to
public comment I know they'll
be.
Robust COVID and excited for the
committee questions and for
public comment Mr chairman.
Representative salt lick me ask
you this the majority of the
comments
for quite general in nature
about the potential impacts of
this bill would you like to to
walk us through the mechanics of
this bill.
And thank you Mr chairman I I am
happy to do that and then of
course also with.
Madam chair and with secretary
Kenny.
As well and secretary Schardin
Clarke and and Mr van Gorder
Mr Chairman the.
The general in the the the key
overall
point to understand is we've
communicated.
Is that this is a
decarbonisation bill ought be
happy to go through those points
Mr chairman I for I know that
madam chair Lundstrom has her
hand up I'll offer specific
points especially about the
carbon intensity the
decarbonisation for industry
pieces but I would defer to
madam chair first Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative small a
gentleman Lundstrom
I guess what what I'm interested
in is you know it is a sixty
eight page bill so in the
interest time maybe just sort of
walk us through the different
sections and.
If you could you give us just
through a nut shell of with with
these the section is is about
and I I understand that a lot of
the
We were just to bills and a lot
of the information from the bill
that you were sponsoring is up
first so perhaps that would be
great if you can service all.
Thank you Mr chairman just the
fifty thousand foot view first
and then we can get into the
nuts and bolts of the of the
bill itself that's what we've
got our Legislative Council
drafter with this also but what
this bill does Mr Chairman is
here is an image of the federal
hydrogen how packed and what
we've done is we've taken
components of that because we
think it's incredibly important
that we not be different than
what the federal government is
looking at in order to receive
some of the benefits will be
applying for should this bill
become law the ideas that we
would set up place based
hydrogen hubs and when you think
about it is very very similar to
tax improvement districts where
there's a geographic area that's
designated based on criteria set
in this statute and approved by
a board that said in the statute
the board is is set up there's
criteria for them to look at an
application is put forward and
how designation is either given
or not given so once the how
this set up inside the hub there
are specific incentives that are
provided
and some of them are these tax
incentives that were that were
briefly discussed but what is
envisioned inside the hub is
incentivizing
I'm sorry companies so it's like
a cluster Development its
industrial cluster development
you would have the opportunity
for participation with a public
private partnership.
In the currently House
Appropriations as provided for a
hundred twenty five million
dollars in a P. three Fund
inside the budget that would be
administered by the New Mexico
finance authority so once an
application has been approved
the help is been established a
P. three methadone is provided
for those that are interested to
apply The New Mexico finance
authority then does all the
financial due diligence for
approval is reserve technically
used for public infrastructure
particularly in rural areas we
have tremendous need for things
like broadband.
Water and wastewater
infrastructure as well as roads
you can also be used by
companies but it's a fifty fifty
match the other thing that would
be inside the hope would be
things like coal manufacturing
and I think one of the most of
most proud of is tech transfer
we hope that the committee may
have received the memorandum
between the economic development
department and our national labs
the talks about tech transfer
and technological support for
hydrogen we would like to see
inside these helps protect
transfer component.
So inside the home is a very
specific very specific
designation has to meet criteria
and it also has to meet
emissions standards.
Outside of the home or
individualized opportunities for
projects that don't want to be
in a or or there isn't the
ability to be in a hobby but
those would be companies that
and that would tie back to the
incentives to tax incentives
that the cabinet secretary has
has talked about the tax and
Representative cabinet
secretary.
What we're looking for is to
make sure that those things are
incentivized are the cleanest
kinds of projects we want to
make sure that they are rewarded
for being clean and that.
This time if this bill should
become law ten years from now
whoever sitting and all of our
chairs whoever's governor and
whoever is the cabinet
secretaries at the time what
then have to review these
incentives and determine whether
or not
the sunset would be re
authorized or not so it's only a
ten year instead of available to
the to the hydrogen economy so
if I could Mr chairman I'd like
to ask chase to just take us
through those sections of the
bill is quick at it understands
exactly what's in there and I
like us to do that K..
Mr Van Order.
Committee to the Legislative
Council Service I am here for
the sole purpose of providing
technical assistance to the
matter before the committee I do
not appear in support of or
opposition to the matter before
you Mr chairman members of the
committee second one of the bill
is to simply the.
Four of the bill we're working
at the short title.
Development Act.
Section two ages two through six
sets forth definitions of terms
used in the hundreds Development
Act including clean energy three
hundred clean hydrogen electric
generation facility
decarbonization greenhouse gas
emissions hard to decarbonise
industry hundred.
Hi hope project.
Sequestration of carbon dioxide.
The private partnership and
responsibly sourced yes in those
terms are all used within the
hydrogen Development Act.
Section three pages six through
eight the section lays out the
criteria at the heart of the
public board must use in
deciding whether to designate a
specific geographic area as a
hydrogen hub and if so the
geographic boundaries the any
such I need to know.
Session for ages eight to twelve
permits and sets out the
requirements that a proposed
public private partnership
agreement must meet in order to
be approved by the hundred
development board includes a
process for getting an agreement
approved and what must be
included in such an agreement.
Section five ages twelve
thirteen this wishes the Levin
member hi development board
provides for the appointment
that I members of the board by
the New Mexico Legislative
Council.
There are six members of the
board that are.
Representative is of the
administration the board is
administratively attached to the
department of environment and
also creates in the the session
also create contains a conflict
of interest provision.
Section six ages thirteen to
fourteen just for the powers and
duties of the hydrogen
Development board including
approving proposed hi Jim ****.
Pros public private partnership
agreements and grants and loans
proposed I need.
Projects.
Section seven ages fourteen
through seven cents for the
criteria the hydrogen hub
development board must use in
deciding whether to approve a
proposed public private
partnership agreement.
Some of the criteria are
mandatory the projects that
produce hydrogen.
A public private partnership
agreement will necessarily
include a proposed hydrogen
project the projects will often
be used for public
infrastructure needed to support
specific industrial projects
which may or may not generate
hydrogen.
Section eight ages seventeen to
eighteen so just for the duties
of the New Mexico finance
authority is supporting the
activities of the hydrogen
Development board including
staff support for financial
analysis establishing forms and
processes.
Are requests
and loans for high do projects.
Section nine ages eighteen
through twenty creates the
hydrogen hub project fund and
sets forth guidelines for the
grants and loans for hundred
projects including wireless for
matching funds from private
partners.
What do the fund also be
appropriated by the legislature.
Two hundred development board to
the department of environment
into the New Mexico finance
authority for administrative and
reimbursable costs.
Sections ten through twelve ages
twenty to twenty five I is
mainly whether rate language
relating to the issuance of
bonds.
Section thirteen ages twenty
five through twenty six requires
the hydrogen hub development
board to make annual reports.
Section fourteen page twenty six
is again a boilerplate language
relating to the issuance of
bonds.
The so sure tribal hi Jim
Development Act we want to other
provisions in the bill sections
fifteen and sixteen provide for
personal and corporate income
tax credits for entities that
produce hydrogen.
The credits are based upon the
volume of hydrogen produced to a
maximum of seventeen million
tons per year.
The value of the credits range
from thirty cents per pound to
five cents per pound.
On the level of emissions and
whether the facility is is in a
designated hi Jim.
The tax credits provisions
sunset after five after ten
years and the maximum amount of
tax credits can be generated
anyone yes we here is five point
one million dollars for a single
taxpayer.
Sh section seventeen.
Provides for deductions from
taxes on gross receipts and
compensating taxes related to
the sale of clean hydrogen
hydrogen refuelling stations
hydrogen fuel vehicles hydrogen
distribution systems
construction costs for hydrogen
produced production facilities.
The Little Mermaid deductions
range from one hundred percent
to thirty three percent
depending upon the level of the
patients once again the tax
deduction provisions sunset
after ten years.
Eighteen pages fifty two fifty
three imposes new additional
duties on the department of
environment.
For the use for the use of
hydrogen and greenhouse gas
emissions establishes timelines
for the completion of studies
making reports and recommending
administrative rules that
consider and address the
implications for greenhouse gas
emissions resulting from the
generation and use of hydrogen
in New Mexico.
Section nineteen ages fifty
three through fifty nine just
simply amends the very last
section immense procurement code
to exempt from the procurement
code how you doing how projects
which often times will be
undertaken by private partners
rather the public partners.
Sections twenty through twenty
one pages fifty nine to sixty
seven then the rural electric
cooperative act and the
renewable energy act.
I the power generated by a clean
hydrogen nectar generation
disability meeting certain
environmental criteria can be
considered part of rate of a
renewable energy portfolio.
And these changes are necessary
in order to ensure that electric
power generated by a clean
hydrogen electric generation
facility can be marketable.
Section twenty two pages sixty
seven through sixty eight or
simply technical section
concerning the ability of the
tax credits.
Sections twenty three describes
prescribes the effective date
the gross receipts tax income
sitting tax deductions so the
beginning at the beginning of
the.
Fiscal year.
And finally section twenty four
declares an emergency so that
the effective date will be when
the governor signs the bill.
With that Mr chair I stand for
questions.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Van Order of
chairman Lundstrom do that
anything that or percent small
give anything like that.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm I'm
anxious to hear the the comments
myself but thank you very much.
Same Mr chairman.
Okay so that I think brings us
to the end of our presentation
of the bill.
What we're gonna do next but if
Augustine is ready is a whole
will have to pull open for
twenty seconds.
And members and attendees
members of the public who are on
zoom we'll be able to indicate
support or opposition to the
bill and this is you know this
is a chance for us to to you
know just get a feel for the.
the members of the public where
they stand we have two hundred
ninety nine currently online
which I think is a a testament
to the soon platform we could
not fit to ninety nine people
are committee rooms sorry
welcoming all in I've seen when
you're ready please but all of.
About five more seconds.
Okay seated in the fall.
so we have seventy three percent
in support and twenty seven
percent no I got that backwards
twenty seven percent in support
and seventy three percent in
Opposition Hey I don't know if
the committee can see those road
results economic.
Yes you can could.
So it's a pretty robust.
Response okay now we're going to
go to the members of the public
we are first going to hear from
people in support of the bill.
So if you oppose the bill please
do not put your hand up yet.
you know we're first for going
to
good to those in support
everyone will have a minute
though there will be a timer on
the screen at the end of the
minute you're you're you will be
needed
the right at the end so please
wrap up for a minute.
And first offering a good to
chancellor RBZ to and I may not
pronounce your name correct
chancellor but
Thank you for being here today.
So Augustine can you allow him
to speak.
And our reason.
Thank you Mr chairman Dan Arvizu
here.
We can hear you thank you Sir
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'll be
I'll be brief on Dan RBC chance
for New Mexico State University
and over the last few years I've
been following hydrogen in a
number of different ways the end
through the research communities
presently serve on the
president's council of advisors
on science and technology we've
had discussions about hydrogen
at that level of also won a
couple of other boards are also
discussed hydrogen one of what
one of my boards actually the
CEO of of of liquid the largest
producer of hydrogen in the
world is on that board I had a
couple conversations and I stand
in support of this bill
primarily because I believe of
its strategic value to New
Mexico as part of the transition
to a global clean energy economy
having spent twenty five years
at Sandia national labs I know
of the capabilities and
competencies of the national
labs and hydrogen I also want to
offer that the three research
universities of New Mexico also
have great competencies that can
participate in helping I think I
move this technology full.
Chancellor thank you I
appreciate that I do apologize
for cutting you off
you know this that the it will
cut off automatically and that
will apply equally to everyone
but chancellor thank you for
being here today next up we have
Max Energy.
Hello yes my name chair around
in the CEO and president of the
next century we have been
actively engagement renewable
energy development New Mexico
for the past five years we
developed the solar project and
bit into the Facebook Center and
only lost that bid to PNM.
currently we are in the process
of the firing twelve thousand
acres of land west of Lordsburg
New Mexico we're gonna be
putting in a hydrogen of
development there not just a hot
but we're going to.
Representative Parke.
It's going to be two thousand
acres of industrial buildings
dedicated to green energy
development and research and
manufacturing to bring products
such as Evey charging stations
and hydrogen truck conversions
so we're actively right now.
Negotiate with the company to
convert existing diesel truck
struck.
Okay sorry about that so I can
come into the the.
tire is not showing it is on our
screen is not visible to the
public Representative Dixon.
I'm thank you Mr chair it just
it didn't show I guess when the
speakers were talking so I
wasn't sure if they were saying
it my apologies okay the
Is on there if if our cabinet
secretaries
Are no longer with us we can.
The remove their tiles from the
the panel which might make it a
little bit bigger.
But I think keep secretary Kenny
I don't know if everyone else is
staying with us okay so going
back to those in support of next
up we had Patrick Killen.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me.
Yes.
Chairman queen members of the
committee Patrick Killen
registered lobbyist for chevron
chevron believes the future of
energy is lower carbon we
believe in lowering the carbon
intensity of the affordable
reliable energy the billions of
people worldwide rely upon every
day and we believe that hydrogen
can play a role in a lower
carbon future as a
transportation fuel industrial
feedstock and as an energy
storage medium we believe the
use of blue and green hydrogen
as a fuel source can help reduce
greenhouse gas emissions helping
to address climate change while
continuing to deliver energy to
support society we applaud
governor Lujan Grisham for
engagement on hydrogen we
appreciate Representative
Lundstrom and Representative
small for bringing their
legislation forward and I think
you for our for the time today.
Thank you Secretary coal.
Thirty year muted on here at.
Years they're they're out thank
you I'm good morning Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is Terry Cole I am
president CEO for the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
so much of economic development
is about seizing opportunities
and recognizing where our
strengths lie as a state our
strength is in energy we can
begin national leader in the
production of half a dozen types
of energy yes we should be a
hydrogen energy production hop
we support this bill because it
will create an exciting new
industry within a competitive
advantage secretary it will save
and generate new jobs are we
really in a position to say no
to that job growth and it will
seize the opportunity to be
recognized nationally as a clean
energy innovation leader we
can't be so myopic or
ideological that we let this
economic opportunity pass us by
let's get in on the ground floor
of this work we urge your
support for the bill thank you
very much.
Thank you for that we have we
we.
You disappear.
No I'm wondering this okay now
we have our call I'm sorry I
was.
My.
Mr chair members of the
committee can you hear me.
Yes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm are called a
registered lobbyist for NextEra
energy NextEra energy is in
favor of exploring methods to
develop a green hydrogen economy
in New Mexico and are also
interested in investing in green
hydrogen projects this
legislation is a great step
forward.
We believe there is more work to
be done on this issue and very
much look forward to being part
of the conversation as this bill
moves through the process.
We very much appreciate the bill
Sanchez chairwoman Lundstrom and
vice chair small along with
secretary Kennedy and the rest
of the entire administration's
work and attention to this very
important piece of legislation
for New Mexico in order support
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Thank you for that next up we
have Tommy Haas.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
calling because I president and
and board chair for the greater
Gallup economic development
corporation and a senior vice
president that the pentacle bank
in Gallup I'm grateful to stance
at in support of this house bill
four and that opportunity that
we have to grow our hydrogen
economy in New Mexico in in our
area.
And then it hit we not only were
hit very hard in the county with
the disease and virus but we
also had another large blow to
our our area with the closure to
economic base of providers and
this is an opportunity for us to
be able to use the hydrogen
economy that's coming in the
rest of the world and to be a
leader in New Mexico to be able
to do this so I stand and
support and urged committee to
move forward with the do pass
recommendation before thank you.
Thank you for that we have bill
the.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
bill Lee CEO for the government
in one county chamber of
commerce are chamber stands in
strong support of age before we
thank the sponsors for bringing
it forward New Mexico must take
action now to capitalize on the
nearly three hundred billion
dollars anticipated to be spent
on hydrogen related projects
within the next eight years and
the additional eight billion in
incentivized.
Programs for the development of
four regional hubs to produce
low carbon hydrogen hydrogen
please remember there are key
sectors to the economic engine
that at this time simply cannot
efficiently decarbonise without
low carbon hydrogen long haul
trucks by the thousands travel
I. forty through our state every
day and they will need to rely
on this technology along with
manufacturing construction
electric generation and others
make no mistake though please
committee this could be New
Mexico's best and only
opportunity if we fail to act
quickly then once again we will
find our state at the bottom of
the list H. B. for provides the
tools necessary to incentivize
and bring this industry to our
state and you have a screen and
a drink a robust economy thank
you committee.
Thank you for that next step we
have we we on a greedy.
I'm gonna wait hi I am the mayor
of the city of Gallup and I want
to thank the committee and you
Mr Chairman for hearing this
bill and chairwoman Lundstrom
vice chair small for sponsoring
this important legislature I am
in support of house bill four
for the following reason a
hydrogen generating hub
hopefully will include the
Escalante generating facility
which is in our county and will
have a direct effect not
financially in the city of
Gallup hydrogen will affect us
as explained earlier trucking we
are in the western wait gate
gateway of the State on I. forty
eleven hours from Los Angeles
but hydrogen the future for it I
mean it could could include
train manufacturing construction
Janet electric generation it's
very important for the financial
future of gal and I hope we
don't miss that opportunity
thank you and the members of the
committee.
Thank you for that we have rob
black.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is rob
black and the president and CEO
of the New Mexico chamber of
commerce I'm very excited to be
here to support just before the
past two years the chamber's
been focused on developing and
supporting efforts to equitably
diversify and grow New Mexico's
economy the bill before you
today will do more to bridge the
gap between the haves and have
nots especially in our rural
communities than any other
standard will billable for bill
before you this session it will
target counties veteran
population decline McKinley in
San Juan and Dr good paying jobs
with new an evolving industry
and technology.
Jobs that will allow our
children to stay in their
communities and razor their
children dignity and don't think
we can push this off and study
it and come back later.
By then the eight billion
dollars of infrastructure
funding that was a key priority
for the by demonstration to
support hydrogen Development
will be allocated to places like
Texas Montana Oklahoma instead
of New Mexico we can be first in
the plug in the world to convert
a coal fired power plant to
hydrogen plant please support H.
before thank you.
Thank you we have.
One part.
Morning chairman clean and
members of the committee my name
is Caitlyn Hart registered
lobbyists for el Paso electric
and in respect of the
committee's time okay this
brief.
The previous reason stated we
stand in support of the spell
meant like to thank you for
allowing me to speak today thank
you to Representative Lundstrom
and small for bringing this
legislation forward.
Thank you for that we have any
parity.
Good morning chairman the queen
and members of the committee my
name is Amy bear B. and I'm the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico oil and gas association
we sincerely appreciate
chairwoman Lundstrom lifelong
dedication to economic
development for our state
especially for her commitment to
creating jobs for New Mexicans
we're grateful to both Sanchez
who sought stakeholder
engagement including our members
as they develop the top
legislation presented today for
this committee's consideration.
Our industry is committed to
working with policy makers to
expand commercial applications
of our oil and natural gas
resources including hydrogen
produced using natural gas as
feedstock our energy leadership
can bind with the vast oil and
natural gas resources provides
New Mexico an opportunity to
leverage our strengths
capabilities and energy
potential to the benefit of all
New Mexicans for these reasons
that some of that request they
committee's consideration of
house bill four and again I
appreciate the leadership at the
Sanchez thank you.
Thank you for that we have
missed Martinez.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I am Vince
Martinez senior government
relations adviser for tri state
generation and transmission
association.
Committed to providing reliable
affordable responsible energy to
our member owners by twenty
twenty for more than fifty
percent of the Energy tristate
delivers will be from renewable
sources and by twenty thirty we
will at over eighteen hundred
megawatts of wind and solar
bringing our PS to seventy
percent unfortunately New Mexico
can go from a to Z. overnight or
wish carbon away but through
hydrogen New Mexico can have a
bridge technology that provides
a dispatchable carbon free
source of energy that
complements wind and solar that
ensures future reliability and
creates economic opportunities
for many of our rural
communities we urge you to
approve house bill eight house
bill four rather than secure
this once in a lifetime
opportunity for New Mexico to be
the leader in clean energy
technology thank you.
Thank you for that with Kevin
grumbled.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Kevin
Greenwald I'm the CEO The New
Mexico ruling costs association
at our last board meeting
January seventh my seventeen
member board voted unanimously
to support this bill we see it
as an opportunity to places what
is economic development in the
local area there
this area was hit hard eighties
when uranium mine went away
And this is the place where we
jump certain come back the
second thing is look at
industries when we went into the
Energy transitioned Act in
twenty nineteen we did so with
our eyes wide open we knew that
our zero carbon goal by twenty
fifty would you rely on new
technologies I'm at some point
we're gonna have to start and is
gushing about capacity and the
value capacity so we can keep
our system reliable and
affordable and this is the first
great opportunity to have that
discussion because hydrogen can
find great capacity dispatch
ability thank you.
Thank you for that except we
have clear chase.
Good morning and thank you
chairman agreed to members of
the committee.
Can you hear me yes okay my name
is Claire chase I am
representing back energy
corporation we would like to
also take this opportunity to
recognize and thank the sponsors
especially terminals from for
her tireless dedication to
growing New Mexico's economy
looking for ways to bring new
opportunities to our state we
believe that any time we can add
a new source of energy to New
Mexico's all of the above energy
production narrative for which
we are so well known also not
damaging or interrupting
industries that are already
working successfully in our
state it's a win win and so for
those reasons and others that
have already been stated we
encourage our consideration of
this bill thank you very much.
Thank you for that next step we
have widely roads.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee first of all
I'd like to point out that would
be working with chairwoman
Lundstrom since like twenty
twenty to convert Escalante from
cold hydrogen in the success
that we realize so far has been
based on mainly the
infrastructure that's there in
the work force that's viable so
the things that I would like to
point out is that the Escalante
provides the financial
foundation by which we can build
out the infrastructure take
advantage of the location to
interstate forty the road the
rail in the pipeline we can
develop hydrogen fuel bright
green cement and green steel
semiconductor manufacturing
those type of industry they can
bring additional jobs to
McKinley and Cibola County if
further developed a low hard a
low carbon economy in the state
of New Mexico thank you
chairman.
Thank you for that next up we
have Bernalillo treat.
Good morning chairman McQueen
and members of the committee
thank you to the bill Sanchez
for bringing this up bill
forward my name is Bernard treat
registered lobbyists for Xcel
energy also known as SPS
providing power in southeastern
New Mexico we're in and of the
innovative the industrial
investor owned utility focused
on our energy future and we're
speaking today in support of the
bill this is a great opportunity
for New Mexico and our economic
development.
Legislation will assist us to
reach the twenty five twenty
forty five card and three goals
and the source will also aid in
the reliability aspect as we
reach those goals.
We asked this bill move forward
today as we understand the hubs
will be awarded this year and
also ability to leverage the
potential federal investment in
New Mexico.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you for that we have my
cut.
Hearing.
Yes.
Chairman between members the
committee my name is Mike Hyatt
superintendent for Gallup
McKinley county schools I want
to express our support for house
bill four and it's been energy
and economic opportunities that
it helps find in addition to the
many positive things to mention
about the outcomes of this bill
I want to talk about education
over the last few years tens of
thousands of children across New
Mexico have lost millions of
dollars in lost revenue due to
low lowered bonding capacity in
tax revenue.
House bill four helps restore
bonding capacity in tax revenue
for our children it directly
helps them with their school
buildings they're learning
and opportunities that we are
entrusted to provide for them it
does this in a safe manner I
urge you to supports house bill
four on behalf of our students
in New Mexico thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have Anthony do miss.
Good morning Mr yes.
Thank you Mr chairman and board
member my name down to the U. S.
junior on the county manager
McKinley County and is part of
H. before are you know McKinley
County was one of the hardest
hit
areas in the nation for COVID
nineteen and so and moving
forward also in the last year a
few months we've lost to our
property taxpayers that B. tri
tristate and marathon all I know
the state and always talk about.
Major transformational change
well this how to your bill the
game changer this could change
the potential for not only New
Mexico thank you for the four
corners area of our area Gallup
the county the economic
development opportunities the
job though I will come we
strongly support it we ask that
you also for H. before and moved
to the next
or the next step again thank you
Mr chairman and we support eight
eight before.
Thank you for that we have
Eileen Chavez Yarborough.
Can you hear me yes good morning
chairman McLean and members of
the committee my name is Eileen
Chavez Yarborough and I am the
executive director of Cibola
communities economic development
foundation I have been working
very closely with greater Gallup
economic development and Mr
Wiley Roach on transferring that
decommissioning of a coal fired
plant in to the new emerging
industry of firing up a hydrogen
energy related plant and this is
significant for Cibola County
and that when tri state
Escalante was in operation
ninety percent plus of their
workforce came from Cibola
County when I just go and win
tri state made the decision to
close it affected as in those
one hundred of one hundred seven
jobs and it was a fourteen
million dollar annual impact to
our economy we want and need
those jobs back and this
hydrogen had of legislation can
put our community at the tip of
the spear something that would
be great for our new claim.
Thank you for that next up we
have Justin Campbell.
Good morning can you hear me OK.
Yes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Justin Campbell I'm vice
president of power and
transmission for tall grass
energy I'm here to voice our
support for H. B. for their many
important benefits to this
legislation including economic
development environmental
justice decarbonisation and
positioning New Mexico to
benefit from the growing
hydrogen economy.
But while all those benefits are
here today I want to highlight
the potential for very large
scale I could not economic
development across the state.
Tall grass itself is evaluating
several hydrogen based projects
in New Mexico which if
successful will result in
billions of dollars of private
investment across New Mexico
from tall grass one of course
that comes with the jobs.
In gross the state economy to
the benefit.
Of New Mexicans this legislation
can help unlock that kind of
growth and investment for this
reason and several others we
support age before and would
encourage you to do the same
thank you for your time.
Thank you for that next step
with Scott Scanlon.
Good morning Mr chairman Scott
Scanlon with New Mexico
government payers Representative
representing San Juan County San
Juan County supports this bill
we don't want to lose sight of
the incredible opportunity that
the federal government would
give northwest Mexico if we're
able to passed house bill four I
also Mr chairman and members of
the committee speak on behalf of
the city of Farmington they to
support this bill and we urge
your support thank you Mr
chairman and members.
Thank you for that we have
Thomas Whalen.
Thomas your muted on here and
there you go also thank you
thank you Mr chair committee
members Representative one last
of I to echo support of house
bill four I am not a registered
lobbyist model elector
divisional.
So suppose General Hospital a
member of the chamber of the
local rotary club and then
interested committee member.
This bill will help will be
beneficial to requests which is
a resilient community.
Looking for opportunities to
benefit our community the county
the state and nation and with
our access to I would be and to
rail
line deals spot for.
The country four by two thousand
dollars into our local
communities to be beneficial
call I thank you for your time.
Thank you for that we have Jason
send up.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee it is an honor
to be able to speak before you
today my name is Jason Sandel
I'm a businessman from
Farmington New Mexico.
US the world governments
including ours and those in our
states are introducing
industrial policies that will
decarbonise their economies in
response to climate change these
efforts include major
investments and policies
positioning clean hydrogen fuel
power generation transportation
which could lay the groundwork
for global hydrogen supply
chain.
The hydrogen hub Act is about
fueling the state's economic
future for decades with jobs in
rural economies and communities
workforce development and re
training for people who need it
most this is welcome news for
New Mexico which has had areas
rural areas ravaged economically
since October of two thousand
and eight for example the City
of Farmington's not adjusted
gross receipts tax collection
has plunged by thirteen and a
half percent hydrogen economy
can lift these communities and
we would appreciate your support
for house bill four.
Thank you for that we have Jason
Weaks.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks on
behalf of the mint Kenley county
electric generating facility
economic distress Authority the
authority's board has not yet
had an opportunity to
specifically review and endorse
this legislation we support
general concepts behind bill and
believe the development of
hydrogen infrastructure and hubs
in New Mexico is critical for
states and regions economic and
clean energy futures crazy
previous drafts of this bill
have promoted brought economic
development opportunities
related to the development of
hydrogen infrastructure that is
forward thinking and puts New
Mexico at the forefront of this
emerging economy as a result the
authority stands in support of
this effort and thanks the
sponsors for bringing this for.
Thank you for that we have right
the shrewd or shooting for
cleaning right.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is pretty poor shooting but I
work for fuel cell energy that
we're Connecticut based
manufacturer of fuel cells and
clean energy technology and
we're in support of age before
I'm excited to bring our
technology and staff Mexico this
bill passes we're developing
solid oxide electrolyzer is
still sells and with vision the
use electricity water to create
hydrogen the system will produce
hydrogen as green as electricity
it's feeding into the fuel cell.
Our lectures are like flies
there's would be able to be
paired with renewable energy
projects like large scale solar
or wind farms to create
Representative green
electrolytic hydrogen we're also
developing also solutions that
will convert waste methane gas
like what's produce waste water
treatment plants directly and
without any combustion and
hydrogen fuel cells use electric
chemistry to convert methane gas
and hydrogen or electricity
preventing harmful emissions in
particular matter that's
producing steam methane
reforming our combustion we
support HB for New Mexico for
its passage thank you.
Thank you for that except we
have Robert when our.
I would like to express my
support for H. B. for and thank
you Representative Lundstrom
chairman Lundstrom for breaking
that fort we were devastated
with the closing of the Marathon
Oil and tri state generation
Platt
both have been in McKinley
county but did affect Cibola
County where I am may I county
commissioner by the tune of
about forty million dollars to
our area.
I think this is a no brainer we
can make this I tried to.
Transition this generation plant
in pro it into a retool it into
a hydrogen Platt and I think
that makes a lot of sense it has
many different applications that
would be beneficial to our
economy and would help the state
of New Mexico thank you.
Thank you for that next step we
have we do a.
Is Michael yes morning Mr chair
members the committee my name is
Li doula registered lobbyists
for Exxon Mobil in New Mexico
ExxonMobil believes hydrogen
used as a fuel could be one of
the essential means to help
achieve society's net zero
emissions coupled with carbon
capture and storage it's likely
play a critical role in the
lower emissions energy system
thanks for the opportunity to
comment today.
Thank you for that we have in
the wrong the.
Hello
good morning my name is Anna
Runyan and I'm calling from
casual talk
community by vendor weighed in
and I really feel that.
This type of development needs
more research and just like how
the previous industry came here
about over eighty years ago so.
Your use in support of this or
you in opposition opposition
okay so we support right now.
We.
Okay.
We have an Eric Garcia.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Eric Garcia city your
requests councilman district one
on behalf of the city of
requests we are support of bills
agency for as we are need of
jobs in our area due to the loss
of jobs that Escalante coal
power plant as commissioner
Robert went first said this is a
no brainer and I want to thank
you for your time.
Thank you for that
We have Abbas Akhil.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'm in support of this
bill that some could be a
technical challenges and
questions about successful
sequestration of carbon
reduction of carbon emissions
and the ability to use hydrogen
as a fuel and the Escalante
potluck no the less I'm willing
to take the rest and support age
before what's potential for
economic development job
creation and solving the
technical challenges that lie
ahead and the inescapable fact
that hydrogen will be a few of
in a carbon free future so for
those reasons it's a.
It's a difficult decision but
overall I'm in support of this
bill thank you for your time and
it's really great to speak to
you again.
Thank you for that
next on the list is Max energy
which I believe we have already
heard from.
So what's going to take a train
to Florence.
Can you hear me.
Yes I thank you Mr chairman
committee members my name is
Katrina Flores with SB and well
Donald commercial brokerage I
support age before a hundred and
fifty percent I am currently
working with developers.
Such as Max Energy in California
who are in the process of as
well as they are currently
developing using hydrogen and
our surrounding states they have
been very successful and they're
wanting to expand here in our
state if we don't act now and
get this bill passed we will
lose this opportunity to our
surrounding states this is a
huge game changer for state I am
in support of age before it and
encourage you to do the same
thank you Sir.
Thank you for that
we have automatic Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman can hear
me.
Yes perfect Mr chairman members
the committee my name is Matthew
Gonzalez I'm the state affairs
director for the consumer energy
alliance New Mexico thank you
for the opportunity to comment
on this truly landmark
legislation as C. A. we support
all of the above energy policies
that promote energy production
and environmental stewardship
that results in affordable
energy options for working
families and small businesses
energy production environmental
stewardship are not mutually
exclusive in in New Mexico we
prove that every day New Mexico
has made a commitment to
cleaning up the environment
because of strict environmental
regulations New Mexico already
produces some of the cleanest
energy anywhere in the world so
there's no doubt New Mexico can
stand up in environmentally
responsible hydrogen industry
here in the state we are also
uniquely positioned to be a
leader in this industry but we
must act now I'd like to thank
the sponsors for bringing this
important piece of legislation
board and I think you committee
for the opportunity to speak.
Thank you Matthew next on the
list is Giovanna hawks.
Hi my name is Stefan Hanks
without McKinley County schools
I would like to speak in support
of this bill for many of the
reasons that have already been
articulated but edition only for
the opportunities that our
students can have in new
industries.
Innovative industries as well as
the economic development that
was stated by Representative
small so eloquently by the
secretary thank you again for
the time.
Thank you thanks I'm next on the
list is Joanna Martinez.
Do we need to end here.
I just saw the on mute but but
then can you hear me now yes we
can okay thank you are good at
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I would like to
thank the sponsors of this bill
for their continued concern and
support of the northwestern
region of New Mexico I am a
community member who is lucky
enough to be gainfully employed
many of our residents here table
County are not I I just want to
thank you for and Representative
Garcia Senator mo nos all of
those.
Percent of Leicester of course
but thank you so much for.
Continuing to consider stable in
your activities and with
economic development and to that
Committee thank you for your
support we were carted people
commit community I lead as our
economic development director I
am secretary of the economic
development foundation here and
Cibola thank you thank you we
support this bill we we know how
important it is to the
northwestern region thank you.
Thank you miss Martinez next on
the list is billion more.
You need to you please.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee
serviceability more.
The chairman of northwest New
Mexico council of governments
which represents McKinley County
Cibola County and San Juan
County we are in favor of house
bill four.
The and the economic development
that it'll bring into our
region.
We believe this as a.
Basically a no brainer that our
federal government and the state
government is supporting of
this.
Hydrogen development we believe
it is the future development of
the.
Clean energy and there.
That'll be coming through the
United States through.
Our.
Development here in New Mexico
but also it'll be something that
so.
It's gonna be National.
And we just want to express our
commitment to this also is the
chairman in McKinley county
commissioners.
We're very supportive of house
bill four.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Moore next is eight
Anderson.
Hello thank you to the chairman
and committee for allowing me to
speak my name is Anastasia
Anderson I live in Albuquerque I
support this bill I'm not a
lobbyist or business owner
Justin unemployed citizen of New
Mexico but I am thrilled that
the fossil fuel industry will
continue to get its subsidies
while squashing true energy
clean energy like solar.
So we're on support of the bill
at the moment next up is marks
of Asia.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee marks.
What the next council university
presidents I know your
difference in child services and
some other folks in terms of the
interest in the score higher
education has for additional I
thank the sponsor thanks
Representative Lundstrom
representative Garcia chairman
and senator Munoz along with the
governor and some of that house
University presents disruption
represents the four seven
university stand in support of
this legislation thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
your.
Thank you for that.
In my list of supporters and
we're all set of time anyway.
But if you would like excuse me
at
if you'd like to speak in
opposition you may now raise
your hand.
I I would like to remind people
to be courteous.
You will have a minute we will
do it for another forty five
minutes not everyone is going to
probably get a chance to speak.
if you have multiple people from
the same organization I we can I
would encourage you to consider
having only one person speak so
we can hear from other members
of the public.
First we see if I get that right
first up with Eric my current.
We and members of the committee
my name is Eric naturally and I
work as senior director of
strategic partnerships for the
nuclear energy institute we
applaud the initiative in
bringing this legislation
forward believe strongly that
hydrogen.
So we're not as.
The sorry next up with Mario
Atencio.
Can I give my full minute.
Yes.
Okay great thank you Mr chairman
and I remember was committee
well my name is Mario Atencio I
am the vice president of the
Torreon chapter house and the
Navajo Nation east agency
a call I I rise in opposition to
HB for because of there has been
no outreach to local impacted
communities in the eastern now
what HSD by the state tribal
collaboration act very important
because as I heard
we are we're not going to be I
did a rod we're not gonna be an
Iditarod would be Guinea pigs
externality agency of unproven
technology is a no agency by all
means is part of the greater
tropical landscape and the
impacts of said oil and gas
creates hydrogen as added added
up.
The is only derive from fracked
height fracked gas it's a very
much there's a lot of some tunes
that and it's something that are
that that's that carbon capture
sequestration is a viable
technologies it is not and so
and department of justice.
Issues need to be at the
forefront of this thank you.
Thank you for that next step we
have Camilla I will.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee and Camilla I will
then representing the Sierra
Club Rio Grande chapter with
thirty five thousand members and
supporters around the state well
we understand the interest in
exploring alternatives for
decarbonisation and jobs this
bill doesn't do that and it's
it's an incentive bill for not
just green but fossil fuel
hydrogen that economic and now
analysts predict will soon be
out competed by other
technologies there's been a lot
of talk today about zero carbon
zero carbon hydrogen and
decarbonisation but the bill
offers tax payer dollars for
hydrogen production that a
wealth of studies and analysis
have shown make the climate
crisis worse not better fossil
fuel hydrogen as a source of
climate and air pollution at
every point of production from
massive upstream methane
emissions to unproven and
incomplete carbon capture to
combustion on the ground that
creates health damaging
pollutants if anything we should
be regulating hydrogen in
particular the bill in some
cases doesn't include
measurement of climate impact
for upstream sources the so
called net negative hydrogen.
Thank you for that that was the
end of your.
except we have.
Radion.
Hello are you able to hear me.
Yes.
Yet a banishment I share re on
Francisco again share good
morning chair and members of the
committee my name is Leon
Francisco and I'm a community
member of the side of interest
include New Mexico I am here to
state death no to each before
how many more times does history
have to repeat itself before we
learn how many times do First
Nations indigenous people have
to be forced to give up their
health and safety for the
economy of New Mexico and the
United States to make way for
competitive industries that
require specific skills that
only people outside of the state
people outside of the community
have if you want to be a hub or
something the hope for clean
water in our community be a hub
for respecting the health and
safety of indigenous peoples if
this is clean and safe and
reliable let's put it in the
suburbs within he said your own
homes enough is enough our
health and safety are more
important I should have thank
you.
Thank you for that we have chair
and consolidates allay.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members of and members
of the public my name is Bob
Holly and I'm speaking on behalf
I'm sorry I don't see my.
Then it started.
Morning Mr chairman
my name is Bob Ali and I'm
speaking in opposition to this
bill I grew up in Los Alamos
where my father was a chemist in
the lab the other day said to me
our people are talking about
making hydrogen NMSA I can't
think of a more expensive
polluting and inefficient way to
do that first you have to get
the methane however you do it
it's expensive some will
inevitably begin to the
atmosphere then you burn it
creating tons of CO two as you
make electricity.
When you select the type less
water to get hydrogen.
He told me back in the eighties
some guys from the lab to the I
called there and show that you
can drill a hole five hundred
feet down pump water through it
and get the.
Do that provide technical
activities hydrolyze water into
clean hydrogen.
What happened to this project
according to my dad.
Additions got wind of it it was
scuttled because fossil fuel
companies would make money off
it the reality in New Mexico.
Thank you for that.
So hopefully you can see there
the timer and does automatically
turn off after a minute.
We have chance.
Thank you Mister chair members
of the committee I'm Erik Jantz
senior staff attorney at the New
Mexico environmental law center.
and I am here to urge you to
vote against HB for the sales
pitch that we heard this morning
reminds me a lot of sales pitch
that heard for years before in
the context of nuclear energy
and uranium mine that the
streets of New Mexico will be
paved with gold only we submit
to massive taxpayer handouts to
plundering industries rely on
failed technology and embrace
claims questionable claims of
clean energy industry.
We know what happened with
uranium mining in the nuclear
industry we have polluted water
and land and public health
disaster in primarily low income
communities color and indigenous
communities I expect the same
with this bill so again I urge
you to vote against H. before
thank you.
Thank you for that except with
Erik Schlenker Goodrich.
Thank you chairman thank you
members of the committee I urge
you to vote no on age before
let's be clear what each before
does provide Spaso gas hydrogen
developers and investors
including the Blackstone group a
seven hundred and thirty one
billion dollar global investment
group with taxpayer subsidies
under the assumption that the
budget will somehow trickle down
to our climate and communities I
don't buy the faucet gas hybrid
hype hype I don't by the fossil
gas hydrogen height and I hope
you don't either please vote no
on H. before thank you.
Thank you for that we have
Michael I just felt.
Chairman queen and committee
members Mike as Intel live in
Farmington and work for San Juan
citizens alliance we firmly
oppose H. B. four we oppose
fossil fuel hydrogen we have an
exit exit central climate crisis
in northwestern New Mexico it
would be exacerbated by this
I hear zero carbon hydrogen
carbon negative hydrogen I don't
understand what that means I
also and been watching the
permanent sequestration of
carbon and certified and
responsibly sourced gas concepts
and those are very much
very much just conceptual right
now I think this is really
really scary in terms of the
greenwashing that's going on and
if people want to be investing
in New Mexico let's let's do the
right thing go to renewable says
we bought into it the energy
transition act.
Representative small I hope that
you would want to talk to us
about what's going on thank you.
We have crystal currently.
My name is crystal curly I'm the
executive director of a
nonprofit called indigenous life
weights McKinley County has been
a target for fossil fuel
industry before New Mexico
became the state in the
beginning it was cold and when
that collapse sixteen then came
uranium mining I needed
communities have suffered the
worst from each fossil fuel
business venture in New Mexico
near Gallup we were left with
the largest radioactive spill in
the US history this bill has had
a tremendous effect on our way
of life.
After all my community has gone
through we are yet a target for
gas fracking and now hydrogen
each time these industries
ambush our communities were told
lies are told renewable told
nothing about the horrific
impacts it has on our
environment is an industry of
extraction are unforgivable and
most of all these people much
like the legislation
Representative Lundstrom is
proposing false solutions to
call it climate change are not
the answer we must and
departmental racism thank you
at.
We have Joan brown.
A good morning chair and
committee and thank you for all
your hard work my name is John
Brown I'm a Franciscan sister
and the judge of New Mexico
interfaith power and light we
work with faith which is all of
the state and we have real
ethical moral concerns about
this bill going forward and many
questions we've heard before new
and innovative best in only
opportunities so now we're
strapped with nuclear waste
running through the state and
continued uranium legacy that
affects oil water.
The land water and health of our
communities I'm oversight is a
question the agencies already do
not have funding or staff to do
adequate oversight in the oil
and gas industry a question
about financial stewardship is
this really financial
stewardship grants loans and
millions and millions of dollars
of tax incentives where is the
liability insurance for these
companies what about stranded
access at announcements what
about bankruptcies the taxpayers
the public inclusion tribal
frontline communities health
implications future children
generations questions of ethical
concerns thank you.
Thank you for that except we
have Luke McMath.
Hello.
Hello.
Hello my name is the big math
I'm an educational assistant
working for APS with our most
vulnerable children I am deeply
disturbed by HB for the young
man myself as someone who works
with the next generation.
Representative why this
committee will be considering
further subsidies from methane
gas at a time when we
desperately need to be phasing
out its use is our future that
your attention with basing at
risk for this bill which will
create another carbon heavy
industries with underfunded
oversight on certain gains and a
dependence on fracking in the
very best case scenario the hard
rock will be left with a massive
carbon Byrd you will have to
overcome if we are to meet the
goal of net zero emissions I am
not indifferent to the economic
concerns at play as someone who
works education I have a desire
to see New Mexico flourish the
answer is not to extend the use
of methane gas or any other
fossil fuel is to invest in
renewable energy green
technology which will bring
stable and sustainable growth
for state thank you for your
time.
Thank you for that we have Janet
Carter.
Hello can you hear me yes good
thank you chairman McQueen and
members of the committee for the
opportunity to speak my name is
Janet Carter I'm a resident of
Santa Fe hydrogen fuel maybe
carbon free but it does not
pollution free it is still a
mystery Act of technology
studies have shown that types
the types of projects that would
qualified for or for a four of
the foot and for subsidies under
H. B. H. before may cost more
climate pollution than burning
oil and gas in part because they
do require large quantities of
methane methane burning is a
major factor in climate warming
pollution from the release of
may eighth methane into the
atmosphere will not be totally
eliminated with this with this
technology this bill basically
increases subsidies for fossil
fuels I believe it is past time
to move away from all fossil
fuels and commit our time money
and efforts to promoting a just
transition to truly clean energy
sources such as wind and solar
we can meet our clean energy
goals in this manner and in the
long run it will save lives and
money please vote no on this
legislation thank you for your
time.
We have Tom Solomon.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
Tom Solomon with three fifty New
Mexico I start by noting that
the hydrogen council previously
referenced is actually a
consortium dominated by oil and
gas companies like BP shell
chevron Saudi Aramco and others
this bill is a gift to them at
the cost of our client their
vital questions that must be
answered before we rush to pass
the bill heavy in tax cuts for
the gas industry which already
and are enjoys enormous federal
tax subsidies such as what is
the impact of more fracking on
native communities near fracking
feels how do we stop the methane
from leaking from the thousands
of valves pipe joins wells
compressors it's that are for
more at least today is carbon
capture and sequestration work
at scale it doesn't is it
economical it is not what are
the cost in parasitic energy
losses they're huge how do we
guarantee that the very carbon
dioxide doesn't leak back what
are the economics of hydrogen
compared to the better solution
of clean electricity how many
jobs will result first is the
cleaner alternatives.
Thank you for that sorry about
the time limit that stuck with
on that that whileor.
Good morning thank you for the
chance to speak The New Mexico a
citizen and I have three
questions does New Mexico want
to squander its precious water
on a marginal technology.
Number two does New Mexico need
more industry one existing
companies can't find workers.
Number three does New Mexico
need more energy one having more
energy seems to simply
accelerate destruction of our
land water and air.
Please see through this Mirage
and focus on the majority of
yours constituents who oppose H.
B. four thanks for your
consideration.
Thank you for that next up with
Neil Williams.
Good morning chairs McClinton
Lundstrom thanks for inviting
our comments.
My name is Neil William St I'm a
registered environmental
engineer living and working in
Santa Fe.
So blue hydrogen is what my
mother in law would call a snare
and a delusion.
The delusion is that we can beat
the first law of thermodynamics.
Energy scientists have
demonstrated that it takes more
energy to create little hydrogen
that can be derived from burning
and that's without considering
the huge environmental costs of
construction of the hydrogen
hubs proposed in H. before.
Business analysts have concluded
that by the time the methane
based hydrogen industry is built
out it will it's been over taken
already by green water drive
hydration.
Yes it is our governor has told
us we have unimaginable
resources to spend on New
Mexico's future let's not spend
them on this false hope of
partnership thanks very much.
Thank you for that we have
Kathleen mostly.
Thank you Mr chairman clean and
representative representatives
on the committee I'm retired
community health nurse
registered nurse with a master's
in preventive medicine and for
the past thirteen years I've
traveled around the state.
Trying to support children with
asthma in our state
the highest emergency department
visits and hospitalizations had
coincidentally been in the areas
with the highest fossel fuel
production companies.
I really stand to oppose this
bill because I don't think we
adequately addressed the
problems of us already in
children in our state and I
understand that this new
technology even the green
hydrogen would produce three
tons of carbon dioxide for every
time of hydrogen produced and
also it could be increased
nitrogen oxides by six times
leading the same environmental
vulnerability of groups exposed
to
some.
Thank you for that.
We've rose Russian.
Hi everyone good morning my name
is rose rushing and speaking in
my individual capacity as a
resident of Farmington down here
in Brookside park I oppose this
bill is a bad investment for the
state of New Mexico the science
is simply not there to support
the idea that a hydrogen hub
actually works instead this is
an this boondoggle that allows
us to continue to give hand outs
the oil and gas industry I love
my community here in Farmington
and I'm no stranger to the
impacts of the shrinking economy
I live every day but likely San
Juan county is one of the best
places in the country for the
development of solar power which
is scientifically proven
economically viable and actually
takes us towards a decarbonise
future every tax so that we
continue to hand out to oil and
gas development is a dollar that
we don't invest in ourselves and
in those industries that are
actually going to prevent a
climate disaster thank you.
Thank you for that next week we
have had she Lee.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Patricia
chiefly I have lived in Gallup
since nineteen ninety three I
work as a dietitian and diabetes
educator Gallup Indian Medical
Center.
I oppose H. B. four I have many
concerns I will list three of
them one our impacted
communities and our tribal
nations have not been asked for
their input are they going to be
included are there concerns from
other is going to be taken into
account their concern for for
the jet future generations is
important and should be included
in discussions second are we
going to have the capacity to
develop oversee and enforce
standards that will be necessary
to ensure that this large
project is conducted safely
NMED and them wrong are already
understaffed third I am also
concerned about how much
taxpayer money will be required
thank you for considering these
concerns.
Thank you for that we have Dan
Intel's.
Hello my name is Dan Pritchard
good morning Mr chairman and
committee I'm on the executive
board of renewable house
representing a hundred fifty
members in northern New Mexico.
I'm in favor of jobs economic
development and think they're a
budget in green hydrogen however
I and many others are tired of
the subsidies to polluting oil
and gas industry it is time to
move to purely green energy not
technically complex blue methane
hydrogen that often name it's
more collective pollution in the
energy it creates.
This is not about ideology it's
about the proven climate crisis
what we can do is the state to
truly set a national standard to
go green this bill is misguided
and deceptive reject this bill
we can and must do better.
Let's incentivize green energy
instead of carpeting blue
hydrogen I had a thirty five
year career one of the national
laboratories has been mentioned.
So thank you for your apologize
about the timer next up we have
a Tina.
Good morning chair and committee
members my name Justina
Christodoulou and I'm a retired
navy energy and environmental
engineer I also represent the
environment mental justice
caucus and the auto on the
progressive caucus and we and we
are in firm opposition of the
bill as written green hydrogen
is a solution but that requires
water which we are in short
supply of and by the way science
is not negotiable in the bill it
tries to make us believe that
three hundred seventy five
pounds of carbon dioxide per
megawatt hour equals zero.
I can see how the fossil fuel
industry wants this it's means
continued subsidies and it means
by the way killing humanity and
on the way pulling us poor
suckers again in New Mexico on a
fool's errand but I say no more
we've had and heard from
industry clean coal clean
natural gas and clean diesel and
now they're trying to foist
honest clean suppose it hydrogen
we propose hide H. before as
written it needs study Marian
haste and repent at leisure.
Thank you for that we have Rolf
Roland's.
Good morning and thank you
German the queen and members of
the committee for this
opportunity Madam I'm retired
energy engineer with three years
experience at a coal fired power
plant in a twenty eight year
career at Sandia national labs
and energy efficiency and
management also to raise.
During the COVID bill sponsors
and supporters are very
concerned by the green washing
up what is at its basic core
host of subsidized vehicles
continued fracking of methane
this act is based on steam
methane reformation.
The low carbon hydrogen is
entirely dependent on the very
shaky expensive very energy
intensive foundation of carbon
captures stretched.
Please note that the Albuquerque
journal editorial board a macro
economic development of used
paper publishers oral two days
ago recommending this bill needs
more scrutiny it should be table
I also want to say that I agree
with the comments that have been
given previously by Mario
Atencio Camilla I woman Tom
Solomon Neil Williams Dan of
renewable tells most recently in
a Christodoulou thank you very
much.
Thank you for that except with
Kevin being.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Kevin being a member of the
sheriff that China coalition a
lifelong environmentalist I ask
you to oppose this bill.
And Representative was small
Representative Lundstrom I just
want to stare don't question
your motivation.
And I or your sincerity but I am
concerned that making
intelligent and well intentioned
people are being misled in this
campaign Nyerere need to oppose
this bill thank you.
That we have twenty two Zamora.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
I strongly opposes I would like
to read a brief sentence from a
highly credible national
government organization don't to
senator Schumer speaker posi.
New research from scientists at
Cornell and Stanford outlines
also you'll based hydrogen with
carbon capture and storage as
larger greenhouse gas emissions
than coal this leads me to
believe that we have experts
that do not support and as of
this as others have mentioned it
is not safe for our planet work
community here in New Mexico we
should not lose our ideology for
the future for profit thank you.
Thank you for that next step we
have Stephanie Lujan lots of.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee this is
Stephanie how tomato from Los
crucis and I'm on the steering
committee of three fifty New
Mexico we stand firmly opposed
to HB for I am a mother and work
in the field of science and
environmental education which I
chose because I wanted to make a
difference for our kids in the
future I suspect that all of you
decided to run for office for
similar reasons.
Please look to your conscience
today and but with our futures
in mind.
I'm very concerned about the
climate crisis and while
hydrogen might sound good
producing hydrogen for number
from natural gas is even worse
for the climate been burning
that natural gas directly my
main concern is that we would be
subsidizing the fossil fuel
industry with over a hundred
million in tax dollars instead
of making that kind of
investment in our children's
future let's invest those
dollars that we need to quickly
expand wind and solar to really
solve the climate crisis and
supply sustainable New Mexico's
jobs please vote no on each
before thank you.
Thank you for that we have so
that could Johnson.
Good morning my name is Anna and
I'm a representative of yucca
use United for climate crisis
action you can use of these
members throughout northern New
Mexico and we strongly oppose H.
B. four.
Investing in hydrogen is a
catastrophically bad idea we
need to be transitioning away
from fossil fuels hi Jim
production relies on those very
fossil fuels in fact hygiene and
it's twenty percent more than
just directly burning natural
gas is nonsensical to believe
that this is what just
transition would look like and
even the so called clean
administration of hydrogen is
not feasible here because of the
massive amounts of water
resources required of which we
all know weren't hi we can be
incentivizing the production of
hydrogen in New Mexico as
hydrogen is a false solution
districts resolutions like the
renewables wind and solar which
don't really screen house gas
emissions that pollute
communities are cheaper to make
create jobs without sacrificing
our communities already have
existing infrastructure globally
in New Mexico has incredible
potential for them you like to
see this kind of wholesale
support for renewables incentive
subsidies urgent action but we
see no good when this fire we're
rapidly shrinking we have a
reputation to get money and we
can't waste time of all stations
so please go against each before
thank you.
Thank you for that we have
Warren Howland.
Hi thank you Mr chairman my name
is Lauren Holland I'm here to
speak on behalf of the public
action lines as their
environmental justice organizer
this legislation does not
require actual carbon reduction
at all New Mexico must halt
extraction of fossil fuels and
keep them in the ground which
cannot be achieved through
hydrogen hubs hydrogen is being
touted as clean energy but
actually requires the burning of
more fossil fuels to produce it
a recent study from Cornell
University concluded that
hygiene facilities produce
twenty percent more greenhouse
gas emissions from the burning
of more traditional fossil fuels
for heat such as coal and
natural gas this means that
clean hydrogen cannot be
realistically achieved their
hydrogen hubs and it's just not
the full solution for climate
mitigation and adaptation the
immense amount of water usage is
something our state should be
the most concerned about as
education of our southwestern
climate continues the state of
New Mexico should be supporting
legislation for New Mexico field
standard instead we need real
climate leadership from our
elected officials not leaders
who are lined false Lucien's
like hydrogen hubs that
jeopardize the health and well
being of the people who elected
them thank you.
Thank you for that we have Paul
Gibson.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members my name is Paul Gibson
co founder precheck Our
Democracy for over a decade
fossil fuel industry has this
been disseminating misleading in
that it information about this
technology as they recognize
hydrogen's a life raft that
they're dying industry
interestingly prominent among
bill supporters were no Moga
chevron Exxon NextEra tall grass
all deeply involved in the
fossil fuel industry well the
presentation this morning was
very persuasive it was largely
based on research developed by
the fossil fuel industry at and
omitted some inconvenient truths
first inconvenient truths clean
hydrogen is not clean it emits
more than three hundred and
seventy five pounds of carbon
dioxide equivalent per megawatt
hour.
Second inconvenient truths the
hydrogen is not a prudent
financial investment energy
researchers project that within
the decade the cost to produce
green hydrogen will be lower
the blue the blue proposed by
the governor in other words
within a few years New Mexico's
investment in hydrogen would be
worthless stranded assets in
closing hi I'm.
Thank you for that colleges
about the timer next up with
Keeley should.
Good morning my name is Kelly
shoot I'm a community organizer
with citizens caring for the
future and a young woman living
in Carlsbad today many people
have raised a pertinent points
as to why hydrogen is an
unstable investment that will
likely leave us with the reeling
economy in the future along with
the worse off plan and quality
of life for all people because
of this false climate solution
that the energy administration
is championing I know miss that
a yes vote on this bill will be
a stay on your record a
bipartisan when here is no way I
live in a region that's ravaged
we're Ascot silly to support
legislation rulemakings that are
designed to protect us and yet
on the ground I see little
difference not only that but we
are asked to support leaders a
claim to value our input they
want to be chaired on the don't
always once with that I ask you
today to listen to those of us
that will be most affected by
these have been increased
upstream methane emissions that
come with that be moved by and
through the listen to the people
you represent don't be moved by
corporate interests and the
powers that be in Santa Fe your
job representing the people be
brave and bold please do what is
right thank you for your time.
Thank you for that next up we
have merry and Maestas.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is Merion
Maestas and I'm with her's Care
in environmental and social
justice member based
organization here in Santa Fe
County we oppose house bill four
because it's investing in
continued fracking and pollution
our members have asked for real
climate solutions like
investments in the abundance of
renewables in our state and we
have a moral duty to our
communities our youth and our
land and water to invest in
solutions that will not continue
to progress down in greenhouse
gas emissions and negative
health impacts please stand with
New Mexicans to oppose this bill
thank you.
Thank you for that except with
Merrill the nasty.
Good morning chair and committee
members I am the executive
director of new energy economy
and on behalf of our thirty five
members I'm asking you to vote
no on page B. for hydrogen Act
clean hydrogen is an oxymoron as
defined in **** section twenty
of the bill clean hydrogen
emits.
And permit the emission of
carbon dioxide ninety nine point
eight percent of hydrogen causes
more pollution than burning gas
to important highlights of the
bill.
Over the past six years there
have been a five hundred and
seventy two
at oil and gas companies that
have filed for bankruptcy we
should not tie the New Mexico
finance authority or any other
government agency to this
financial unstable industry and
that section eight through
sixteen also section eighteen C.
of the bill states that two
years after hydrogen production
they will begin to our address
corporal will.
Sorry about the timer next up we
have no as long.
Hi I'm can you hear me.
Yes hi hi this is no along with
the natural resources defense
council I appreciate the
opportunity to speak today
I'd like to thank the sponsors
for making improvements from
their initial drafts of the work
that they're doing to continue
that progress unfortunately I
ask you today to vote no or to
table this bill because that
progress has a long way to go to
continue and before this is a
bill that's ready and ready to
pass are ready to help New
Mexico as it is today if it's
not ready I urge you to vote
now.
I do is an unstable molecule and
it can be isolated store energy
from fossil fuels are for
renewable energy and
unfortunately this bill uses
subsidies to support fossil fuel
uses which will worsen the
climate crisis here in New
Mexico there's loopholes that
you can drive trucks through
that will allow upstream
emissions of all sorts and
averaging out of emissions from
very small percentage of
biogenic methane this bill is
not ready I urge you to vote now
thank you very much.
Thank you for that Sir we have
Marlene corrupt.
Good morning Mr
Chair and members of the
committee my name is sister
Marlene pair and the sister of
mercy with the partnership for
spirituality we have heard about
the advantages hopes and dreams
of fossil fuels hydrogen however
we need to recognize that the
fossil fuels hydrogen is a moral
ethical and Community
perspective we must apply the
precautionary principle to this
new on pro wind technology the
introduction and the principal
is the introduction of a new
product or process is
alternative facts are disputed
no should be resisted.
It is a new technology and is
still being developed hi
production especially derived
from methane produces many
different types of pollution
safety and local health threats
on communities along the
production and distribution
chain that needs study and
research.
No there's no oversight no
subsidies to possibile
industry with the upper level of
carbon dioxide equivalent that
qualifies for tax rate is on in
a three four thank you.
Thank you for that.
This Tracy Neal I believe.
Okay looks like I'm unmuted now
is that correct that's correct
okay thank you very much I'm not
here representing a particular
group I'm here representing
people who want to live in New
Mexico in the future and raise
our kids here you've heard all
the reasons why this bill is
basically just has not to do the
clean energy and as a giveaway
to the fossil fuel and industry
which I don't want to support
anymore because I would like to
stay here with my kids and my
grandkids and I I would urge you
to ask yourselves this question.
What good did jobs do us if the
climate change makes it
impossible to live in New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you for that is Robert
accordingly.
Thank you Mr chairman McQueen
and members of the committee can
you hear me.
Yes.
Accordingly and I'm here to
speak on behalf of our team at
three fifty Santa Fe a nonprofit
dedicated to solving the climate
crisis we restrict press a
strong opposition to rage
before.
Because it's upside down when it
comes to working on the climate
crisis and and sanctioning of
fossil fuels for hydrogen
production.
Such great hydrogen production
increases part of methane
emissions.
His demand for natural gas from
fracking and the Senate's aged
water consumption reporter is a
concern for the state.
It relies on costly unproven
common caption sequestration
technologies and injection wells
it essentially gives tax credits
and subsidies to the oil and gas
industry when they should really
be going to renewable energy
renewable hygiene industry.
With us.
Read in results is if anything
New Mexico's really deserve a
small bill one that captures the
two billion dollars for the
renewable hygiene I have one
that explicitly encourages the
development of renewable
technologies and green
businesses.
Thank you for that next step we
have Carl Peterson.
Thank you chairman the queen and
members of the committee my name
is Carl Peterson I'm a member of
indivisible ABQ this bill is far
too permissive of carbon
pollution this is fatal weakness
there are emerging technologies
that can answer the true
definition of clean hydrogen
using nothing however this bill
incentivizes the pollution of
existing industrial process the
committee should listen to the
people and not the oil industry
and its lobbyist I urge you to
table this bill for the purposes
of dramatically reducing the
total allowable ratio between
carbon to hydrogen production
and if you do this you may be
able to truly generate clean
hydrogen in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you for that we have time
for just a couple more we will
not get everyone acknowledges
that that next up we have
Barbara Calif.
You hear me now.
Yes.
Good morning chairman of queen
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Calif I'm speaking
for the league of women voters
of New Mexico we are both oppose
H. B. four the bills described
as relating to economic
development however we cannot
afford to subsidize potential
economic development with
increased gas greenhouse gas
emissions as you heard hydrogen
produced from natural gas is not
clean because the extreme
methane emissions will be
considerable the carbon dioxide
sequestration on which this bill
depends has not been
demonstrated on a large scale
this bill will perpetuate our
reliance on fossil fuels we're
concerned about the budget and
tax implications of the bill
according to the fiscal impact
report this bill baby counter to
the LFC tax policy principle.
Adequacy efficiency and equity
due to the increasing cost of
the tax expenditures revenues
may be insufficient to cover
growing recurring appropriation
please vote no still thank you.
Thank you for that except with.
Liliana Castillo.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is lily
anexio and I am with I do
Clemente advocates poses in need
us for all the reasons
previously stated particularly
from committee members who will
be most impacted by policies
such as age before that further
invest in fossil fuel industry
that is damaging their health
our climate and of the hope of a
thriving and sustainable future
we encourage folks to vote no on
the bill and also think about
the questions that have been
raised here and consider you
know slowing down this process
and so we can really get some
answers before we move forward
thank you.
Thank you for that I have Diane
Reese.
Good morning I'm Diane Reese I
live in the south valley of
Albuquerque where there is
plenty of toxic of industry that
is in a community of lower
income and color I am also a
retired Air Force colonel and I
chose to live in New Mexico
because of its beauty and
opportunity and access to its
legislators I will say so thank
you to our legislators today
part of my job was to protect
the health of the fourth force
as a health care administrator
that's why I'm asking you to
vote no on H. before.
Hydrogen will poison our air and
therefore please our children
pollute our water and destroy
our natural landscapes it's
expensive polluting ineffectual
inefficient and conceptual and
the water use is incredible it's
not easy listening to all these
wonderful jobs and opportunities
that were put out by mostly
lobbyists for the oil and gas
and who's speaking against it's
us the people please listen to
us and vote no thank you for
your service.
Thank you for that we have the
lane Solomon.
Thank you very much for this
opportunity to speak to this
committee I am in opposition to
this bill and at the same time I
want to say I'm very grateful
that the subject of clean energy
has gotten this degree of
visibility and I appreciate that
there has been some very hard
work done on this.
I do not want us to settle for
the framework that says it's
time to say yes or no to the
hydrogen economy that is
simplistic and we need to be
comprehensive about something so
complex I am very concerned that
some stakeholders have not been
at the table and they are they
include people who are very
knowledgeable and are very
passionate about the environment
of our state I fear that it is
seductive to look at those
federal dollars that might come
the opportunity to be a leader
the us being successful
competing that's not good a good
reason to do.
Thank you for that except we
have John boxer.
Hi my name's John boxer thank
you to the committee and to the
chair for giving us the
opportunity to speak today I'm a
citizen in Santa Fe New Mexico
hydrogen I think is a very good
potential fuel for
transportation.
We have here wind and solar in
plenty.
Electrolysis is a viable
technology given.
Power and lots of water we don't
have the water.
Extending a polluting lifeline
to oil and gas.
Industry is not the solution
thank you for considering not
supporting this bill.
Thank you for that we're gonna
do two more and we're gonna go
to chili Yazzie.
I do development as well as any
other extractive energy activity
is the proverbial candle burning
at both ends at one in there's
the methane flare representing
your coveted revenue and
economic development and at the
other end of the candle is the
inflaming of the life of the
planet one day when the two
flames me there will be darkness
all the revenues economic
development well not rescue
continued life of the plan
including the future of mine
grown children and your
grandchildren I did not hear one
indigenous course in support of
this bill all indigenous forces
have been opposition that should
tell you something this is our
you are destroying our earth I
stand in opposition to this
bill.
Thank you for that our final
public comment is going to come
from commissioner Anna Hansen.
Good morning Mr chairman
Committee members hi my name is
on a hand from Santa Fe County
commissioner Santa Fe County is
a leader in our response to the
climate crisis we've taken bold
action to expand renewable
energy and energy efficiency we
proudly supported the Paris
agreement to route to use
greenhouse gases.
But the hydrogen hub is simply a
bridge too far we cannot support
the bill to incentivize hydrogen
print production.
This bill will promote even more
fracking and the release of
methane in our community it runs
the risk of diverting attention
from expanding wind and solar
from an environmental justice
perspective this bill will make
worse not improve the lives and
health of our native brothers
and sisters in northwest New
Mexico I strongly urge you to
vote no on this bill the risks
far outweigh the potentials why
are we waiting two years to
write rules after implementing
that.
I really thank you for the time.
Thank you for that and with that
we're gonna and our public
comment and I still have twenty
five people with their hands up
in yeah their people their names
I recognize our people I know
there are people who'd spoken to
this committee before their
people whose incomes we value
and I apologize that we're not
gonna get to you today in the
interest of time.
We we do need to move on.
For a good to the committee I
would like to give the Sanchez
Representative small and Richard
Representative Lundstrom a
chance to make
the to respond to anything if
you so desire.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
committee members and tall who's
spoken who attended today I'm at
a deeply and I know we all
deeply appreciate the important
nuanced and passionate
engagement Mr chairman and
committee members we do want to
address a few things and I want
to go briefly through them Mr
chair committee members I would
drop folks attention to HB for
to the bill that you have and
starting on page two.
continuing through
the the early part as we go
through the definitions I want
to call out a few of these Mr
chairman and committee members
to reinforce the point that the
carbon emissions for hydrogen
are in fact very closely
Regulated in this legislation
tuned very tightly to federal
standards but allowing to
actually reach above those when
appropriate and so Mister chair
and committee as we begin to go
down through the definitions
briefly here on page two
beginning online nineteen you'll
see this definition
appear many times in different
places throughout house bill
four and this says all right it
briefly Mr chairman without
going ad nauseum through things
but this says hydrogen meeting
the standards for clean hydrogen
develop pursuant to section
eight to two of the federal
energy policy act of two
thousand and five as that
section may be amended to re
number what's critical there Mr
chair and committee is that the
this refers directly to the
recently by past.
A bipartisan infrastructure law
that contains strong standards
and also allows the secretary of
energy to continue setting more
stringent and more detailed
standards as we go forward in
this important part of our
economy and so we just want to
make incredibly clear Mr
chairman and committee members
that we are
We are closely aligning in fact
with no separation to the
federal standards why is this
important Mr chair and committee
members it's important because
as we all acknowledge there are
over eight billion dollars that
are already out there that will
be awarded to communities
regions perhaps different states
working together to develop
hydrogen include it and.
The fact that these dollars are
out there with the federal
guidelines mean that these
projects will happen the
emissions or the the whether
it's a high emissions profile or
a low emissions profile will
occur from this law Mr chairman
and committee members house bill
four sets out a very thorough
process to ensure that we are on
the low emissions.
Part of that continuum it does
that through the repeated
definitions that hi that
reference Mr chairman I'll stay
here on page two briefly.
Clean hydrogen means whichever
one of the following results in
the lower carbon intensity so Mr
chairman and committee we say
here that whatever's lowest
whether that's the federal
standard as that changes and as
that tightens whether that's the
state standard whichever is
lowest New Mexico will do there
is no way to say more clearly Mr
chairman and committee members
that New Mexico commits to being
on the lowest end of the scale.
Mr chairman and committee so
moving forward from there a few
other things that have been
brought up Mr chair committee
members
a number of times we've heard
and of course we absolutely
agree that fresh water is
incredibly important and you'll
see Mr chairman committee
members repeatedly throughout
our bill starting on page three
on page sixteen and many other
places a key criteria for
awarding of a hydrogen high is
the consideration of the
available water resources and
alternative water resources that
can be utilized similarly Mr
chair and committee members I'm
now on page three.
We provide definitions for the
extensive list of the terms that
you for here today including
very important areas like the
hard to decarbonise industry and
so Mister chairman committee
members
all dry your attention there
line eleven page three hard to
decarbonise industry means an
industry for which they are not
yet easily adopted cost
effective alternative
technologies to eliminate
greenhouse gas emissions Mr
chair committee I just wanted to
bring that up because.
Far from displacing wind or
solar or other renewable
energy's H. B. for it supports
them we specifically say that in
the bill here and in other
places so that the places that
are very difficult to do with
existing or emerging
technologies that we allow
hydrogen to fill that niche
which it does well in which the
global community is moving
aggressively towards
Mr chairman and committee
members.
I I I I do want to be very
cognisant of our time
suffice it to say as this bill
the collaboration between
multiple stakeholders has sought
to define and all of the areas
that we that have been touched
on today to ensure that they are
at the lowest and of the carbon
emissions spectrum and as
secretary County has pushed
pointed out and which is
globally acknowledged not only
do we have to reduce emissions
we have to push forward and
innovative ways where we draw
emissions down that have already
been that are already in the
atmosphere finally I just want
to say Mr chair and committee
members.
That the creation of a hydrogen
or just regional or otherwise
will not affect global.
Hydrocarbon demand.
Mr chair committee members it is
this is an incredibly
challenging area we will not
affect to that global demand but
Mr chairman committee members
what H. B. for does is that it
continues building upon New
Mexico's national and
international leadership.
In the area of reducing
emissions including related to
hydrocarbons we are saying that
although we don't control
worldwide demand we are plowing
and plunging forward to set the
strongest emissions standards
possible that will be at or
leading the the U. S. standards
and so Mister chair committee
members.
As we do that as we reduce
emissions from hard to
decarbonise industries like long
haul trucking like cement
production or steal aviation and
other areas we are in my opinion
maximizing New Mexico's ability
to shift the global paradigm and
lead the way on a low carbon
future.
And I'm so grateful Mr chair
committee we have the
opportunity to do that and I
would also finally add.
That in this low carbon reduced
emissions future central to all
of us and what madam chair has
worked on with incredible
diligence faced against the most
difficult circumstances the
energy transition and challenges
are buffeting New Mexico and
especially the northwest part of
New Mexico as severely as any
place in the country frankly is
severely as many places in the
world our bill sets the standard
for reducing emissions and does
that in a way that powers our
economy and that is the.
pronged approach that provides
hope for our future hope for our
state and that's why I'm so so
grateful to get the chance to
have the style on today thank
you very much Mr chairman.
Representative small
Representative Lundstrom all
right I have one final comment
before we go to questions Mr Mr
Chairman I just would like to
say I found the comments from
both sides very interesting and
very important.
When I was a little confused
about is that hydrogen is
already here.
So to hear comments that this is
something that isn't happening
the reality is is that it's
already here what this bill does
is allows the state to set our
own destiny.
And if we don't we'll be swept
up by surrounding areas so with
that Mr Chairman would stand for
questions.
Okay thank you for that we'll go
to the committee now
sure the committee
The M. I thank very cognizant of
time but I would also like you
to ask whether questions you
have because I think this is an
important bill we have been
excused from the floor I don't
expect this to be done in the
next half hour
so we'll just work our way
through first up we have
Representative Garcia.
Thank you.
The more chairman and on.
Thank you madam chair Lunsford
restroom and
Representative
Small.
You know I
when did this issue of
Hydrogen.
Legislation.
And then kind of when some of
the for statements started
coming out on the media.
about legislation dealing with
the cleaner hydrogen.
Energy.
it got me excited.
I have to say.
You know because I'm a proponent
of
Clean hydrogen.
Technology and energy.
And
You know and I really want to
thank.
The chairwoman for.
Bringing this forward because.
Again Mr chair.
It kind of brings to light.
This concept of hydrogen
Development.
And
And I want to address that.
What what was gonna of the what
was of interest to me.
Where two things the.
The fuel cell.
Component and the tech transfer
component.
But getting back to Mr chair to
the and I have questions on
those.
But getting back to
the whole concept of urgent fuel
cell technology.
I was the first legislator to
introduce legislation dealing
with hydrogen fuel cell
technology.
nineteen ninety nine.
Thirty twenty.
Twenty three years ago.
Mr chair madam chair and it had
to do with the the legislation
to provide for us to sell on
demonstration project for on
site electric
generation.
And.
It passed the house sixty one to
four.
You can see Mr chairman of and
and share that the that this
issue of of hydrogen technology.
From the very get go of the
first attempt have bipartisan
support.
In the and
I think that that project with
the junior money and the state
forest department set up a
little project at the one of the
rest stops within the US the US
than forced on
of property and
and and this is are operated.
During the committee process Mr
chair I had an expert on fuel
cell technology.
And he he had a little kit.
That you could fit into a shoe
box.
And then this kid madam chair
was a small.
Was a small solar solar
photovoltaic panel.
Not even the size of a dollar
bill.
And actually we point out that
order solar photovoltaic panel
at the window.
That our.
That's all of our then.
Was transferred to this
electrolysis process.
Splitting hydrogen splitting
water splitting hydrogen from
water.
So there was a little
contraption made of glass that
had like two little straws.
It that bubbled up.
Westrock you know that phone the
three other straw came out the
the hydrogen.
That hydrogen by that
electrolysis process are then
went into a little fuel cell.
The size of a fifty cent piece.
That fuel cell at that energy
from the hydrogen of the
processor.
David was attached to a little
motor but the little fan.
Not bigger than the palm of your
hand.
You know was the size of the
motor with the little fan.
That fuel cell was powering
that.
Motor.
So that shows you a dynamics of
a combination of solar
photovoltaic to to basically
stimulate the process are
of I will look process and then
the creation of hydrogen stored
in the fuel cell them our
writing this little motor.
Now at that time Madam chair and
Mr chair there was a wave of
hydrogen fuel cell development
off of this electrolysis process
in that the use that the
university of California
university system
almost all their all their
branches.
Transferred school buses.
At the transport of the students
from parking spaces to the
campus.
With I just feel sounds.
And to and to sell that that
idea the more of these towns and
the president of the university
would run behind us the school
bus sucking up the fumes.
Which was what are made per.
You know and that so that that
kind of shows you the dynamics.
The power of hydrogen stored in
I did that fuel cells.
And
You know.
Mr chair madam chair.
what is disturbing.
About the legislation is that.
The legislation does not move.
In that effort.
Well that example that I gave.
You know it moves in the effort
of basically generating hydrogen
from natural gas.
And in that extraction we create
of greenhouse gas methane.
Now I take issue with
environmental groups.
Because they say that this
process of electrolysis is is
way to costly because of its
dependency on water.
Well madam chair and met Mr
secretary and Mr chair you know
New Mexico as an abundance.
Brackish water.
The lower on the first.
We have an abundance of brown
water.
That comes aloe under more solid
waste treatment facilities.
So the issue is that we can't do
an electrolysis process.
In generating hydrogen and
storing because of the water
issue I think it's false.
You know and that mainly because
of those two factors brackish
water groundwater.
And you know in the processing
of hydrogen it doesn't have to
be potable water.
And
madam chair and Mr chair
You know we know that methane.
Is a primary contributor to
ground level ozone.
Which is a hazardous air
pollutant and greenhouse gas.
That kind of
is damaging in many ways in
terms of chronic bronchitis
asthma emphysema and it damages
our lungs.
And may think methane also.
According to some medical
journals exposure to methane
causes
Kind of premature.
Dance to the tune of one million
a year.
And it's also powerful
greenhouse gas.
Over twenty year period at some
journals report that it is
twenty times more potent at
warming and our government
oxide.
And.
You know madam chair Mister
chair
It's it's struggling to me.
To
Have this initiative.
Just stop at that.
In terms of extracting hydrogen
from natural gas.
And I wish I could kind of go
beyond that.
And maybe create a balance.
and
Because we know that.
That dependency on natural gas
to create hydrogen.
Yes the sensitive madam chair
going to lead to.
more fracking.
More pipelines and greater
deterioration of environmental
quality.
But I do want to ask the
question.
In terms of.
How the bill is crafting.
The creation of the fuel cell.
How is that.
Coming out of the hub how is
that being created out of the
hub as a final product or as a
G. product.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much representative Garcia
I will go to secretary Kenny for
a deeper dive Mr Chairman
representative on the fuel cell.
Mr chairman and representative
Garcia thank you for your
question thank you for your
leadership and developing fuel
cell
Transferred in New Mexico as
well
Let me let me have some
highlights not only in this bill
but sort of that help compliment
the bill so it with respect to a
hydrogen economy you cannot just
produce hydrogen without being
able to use it see we need
production and consumption and
and you're absolutely right Mr
Chairman representative that a
fuel cell is a good energy
source clean energy source it
only gives you really water
vapor are on on the outside of
that in terms of its emissions
if you well
the bill itself allows for G. R.
T. reductions as well as well G.
R. T. reductions if a company
wanted to use your cell
technologies
so whether that is you know like
what you know a big box store
retailer who wants to back up
their power with fuel cells were
is going to use fuel cells in
portable equipment where
forklifts or things like that
all the way up to and including
like cell towers that have
backup diesel generators today
they can use fuel cells as a
back up generator for their
power source so there's
incentive for multiple parts of
the economy to decarbonise using
fuel cell technology and Mr
chair and and Representative
then there's sort of that larger
operation of fuel cells being
able to be used in sort of the
more heavy and heavy duty
equipment are heavy duty sectors
where you need you know combined
heat and power steam and things
like that to run your operations
food processing anywhere and you
know on up industrially you can
you can offset your diesel or
natural gas with with the fuel
cell technology and and similar
Mr chairman and representative
much like your leadership you
know New Mexico Environment
Department is.
The first state in the country
to offer at authorized an air
pollution control device other
than a flare and that is a fuel
cell and in our ozone
regulations with which we put
forward to the environmental
improvement board it should be
heard in March and finalized
of fuel cell technology isn't it
is an adequate technology that
would offset those combustion by
products even flaring so we have
that in there and as the first
as well so between all of us
right we're the first of many
things on fuel cells.
Thank you Mr secretary.
Mr chair the other question has
to do with the.
The concept that the madam chair
Mr also addressed in the
presentation initially and that
is a tech transfer.
And you know tech transfer
is a key component part of.
Creative industries coming on
board.
Created businesses coming on
board in our state.
And and and maybe a madam chair
Mister chair maybe a lot of us
don't really realize but
proportionately.
In regards to our population.
The New Mexico is at the top.
Three tier.
Population of scientist versus
general population in the
country.
So that gives you an indication
of of the significance of hi
tech.
industry and how we're at the
forefront in terms of the work
force for those high tech
companies.
In this particular case
scientists.
So my question madam chair Mr
chair is.
Is is there that ongoing
relationship with some the other
lands with Los Alamos lands in
regards to unfolding this tech
transfer process.
Yes Mr chairman Representative
Garcia.
It's unfortunate we cannot share
our our screen with you but
there is and memorandum of
agreement between the Economic
development department and our
national labs it is so secretary
of Alicia keys still on.
She is not okay she.
As provided that document to us
and what we envision Mr Chairman
representative that tech
transfer would be would be
located inside the hubs as part
of the process for the kinds of
new development they can happen.
I agree with you are we I think
it's been under utilized
throughout our our our state and
I think having that ability and
that service immediately
available to us is tremendous
and to have it inside the hub
for helping with the hydrogen
Development is absolutely
tremendous
we certainly see that as part of
the incentivizing of of hydrogen
Development.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chair and that concludes
my comments and I I do want to.
That the chairwoman of that
unfortunately.
You know a given that the way
that this legislation.
Is currently written and with
this dependency on natural gas.
As the main number.
Producer of the hydrogen
And what kind of are the focus
of that building.
The the Kerry through of the
technology you know at this
point in time madam chair I
cannot support your legislation.
I thank you for again rebooting.
That energy that we had in
nineteen ninety nine in terms of
the significance of this
technology and this energy thank
you madam chair thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you representative Garcia
nextstep we have Representative
Scott.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman Madam chair
representative small.
I have tried to be thoughtful
with money and now she's so
much.
Very complicated piece of
legislation are.
Recognize on one side due to
what.
So a lot of natural gas.
Been from all countries such
that's a good thing.
Recognize the.
The northwest communities.
Hammered with the.
The closure of.
The.
Coal fired power plants and
wind.
And I recognized leaders.
Several billion dollars
available to support please.
On the other side of that.
I'm sure that we may be.
Developing and industry.
That over the long term does not
survive.
Without.
Taxpayer support for.
The alternative significantly
increased costs to our consumers
and I'd like to start I've got a
number of questions.
With respect to the bill itself
but I'd like to start at a
higher level.
And start with the climate
component.
And from everything I can read.
We creative outlined kilograms.
CO two for every kilogram of
hydrogen production and then the
option.
sequestration this is not.
Really
Question of natural gas.
Power directly so.
Could we start by addressing
the.
If you will
request iterations that would be
required to bring down the.
C. O. two emissions.
Secretary economic.
Mr chair and representative
Scott thank you for the question
so the the carbon capture
sequestration technologies
continuing to improve
I'm not sure how to quantify and
the answer to your question is
there an opportunity to further
expand upon your question Mr
chair representative.
Madam chair Secretary Canada's
post.
Request permission for.
Was a component of.
Circulating this material for an
Bill recovery J. quest
iterations is significantly.
What is as I understand it
requires.
Our with significant our base
pointed somehow eight or five
all and gas production or or
some of the nation's and I don't
see component in this piece of
legislation that would address.
What what that technology what
are the plans to keep.
Request iterations from.
Where we are now.
Mr chair and I Mr secretary Mr
Chairman representative got all
at a couple of quick thoughts
and then I know secretary Kenny
has some as well Mr chair
representative.
On carbon capture and
sequestration there is a
separate federal tax credit that
is I believe it's ninety cents
per tonne that is permanently
sequestered there are current
and operating Federal guidelines
used by the environmental
protection.
Authority by the EPA that set a
permanent standard so that is.
Out there now and there is a
federal tax credit the full
ninety cents I believe for
permanent sequestration.
A half of that roughly forty
five cents Mr Chairman
representative Scott that is
permanent sequestration but used
and enhanced oil recovery so
there are drivers separate from
this legislation for carbon
capture.
In sequestration Mr chair
representative this is a well
settled upon international need
to address catastrophic climate
change finally Mr chair and
representative before going to
secretary secretary Kenny New
Mexico has the ability to invest
strategically in our energy
minerals and natural resources
And and associated natural
resource agencies including in
areas that will directly help
New Mexico benefit from
environmentally and economically
carbon capture and sequestration
things like the classics well
certification and so we have
that opportunity I know that's
been discussed
right here in the state and I
don't know secretary Kenny have
anything to add thank you Mr
chair.
Mr chairman and representative
Scott enters your question thank
you for taking time to explain
it further sanitation do what
Representative small just
indicated Mr Chairman
representative Scott the
Google Google developments here
to maybe highlight so our
department of energy and you as
a focus on carbon capture
sequestration
aspect to it to hit some of the
areas you highlighted in your
further clarification question
on.
Representative Scott and that is
something that is on going just
comments that and December I
think it was and we're going to
continue in that effort on the
science and technology and then
technology transfer of that in
addition Mr Chairman
representative Scott we my
colleague at energy minerals
secretary cultural Propst and
her team are looking at the
classics save drinking water act
underground injection control
permitting so that is the the
permitting authority the EPA
currently holds right now for
sort of establishing a carbon
capture sequestration well if
you will for that permanent
repository of CO two emissions
and
The those two sort of tracks are
are kind of parallel and then we
have the technology investments
that are happening around carbon
capture sequestration as well Mr
chair and and Representative
sort of the projects in which
you know.
Might be incentivized here will
take some capital and time to
build so while we're working on
the research with you we and
we're working on potentially
that privacy from the
environmental protection agency
those capital projects will be
will be happening as well and
that her rising will be sometime
in the future in which we have
the the.
A better sense of how carbon
capture will work here in the
state.
So Mr chair madam chair.
Secretary Kenny what I got from
all of that was.
The technology.
You have to be developed and
proven this is all.
Really to be determined is
accurate.
Mr chair and and Representative
I I don't know that it I think
it's to be proven in the state
of New Mexico
Mr chair and representative
there are other states with that
classics underground injection
control primacy who are using it
to my knowledge today and
working with industry to
sequester carbon emissions and
there's certainly investment by
companies in that space as well
so I as best as I can tell you
we're we're not there yet in New
Mexico but I understand other
states to be further along
that's.
Okay Mr chair.
Share thank you Mr secretary to
help.
Move on to.
The economic component of this
if you will from everything I've
read.
It would appear that the more
process to generate Lujan
hydrogen.
Would have a cost.
The one dollar per kilogram.
Yes No sequestration component
and somewhere upwards of two
dollars per kilogram yes
sequestration is included well.
They all failed.
I don't work much in kilograms
of work in the LFC.
Or may you be to use which is
which is in the M. C. S..
But if I convert to heat value
of loans kilograms.
And then be to use I can.
What the end of the process is
very very expensive fuel source.
So the question.
How are we going to.
Support this industry.
Without the need for Hey is our
continued tax dollar
expenditures or be.
Significantly higher energy
costs who are consumers.
Mr chair representative got now
It do for I I know that Mr Wiley
roads may have additional
thoughts to answer or to offer
in this area as do secretary
Kenny
but Mr chair and representative
Scott the need for lower carbon
fuel sources for hard to
decarbonise areas
Is.
The is the.
Outlook that
internationally we certainly see
and and we see that in different
places different different
approaches certainly here in the
United States with the
bipartisan infrastructure while
Mr Chairman representative the
front and on the incentives
include especially with the
hydrogen hubs meant to capture
the economies of scale allow for
very reduced costs when as the
hydrogen
whether it's a fuel cell to
power long haul trucking our on
site for green cement steel
those sorts of things to reduce
those costs very aggressively so
they were able to supply Mr
Chairman representative.
Increased energy needs with a
lower carbon intensity energy
sources.
And Mr I don't know secretary
Kenny or others have additional
comments to and Mr Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair and representative
Scott thank thanks for the
question and it's a good a good
destination question how are we
going to four hydrogen based on
what we know now and I and I
appreciate that question that is
exactly the question that the
federal government is putting
eight million dollars literally
and in resolving they have with
the at now called which is
called the outside of the
infrastructure package which is
the eight million dollars to
develop hydrogen hubs for the
purposes of technology transfer
and understanding how to reach
that goal that you just so
clearly enumerated
that they have a program that is
sort of tangential to that
called the at.
shock if I remember correctly
the hydrogen or shut their goal
is to have in one decade a
kilogram of hydrogen priced out
at a dollar and that is that is
why the rush on technology so
where you may have steam methane
reforming of hydrogen today of
methane today to reach hydrogen
at that sort of energy and cost
you just described where will be
is through electrolysis
pyrolysis and other types of of
of transformation lower costs to
produce a greater amount of
those kilograms
and that is exactly what's being
funded and that is exactly why
the hydrogen economy amongst
other reasons climate goals
included it is so prolific in
for financial investment right
now.
So.
Mr chair.
Secretary can a.
My economic analysis.
Is in fact.
Day.
How about three to four.
What was hydrogen what
conventional fossil fuels could
supply for the same amount of
energy and it is my
understanding that you believe
that multiplier can be reduced
to something more reasonable is
there a target.
Mr chair and representative as
their target in terms of that
the target that I'm most
familiar with is the shot target
to DO we put out there but
that's that's a price per
kilogram I think you're asking
at sort of the B. T. U. R. you
know Energy per
a dollar amount.
energy unit and Mister chair and
if that is your question chair
representative Scott then I
would have to do a little bit of
research on that.
Okay thank you for that Mr
Chairman Mr secretary now a
question for madam chair.
Chairman Lundstrom.
With respect to the financial
incentives understand that there
or.
Maybe a hundred and twenty five
two hundred fifty million
dollars in the.
This year's budget.
Getting this effort kicked off
is a one time contribution or is
that expected to be an annual
contribution.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Scott in the
general appropriations act as
it's developed today it in it
includes a hundred twenty five
million dollars for the New
Mexico finance authority
specifically to manage our P.
three portion of this of this
bill.
Mexico finance authority will be
asked to do the financial due
diligence once they've completed
that they'll make a
recommendation to the Vigil
board as a as a as the process
goes down for of.
Approval of the P. three
contract.
Currently it's in there
for this first year.
we are asking that more money be
put into both the environment
department and energy department
to help with oversight and
management.
And where the incentives come in
our with these tax incentives in
section fifteen those are for a
ten year period of time because
we put a sunset on their we'd
like to have these things
reviewed Senate we've seen in
the past a lot of these run away
incentives that are hard to get
our arms arms around so we want
to make sure that within a ten
year period we have full review
and and understand what the
return on investment is.
We have the opportunity to keep
the P. three program going
indefinitely if it's used not
everybody wants a public private
partnership agreement but for
those who do it would make sense
and then we have the traditional
financing your bonding and other
things are in this bill.
Representative Scott is I think
you're on mute hi I am in fact.
Sorry about that that's okay
trying to read your lips but I.
Mr chair madam chair.
So over this ten year period all
will get to the to the direct
ship cities here a minute.
Over the ten year period what
would you anticipate the total
direct cost to the state at as a
consequence of this legislation.
I'm hoping that the committee
members all receive the F. I. R.
last night we were hope that
everyone got a chance to see the
legislative finance committees
FIR and I will around here and
grab it.
Mr Chairman representative Scott
on the front page we have an
indication of what we think
would be affected the
reoccurring or non reoccurring
and the which funds would be
affected starting with FY
basically it's going out from FY
twenty two through FY twenty six
but I can tell you what our
economists have said and what
they've provided to us in terms
of of cost it's pretty it's
pretty marginal
when you look at going all the
way out to FY twenty six and
then what the budget impact is
three year total cost of non
Is of reoccurring is eight
hundred and ninety
I think it's.
Eight hundred and ninety the
three year total cost it's got
non FIR not an elf on my.
For FY twenty three is a hundred
ninety thousand FY twenty four
is seven hundred and for a total
of eight hundred ninety.
So we think that's in
reoccurring.
Just the general fund or the air
quality permit fund or the
hydrogen hub project fund so
it's pretty it's pretty non
substantial in terms of what
true cost would be.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
madam chair let me now if you
allow thank you.
A little more into the weeds of
the bill I'm on page I.
And the.
Responsibly sourced gas.
Has given me just a little bit
of heartburn.
Because.
The gas that's produced.
Really everywhere.
Yes so was custody change very
near the well.
At which point it is called
medical with guests from many
other sources and operators and
I'm curious as to how a
certification of responsibly
sourced not work because.
All of this.
Committee your consideration.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Scott and also go
to secretary Kenny on this for
additional comments but Mr chair
representative got as you point
out pipelines like transmission
lines don't choose what contents
go into them the responsibly
sourced gas which as you point
out in the definition Mr
Chairman representative Scott
role require a third party
certification and the New Mexico
environment department to
certify will include the
lifecycle emissions
consideration that is so
important right now Mr chair
representative it's difficult if
not impossible to account for
the life cycle emissions for
production given that it's
Yes it is difficult for a number
of reasons this will allow Mr
chair representative for the
volumes that are utilized the
clean hydrogen volumes that are
utilized in New Mexico to
account for the entirety of
their volume through a
certification process that
minimizes upstream and midstream
leakage and allows the New
Mexico environment department to
be.
Part of that to ensure the New
Mexicans health and safety is
protected
while insuring that our energy
needs are met.
Mr secretary Kenny would you add
anything to that.
Mr chair and representative
Scott I think Representative
small described very well
Know that responsibly sourced
gas would be above and beyond
requirements that would be
required in the state of New
Mexico
and as verified by a third party
organization it's not a new
concept Mr chairman and
representative Scott this is
what many oil and gas operators
who are needing yes she
requirements are working towards
as well ensuring that their
their gas has the lowest carbon
intensity because that's what
market segment.
Thank you for that answer.
Still a bit.
As to how that would work in
practice given common carriage
but all will help move on at
this point and I'm not seeing
that.
With respect to the public
private partnerships.
So.
The prime partner.
manage their funds.
With.
Completely with debt.
Representative.
With equity would.
Look madam chair.
Care to address why.
That would be component is only
an obligation at the state level
and not to the front part.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Scott first
off I'd like to just say
I've been carrying P. three
bills for a long time.
And we've and what we've done
with some of the previous bills
is just basically inserted them
into this bill and it all
started with my work with the
former colleague of mine on the
Appropriations Committee
representative Larranaga he was
the first legislator to.
Really initiate P. three I
jumped on board and not taken
this information.
My feeling is is that all of
these P. three contracts while I
have general guidance The New
Mexico finance authority will
have to have rules created for
every new program that they take
on they'll have a rural setting
session.
So in that questions like that
would be taken up at that time
when they look at the due
diligence and they look at the
benefit to the public I mean P.
threes have to show a very clear
benefit to the public but when
you think about it and you think
about initially these
infrastructure projects that are
paid for by P. threes let's take
a county road is an example and
the public partner is the county
private partner is the company
that needs to have the road
fixed.
Those are the those are the
pretty traditional P. three
kinds of projects that we
envision because we see these
hubs basically out in rural
areas where there have where
there were industry is welcome
so to speak and I'm talking
about my own county and San Juan
County probably you're County
where we don't have the greatest
of infrastructure we don't have
the greatest broadband we don't
have the greatest of waste water
systems and things like that.
Industry needs to grow and is
willing to help pay for half of
it my my feeling is is that when
it gets to the **** highbrow on
how each one of these contracts
would be developed would be
through the rules process of the
New Mexico finance authority.
And Mister chair madam chair it
would not concern you.
On.
The million dollar project.
The only have to do with actual
skin in the game could the state
of New Mexico is not of concern.
It is concerned there may Mr
chairman Representative that
would be of concern to me but it
would also be of concern to the
New Mexico finance authority
that's doing the review and
setting up the contract I think
that the requirements are going
to be more than that.
And I just don't think they
would put something like that
for us to the hydrogen hub board
and expect approval.
Thank you for that madam chair
let me see if I could now to
page twenty seven.
And now we're getting into the
actual subsidies.
Tax subsidies for the production
of this material and I'm on
paragraph SSI down at the bottom
of thanks twenty seven.
The sentence is shell will.
Tax credit shall equal the cost
of producing hydrogen in New
Mexico.
But for the first seventeen
million kilograms is limited to
the thirty twenty ten.
The numbers all four on the next
page does that indicate.
Well read that is over seventeen
million kilograms the step today
would be the actual cost of
production is.
Reading correct.
We just secretary Schardin
Clarke please to jump in on
this.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Scott Mr chair I
see the distinction that you're
questioning about Representative
Scott certainly the intent is
that after seventeen million
kilograms are produced and
receive the credit that then the
incentive goes to zero and that
there is a cap there while we're
sitting here a minute I'll
review that language and talk to
some of our experts an
interpretation at the department
it just make sure that the
intent is actually what's where
it thank you.
Thank you madam chair madam
secretary that one did give me a
call it may pause because about
seventy eight million kilograms
the cost of production is
significantly above thirty cents
a kilogram of.
Mr Chairman madam chair I
believe that's all the questions
I have for now
raised my hand again but I'll be
interested to hear the rest of
that thank you for your H..
Thank you Representative Scott
we have Representative Ortez.
Thank you Mr chair Madam chair
representative small members of
the code of the committee of
course sent and the experts and
those listening I have a lot of
questions many technical
questions and I I have to
apologize yeah I'm not an expert
on engineer
I I think that a lot of folks
that are listening and watching
are also not experts and
engineers and so I just want to
better understand how it how it
all kind of works right so the
those are my I have some
technical questions first and
then some deeper questions so
I'd like to met Mister chair I
don't get a better understand
that that you know the feedstock
for hydrogen production like how
does that actually work what
what what is the compliment is
how do we how do we feed into
the plant and get hygiene that
we can use.
Mr chair and them anyone on the
panel can answer that thank you.
So that Mr chair of some words
as and I'll go to secretary
Kenny and others for additional
comments Mr chair representative
HB four sets out a carbon
intensity.
Threshold for hydrogen that
would receive state incentives
right now Mr chair
representative there is
no guidelines on the production
of hydrogen in New Mexico and of
course Madam Mr chair
representative hydrogen is
produced and used in many
different parts of the world in
an industry
Currently so Mr chair
representative works as right
now there's no floor for the
carbon intensity of production
of hydrogen in New Mexico with
our bill not Mr chair
Representative Ortez we do set a
firm floor and key standards
that are equal to or greater
than federal standards two four
and that for the production of
hydrogen to receive incentives.
Mr chair representative Ortez
for electric generating
for clean hydrogen is used in
electric generating that is two
kilograms of CO two per one cat
for one kilogram of hydrogen
basically the federal standard
clear output standard which is
roughly one third of what a gas
plant
a minutes per megawatt hour and
then Mr chair representative for
non electric generating stations
for hydrogen for non electric
generating stations that's going
to be for all of the other
industrial uses for the long
haul trucking for fuel cell for
aviation X. cetera the there is
a
Carbon negative claim at there's
a three tier system set up Mr
Chairman representative and so
the the feeds it ensures that
the emissions there are
emissions limits to receive
state incentives that coincide
with the federal incentives so
that practically we're gonna be
moving away from an unregulated
high emissions hydrogen
production for images of the
world and the state economy and
toward adoption of a low carbon
intensity production of
hydrogen.
Mr secretary Kenny do you want
to add any additional details to
that.
Mr chair and representative law
again I think you did a good job
and Representative Ortez thank
you for your question and and
you know.
State fully recognizing that
that the committee members the
committee have different
professions and expertise and
this is a challenging topic as
well as members of the public
listening I think there's just
sort of a real simple way to
kind of help for in this issue
which is that
many companies you know from Big
box retailers to you know large
aviation companies to the
federal government are all
pledging at zero so there is a
third demand for low carbon
fuels including hydrogen is the
top tier of what we're doing the
Carmen negative hydrogen so that
the incentives that we're
providing matched up with
commitments from those.
Companies institutions academia
the federal government are sort
of aligned in this tax incentive
bill.
but on the other end of the
spectrum today if any company
wanted to come to New Mexico and
produce what what we may call
dirty hydrogen you know I'm very
high carbon intensity hydrogen
they would not be prohibited
from doing that
we don't have a backstop
provision in the state of New
Mexico at the moment and that is
what is in the bill to look as
the industry develops in New
Mexico for the environment
department to come back to the
environmental improvement board
and establish for any hydrogen
production what are the rules
that need to be in place and Mr
Chairman Representative you know
we can we can quarterback that
earlier out of the environment
department
we just don't have the industry
as prevalent here as we would
almost need to be so it's a
little bit of a chicken and egg.
we know what to regulate when
when it's here and we don't know
which regulate when it's not
hear it you know we're going by.
Other information so madam chair
and.
Mr chairman and Representative
thanks for your question that
helps.
Thank you Mr chair
representative monster secretary
Kenny it does have a little help
me a little bit it does make me
think about how we can create
that backstop provision now as
part of this legislation so that
that's just a question I have
From your answer I have another
question about the steam methane
process
you know how how does that work
and what are its by products
thank you Mr chair.
Yes Mr chair and okay Mr chair
representative as the methane
reforming that basically takes
methane
from any source anytime in
methane whether it was biogenic
methane orchestrated extracted
methane and converts it into
hydrogen is that there's a
series of pressure and and she
applied in order to break that
molecule of methane into the the
the desirable piece of hydrogen
in the last and that the non
desirable piece of carbon
dioxide which comes out of it
based on your design and
engineering of that's demanding
reformer summer mortician summer
less efficient
The by products are are
typically hydrogen carbon
dioxide and you know pretty
those are primarily the the
components were talking about
concerned about in in this bill
the one product the one race if
you well.
Mr chair secretary Kenny so
we're we're not worried about
knocks.
Mr chair and and Representative
I apologize for that I'm he can
to narrowly so yes we are
worried about not commissions
and and maybe my my lack of
thinking about that is inherent
in the nature of like how we
think the environment department
which is Mr chair and
representative we have knocks
and mission requirements for.
electric generating facilities
or most types of industry in the
state of New Mexico it can range
of your a small stores in the if
you're a small stores like issue
mapping require it may be a
small sized demanding reform
might be ten pounds per hour of
Knox limits we also have up to a
hundred based on the federal and
state requirements the Knox
limits are hundred tons per year
and those have been around for
decades there part of the clean
air act part of the state air
quality control act so I
apologize was and it's it's.
I'm focused on the the new types
of emissions in new technologies
as opposed to
You know what what we're used to
dealing with them the
environment department so I
apologize for that.
Mr chair and secretary no no
worries thank you for that
Representative Scott asked my
questions around the carbon
sequestration process I still I
still have a lot of them but I
will do the research on that
myself Mr chair and and
Representative and madam chair
I would like to understand
though how this bill fits in
with you know with the ETA
You know I I'm I'm I'm having
trouble kind of reconciling that
that Mr chair Representative
small if you could help if you
can explain that for me I
appreciate it thank you
madam chair there is a gun.
Madam representative Mr chairman
Mr chair representative works as
I appreciate the question about
how V. four fits in with the
energy transition act Mr
Chairman representative if it's
very closely because Mr Chairman
representative we need the zero
carbon low carbon resources for
dispatchable power that support
deeper penetration of renewable
energy the current options Mr
chair representative.
That are utilized both in the
country and in different.
Mixes in New Mexico R. I. their
nuclear energy which of course
is zero carbon but has the
significant upstream and very
significant downstream waste
challenges and nuclear energy of
course support supplies may
significant part of the Energy.
From the place where I come from
from southern New Mexico in the
territory of the of the past
electric down there that's one
dispatchable zero carbon
resource Mr chair
representative.
Batteries are in other zero
carbon dispatchable resource
there are it is a very important
resource we see significant
challenges of course or their
their challenges and
opportunities with its adoption
as well including the price of
metals the scarcity of metals
and other supply chain
components and others that make
batteries a key but not the sole
source of a zero carbon
dispatchable resource that
supports more and more
renewables that we need on our
grid and that New Mexico is well
positioned to offer natural gas
is been the.
Kind of the British as it were
Mr chair representative and in
fact natural gas has been the
key driver in New Mexico in the
United States and around the
world the more natural gas the
less coal because natural gas
has been cheaper and lower
carbon.
But still that has significant
carbon associated with it so
Mister chair representative the
final part why how this fits
into the ETA is because there is
zero carbon emitted when
hydrogen is combusted and
because there is a clear the
missions control in our bill for
electric Gen for clean hydrogen
for electric generating that
this will be less than one third
of the amount of CO carbon life
cycle for a megawatt of energy
that will be dispatchable.
For any time any place on the
grid.
Long answer Mr chair
representative I appreciate
being able to kind of go through
and that why this not only fits
but again in my opinion Mr
Chairman representative works as
actually supports the deeper
deployment of more and more
renewables onto our grid at a
time when our energy needs and
our energy usage electricity
specifically is only going to
increase and very significant
rates.
Thank you Mr chair
representative small
We heard a lot about all the
various colors and I recognize
secretary Kenny that you know
that that might be sort of a
disingenuous way of looking at
how how we're producing hydrogen
disingenuous might not be the
right word but it's it's complex
right so but I have also read
chairman Mr chair that really if
we want to do this without
creating emissions that will
harm communities that we have to
do it in we have to do with
green right we have to focus on
green heart hydrogen how how
long will it take for us to get
there can we get there.
Thank you Mr chair.
So Mr chair and representative
Ortiz says
thank you sorry
The.
You know experts are predicting
within you know so the question
is about technology and
electrolyzer is are the
technology that you to come down
cost
and they need to cut they need
to ramp up in technology
production like in the in the
production of them once
electrolyzer is are cost
effective and and more
deployable and and being
produced and then green
hydrogen will be as long as it
and in baseload capacity is
renewables then we'll have the
opportunity for green hydrogen
so I think experts are expecting
that to happen in about ten
years
you know that that's the goal I
think DO we would probably agree
to that that getting down to the
one kilogram in one decade.
Is it is probably within reach
In addition it would let me just
also say Mr chair and
representative that the.
That I think that's one
destination we should chart for
and we should look towards that
in the still kind of gets is
there incentivizes actually
going past going to carbon
negative.
And you know whether we produce
green hydrogen in ten years for.
Our negative hydrogen you know
from ag waste a secretary we
explained at the beginning of
this
with renewables you know both of
those are.
Great options for the state of
New Mexico and as many of the.
Those in opposition from the
public indicated you know we
don't have a lot of water and as
a representative Garcia begin
using things like brackish water
or off spec Water is it is a
better opportunity for green
hydrogen so
Mr chair representative eight to
ten years for green hydrogen we
shouldn't chart that is so
destination we should look at
low Carmen Carmen negative
hydrogen out that far from
multiple sources.
Thank you Mr chair secretary
Kenny that that is very very
helpful for me to for me to
understand I'm I have a question
now about that and you that we
we talked about
Does that does that send a
signal to you need to folks that
we're that we're we're open for
business on the how can you tell
me a little bit more about that
thank you Mr chair.
Yes Mr chair and representative
I I think it does send a signal
that we're open for business but
the point of the MO you I know
we're using a lot of different
terminologies carbon negative
zero carving clean hydrogen I
mean it is a little confusing
but you know the the goal of the
bill as is carbon negative.
D. M. O. U. talks about zero
carbon hydrogen so just think of
it is you know getting zero that
raise to zero for carbon
intensity the hydrogen or
producing it not only signals to
the industry that that's what
we're looking to do but it also
signals to policymakers in the
state for future administrations
both federally and state that
this is the goal of this this is
the direction the state wants to
go there's multiple areas of
research outlined in the MOU.
But but really what it comes
down to is ensuring that what
the labs are developing stands
out in a carbon zero way for
hydrogen and becomes deployable
investable technology that not
only sits on the Indian academic
papers but then is is brought to
life in in the way in which we
reduce
Carbon dioxide emissions will
make hydrogen so it's about
technology transfers about
capacity building with federal
and state governments it has a
real sort of.
Estimation of of of a tangible
outcome not just academic.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
Kenny so that's that's it for my
questions are now I just have I
want to raise some of the
concerns that I have and I guess
I have some questions within
those concerns as well I I guess
my one of my biggest concern is
is the issue of of
inconsistency you know and the
federal infrastructure bill that
there is that that basically
hydrogen standard is two
kilograms
Urban for per one kilogram of
hydrogen
it seems a little bit off if
we're going to subsidize the
servant a thirty year
Standard is that the case with
this bill.
Mr chair.
Thank thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative
we say that the lower carbon
intensity whether it is the
federal standard or the state
standard Mr chair
representative.
Interestingly in the federal law
the the secretary of energy
federal secretary of energy is
given the ability to
essentially Titan and
Add detail to the law governing
the granting of tax credits and
federal incentives to the
production of hydrogen.
We anticipate that and stay with
that federal standard in the
state and specifically in the
bill in the absence of the
federal standard we have very
clear state standards that do
not incentivize or give state
resources to dirtier forms quote
unquote.
Higher emissions intensity forms
or manners of of hydrogen
production.
Mr chair representative sorry.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
if I know the secretary Kenny
may have something to add there
also.
Mr Chairman representative it
it's a great question and we try
to parallel are build towards
that goal so I I Mr chair and
representative I don't want to
make this too complicated but on
the hydrogen I front you know
our best hydrogen are best
carbon intensity starts to match
their does magic see the federal
productions ACCC the federal I
definition keep in mind that the
federal government is also
offering subsidies for carbon
capture and sequestration of the
forty five Q. tax credit so
there's a little bit of a at the
end I caught in the hearing that
they're at that there is an
incentive for hydrogen
production and there's also
incentive for carbon dioxide
sequestration so when you look
at those two things in parallel
and where we are and are built
from a private infants of
negative whatever up to a high
carbon intensity of for for a
long for a short period of time
where we're working both sides
of that as well the hydrogen
production as well as the carbon
capture sequestration through
kind of hearing.
Different federal laws both with
incentives one hundred one on
carbon capture.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative small secretary
Kenny I I think I'm just maybe
I'm just confused if you can
help me figure this out on page
thirty five as a as the bill
currently states qualified
hydrogen refers to hide your
produce to the carbon intensity
equal to or less than four
kilograms and the federal
standards.
To.
That please help me understand.
The difference there.
Maybe you did no no no I'm just
saying it Mr chair
representative I always try to
be respectful to see if the
sponsors you jumping you before
that's all
Mr chair and and Representative
yeah so where would imply in the
state of New Mexico that you're
doing something like blue
hydrogen to use when the color
definition so it's a it's a
methane plus carbon capture
sequestration
what that would mean if you are
producing hydrogen is you would
be likely using the carbon
capture sequestration forty five
Q. tax credits.
It is offered by the federal
government but you would not
necessarily qualify under the
federal definition for hydrogen
production tax it's.
When you get down to the
definite when you get down to
two.
In in our in the in our bill now
you would qualify you wouldn't
need necessarily carbon capture
sequestration you might doing
green hydrogen well you would be
eligible for tax credits under
the federal and state.
Definition at that point I hope
I'm hoping it's not confusing.
We'll see Mr chair and secretary
Kenny it is it's a complicated
there's there's a lot to learn
and understand you know and and
there's a lot of money that
we're we're investing and it do
you think it's possible Mr chair
representative small.
Madam chair as well that we
could we could get to you know a
better standard of the missions
and and and that zero standard
of emissions with this bill.
Thank thank you.
Mr chair representative you it's
very important to listen to all
the points that are raised
acknowledge you know.
So Mr chair representative it's
incredibly important to listen
and the points that are being
raised in closing including
conversations about how right
now there's there's no floor for
the production of hydrogen in
the state of New Mexico so with
or without this legislation
separate from any state efforts
the.
The the door right now in New
Mexico is open to the production
of hydrogen at any carbon
intensity including the very
very highest carbon intensity
you know the nine kilograms and
above and so I think what we've
been trying to do in this bill
Mr chair representative is to
continually fight to lower the
carbon intensity and look to
where our economy in our state
needs to be at.
And clearly this is young in my
the thank you for continuing on
that path so it's a general
answer but it's a point well
taken both on the floor of the
fact that there is NO for
another things.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative small I I just I
want to reflect some of the
testimony that we heard and and
that which we didn't hear and I
received lots of emails and
texts from folks from our tribal
communities who have expressed
great great concerns about not
being not being part of the
conversations and and I I do
think that this happened very
very quickly I also want to be
really clear here I recognized
that
I recognize that we have to act
swiftly because of new federal
incentives that may be coming
our way I and and I was very
drawn madam chair by your your
comments earlier in the week
about how this will this will
replace jobs that were lost and
I really understand I'm from a
rural community that needs could
jobs I really really get that I
am Mr chair representative I I
just I want to reflect that that
we.
We need to really listen to all
of our tribal communities in all
areas of the state when when
we're making a big decision
about how we use our money so I
I wanted to put that out there
and I'm really grateful for all
of that.
The questions that you answered
for me I have a lot more but in
the interest of time I will stop
thank you Mr chair thanks so
much Mr chairman then make a
comment on that please.
Sure.
Just wanted to let the committee
know that this process for the
hydrogen of Bill started back.
Almost a year two years ago and
there have been several interim
committees of that have been
certainly open to the public and
a couple of them in my area.
in which this was a subject of
discussion.
We had carpet we have the
hydrogen issue in front of the
LFC last July.
We had it in economic and rural
development it's been discussed
there so it's not as though that
this is been done in a vacuum it
has been through an internal
process.
In times of discussion about it
it's an endorsed bill by one of
the by one of the interim
committees.
Of the original bill was
endorsed by LFC so I just want
to say that
and I imagine part of this is
due to the pandemic when we've
had to do a lot of things
virtually it hasn't been easy
for folks to tune in.
But I do want I do want everyone
to know that this just didn't
happen a day or two ago thank
you.
Thank you for that next up we
have Representative vice chair
Sarnia.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for being an
additional madam chair
earlier you said hydrogen.
Hi do this is it has been here
and you're right but we have to
look at what kind of hydrogen is
been here we have biotech in
Albuquerque New I don't think it
captures carbon in it produces
great Haider and I believe and
that's not the kind of hydrogen
we want this the dirtiest from
hydrogen so I agree hydrogen is
been here but is it's not the
best kind of hydrogen that's
what we need the stringent
regulations are
second so we're giving subsidies
to natural gas to do this but
the paper today.
There is there is an article
that said according to the
center of applied Sir research
studies New Mexico has fifty
seven thousand four hundred one
act oil oil gas and oil wells in
the state and sixty four
thousand eight hundred fifty
eight in act well statewide that
and that is what is driving the
cleanup costs that is estimated
at over eight point three
billion for the state.
So we want to give subsidies to
an industry that is costing the
state over eight billion dollars
to clean up the messes they've
left I I just have heartache
with that I'm a technology
person I believe so much in
technology I talked to chance
are bees you we talked about
this bill I'm gonna talk to the
environmental people I've talked
to the universities I've talked
a hydrogen experts in
everybody's giving me a
different answer on this bill
but I have hardly giving
subsidies to an industry that's
costing us a billion dollars to
clean up some of the messes they
left and
So and listening might my new
constituents I got sixteen new
new precincts and I have heard
from people I've never heard of
but there in my district that
they don't like this they don't
believe it's it's clean they
don't believe it will make its
healthy they don't believe it's
something we should do as a
state I'm again I am a
technology person so this is
really hard to not work for
technology because I think you
know as a state we have the labs
we have we have the smartest
people in the.
We Representative when you turn
this.
Back here Representative.
So I believe we have some the
smartest people in this country
in our state with our labs our
universities on sequestration I
know New Mexico tech is doing a
great job I don't think
sequestration is what needs to
be yet but they're working on
it.
But I'm as a state I don't know
that we have the expert
everything we need to do this I
think maybe we could work with
Colorado or Arizona or some
states in the southwest to work
together to do this I I I don't
know that we have everything we
need at this point.
But I'm.
Couple things.
Thank you Representative asked
about responsible sourced gas
but I had to leave is anyway you
could just explain that really
quickly one more time because I
I I just a I don't understand it
and I've gotten a lot of
questions on it.
So Mr chair representative at
Indiana first I just want to
address something that you
brought up thing is really
important.
In our bill page in in out house
bill four page a.
line I one of the criteria for
the creation of the hydrogen hub
this is based upon madam chairs
Expertise and work to build
these hydrogen hubs one of the
key criteria I'll just read
briefly it says potential for
participation in a regional or
multi state effort to develop
hydrogen related industries and
so Mister chair representative
on the on a your point about
being open to an encouraging
collaboration with other states
is in the bill.
Mr chair representative.
To briefly go over the
responsibly sourced gas and then
to go to secretary Kenny.
Right now.
There are.
What responsibly sourced gas
does because it requires third
party certification and the
certification of the New Mexico
environment department is it
allows us to address the
upstream emissions and this
isn't just from venting or
flaring that have been the
subject of state rulemaking set
of actually put New Mexico at
the head of reducing greenhouse
gas emissions this
allows us to.
Ensure that we're addressing all
of the upstream emissions and it
also allows Mr chair and
representative
for those entities that are are
reducing and eliminating all
emissions that's not just again
venting or flaring but that's
leakage replacing infrastructure
to make sure that there's no
leakage
for emissions that their product
can receive
They and in potential additional
market amount in so we're Mr
Chairman representative this is
a clear way that we're reducing
emissions in a way that we're
not able to unless we pass this
legislation.
Representative Mr Chairman
representative why do we okay
private certification do we have
any government regulations or
oversight over this and why do
we need private certification
thank you Mr Chairman
representative we do have the
New Mexico Environment
department would have to certify
this and so we do have state
oversight of it Mr Chairman
representative and and there are
third party beginning to be
third party independent
organization shins that are
helping to do this not only at a
state and national but
international level the drive
decarbonization but we ensured
Mr Chairman representative that
our New Mexico Environment
Department with the support they
need we'll be able to certify
this.
Okay it we just can't measure
the greenhouse gases directly we
have to do this is that
something we just can't do.
Mr chair representative I'm I
would go if secretary Kenny
wants to add any additional
comment to this but in my mind
Mr chair representative that's
exactly what we're we're we're
working to do and we're bringing
new tools to bear Secretary
canning can address.
Yes.
Chairman and
Representative
thanks for your question gives
you and the the I'm I'm doing
this to kind of indicate that
the nearest oil and gas let's
let's say we're going against
the responsibility to comply
with all the energy requirements
and soon to be New Mexico
Environment Department ozone
precursor rules which will be
finalized in March those two
sets of rules individually are
some of the most stringent are
I'll say are the most region in
the country they allow for
innovation allow for different
ways to comply but they are the
most stringent there I would you
EPA is now modeling their rights
off so that's your baseline and
effectively you know being in in
the environmental regulatory
field for as long as I've been.
We we are we're on wavering
about the obligation of
compliance so that and then we
have to assure compliance and we
do that to inspections we do
that and flyovers we do that
through monitoring devices we
have on a number of tools we
bring to the table did you
compliance assurance of those
regulations responsibly sourced
gas is somewhat like a
it's a it's a new term of art at
the moment but similar to what
international standards
organization I so did think of
also like when you go to home
depot or wherever to buy and
plans for local strokes right
and we go by our plans as you
see the energy star label on
that there there is something
responsibly sourced gas like
energy star justify an allergy
but not necessarily this evening
sure as the consumer that that
responsibly sourced gas.
Is above.
The minimum compliance
requirements and it's not just
about air quality it's not just
about that the leaks in the
venting and flaring it's about
water it's about environmental
justice it's about a lot of
different things other than just
air quality so that.
We could we use more resources
in our natural resource agencies
I'm going to say yes to to do to
do the compliance assurance
aspects of what we're doing but
that aside for just a moment in
Campos I'm very far but that
aside for just a moment the the
notion of responsibly sourced
gas is above the compliance
requirements third party and oil
and gas companies just like
every other industry is seeking
that third party validation
for shareholders for access to
capital for all of you know
social licensed operating
communities it's such.
Thank so I'm.
Another I think we talked about
this last time we spoke
Right now we don't have in in ET
we don't have enough people to
Regulate the the.
Or to inspect wells to see the
ones that are leaking in and
emitting wasted nothing so.
How are we gonna do this if we
can't even do that how are you
gonna regulate this or how are
we going to make sure.
We are capturing what we need to
and.
Thank thank you Mr chair and
representative it's a very
important question Mr Chairman
representative through in all of
the above which I would say make
it up here on the spot Mr chair
representative through an all of
the above legislative approach
is what I would say and what I
mean by that Mr chair and
representative is that we work
on the policy to lower emissions
as we're doing here and in other
efforts secondly Mr Chairman
representative we engage
robustly with the federal
government like we're doing with
the money that this legislature
appropriated.
Based upon madam chairs
leadership to put us first in
line to get money to clean up or
from an abandoned oil wells
third Madam chair representative
we make strategic investments
and follow the expertise and the
leadership of our very strong
natural resource agencies Matt
Mr Chairman representative.
Uniquely we have the opportunity
to do all three of those this
session to.
Come away with more federal
engagement based upon an initial
state investment for orphan well
clean up to appropriately
support our natural resource
agencies which you know.
It is a is is something that
that has been discussed in madam
chair brought up just earlier
today as well and madam chair
representative to legislatively
move forward on efforts that
decarbonise.
So that's it it has to it
there's no silver bullet madam
chair and representative if we
have to do the all of the above
pro approach.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chairman and and Representative
A lot of the questions I wanted
to ask been asked but when
working on on sequestration
permanent sequestration of
carbon dioxide.
Do we really have that expertise
I mean.
A lot of the people I spoke with
scientists and an academic
people said we we we can't
guarantee it stays on the ground
when we put that there we do
have a big salt mine in the
southeast but how do we how do
we know what's going to stay is
there.
Data and I know you're spending
on this but do we have strong
solid data that says that will
work.
Mr chair and representative you
know the two point two points to
make here especially related to
hydrogen one is.
That is the whole point of that
of us going after the federal
privacy of the classics wells
from EPA those wells are are
built to last if you will for
the purpose of carbon
sequestration that is not a
whole program
out of that is federally sort of
uniformly implemented across
states so that the the
confidence we would have in that
program is high for permanent
secret in sequestration is
permanent right at all not
notion of that term the
companies we have as high there
and and that is a program we
want to bring to the state of
New Mexico so that it's not
administered by EPA not longer
to administered by the state
it's really important we do that
for this bill and brother
purposes
secondly not all sequestering it
so when we think of carbon
sequestration it is likely that
all of us are envisioning carbon
dioxide a gas there are process
sees one of the largest funded
companies in the country by DOT
Adam the brassica uses
technology to connect to make
hydrogen where they produce a
carbon solid not a gas so you
can see that it's right in front
of you right we don't have to
worry about it is keeping so to
speak they make it hard and
solid in that part and solid is
a is a high value commodity
again another company like many
others who are looking at New
Mexico as an opportunity for
future investment
But anyway so sequestration yes
it's real and at the same time
it's not always about the gas
it's sometimes about the solemn
as well.
Okay so if the CO two will be
sequestered if we have to make
it it's going to be sequestered
and it's not going to be used
for gas and oil extraction not
at all just sequestered right.
Is that correct.
madam chair and I'm I'm so sorry
Representative McQueen
generously I'm gonna defer to
you I I'm just not as familiar
with this part of the bill and I
need to to double check and so
I'll referred to our R. Sanchez
on the enhanced oil recovery
question.
Thank you.
Mr chair representative
four we've we just had a
discussion Mr chair
representative about some of the
things needed for sequestration
including the classics well.
Mr chair representative because
there is an uncertain time line
for the federal permitting of a
classics well in because as of
yet we have an
We don't have the states primacy
to permit those wells in part
because of resources we have set
a sunset Mr chair and
representative currently in the
bill although of course that's
something you know obviously
that we want to note that
currently the sunset is in
twenty thirty and Mr Chairman
representative it includes until
twenty thirty one that would go
away it includes the strongest
possible EPA certification
that requires and certifies that
the carbon stay permanently
sequester so currently because
of some wanting to make sure
that the timelines aligned
the sons that would happen in
twenty thirty Representative
with this
Very strong certification with
that that include a
certification.
Okay so Mr chairman and
Representative so in the bill
does it say it will be sequester
the CO two will be sequestered
and not used for oil and gas
extraction.
Mr chair representative it says
that.
I'm gonna be precise with my
wording Mr Chairman
representative it basically says
that after twenty thirty it the
carbon can not be allowed for
enhanced oil require recovery
after twenty thirty.
Until twenty thirty Mr chairman
and representative.
If any of the CO two is use for
enhanced oil recovery it must be
certified by the EPA at the
highest standard that's been in
place that that permanently
sequesters that car but.
So Representative would you be
up for maybe to mend the bills
definition of permanent
sequestration of carbon dioxide
to exclude CO two used for
enhanced oil recovery.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative like some other
points that over in raised it's
certainly something I think that
so Mr Chairman representative to
be very clear
But I can't commit to it is I am
not the primary sponsor Mr
Chairman representative but like
with some of the other key
points that have been raised
including the fact that
currently there is no floor for
the emissions intensity of
hydrogen production in New
Mexico this is your these are
important points that are being
raised in the first committee in
this legislative process and
it's incredibly helpful and
that's how the legislative
process works to works best and
we've seen it work incredibly
effectively Mr Chairman
representative.
Not sure I got an answer but
thank you Representative thank
you Mr chairman and
representative the yield.
Thank you Representative.
Well we have Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman
chairman chair what chairwoman
Lundstrom could you explain to
me a little bit about the grants
that are available right now
because I I mean on its face if
if if this is just a program in
New Mexico.
It's hard to justify this is
good policy if it's just within
completely within the New
Mexico.
And we were doing this program
on our own but
it it appears to me that the
real.
Price that we're going for here
is the graphics the federal
grants.
You walk me through that a
little bit more I know the folks
that we're interested in this
they had initially scheduled to
meet with.
Legislators from up in San Juan
County but they did not make
that meeting and then they did
not reschedule so
if you could walk me through a
little bit about the the federal
grant that it that were.
Trying to capture.
Thank you thank you
Representative Montel I have for
the question.
In the bill there is there is an
allowable peace within the P.
three four I think it's two
hundred fifty thousand.
That helps for or planning.
Projects.
Once that work is been done it
would make sense down that the
federal program grants could be
applied for because we would
have done the research and on
the planning work.
The federal program itself and I
I was actually schooled in
Farmington one you have the DO
IT the federal Deo Aid.
D. O. E. secretary there and she
talked about this program talked
about the federal program I was
fortunate enough to be invited
by the delegation to
participate.
It's my understanding that there
was going to be a process
established by the federal
government.
That anyone who is interested
any area that was interested who
might meet those criteria would
be able to apply.
We think it would be very
prudent to be able to have some
planning work behind that and
some justification.
Which is the reason the bill is
designed the way it is the bill
is designed so anywhere in the
state of New Mexico.
You have you meet the criteria
for qualification of the hub or
for the incentives.
We were not trying to eliminate
any area but we do think that
there needs to be more in that
work I mean just listening to
the questions today on this very
knowledgeable Committee.
Some of those things need to be
answered and you know we have a
lot of good good faith out there
but that doesn't mean that
they've got the answers my
understanding is is that the
process is available for us to
start looking at in to become
part of.
Thank you madam chair you Mr Mr
Chairman
So as I understand it there's
what eight is that eight billion
dollars in grants that are
available.
And they're looking to to to put
in place.
Four hubs or less is that
correct.
Mr Chairman yes Representative
it's up to four hubs and
interestingly enough.
One of is
The language states it would be
for a.
A former coal fired power plant
interestingly that would be
looked at as possible.
In this process.
Thank you madam chair
Mr Chairman.
So I'm wondering have some
conversations with
Interested parties and
the discussion was whether or
not New Mexico I potentially
would be its own hub.
Or if we would then be combined.
With other states.
To become a regional hub.
And I it was my understanding
that we were what we were trying
to do is maybe become our own
house but then I I I heard that
the governor is going to the
national governors association
or something like that and just
wanting to announce a.
You know our progress hopefully
and that's a and that
We might look to become part of
a regional.
Effort is that is that your
understanding or because I'm
trying to figure this out I I
don't know how big the hi at how
big the Pete the pie is and how
many.
slices there are and you know
concern is if we do this with
other states.
Is it possible that maybe our
resources are used but the
workforce doesn't benefit.
Representative you know I I have
been approached by folks out of
two other states that are orders
state in New Mexico.
The vast just kind of testing
the water if we'd be interested
in a multi state of.
My response was we need to get
our feet on the ground first as
a state understand what all this
means and try to get our own our
own place in the world set up
the my my feeling is as to the
efforts of New Mexico to join
another area I I don't have
heartburn over that because when
you think about it you think
about this this energy it
doesn't recognize state
boundaries necessarily it's not
a thing where the county
boundary are state boundary
really matters because it's
international in nature as you
know coming from an energy
County the importance and how it
is not just our neat little
corner in the northwest corner
of the state but it could be the
whole state it could be the four
corners area we just don't know
yet.
Thank you.
So Mr chairman and madam.
Chair of.
So.
I guess that's the that's the
concern I guess if I if I have a
concern at all it's that that we
joined this effort and
ultimately
it doesn't benefit worker the
like like like McKinley County
in Cibola county the job losses
that have just been.
Crazy that we've experienced and
so
one of the things that that.
I heard stated earlier and I and
I just always
always feel like I have to
address it and that is that that
native Americans are not for
this energy and I all I know is
when I worked at the coal mine
myself and enough power plants
the interaction it was.
You know eighty five percent of
that workforce was native
American and those are good jobs
and the jobs I understand that
would be coming from this.
Are good jobs and there would be
a bunch of our.
And
It's a some some questions that
that were were brought up today
about.
The dispatcher bility and the
need I mean I do right now it
looks like PNM is looking to try
and extend the time that was a.
The time limits that were in the
ETA because of concerns for
rolling blackouts or brownouts
and you know we just so you know
we cautioned.
This that was that we were
potentially going to put in
place regulations and.
Lace and and that would be
unattainable in the short term.
And you see now that California
has just declared natural gas to
be a a a clean energy source.
So I and they were the ones who
rushed out first with all the
renewable mandates and all that
and it's just the idea that.
People want renewable it is true
but when you compare that to
them wanting to make sure when
they go to that light switch
that turns on and that their
refrigerators able to keep your
food cold and that there he is
able to stay on.
Are are are bigger concerns and
more pressing immediate concern
so
dispatchable energy there's just
not that many choices.
right now we're we're talking.
Call.
Nuclear.
Natural gas.
So this we're talking about
another.
Source which.
Would be more clean.
Then what we currently have an
and what I'm hearing is.
We almost would rather.
Have people not have reliable
energy.
Then.
To maybe accept something that
is much cleaner than.
Than what previously was.
We've relied on so and I mean we
have another bill coming up
that's going to talk about
whether or not we
I'm gonna accept hazardous waste
into New Mexico and allow
business to that within
sequester since we're talking
about sequestering sequester
that waste
and it looks like we don't we
want to make sure that nuclear
doesn't survive in America as
well so in reality what we're
talking about is.
What's left is a bunch of
unreliable.
Interment.
Sources and
You know it's just.
Affordable energy and reliable
energy is is very important to
all of our.
Situate so I I just as I'm
hearing some of the discussion a
little concerned that even to go
through the hoops.
Of separating natural gas which.
Is our alternative short term
alternatives to go natural gas
power plants
that.
Trying to step.
A little bit from there in
whether or not it's clean.
But I I believe there there's of
several questions been asked
about.
The affordability of it I I
don't know that that's a concern
as I'm sitting here listening to
it and also the subsidies.
our concern but that being said
one of the questions about the
subsidies
That has been brought up that
subsidies would be going to oil
and gas company's I don't
believe that's the way this is
written could you maybe to spell
that.
You have Mr Chairman
representative certainly that is
not in the bill I think.
I think there may be
misunderstanding I mean just by
some of the count I mean I list
all the comments I've heard
everything and I just feel like
there is misunderstanding that
is not how this works excuse me
it is has not been designed for
oil and gas.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
chairman I I did not see that in
the bill so I was I was actually
surprised to hear that be one of
the comments
but I but I have a second
question maybe a follow up
question if.
If
The supply has to come from.
The sources that.
Maybe there's gonna be more
regulation over
What was the term that was used
Secretary Kenny said that they
would be certified.
I'm I'm wondering if there's a
certification process to make
sure that what national gas has
been produced.
May be able to a higher standard
is there gonna be a difference
it is going to be the premium
that would be placed on that
natural gas for going you know
for there being a higher.
Level of accountability on the
producers of natural gas to to
be able to provide for this
purpose.
In the this would be in your
will house
Chairman Greene and
Representative Montoya could see
the
He typically that is what
happens is is is that there's a
more premium or responsibly
sourced gas
and then you know that sort of
market dynamics sort of pushes
the industry in that direction
as well.
Thank you for that answer Mr
Secretary
So Mr Chairman
I think there's two other things
that I that I.
Like to talk about here a little
bit and I briefly mention the
job losses up in there in the
four corners region in
particular the three counties
that I mentioned earlier.
There were some some discussion
earlier
About.
Sequestration.
It is reliable if it's a if it
if it is ready for prime time
but I know Mitsubishi.
A major company has has been
working in other places with the
carbon sequestration for coal
mines.
So I I do believe that this.
Sequestration is maybe a little
bit more cruise and then I know
there's Canadian
Power plant in a Texas power
plant that are using this.
Technology today so you know I I
know it's being done not just
and not just in the in in
America but so.
And in but in Canada and also in
Europe so I I don't know that
the technology is.
Not fully developed I just think
it hasn't been.
Fully accepted.
But.
Several things in in Europe
which are considered to be
either renewable or clean.
In America just for whatever
reason have not.
Have not been considered so I I
just wanted to mention that that
that the service the
sequestration of carbon and the
separation sequestration of
carbon technologies existed for
a for a while now.
But one last thing
Mr chairman and chairman a
Lundstrom.
What is the time sensitivity.
Of this I understand that to be
able to apply.
For these requests that there's
a window of opportunity could
you explain that window.
briefly.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative it's actually
more than the grant opportunity
I believe that we and I've sent
this to the press I believe that
we're in a foot race right now
when it comes to hydrogen I have
actually participated in a
couple of different national
conferences and I do plan to
attend one in Canada in the
spring it is all about hydrogen
and hydrogen development and
hydrogen strategic rollout and
sequestration and
how this and new energy sources
being looked at by the rest of
the world I I think that you
know the the economy in New
Mexico is based on energy I
think New Mexico should be the
lead on this thing we should be
close to what we should be close
to it and we should be leading
the pathway and I want to
conflict compliment the governor
for taking that approach you
know she doesn't want to be in
the backseat so to speak when it
comes to this new energy
development so it's more than
just a federal grant chasing
game because that's not where
I'm coming from I'm coming from
the fact that we've got the
technology in the state we've
got the science when it takes to
make this work we are an energy
state gosh where we waiting for
here I mean it's we we just need
to step out to start moving and
we need to set our own pace I
don't think the fed should be
setting our pace I don't think
Canada should be setting our
pace I think New Mexico needs to
set its pace.
Thank you madam chair yeah
that's a.
I do feel it there maybe is a.
Hello that is time sensitive
because of the the requests and
if and we do have the stock here
we do have which.
This is been an argument making
for awhile which is if we can
make something that is carbon
based if we can take away as
many of those effects with.
So we don't have to decimate our
economy I've been making that
argument for why just have you.
So Mr Chairman with that I I I
get that yes the end of my
questions and comments except
for.
I'm at the appropriate time Mr
chair I'd like to make a motion
thank you madam chair.
we have Representative heard
and.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair and the.
And bill Sanchez I do have a
couple of questions just on a
basic practices with respect to
this bill I I'm looked at as
well listen to the number of
people for the bill and those
who were against on the for side
it was all business everybody
would be putting and possibly a
request for money from the grant
those who were against it where
the community the people who
allegedly would be those would
be the beneficiaries of the many
jobs that we're supposed to be
are alleged to be produced from
this bill and that was quite
stark to me and because it what
we didn't have it looks like a
at a time with these two groups
were meeting together and I know
of Mr chair Madam
Representative Lundstrom thank
you said that there were all of
these hearings that have been
going on but I'm concerned was
there a in a specific outreach
to the community members
regarding their concerns and and
let me just and before you
answer that I just want to point
out that I heard a number of
questions by people like Tom
Solomon and Pat she Lee and that
the in the Christodoulou that
were never answered may still
haven't been answered now so
please help me to understand how
that outreach to the community
was may and why do they still
have these questions.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman I think
the representative I think part
of the reason is because the
legislative process allows folks
to participate so when we
introduce a bill and we work
pretty hard in trying to piece
it together it's not really
ready for review and tell it's
dropped and at that point of
course everybody gets a chance
to look at it and to provide
comments on it.
Of the that's just the process I
mean we talk about hydrogen in
general when we're in these
interim meetings but we don't
have anything specifically in
writing I mean it's just like
the bills that thank you drop
Representative into a
potentially get it in writing
and now exactly what you want to
do it's hard to have Madam yes I
appreciate this committee
allowing as much COVID as as was
allowed today.
The input is what we're doing
right now of and that's the
legislative process the bill's
been drafted their remarks have
been provided and now it's up to
all of you to take all that in
and and it's up to
Representative small and I to
try to convince you that this is
a good thing.
But that is just the process the
outreach is just like any
interim outreach committee
committees are assigned a
communities folks are interested
either sign up or they appear
In in person.
But you know it's not something
that is that is out of the usual
what we're extending now
I can tell you though that it is
not correct to say.
That the people in support were
only industry I heard because
those voices come from my part
of the state that has had the
tremendous job loss in the
poorest county in the state of
New Mexico we heard from people
like our county managers those
people are representing a
constituency they're hearing the
public they deal with the public
every day much more than we do
as legislators every day they've
got somebody in their office
about something.
I think of you heard from the.
There is more more more more
than just industry discussion
and I also need to say I'm not
against that industry has a
right to talk also I mean
everybody does they all do and
and I don't know why there has
to be that differentiation.
These are these these industries
provide good jobs and in my area
that's exactly what we'd like to
see we need more jobs out there
we need to get back to where we
used to be where we could pay
for pay our own freight.
Thank you Mr I'm sorry.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Lundstrom I think
that more specifically.
What I heard was some questions
regarding
Methane and how do you stop
methane from leaking from the
thousands of valves and pipe
joints and Wales at least that
was the allegation and and
compressors from which it looks
from today if that is if that is
true and how do we guarantee
that berry S. C. O. two doesn't
need back I also heard questions
like how many jobs will really
result from the cleaner
alternatives and the reason I I
bring up the last one is I just
look at Escalante right now and
the fact that that of that plan
has been changed over and a lot
of people lost their jobs those
people who lost their jobs were
not replaced with the new
positions that were that came
about at that at that a coal
fired plants that had previously
been there so I I think that a
big worry if I could bring this
up is that the jobs that are
going to be created are really
going to be filled by New
Mexicans and that we really will
not be bringing in other
individuals to fill those jobs
leaving New Mexicans out.
Sure Mr Chairman on that
when when industry comes into an
area one of the first things
they look at is workforce in is
there an established workforce
that can move into this industry
with some re training and
upskilling.
And that is one of the issues
that is really really good about
a plant like Escalante.
As you heard from the symbolic
county people most of the
employment came out of that
county is it's only a ten minute
drive from Cibola County into
McKinley County to that plant.
That is one of what is one of
those positive attributes that
we have in re purposing a plant
like that because you've already
got the workforce infrastructure
in place you've got not only the
workforce infrastructure in
place but you've got the
industrial mentality in place in
other words people that I
represent are blue collar people
that work with their hands they
understand shift work they
understand what it means to be a
part of unions they understand
what it means to be not part of
the unions they understand of
that we get paid for days for a
day's work kind of thing and I
know that may sound a little bit
too corny but that's who we are.
And and that's my background my
background is uranium mining my
dad was a uranium miner for
goodness sakes I understand how
industry operates and what those
jobs mean and what those
salaries mean to the public what
they mean to families and in
most of those industrial sites a
lot of the employees were native
American yes and Hispanics
because that's what makes up our
population secretary.
So industry looks for economic
base.
Opponents and workforce is one
of them and attitude and
willingness the the community's
interest in industry there's a
whole bunch of components that
go into this but workforce is
one of the which is readily
available particularly in
northwest New Mexico.
Thank you very much
Representative Lundstrom.
Mr chair and and Representative
one of the things that I noticed
in the F. I. R. it says that if
the Escalante project is
selected for federal funding
then the there are all of the
conversation that we've been
having about state tax credits
nor of public private
partnerships or investments
would be necessary so my
question to you is what happens
if we apply for the grant.
Don't get it but this bill
passed how does that for.
The state if you
happening is that this bill
allows for applications from
different areas of the state for
New Mexico designated hydrogen
hub regardless of the federal
stuff happens or not this is an
independent process so say that
federal designation doesn't come
in we don't get one in New
Mexico.
I guarantee you that there's
gonna be a whole bunch of area
probably in northwest New Mexico
probably in southeast New Mexico
south central New Mexico well
we're Coppermine said Dan is
southwest New Mexico they're
going to come forward because
they have that industrial
infrastructure in place they
have the workforce in place so I
think what will happen.
Regardless of the federal staff
we're gonna say New Mexico
communities and companies come
for to this new hydrogen hub
board asking for designation.
And thank you of Madam chair
representative lunchtime I just
have a couple more questions in
that area so if we look I think
it's really important to look at
the fact that this eight billion
dollars is has been approved by
the federal government so for
for I'm stand for states I
presume that more people could
collaborate to make up the poor
states but the and one of the
things that is really important
to look at is that if we have
that high level of the money
that's been put out and all of
the issues that have been raised
here today.
they could still be raised in
those other states but yet New
Mexico has the opportunity it
sounds like to create the best
footprint for utilizing the
funds and for utilizing the
hydrogen so my question to you
two questions in that regard
can I plant for your statement
there because I think you hit
the nail on the head.
Thank you but what is the due
date for the grant.
You know I don't know that right
in front of me let's see if I
can get somebody maybe Secretary
economic you know the due date
of the grant to this.
I'm not Mr chair and
representative madam chair
Lundstrom the due date of the
grant has not been announced it
is likely that it's going to be
announced before may eighteenth
and I are delays T. O. E. state
this week that applications
would be due by the end of the
year.
The end of twenty twenty two
that's what they said I wasn't
clear there talking federal
fiscal year
Mr chair and representative so
either September end of the year
but may eighteenth is around the
time in which we expect to get
all that clarified.
Okay and let me tell you the
reason I asked that question as
we listen to of both the
business side and we also listen
to the community what I hear is
that there is will still for
improvement in this bill without
jeopardizing our application
process so if there's more time
then there's still the
opportunity to get the community
members and the business
together to work on what could
be an even better deal than we
have now what I heard at the
beginning of this conversation
and that this is been a process
that has been moving forward and
that this is the and integration
that has come about but
something better than the person
that is in the Senate so that
yes the bill is not passed
during the of this thirty day
session I'm just presenting a
scenario there's still an
opportunity for us there so
session after the all of the
parties are able to get together
and those voices are heard and
and I just want to point out you
know I heard chill chill Yazidi
talk about the fact that he felt
very concerned that his
indigenous voice has not been
heard and I also and I also take
just a quick look at the at the
F. I. R. B. guarding something
else that I see and it says here
that section nine lays out
additional requirements that
must be bad to receive a grant
or a loan from the fund
including requests including
that grants or loans may only be
made to public partners an
Indian nations tribes and
pueblos but we've heard many
people from nations tribes and
pueblos send their voices in
putting this whole proposal
together has not been heard and
I'm just saying that we we have
time to get those forces
together without violating are
jeopardizing our opportunity to
get this fun so I I just present
that to you to think about I.
I just think that is something
important that we do have this
great collaboration because
there is no state greater than
New Mexico and that we can show
how we are working together to
create that but rent that I laid
out about creating the best
opportunity to utilize these
funds so with that madam chair
madam chair
Representative Lundstrom
Secretary I I stopped in just
give that to you to think about.
Mr chairman I think two thousand
twenty three would be too late
the opportunity for at least the
federal program is twenty twenty
two
and what this legislation does
is provides the competitive
advantage for us thank you Mr
chairman.
So I just let me emphasize what
Mr chair in yes you can go
through the chair I would
appreciate I'm sorry I was I was
admitted to St Mr chair
realizing that thank you for
forgiving me for my know this in
this and tried to make sure
about in the past this but Mr
chair and and Representative
Lund I'm not saying I don't want
to wait to twenty twenty three I
want I want you to I want us to
present this timely by the due
date of the bill by the due date
of the grant and I'm just.
I'm I'm just saying it would be
really really great if we have
these voices together to know
that we had put together the
best possible deal.
A proposal that we can actually
come up with and that we could
have a special session after all
of the parties got together to
take the those to say their
voices have not been heard and I
have Mister chair Representative
Lundstrom thank you for your
patience with me and I I
appreciate your.
Thank you Representative heard
and we've been joined by
Representative Garcia on the
bill's sponsors Representative
Garcia before we finish the
questions from the committee is
there something you'd like that.
Thank you Mr chair I would just
a comment Mr chair I've been
listening to the presentation
also all morning.
And representative of all small
mentioned that.
A lot of the issues here Mr
chair our emissions and carbon
capture additional for and if
I'm not mistaken
Mall engine that it was at or
below federal standards are
correct.
Mr chair representative Garcia
yes we're gonna meet or exceed
the federal standards thank you
of Mr chair and
Mr vice chair appropriations of
but you know my concerns are of
in the same line to
Representative Rod Montoya we'll
go by a little bit ago you know
in in our part of the world the.
You know we lost the gold mine I
mean we lost of our brand we
also
all refinery and we're in
jeopardy of losing the coal mine
now and at the end of the day Mr
chair my concern is we need to
put being the Gillian the table
at the end of the day if we
don't have jobs out there you
know we're struggling we just
off the Mr chair the state of
New Mexico what our prison it's
in requests.
The city of requests lost half a
million dollars of gross
receipts taxes for that purchase
you know we're we've been
devastated for what's happening
in our communities and my
concerns are people need to get
back to work could you all well
we're gonna struggle with our
kids with struggling with our
families are you struggling
altogether Mr chair and that's
just a concern of mine and in
all a lot of people are favor of
this a lot of people are not in
favor of this Mr chair.
But we need to open our eyes and
and see how we gonna turn a
the light switch and the lights
go level on how are you gonna
buy food for kids and how we can
address them and send them to
school those are important
issues of thank you Mr chair
give me the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you representative Garcia
next up we'll go to
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to all our presenters and also
to the vast majority of the
public that has stayed with us.
For this long discussion
Mr chair representative and
secretary Kenny
Since I first heard about
hydrogen and carbon capture
sequestration last year I've
read hundreds of pages about how
we can achieve net zero by
twenty fifty read books and
reports from international
energy agency's and non partisan
academic institutions as well as
having listened to hours and
hours of seminars and podcasts
on hydrogen climate change and
energy hi and my daughters can
attest to that because we
frequently listen to them on the
drive to soccer.
so I'd like to acknowledge and
share with the committee members
and the public some of the
resources that I intend to quote
for that have helped me check my
perspective.
and Mr chairman some of these
resources include the energy
transition commission the
international energy energy
agency and energy futures
initiative I'm in addition for
folks who live podcast I highly
recommend the catalyst with
shell con carbon copy with
Stephen Lacey the interchange as
well as the big switch by doctor
Mullis a lot from the Columbia
university's center on global
energy policy.
Mr chair and representative I
have read the bill.
And I appreciate that it sets up
hydrogen hubs it offers tax
incentives and it provides high
quality definitions I think
we've got a very good discussion
today on the different
provisions of the bill and some
of the factors what I would like
to do is I would like to focus
my questions on the role of
hydrogen in the global effort to
achieve net zero carbon
emissions by twenty fifty
because I believe that this is
the crux of the concern as to
whether or not to support this
legislation and there by
hydrogen Hobbs.
So first Mr chair and Sanchez at
Mr Representative small can you
tell me what net carbon net zero
carbon emissions means thank you
Mr chair thank you
Representative it means the
balance between what is the
minute and what is sequestered
in capture.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative small could you
tell me why net zero by twenty
fifty is an important concept
when we talk about climate
change thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative it is vitally
important to get to net zero
because that is the
internationally accepted
timeline for us to avoid going
over one point five degrees
warming which could present and
will present catastrophic
consequences to our world.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative are you by chance
familiar with at net zero by
twenty fifty or roadmap but for
the global energy sector it's a
report by the international
energy agency that was published
in October of twenty twenty one.
Mr chair representative I know
secretary Kenny can add as we as
of a dressing many of these
questions that is something that
I have looked at as part of the
research and work in this area.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative small I just want
to is quote the international
energy agency I'm gonna say I EA
henceforth which by the way is
comprised of representatives
from over thirty nations that
are all committed to meeting the
Paris climate goals the report
says net zero by twenty fifty
requires huge leaps clean energy
innovation.
In the report the IEA outlines
seven pillars the global pathway
to net zero carbon emissions in
twenty fifty those seven pillars
our energy efficiency behavior
change electrification
renewables bioenergy carbon
capture utilization and storage
and hydrogen and hydrogen based
fuel.
The IDA goes on to say quote the
biggest innovation opportunities
concern advanced batteries
hydrogen electrolyzer and direct
air capture and storage together
these three technology areas
make vital contributions to the
reduction in CO two emissions
between twenty thirty and twenty
fifty.
Innovation over the next ten
years not only through research
and development and
demonstration but also through
deployment needs to be
accompanied by the large scale
construction of the
infrastructure technologies will
need this includes no pipelines
to transport captured CO two
emissions and systems to move
around and a tool to move
hydrogen around and between
courts and industrial zones.
The report also says the initial
focus for hydrogen is to convert
existing uses to low carbon
hydrogen then expand across all
and uses.
And so Mister chair and
representative and secretary
could you tell me briefly what
are some of the existing uses
for hydrogen.
Mr chair representative I'll
start and go to secretary
canning briefly one is Mr chair
representative the
how you move the pallets and
stuff around warehouses so small
a quick meant that used all
around the world increasingly
and logistics that currently
uses the highest emissions
hydrogen this is something that
we can immediately and with our
logistics advantages.
Convert from this high emission
intensity hydrogen to low
intensity hydrogen actually
bring reducing emissions and
bringing those jobs and economic
opportunities in logistics to
New Mexico secretary can do
everything that.
Mr chair and Representative
Dixon
To be clear it's the answers
your questions those industries
that use a lot of power but
can't use batteries so to unpack
that a little further trucks
trains planes construction
vehicles is and Representative
small spin indicated some
additional examples so then this
makes us all plans use a lot of
energy
even food processing agriculture
I even our new cannabis and hemp
industry could fit into that
category and baseload electric
generation are some of the
most common examples.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
and Representative and one thing
you didn't mention which is also
a major driver of the hydrogen
economy is fertilizer which is
absolutely critical to our the
food supply for the globe.
I'm do you know
Mr chair and secretary Kenny or
Representative small how much
carbon dioxide is it emitted
right now from the hydrogen
production.
At I believe it's over a hundred
million tons but I don't know
the exact number Mr chair
representative thank you Mr
Chairman representative it is
indeed over a hundred it's a
hundred and fifteen million
tonnes of hydrogen that are
produced per year would you
happen to know how the vast
majority of that hydrogen is
produced Mr chair representative
our secretary Mr chair
representative so much of that
is produced through the highest
intensity including a
gasification of coal it's
producer those highest intensity
with none of the emissions
limits that we have and H.
before.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative I'm.
Is it possible to simply cut
demand for hydrogen.
Mr chair representative like all
energy in fact we're going to
see demand for hydrogen actually
increase and so if we don't get
lower emissions hydrogen
production in hand both as a
country and as a world we would
actually see the emissions rates
skyrocket.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Mr chair
representative and secretary
Kenny are you familiar with the
energy transitions commission.
Yes a little bit and I know
secretary can is is sticking has
a short thank you Mr Chairman
representative the energy
transition commission is a
global coalition of leaders from
across the energy landscape
of who are committed to
achieving net zero emissions by
mid century they published a
report in April of twenty twenty
one entitled making the hydrogen
economy possible accelerating
clean hydrogen in an electrified
economy.
Mr Chairman representative as
you mentioned hydrogen
production is expected to
increase in fact that report
suggests that it's going to
increase between five and seven
fold which would mean that by
twenty fifty.
between thirteen and twenty four
percent of our global energy
supply would come from hydrogen.
You might ask Mr chair and
representative and secretary how
does the role of hydrogen to
grow so significantly between
today and twenty fifty and this
has to do a lot with the end
uses that.
You know I'd like to talk a
little bit more about we talked
about the current uses and why
we need to convert those been
I'd like to highlight some of
the and uses.
Mr chair and representative in
the energy transition committee
commission report they say quote
in some sectors direct
electrification will likely
remain impossible for uneconomic
for many decades in many of
these hydrogen can play a major
role in decarbonization whether
use directly or in the long in
the form of derived fuels such
as ammonia and synthetic fuels
in steel and long distance
shipping for instance hydrogens
of vital new role is
increasingly certain infertile
iser production it will continue
to be essential and in multiple
other sectors it is among the
leading decarbonisation options.
So my next questions relate to
getting a better understanding
of how of these hard to abate
sectors so Mister chair and
Representative small is
secretary Kenny can you share
the approximate breakdown of
greenhouse gas emissions by
sector such as transportation
industry electricity and
buildings.
Thank you
roughly Mr chair.
Representative we've seen
transportation eclipse
electricity and buildings begin
to gain very rapidly on balls.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative I'd like to speak
a little bit about industry
specifically and ask some
further questions regarding
industry's greenhouse gas
emissions Mr chair
representative and perhaps
secretary Kenny do you know what
percent of greenhouse gas
emissions are a result of the
industry so that would be
petrochemicals cement US steel
manufacturing.
Mr chair and representative
Dixon are you speaking
nationally or just for New
Mexico no thank you Mr chair and
secretary I am speaking globally
all of my questions relate to
the global
economy.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Dixon I have the
New Mexico break down in front
of me at about you know greater
than sixty plus percent so I I
don't have that on the worldwide
in front of me.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
globally industry contribute
twenty two percent of our global
greenhouse gas emissions
do you Mr chair and
representative do you know what
steel and cement are commonly
used for today.
Mr chair representative all
infrastructure then that's from
buildings to roads
and everywhere in between and
that's only Mr Chairman
representative again.
Rapidly in increasing around the
world and in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative small that was
exactly my point that over the
next twenty eight years which is
the time frame for our goal for
net zero by twenty fifty the
demand from industry is not
likely to decrease at all rather
increase and so.
Mr chair and representative
Why can't we use renewable
energy to make steel cement and
some of these other hard to
decarbonise our.
Items.
Mr chair representative some of
the challenges that are
presented have to do with
the duration
for generation otherwise known
as intermittency so for the
longest and highest energy uses
there needs to be a very high
and long duration energy source
and that can be challenging
balancing with some with
renewable energy.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative small that's
correct to make steel and some
of these other products you need
heat as high as six hundred and
fifty degrees Celsius and that's
very difficult to obtain with
our renewable sources
I'm and just as a side note on
actually for is steel
manufacturers in the world that
have produced have pledge to
have net zero emissions by
twenty fifty and so hydrogen
will be a important component
for them Mr chair and
representative I would like to
speak briefly about the
transportation sector which is
another major contributing
factor to global greenhouse gas
emissions and rather
Ask a question that I already
know the answer to
I was gonna say that air travel
alone is three percent of our
global greenhouse gas emissions
and so Secretary Mr chair
secretary Kenny and
Representative do you by chance
know why we can't use batteries
for commercial airplanes or
cargo ships.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative up secretary
Kenny got off as I did to it
yeah.
Mr chair and representative
Dixon
and there's number reasons but
one is the weight of the battery
that it would take in order for
that airplane to be you know
flyable and charging times also
would be excessive.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
I'm secretary sorry Mr chair and
secretary do you know if any
airline manufacturers for
airline companies are looking at
hydrogen.
Mr chair and Representative yes
there are airlines looking at
not only hydrogen but
Low carbon fuels Senator another
hearing
and
Looking at innovation around
that hydrogen and and talking
about New Mexico being out for
that innovation actually.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
secretary I'd also like to talk
about buildings and this is an
area that I know my colleague
representative Ortez is working
very hard on which is
decarbonizing and making our
buildings more energy efficient.
So Mister chair secretary
Representative do you happen to
know what percent of greenhouse
gas emissions come from
buildings globally.
I don't know that Mr chair up
and I don't have that in front
of me could you please.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
Representative it is seventeen
point five percent of the global
greenhouse gas emissions come
from our buildings
Question Mr chair secretary
Representative is there a role
for hydrogen in decarbonising
buildings.
Mr chair representative
absolutely yes one of the main
sources for those emissions in
addition to the energy usage you
are the components and
especially the concrete which is
an incredibly emissions
intensive
component for buildings and so
Mr chair and representative the
ability to build cut produce
concrete using low or zero
emissions hydrogen will reduce
the carbon footprint of
buildings just as as you pointed
out Mr Chairman representative
they're gonna be.
There's gonna be a vast increase
in buildings in state in the
country around the world so
we've got to get it right.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative I'd like to
sort of switch to my final
secretary to talk about at the
role of hydrogen and that would
be in the energy grid on this
sort of follows up to
Representative months why is
concerned about reliability.
Mr chair Representative small
could you tell me about what is
dispatchable energy.
Thank you very much Mr Chairman
representative you are the
dispatchable energy of courses
is energy that at any time can
be dispatched over the grid Mr
chair representative this
legislature and our state are
uniquely poised to strengthen
our grid and in fact we are
modernizing investing in our
great working with private
sector and public sector
stakeholders so there is a a key
role for vastly increased
renewable energy on our growth
and there is as we use more and
more energy there is this court
roll along on site it for very
low carbon zero carbon
dispatchable energy.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative small I'm could
you also tell us what seasonal
storages.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
representative you know the
based on the inputs for
renewable energy Garcia a young
can be impacted seasonally and
so sometimes I will be more and
or less during different seasons
of the year of course you know
when it's less sunny in one
place there will be less sun
less solar energy ballot having
some dispatchable clean and
zero carbon energy along with a
string and and more resilient
power grid are the key ways
again both of which New Mexico
is poised to really
excel in.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative I want to go back
to the energy transition
commission report which says
hydrogen will almost certainly
play a major energy storage role
in future electricity systems
helping to balance supply and
demand in systems where most
electricity is supplied from
variable renewable sources.
I'm so thank you Mr chair and
representative
I'm gonna go ahead and and kind
of wrap up my questions
With just I want to conclude
with a couple of quotes from a
book that I read and really
enjoyed called hydrogen resin
revolution and the author is
Marco of era.
And he
You just as much more eloquent
than I am and so bear with me
for a minute here.
You're right hydrogen.
Is stuck in the familiar chicken
and egg predicament where supply
weights for demand and demand
weights for supply.
To stave off catastrophe our
global vision for hydrogen must
become a reality soon we have to
reach a crucial tipping point in
the cost of green hydrogen
making it competitive with
fossil fuels for some years and
after which it will grow with
the snowball effect if we act
fast we can make this happen
within five years.
Mr chair representative
secretary he also says we need
all the carbon reduction tools
we can get our hands on the
rainbow of clean colors show how
lively the hydrogen productive
action sector is given the
amounts of hydrogen we will need
the more ways we have a
producing it the better.
Mr chair representative since
secretary a secretary I would
include my questions and
comments by saying that I am
proud to be in support of this
bill because I am committed to
supporting all viable efforts
that can be and are going to be
a part of the solution to keep
global warming to less than one
point five degrees everything
that I have read and all the
experts that I've listened to.
They all believe that there is a
critical role for hydrogen plate
in reaching net zero by twenty
fifty I believe that our state
is uniquely positioned to be a
leader in not only the secretary
but also the effort to set
rigorous environmental
standards.
Along with Madam chair Lundstrom
I want New Mexico to be part of
the solution so thank you Mr
chair for allowing me to comment
and ask my questions I have no
other questions.
Thank you.
a couple things first
Representative Garcia I see you
have your hand up we are on
questions from the committee at
the moment.
Be happy to come back to you at
closing as the Sanchez would
like to make a comment then.
are there any other members of
the committee that have
questions before I ask my
questions.
so Cena and.
We are in our six hour.
It is all right now one day.
And I don't have just a few
questions I have number.
A lot.
All my questions are some of
technical I thought someone
would cover them before it got
to them.
But anyway what what I first
questions.
Representative small resent ones
uncertain.
We were talking about state
hydrogen hubs.
Could there be more than one in
the state.
It because there's only one
federal I mean when I can get
more than one Senator hydrogen
the but we also have state
hydrogen hubs that burnt Federal
hydrogen hydrogen hubs if you
could explain how that works
other questions.
Mr Chairman good catch that's
exactly right I mean it is an
application process to the
hydrogen hub board if the meets
the criteria then it is
considered by the health board
but absolutely there could be
more than one hub State hydrogen
have invested in New Mexico.
The
there any reason.
Like why wouldn't you want to be
higher education you know you
you double
the tax benefits with with
anyone in this industry want to
be in the hydrogen.
I'm not necessarily Mr chairman
I think part of it is the kind
of industry that might of the
different industries that were
talked about earlier as examples
provided by secretary County.
Aren't necessarily all wanting
to be in a have and we're trying
to incentivize even those
independents that want to set up
outside of the hub.
Chairman Sir I I guess I see it
a tax benefit for being in a I
don't see any
or
detriment per well I guess I do
see attachment.
For being in a home in the
budget for being outside.
So if you're interested in the
taxes you'd want to be in a
right and the taxes are offered
to hydrogen businesses and
that's section fifteen where we
allow for that they don't
necessarily have to be in the
hub.
Chairman Lundstrom staying on
the the the issue.
So a private partner or a public
partner.
May proposes just a specific
geographic area to be a.
So it in order to do a you have
to have a public private
partnership is that correct Mr
chairman no you it would.
An applicant can be either or or
a combination.
As an example maybe will just
use what I'm most familiar with
is McKinley County in Escalante.
maybe the Escalante owners may
want to apply for hydrogen hub
designation.
they don't necessarily have to
have a public partner in.
I think where it gets a little
confusing is the public partner
pays ties to the P. three
incentives and we're not sure
that everybody would want to pay
three.
So just because in order to
designate the the area.
It says public partner or
private partner.
It does public entity and so to
me partner me implies P. three.
That in this case if the
application comes forth it
doesn't necessarily have to be a
P. three relationship which is a
contractual relationship that
they're gonna develop together
it could be it could be just one
or the other.
Six.
Section three B..
The small be.
This is in the criteria one the
criteria is.
There is responsibly sourced yes
the patient to supply one
hundred and fifty percent of the
volume necessary.
Why would it be more than one
hundred percent.
Analysts are are secretary to
answer that James can you to
answer that this is the number
that we have been working with
us we are working with our
stakeholders initially on
building so.
Your claim good question.
That would be on face value to
ensure that there's continuity
of gas flow you don't want to
build baseload capacity with
and inability to have that
responsibly sourced gas.
So it's like a margin of error.
Correct you don't want to you
don't want to run short.
Yes.
Is a public private partnership
subject to the open meetings
act.
It is not of the the partnership
is an agreement it's a contract
that is approved by the New
Mexico finance authority The New
Mexico finance authority
would be the group that's
responsible for providing
information but the actual
contract itself would be
proprietary.
So I don't believe that it would
be open for public scrutiny and
chill it goes to the hub board
for final approval in other
words they're going to work on
this due diligence the financial
due diligence much like a bank
would there's back and forth
there there's and then the final
recommendation for how much
participation of the public
sector dollars would be provided
to the how board for final
approval.
There would be no public comment
on the proposed contract until
after it was approved now
there's a public input piece at
the very beginning of the
process at that time there's
notice that's put out this is
done through the New Mexico
finance authority at that point
to the public would be made
aware that there's going to be
an application coming forth
and that at that point you know
they be informed as to the the
applicants are.
On page.
Fifteen of the bill the.
Hello section is a one.
And this was this is raising
more than LCDs I I'm not.
Smart enough to cut this it
defines a clean hydrogen
electric generation facility C..
The project is a clean hydrogen
electric generation facility.
So.
Used by this the I think that
the question was.
Electric generation facility
uses higher hydrogen does not
generate hydrogen secretary.
Mr Chairman yes.
So so that definition isn't
quite right.
Mr Chairman it that we've gone
back and forth and and this is
the definition to ensure that
it's the lowest emissions
hydrogen with the various
safeguards that we've discussed
and this was the the advice back
is that this was the proper way
to say it in to just focus Mr
chairman on the electric
generation Mr Chairman if
there's other generation of
hydrogen for other uses it would
not fall under that
That definition for for
hydrogen.
And Mr Chairman
I might just add that
on page nine.
Beginning on online line going
down through
It sets out a few of the
criteria for the public private
partnership and it does include
a public as madam chair noted it
does include a public hearing
held in accordance with the open
meetings act and that's
beginning that's an that's on
C. paragraph C. section three
line seventeen.
My question that was then the
once the partnership is
important the public entity in a
private entity operates outside
the public.
Because they would no longer be
subject to the open meetings
act.
I believe what is happening just
under with the New Mexico
finance authority they are
monitoring they have to because
they're the ones that would be
releasing any public money into
the process so they're going to
be monitoring the process
receiving the reporting and if
there's any problems there's a
clawback provision inside this
bill that says we're taking the
money back you owe us money.
The clawback provision would be
inside the contract not the bill
correct in the bill and I'm
looking for here if you look on
page down.
lines right find clawback or
recapture provisions that
protect the public investment in
the event of a default on the
agreement the requirement for
the contract it is a requirement
to enter into a P. three in
other words in statute.
You have to have this.
I'm
trying to get someone recently
as possible you provide me with
the refunding bonds is.
We have Schardin Clarke with us.
She is our bond expert but Jim
do I take a crack at that no
Terry McLean and the gentleman
Lundstrom I'm just wondering we
had heard that the R. her
division director mark I think
was attention on the line.
I don't know if mark is still
there or not I see Mr Van Order
Mr Van Order Gina.
Mr Chairman.
This it this is a way of
refinancing the bonds the.
issued.
This is the standard.
Bonding language that I've seen
in every P. three bills that
I've worked.
I think it says they may.
What's the purpose of the
finance
charge already part of expanding
bonds laws in two to.
A second crack at the at the
apple sure for example interest
rates you can lower.
That kind of thing.
Mr chairman I just got
information sent to me the bond
is refinancing existing bonds
just like refinancing a mortgage
okay.
Thank you for that is is just a
term I was not familiar with.
Is there any all we do tax
credits for the one of the big
items of discussion is the cap.
So for example like the you know
the the rooftop solar tax credit
like maybe I don't know with cap
is maybe it was ten million
dollars a year there any cap on
this.
Yes Mr chairman there is a land
I'm flipping through the pages
J. Scott refine those pages
where we protect on this.
We.
Mr chair.
Where he discussed the issue
with some twenty seven.
Some sections.
So.
The idea here.
Is that we have to offer a tax
credit only on the first
seventeen million kilograms.
Have you produced the store was
thirty cents thank you agree
then that would come out to be
five point one million dollars.
These were the prior it's going
to committee member given what.
Question was representative
questioned whether.
Clear and it has been suggested
by tax revenue department we
could have the phrase in there
saying that make it clear and
what you have seventeen million.
Grams you don't get any.
Credits for anything above.
Seventeen million kilograms.
That your question Mr chair.
Your move your muted sorry Mr
Chairman sorry.
Thank you for that I think
there's a section for I think
it's because I think this occurs
twice there's a section for the
income tax credit and the
corporate income tax credit
thank you to both places on page
twenty nine
section you there's a five year
carry forward and on the
following page there's a seven
year period for.
To say that just for
clarification income tax credit
is better in the hub.
And the gross receipts tax and
compensating tax is the same
whether in the hub or not.
So we have to duplicate some of
those things would be we to make
sure that people understand when
you're in the have you get these
things when you're out of the
hat you're on and these things
in the clear you are the better
of the incentives.
So
I'm looking for that specific
piece you still there chase.
When you see the five year Kerry
for requests to this seven years
sorry I don't either.
Session J. on page thirty.
At the end the section J..
Thank you Mr chair madam chair I
might just briefly the they can
the cap that exist on the page
Representative works out to five
point one million dollars I see
Mr Chaiken is also there who can
speak from taxed ram that's the
only money going out from the
state the remainder of the tax
credits Mr chairman committee
just simply reduce the liability
that the taxpayer is paying into
the state so there is a cap on
the dollars flowing out from the
state per year in addition to
the ten year overall sunset that
covers all of the incentives and
Mr chairman.
Mr mark
Chaykin C. H. A. I. K. E. N. is
a W. that madam chair referred
to
in tax and Rev.
Okay Mr Chaykin are you offering
clarification on.
Any of the recent questions.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for letting
me speak here today yes Mr
chairman of the Atari for to be
seven years and that we're going
to request a vitamin in two of
the bill.
Okay and is your one plus seven
or is it.
A total so for a total of eight
or is it a total of seven.
Mr chairman it should be a total
of seven.
Okay so the tier one plus a
seven year period for that
eight.
With
the.
The credit can first be claimed
Mr chairman in as when the of
hydrogen production facility
begins of production of
hydrogen.
And so we've also suggests
amendment if I can I'm sorry I'm
just looking for the correct
language here.
To make it clear that it's not
five years from the commencement
but sixty months because we did
have this issue with the solar
energy tax credit which the
legislature amended last year's
deal with is exactly the kind of
problem you're you're pointing
out so I'm it would be in this
case total eighty four months of
so should be seven years.
Yes.
Thirty one.
The pause and section though to.
actually
Lawsuits so I the the percent
loan services Representative
small discussion with secretary
Kenny
A couple days ago and we were
discussing how to measure the
carbon intensity and there is
concern raise the carbon
intensity.
Mission did not capture for
example eight or missions at the
well head.
and then thank you the measure
needed be the entire life cycle
of if you're using methane to
produce hydrogen.
From.
From production to completion.
in.
This language that the
definition isn't specifically
brought.
So it just says it provides and
and points it says.
Definitions are sort of all over
the place I mean literally there
the peer review at least through
throughout the bill.
Are you are you aware of that
issue.
Secretary Kenny I at the
splendid clearly perhaps you
could.
Correct me.
Your Mr chairman and and thank
you the the question here and
could I have not had a chance to
talk to Jesus this was just a
drafting our
in the executive contribution to
the bill so read the sections.
Fifteen sixteen and seventeen
the definitions into the tax
code of what life cycle analysis
means.
In that section we have I'm
just.
Concern here in that section we
have if you actually look at the
page thirty three I than ten I
think it's there.
Yes Mr chair and and
Representative Representative St
the lifecycle analysis ten
eighty on page thirty three
starting line eighteen.
The intention there was the
quantity of greenhouse gases
through the point of it says the
quantity of greenhouse gases to
the point of hydrogen production
we had a parenthetical their
prior that's it well to gate
which was in designed to ensure
that we calculate all the
upstream oil and gas
admissions.
And it looks like that
parenthetical may have come out
in the draft so I'm not sure if
that was a drafting issued
through LCS chase given that was
a goal or.
What the issue is there and
that's what German McQueen is
referred to.
Thank you order judge Mr
chairman I would.
This fall yet that thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Mr secretary
Thank you for pointing this out
of as we talked about we've been
working to merge and
the these concepts and so I
appreciate very much you
pointing this out
And highlighting it.
I I I I think we you know we
would want to go back and be
very clear and careful but the
we clearly intend to address of
string to address the lifecycle
emissions but I just want to
make sure and and
Be able to to go back and visit
with folks.
On page
The certified it's related to be
certified this is a question
that was asked for and I I
didn't understand the question
Incheon answer
the the the bill provides tax
incentives for hydrogen
production beginning with the
carbon intensity test for which
I understand is four kilograms
carbon for each kilogram of
hydrogen in my understanding is
that the federal.
Standard is to.
So why are we matching the
federal standard why every
providing tax incentives for
something that doesn't meet the
federal standard.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman I know a
second I'm gonna set secretary
Kenny dropped off.
Mr chair representative it
committee
I am secretary Kenny can expand
but this is a time limited
provision through
twenty twenty eight and Mr chair
representatives I believe the
intention is to help expert help
support rapid technology
innovation locate that
innovation in New Mexico so that
we we have that we we locate the
innovation here in very quickly
transition it to cleaner and
cleaner and cleaner.
Mr secretary can I be able to
expand it Mr chairman and sorry
for my delayed response there Mr
Chairman so there's there's
certain that there's two answers
your question maybe one is is
the is the process in that by
setting a glide path towards
that lower carbon intensity of
zero carbon intensity our
actions a negative carbon
intensity that's that's what
we're doing so if you look at a
company that was mentioned
earlier like and I think Miss
ski methane reforming therefore
we went all think that there are
currently infants is going to be
you know at nine but they're
actually down to about two so
there's companies who are
working on steam methane
reforming in other types that
are at that for three to and
we're glide path thing then in
if you will so that they'll
continue to invest in learning
emissions to pursue that the
cleaner tax credits that are
outlined in the bill.
the federal production tax the
federal tax credits are through
the infrastructure and then
build back better which is not
finalized obviously are talking
about clean hydrogen and carbon
intensity of two so we're we're
sort of transitioning into that
in in some respects by starting
at four and then dropping it
down to three timing that tax
incentive out soonest right
eight that one sun sets the
fastest if you will and and
that's all called qualifying
hydrogen in the in the bill and
then you go down to clean
hydrogen and carbon negative
hydrogen.
So thank you for that yeah I
understand that.
I understand that rationale it
is a situation where the state
is giving tax incentives for
hydrogen that would not qualify
for federal tax incentives.
I believe is that correct.
Mr chairman so this is where I
think it gets confusing and I'm
trying to figure that trying to
find a way to explain this you
would not get the federal
hydrogen tax credit you are
correct.
You could still sequester and
get the forty five Q. tax credit
if you're carbon intensity was
for you would not get the
federal you could get the state
tax credit for hydrogen could
you making qualified hydrogen.
And at the same time.
You would for those companies
are sequestering their emissions
they can get the forty five Q.
tax credit which is another
federal tax credit on related to
hydrogen.
Thank you for that.
On page thirty nine in section
need of one of the Elsie's noted
that the the reference to it's
beginning hydrogen fuel
production and energy generation
income tax credit missing the
work corporate we're in the
corporate section here.
Later in that section there's
another instance the five year
period for.
Seven here on the following
page.
Things are looking up.
Fifty one
Another series of.
Definitions.
Well my questions is and this.
What about the page page forty
nine we we we to provide the
same turned in multiple areas.
Because when this gets codified
it goes in different places
there are statutes right that's
why police so we're not just
such as one act through many
different areas but we're using
the same terms in the the
definitions don't match.
We're not using consistent
language to the fine the
consistent terms.
Yeah I think that's something
that.
I think that's something these
needs to be looked at and I
think that's the kind of thing
that just happens when.
Yes bill you make a lot to
change some.
In FY are my understanding was
that there was a hundred fifty
million dollars in the budget
the fire seems to indicate as
hundred twenty five million.
It's Mr Chairman right now the
general appropriations draft it
is at a hundred twenty five
million okay
Where does that money go with
these four it just for the P.
three it is going to be
administered by the New Mexico
finance authority and of.
We've done with this bill is we
will allow a portion of it to be
used for administrative costs
for administering the hydrogen
hub Act by the environment
department and the New Mexico
finance authority but that
funding.
Well so it's contingent on
passage of the bill first and
it's also designated for P.
three years by the New Mexico
finance authority.
In the context P. three years
would be.
With your loans.
And that the purpose for the P.
three when we talk about grants
loans
Participation with the private
sector for public infrastructure
things like that.
Okay so expenditures.
We might get some of them of
the.
I think you get that back with
us the way it will be calculated
as a multiplier when we start
looking at job creation
establish you start looking at
gross receipts tax rate you look
at personal income tax rate.
what is being paid back into the
economy if we can get with we
can stand up these companies.
On the on the currency
frustration and there and there
are questions about about this
in the feasibility and and
things like that but.
Is.
You for using the card in for
quite a sequestering carbon.
By pumping it back into the
ground.
In order to use it for enhanced
oil recovery.
Are we just started trading
carbon we we're we may be
sequestering that CO two.
But report other car now the
Graham.
Thank you ma'am Mr chair and and
Representative thank you for
addressing this Mr Chairman
representative the only reason
that the as we as our State
makes progress to as we may
address Mr chair representative
towards having the ability to
have the classics well
sequestration which gives the
full amount of the federal tax
credit the the need for enhanced
oil recovery yeah goes away so
Mister chair and representative
is we've had a great discussion
on that today it's been brought
up previously and we now believe
that
it's very likely unnecessary.
As we look at as we look at the
ability for the state using that
all of the above legislative
strategy to to make progress on
being able to sequester carbon
using the classics Wells.
Representative small thank you
but but what's unnecessary and
then follow that sorry thank you
Mr chairman and committee
members I apologize the current
provision that sunsets io R. and
twenty thirty that is the
provision is unnecessary given
the the time frames for
certification for
The sequestering of carbon that
is it seems it seems that by
using our all of the above
legislative strategy.
we would not we would not need
that
sunset to happen in twenty
thirty.
Yeah I I guess my question is
about the sunset it's about what
comes before the sunset saris Mr
chairman at a committee I'm
being what I am.
Conveying is that the E. O. R.
the enhanced oil recovery is
unnecessary
instead of instead of becoming
unnecessary in twenty thirty if
an as our State makes the
progress that we are working to
make it would be a necessary to
have that option so that so that
it would be in that's what I'm
trying to say Mr chair so that
the language that prohibits
using it for your could apply.
At the onset is that what you're
saying Mr chair ya want to again
there are a lot of technical
parts of this but it it seems
like the that yes that is as our
State as we're able to sequester
the carbon especially gaining
the classics primacy
working with the EPA that it's
unnecessary even from the
beginning.
So you we discussed a number
changes and and I think you guys
are working on.
Changes even before this
committee
I guess my question is will a
committee so the or an amendment
comes New Mexico miti prohibits
using CO two.
Produced by these process sees
for enhanced oil recovery.
So Mr chair and committee
members
as we talked about the time
lines are critical for this bill
to move forward this year and so
I think it is we can remove
remove that as we if if we're
able to move forward today I
thank you Mr chairman it really
appears.
Okay.
That thank please and the my
questions.
Are there any other questions
from the committee.
And before I take a motion I
will give the Sanchez an
opportunity to make a final
comments that they might want to
make but before we do that are
there any further questions from
committee okay so seeing that
and right Representative is a
small instrument Garcia any
final thoughts for us.
Mr chairman if I may
Sherman like I said earlier I
was do all of conversations one
thing that was the it was not
mentioned.
The whole process is that my bed
is a paper factory the sits
right next was content to the
our plant.
And if this bill doesn't happen
if it doesn't go through.
S. Caliente which is owned by
the tri state has a water
rights.
That the Bible bill works off of
and that the mobile billing boys
a hundred forty she is now.
And if it doesn't go through the
price of diesel Water Rights way
of that but that paper mills
global we doll school that's a
hundred forty more jobs that
we're going to take a beating on
in our community and one more
thing Sir all Mr Chairman.
Us to more quickly lost forty
million dollars in revenue last
year in a hundred fifty job one
of the.
That's just my concerns and I
just want to put it up for the
committee to Moul what is
possible because if they don't
tools by opal of discarded that
will be dismantled the water
right trouble with that thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative Garcia
and before I go to
Representative Lundstrom and
small members of the committee.
If you're around I hope you're
around to stay close for a close
to a vote so if anyone is.
We're in our sixth hour I think
if this is the committee
assistance and provided
assistance can round up your
members so there present for the
vote I would appreciate it
Representative small thank you
so much Mr chairman I just
incredibly grateful Mr chairman
to you and to your committee to
all who have participated today.
As we've seen Mr chairman and
committee we don't to carbonized
whether as a state nation or a
glow without a more and more use
of hydrogen Mr chair committee
what we've had today we've
brought a product that's been
worked on since last year that
has really seen an incredible
amount of fine tuning so much of
it Mr chair and committee
focused upon getting the
absolute cleanest lowest
emission hydrogen it's something
that we can all work towards
because we all know
the value of a clean and safe
environment in Mr chairman and
committee we recognize that
being.
On the front end perhaps even
being first to grow an economy
to clean up the environment to
show leadership not only in the
nation in the world is some
place that New Mexico has to be
Mr chair in committee
I want to mention to other
points first the all of the
above legislative approach Mr
chairman and committee.
That is something that we have a
unique opportunity to pursue as
a state at a time when there is
so much hardship where we see
the potential to lead the
country and the world in
decarbonising in growing our
economy putting people as has
been detailed who are incredibly
good at what they do working
with their hands back to work
and then finally Mr chairman
committee I think as expected
and as deeply appreciated this
committee and you Mr chair take
your work incredibly seriously
and so even as we fine tuned and
continue to work forward there
have been a number of really
important ideas and suggestions
that have come forward during
this hearing.
And just having seen the process
in the past Mr chairman
committee there's always a
chance to try and make things
better and the work that the
committee has put in today if
we're able to move forward
really seems to have continued
to push us in that direction I
would just close with that Mr
chair
And committee thank you.
Thank you Representative small
Representative Lundstrom thank
you Mr chairman I want to echo
some of the comments of
Representative small I want to
thank this committee for a very
thorough review as you say we've
been here since eight thirty
this morning is now two twenty
and that's been full bore no
lunch breaks no nothing and the
I think I. it reminds me been
back in appropriations but
anyway with that being said I
want to thank you for the time
your committees thoroughness I
also wanted to say Mr chairman.
I am a strong believer and have
been over the last twenty two
years.
In the integrity of the
legislative process.
And because of the tremendous
interest in the hydrogen
Development aspects.
It would be my wish that this
committee would move the bill
along I just believe that that's
what our process is all about
and that's why we have six our
meetings people get to talk
people get to improve the
product and with that again Mr
chairman and committee members I
want to thank you for the time
and the very good hearing today.
Thank you all thank you.
The Sanchez thank you to the
public thank you to the
committee it's been a long day I
think the discussion has been
excellent and I appreciate that.
Representative Montoya would you
like to make a motion I'm yes Mr
chair I'd like to move the do
pass.
Chairman this Representative
Townsend after substitute motion
table.
To the substitute motion to
table
that takes precedence I would
think you take the vote on the
substitute motion to table yes
yes to table though and we're
back in the bill.
Representative Barreras its use.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
No to table.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Herndon.
No.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Yes to table.
Representative Townsend.
Yes the table.
You please go back to the
members who passed yes Sir.
Representative Montoya.
Yes to table and I'd like to
explain my vote.
Representative Ortez.
No to table.
Am I correct in in inferring
that I go back to who would like
to explain about no you could do
a representative Sarinana and
then the.
Yes Sir.
Presented Sarinana.
No to table.
And chairman McQueen.
Yes the table.
The bill has been tabled.
Representative Montoya to
explain has a.
Thank you Mr chairman
Yeah I honestly I voted with so
what I believed was going to be
a major so I could.
And if an appropriate time were
able to pull this off the table
I would be willing to work with
the sponsor to make that happen
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Montoya.
Built in table on sixty four
vote.
I know a lot of hard respect put
into this I appreciate that I
know you'll be disappointed and
I apologize for that.
To the committee of the public
thank you very much we are
turned.
