You'd and proposed is through a
technical group made up of our
committee analyst so in this
case clinicians and the
panelists from legislative
finance council and the
department of finance they look
at everything and then they come
to a consensus and make a
recommendation to this committee
which you all have before
Thursday morning well if we all
if if there's questions that
arise today were between now and
Thursday morning
We'll take a we we will then
look at the final house bill
three as amended version for
your consideration then it goes
on to house bill or how H. A. F.
C. which is a House
Appropriations which will then
get rolled into house bill two
eventually which is the big
budget bill so today it's just a
general discussion and
conversation about this big
picture of house bill three if
there are any particulars about
certain projects when she will
find some time after her
presentation to discuss further
but if it's also okay with
future Lundstrom if if there are
some questions that folks to
have that if you could be of
some resource if in okay
questions do come around come
up.
So we'll go ahead and get
started then secretary
Representative G. Garrett.
Garcia is in the attendees he
can be removed.
Okay thank you for that
reminder.
so
secretary if you'd like to
begin.
Thank you madam chair and
members
the house transportation
committee I do have a
presentation madam chair if you
would allow me to share my
screen I could pull that up real
quick.
Yes we can we can go ahead and
do that.
You should be able to now.
Okay thank you madam chair just
wanted to go over kind of the
investments have been made in
transportation infrastructure
over the last three years
I think it's important that we
kind of talk a little bit about
the state investments go over a
little bit about the new bill
a bipartisan infrastructure law.
talk about some of the
challenges that we are facing at
the D. O. T. and then Mallory
local for our FY twenty three
budget request in in the back of
the presentation I hope that you
have with you if not we'll send
to you it's kind of a listing of
some of the the progress we've
made on the projects with the
money that's been provided over
the last several years.
So I think you know it's been a
pleasure to be cabinet
secretariat the O. T. these last
now going on for years I'm just
to give you an example on the
previous ten years from two
thousand eight to two thousand
eighteen I think when you look
at what money was available and
been provided to the D. O. T. it
was just right around a hundred
million dollars of general fund
money maybe a little bit less
and so this wasn't a lot of
bailable and member in two
thousand eight two thousand nine
and ten that's what we're really
the state was really having some
budget issues and so I know the
legislature always does what
they can with any extra money
but there just hasn't been a lot
the previous ten years I started
in twenty nineteen which was the
first year and after some
comment adjustments we were
provided three hundred twenty
five million dollars a general
fund money go back to a two
thousand twenty that was the
first year of COVID even with
COVID happening the department
was still provided a hundred and
thirty five million.
last four legislative session
the department was provided
three hundred million and then
bonding authority for the
remainder of the grant funds and
we're able to trim those bonds
and to three hundred two million
worth of revenue and so the
total last year we actually
received six hundred and two
million and then of course this
last special session we received
a hundred and seventy two point
five million of our funds and of
course we're still going to work
through the process this year
in this session so we'll see
where that turns out when you
look at over the last three
years more departments received
one point two billion dollars
above and beyond our normal
operating budget which is now
going to be over one point one
billion and so that's twelve
times as much money we received
in the last three years that we
as we had in the last ten years
so it's provided us with a lot
of opportunities to take care of
a lot of the issues that we have
in our state we want to thank
you for providing that money
and really trusting us in
getting that to the right places
in the right projects and
putting that out into the field
as you can see on the bottom.
One of the the struggles that
happens when this money comes in
whether it be through capital
outlay as it sits on the shelf
somewhere it doesn't get put
into a project we're doesn't get
spent and I'm happy to report
that all of that money one
hundred percent of it is
assigned to a project in a lot
of it has already been spent on
war encumbered and so I think
we've taken what you've given us
and taken that trust and put
that into projects and and been
able to spend that money in a
good way to help our state.
One of the things that I think
is been unique about the money
that's been provided over these
last three years is you have
also made a huge investment in
in local money if you look at.
What's happened the previous
three years before
you started providing additional
money that locals related to
depended on the local government
road funds just to compare the
previous three years two
thousand sixteen to two thousand
eighteen local road fund
averages about twenty three
twenty four million per year so
the locals are receiving about
seventy million dollars over the
previous three years and of
course that's a seventy five
twenty five match so they also
have to put in a lot of money
I'm close to twenty five million
of their own money in order to
get that well from the last
three years from twenty nineteen
to twenty twenty one you've
provided over three hundred
million directly to locals so
that four times as much as the
previous three years in the
annual revenue for
for locals has increased from
twenty three million dollars a
year to sixty five million
dollars a year so it's not just
this one time non reoccurring
money but you've made
investments in the local future
to make sure that they've
received additional money
regardless of whether their
surplus or not they're gonna
have more money to work with in
that new money that you're
providing is just a five percent
match which really helps the
smaller more rural communities
that don't have that match in
addition to the bill that passes
even allows for a hardship
waiver where their projects to
be a hundred percent funded also
on a report that all of that
money three hundred million
dollars has been assigned to a
project that's not sitting in
our coffers somewhere they've
all been solicited projects have
been identified contracts have
been put in place for a hundred
percent of that money and once
again I think that's good for
the state that we're putting the
money out into the economy
million much needed areas.
Want to talk a little bit about
the the federal legislation that
that just passed I think you've
probably heard a lot of numbers
the good news is there is a
minimum of three point seven
billion dollars coming to our
state over the next five years.
that is all based on formula
funding so based on our
population road miles other
things but at minimum that's
what the New Mexico will be
receiving over the next five
years there's billions of other
dollars that would be available
through discretionary grants
things that the state will have
to apply for but at least we're
gonna receives three point seven
billion and that's divided in a
lot of different areas for
example the biggest pot isn't
course for roads and highways
which is two point five billion
in their specific money for
electric vehicle charging
stations broadband water and you
can see going down the list the
last one I wanted to mention was
there's also money that's
available directly for locals so
just like the state example that
we set the feds have that same
example where they're investing
in the state utilities but also
making money available at the
local level so I like to say
that we were really ahead of the
game because that's really the
first time that locals have been
included in this type of
legislation going back many
years so the locals will have
that opportunity and I've had
meetings with the mayors and and
with the minutes fully to let
them know you know that they
need to be ready for that money
it's a whole different ballgame
when you're to working directly
with FHWA our federal partners
and we're seeing an offered our
support to help facilitate that
relationship but there's a to be
a lot of local money that they
can apply for in hopefully
obtained through this you bill
legislation.
One of the things that's really
gonna help us kind of reach new
highs in receiving funding is
our ability to go after
discretionary grant money so I
mentioned that three point seven
billion dollars we could receive
a lot more money but that's in a
depend on how successful we are
pursuing grants and so I think
we've shown success over the
last eighteen months
come about eighteen months ago
we received twelve point five
million for US two eighty five
in Carlsbad to a competitive
grant process last year law
students the city of receive
twenty five million dollars for
their project we assisted them
and help them to the question
answer.
Question of that is there a
finalist to help push them over
the finish line including
pledging some match money so we
think that's one of the reasons
they were ultimately awarded and
then just recently a few weeks
ago we were awarded twenty five
million for the Shiprock to the
Arizona state line project which
is US sixty four in a happy to
say that the Max you can receive
is twenty five million in New
Mexico is the only state to
receive the maximum amount which
is at twenty five million so I
think we've shown that we can be
successful and in receiving and
applying and receiving these
requests and we're going to
continue to to try and do that
to pool and as much more of that
discretionary money into our
state as well and I think we
need to also support our locals
because they'll have to compete
in the certainly we're willing
to do that and Linda helping
hand wherever we can in their
applications.
I think.
When I tried to tell.
Staff and others is that you
know having all this money is
not just a one or two or three
times thing but it's really is
the new normal I think for DOT
and for our state.
And we're really on a strong
pass as a department for being
able to to receive this revenue
and put it out into the field we
have projects pretty good Center
projects into twenty twenty
three and twenty four on that
are funded we still have of
course a lot of needs but I
think I want to direct you to
our debt service in this slide
you know as you can see these
next three years twenty two
twenty three twenty four we do
have high debt payments under
and sixty eight million this
year a hundred seventy five
million next year in a hundred
and ninety four million in
twenty twenty four but after
that our debt falls off
by about eighty three million
going all the way and then of
course getting really close to
being out of debt in twenty
thirty and then completely out
of debt and twenty thirty two
and so in that twenty twenty
five year hits when you add in
what we're supposed to receive
from formula funding from the
renewable
Act we're gonna have upwards of
of can continuing revenue
upwards of over two hundred
million dollars moving forward
from twenty five on up until the
new law has passed and so this
really is the new normal for the
department is having some of
this money and being able to
address some of our needs and so
I think the department overall
is on a good path in a good
financial system standing moving
forward and certainly the the
money that we received this last
three years has helped helped us
catch up in a lot of areas and
helped us get along good
financial ground.
Now all of this doesn't come
with challenges I can tell you
having money is great being able
to to put that out in the field
is great but I think we all know
that there have been some
challenges come about not just
with COVID but just in general
with inflation we have a a lot
of rising labor costs both in
the department and in the field
in the department we're having
to bring in people at higher
rates to try and compete with
the private sector so we're no
longer hiring of mid point we're
trying to bring people in is as
high as we possibly can to be
competitive
the private sector has told me
numerous times I used to be able
to bring in labour's and other
folks that you know what what
thirteen fourteen fifteen Bucks
an hour now it's north of twenty
where they're having to bring in
entry level people and and so
that obviously gets passed on at
the end to the total cost of the
projects that we're seeing
projects costs rise just be
simply because of labor then you
add in the material costs
inflation it's been half
happening with still an
aggregate in other things and
you're starting to see you know
it used to be fifteen to twenty
percent a couple months ago now
we're seeing thirty forty fifty
percent rising costs in
construction and so with all
this new money which is great
it's just not The New Mexico as
far because projects are just
becoming more and more expensive
due to inflation and in the
labor and material costs.
I think we all know in of heard
about the supply chain issues
even sometimes or have a project
that's right ago we're waiting
on the still to come in we're
waiting on something to come in
that is low on supply efforts
for projects to get started and
so that's impacting timelines
impacting on the link that how
long a project is going to take
and so we're really have our
hands tied with that because
there's not a whole lot we can
do about the supply chain issue
but we're trying to be smarter
and when we can sub in different
materials that have the same
quality that don't have a supply
issue but that certainly has
impacted projects we see that
continuing to happen in the
future unless some of the plot
supply chain issues can be
corrected.
Of course the third one is the
work force we're all competing
for the same folks whether it's
in the construction field
whether it's in there the
service industry restaurants
were all struggling to find
people that that are qualified
that want to work that will come
in and do a good job and so
certainly we're doing everything
we can to try and keep for young
folks here more college students
young folks who graduate high
school we don't want to go to
college you maybe want to go
right into the business sector
but we will take anyone that we
can and now hiring those folks
but there is just doesn't seem
to be a large enough workforce
for the current demand in
particularly in construction.
The last thing is
I I say sometimes where are our
own worst enemies and sometimes
we had set up processes that
just make it harder to get stuff
done and over the last six
months we've been really looking
at how we can streamline things.
Processes that don't affect
quality but can you improve the
timing of the project or just
making it easier for the project
to get done I think we've
identified at this point four
five areas that have really been
helpful not only to us but to
the industry the contracting
industry to get these projects
done I think we have to think
you know it's a new way of
thinking with all of these
challenges that we have we need
to be more flexible and make
sure of course we're not
compromising quality but if
there are things that we can do
to improve timing and make it
easier certainly were open to
that we've been able to identify
some areas where we can do that.
Moving forward just want to
share with you the audit results
I know like I mentioned you
provided a lot of money over the
last three years and I'm happy
to say and I think I mentioned
this last year that we had zero
findings and so when we do our
yearly audit that's required
they go through anywhere from
six hundred to a thousand
transactions that they look at
all of our federal spending
including our FEMA and emergency
spending this year we did have
to findings but they were minor
and I'll share those with you
one was we have a the safety
database that we have to input
projects into
for whatever reason that having
come up in previous audits but
we we hadn't done that since two
thousand eleven so we're
obviously gonna start doing that
now but it's not a really a
financial issue it's just we
have to ensure projects into a
federal database so that will be
taken care of pretty easily in
the second audit funding was a
gas gas receipts so we all have
our state D. O. T. gas cards and
whenever you get gas outside of
one of our facilities at a
regular gas station chevron
shell whatever you're supposed
to be keeping all the receipts
there was a couple instances
where folks did not keep the
receipt we don't think there was
any fraud or anything going on
like that or any any other type
of
financial issue but since we
were able to produce those
receipts that was not it funding
so those are very minor nothing
that the auditors were too
concerned about they did have to
put that into the other report
but I think with that shows over
the last two years is when it
comes to our main financial
systems how we handle the money
how we pay our bills how we
invoice people making sure we're
spending the right color.
of money in the right place
we've been doing very very very
well with all the money that we
received additional money
including having to deal with
COVID and in people working from
home and struggling through that
so that's really a tribute to
Mallory months and not as in the
entire financial group that we
have in the amount of the work
that they've been able to do and
they're very very clean audits
that we've seen in the last
couple years.
One of the goals that I've had
is to kind of work with our
local governments better hi we
have a authorized each district
to hire at least one more
locally As on them to help with
that now that we've had more
local projects they need that
local supported the districts so
we're increasing staffing and
then a lot of you of course no
no George Dodge the first time
the department has had a an
appointed position as a local
government director and George
is available to all of you as
well as to all of the city and
county and tribal folks to
really try and make inroads in
in providing support finding out
what their needs are making sure
that we're listening and
addressing and helping wherever
we can we are in the process of
really trying to improve instant
start really because we weren't
doing it before how we work with
broadband companies but also how
we expand our own network at the
DOT number starting to include
conduit in projects where it
makes sense two of them the most
a imminent project right now our
project just north of Espanola
and I'll call the that we're
laying conduit in that we're
gonna make available to some
tribal folks down there on some
education folks down there and
then we're finishing the the the
lava hot of project and we're
gonna find conduit for conduits
in that project and be able to
find that it really make a
connection from Santa Fe to
Albuquerque so we are trying to.
Where and we are working with
our new broadband advisor Matt
Smith with the governor's office
he's in support of everything
that we've been doing so far not
only with our rural but just how
we're handling things with the
project with our projects and so
if you have any broadband
questions you can always talk to
me and but I put our CIO Jeremy
a lot though there is been the
lead in that area for the
department.
Part of that new money that we
received over the next five
years New Mexico will receive
thirty eight million dollars for
electric vehicle charging
stations a little over seven
million dollars a year we
appreciate the ten million that
was provided during the special
session in our lead on that is
Jerry bald as who's the
executive director of the office
of the secretary but we have a
statewide implementation plan
that we're finalizing it's very
likely we're gonna start working
on the interstates and U. S. to
eighty five first to try and
make some connective itty
through their but we expect that
to be happening pretty quickly
and with the money that you've
provided last year which is one
point two million the
installations should be
happening within the next couple
months and that money will be
spent as well.
One of the things that we're
investing in is really trying to
get our projects ready get a lot
of shelf projects ready so that
when we do have this
discretionary grant program new
that came in that we're gonna
have a lot of projects iterativ
go that are eligible that
funding so our focus has been
putting money in design and I
think you'll see that when when
we start talking about our
budget and some of the fund
balance that we're bringing in
some of that will be going
straight to designed to try and
make sure that we have projects
ready to go in the last thing is
you know we're doing everything
we can to spend the money wisely
but we don't want money sitting
around we're not building any
war chest or anything like that
we want to make sure that that
we can spend everything that you
provide to us in a smart way and
I think we've been able to do
that we provided a list of
projects that we think are the
highest priority some of the
most of those projects were
included in house bill two in
the special session but there
are a few more that we've
provided that would be happy to
talk about.
And with that madam chair this
kind of summarizing the
financial situation and I would
be happy to answer any questions
I think Mallory has a short
presentation as well to go over
specifically our budget in the
status of our spending on some
of the money that we received in
previous years so okay with you
madam chairman of stop sharing
my screen and you like to turn
over the Mallory I think or I
can answer questions now
whatever you prefer we can we
can go not next to Mallory I
just promoted her to panelist so
Mallory whenever you're ready
you should be able to share
your.
Thank you Secretary.
Good morning madam chair.
Many members of the committee
I'd actually like to see it out
of you and you all aware that
that means and then I'll share
my screen also.
That's that's fine I see like
three different Valerie so I
can't.
Put it all in
In the gallery be sent out go
ahead.
Yes good morning madam chair and
members of the committee today I
would just be present I want to
make the store I bought a custom
which was the better these
generally and was also the year
by the out of state economist
participating pretty consensus
revenue estimating group so
before showing more these days I
just one point anticipate that
this podcast is likely more
optimistic compared to what we
had last July for these guys
have been to three.
That is when the initial budget
that request was the bread in
the significantly more
optimistic compared to what we
had last January I gotta be
straight yes support discrepancy
to and I think that that these
BID good deals in order just to
give you a already great cop
they don't fiscal yep
individuals storing fiscal yep
going to choke on but what was
budget did that last year and
ready for park out of the
stadium these updating please do
so FY twenty two part according
to revenues up by about seven
point four percent about thirty
six million dollars in yet I'm
looking up line seven do not so
the low bond according to
revenue was called up and then
you can see that right now all
of revenues are estimated at
five hundred twenty nine million
dollars call back to four
hundred ninety three million
dollars that whether budgeted
last year salt that these are
are good news in this Oct one
revisions so I did mainly
because the nation they get the
building block of the funds that
Micah as being largely offset by
the COVID stimulus packages
it really strongly sustaining
part of consumer spending and
demand for goods.
So moving to these guys have
been Tuesday which is yes the
the focus of these forecasts
that FY twenty three about five
according to avenues and yet I'm
looking up flights seventeen a
day in court would be of now is
to make it up five hundred
thirty two million dollars so
which represent the compact what
was budgeted the for these guys
have played the pool seven point
nine percent thought about the
the line medium girl.
As mentioned that before all
these opportunities and so in
revenues were mostly driven by a
strong got consumer spending
response and of course the
availability of COVID nineteen
boxes all aware but I and I want
to be added to services
following the the state a lot of
uncertainty and what the EDD
comic environment that and the
call already consumed B. and don
jetted up by persistently high
inflation is an all and the also
by the evolution of the funding
so if we just look at all four
majors revenue sources which
shot in our battle being fought
than special if you well Gaza do
not wait the sense and Baker the
station and which we present
about more than eighty percent
of all our state with fund
revenue so so for the guys do
not as you know all guys and he
was in pocket at the very
beginning of the pandemic of.
And the
Much fully covered by the
address these guys yet is now
expected to remain quite stable
allow one and that they do not
one of the seventeen year and
all that stuff which is yes
Representative on that make a
let the and then that if you
look at the are a lot of Boston
debate but revenue sauce which
is a of a college station.
These revenue sources be able to
develop acted by strong Bacon
saves and is also expected to be
right back stable around eighty
three eighty six million dollars
then if you look at the
commercial break on the revenues
which are mostly revenues con
trolled special you are and we
the stance of these two revenue
sources are also expected to of
glory discrepancy and then off
often and is a mention of the
top of the destroyed having such
as a building was even affect
the the by an increased demand
for goods and E. commerce states
for special view I just want to
mention that the if you look at
the stable you can see Oct are
declining discrepancy three but
that is just I'm the few shell
and the reason is that these
revenue assaults that he's got a
he's got yet is getting some
additional revenue that very
long at the prior BDO it's all
of some all thank you to it
would be FTE Shelly I added
these why you would see that
decline by Dr Lee design
associates still expected to
continue to grow in the state of
the interim and that off the of
then another thing that they
want to show you in the state
bodies that are stopping from
fiscal year could be pool state
of bond that
is being studied in receiving
the additional portion of the
water very quick size and you
can see what director excise
revenues online eleven and
He's a projected to receive
about fifty four million dollars
but these kind yet opt all look
at seven million dollars in
these kind yet twenty one are
then I just want to show you
they board chair next Bajor.
Do this the next page.
Contact in that.
We just moved to the district
funds are.
The New Mexico so yes that is
the our latest forecast for this
stupid in New York the funds and
from here you can see that
pretty much all these funds
operate some driving losses in
the state and you have plenty of
these connected to one good news
is that the they are restricted
to recall reading these kind yep
and the tool in this big did
also to see some growth in
disconnected B. and that often
another positive note that these
stable is that the line for the
fall you would see the fault
for the bus probation project
fund which is to provide that
dedicated for local government
projects that and the despondent
being stopped the receiving go
zero point seventy five
percentage point of water very
quick sisa and the easiest bait
the the to get the I'll follow
the forty five but did you know
dollars for fiscal year
and this is all a I have four I
what revenue so I would just
another commodity for the
remaining of the presentation
unless you have any questions.
The next page is just a
narrative of what louder were no
worse you guys can do that on
your own time what I will be
going over right now it is our
FY twenty three budget request
that was submitted back on
September I will be just
focusing on column B. what you
see here is your cat two hundred
we have requested a six million
dollar increase hundred seventy
seven point six million dollars
in payroll benefits four hundred
and seventy six point seven
million dollars of contractual
services your hundred and ninety
six point seven million dollars
and other costs which are grants
and debt service our total
budget because request of one
point zero five billion dollars
which is about a thirty five
point one million dollars
increase from compared to our FY
twenty to approve the budget our
budget is made up of five
hundred and twenty point four
million dollars the state will
fund eighty five point four
million dollars of restrictive
Fund eight point three million
dollars from TRD and DFA for the
point of entry four hundred and
thirty seven point zero million
dollars of federal funds.
Main differences between our FY
twenty three and FY twenty two
budget request is the increase
of state road fund by the twenty
seven point one million dollars
an increase of eight point one
million dollars in restricted
revenue we did have a decrease
in parts of increased by four
million dollars and we did
increase our federal funds by
thirty two point nine million
dollars and we have a limited
twenty nine million dollars a
state fund balance we are in the
middle of going through
presents us with DFA and LFC so
what you will expect to see I
only want to stay as we will be
sending back fund that fund
balance them out and then we
will be increasing our state
will want to match the new
increase that we're seeing in
the state and the state open and
restricted Revenue.
Show all our appropriations
we've received so far from
general general fund as you can
see you did receive a hundred
and eighty million and then due
to the pandemic some of the
appropriations were reduced we
have seven hundred sixty million
we have twenty two hundred
twenty seven point two million
dollars in coverage you actually
paid out three hundred sixty
point seven million dollars to
contractors and we have about a
hundred and seventy two point
two million dollars to spend.
I we provided more in detail
each program the department made
up of four programs and each
program is less fun here with
how the program is broken down
as far as the budget request.
So this is for project design
construction have highway
operations that's what the
districts let.
Next we have business support
and then the last one we have
the mobile program which is
aviation transit and rail and
traffic safety and then the last
we provided a spreadsheet of all
the general fund appropriations
so this one is the two hundred
and fifty million that we have
received and that kind of color
coordinated so this and colors
represent the same appropriation
and it gives you more specific
as broken down by district and
by project and that madam chair
that concludes the presentation
budget was after questions thank
you.
Great thank you so much Mallory
nada we'll go ahead then and
open it up for questions
are there any members who would
like to begin.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair.
The.
Representative group you're on
mute.
Are you.
Here's some of the more.
I want to representative Garcia
for now of vice chair.
Thank you madam chair all.
Secretary sandalwood few this
morning I just wanted to comment
on the very federal
presentation did you do this
morning is very helpful one
question that I have Madam chair
no Mr secretary.
All the money that is all.
Role of government.
That house that divided reserve
could first come first serve
basis I'm not sure.
Thank you madam chair and and Mr
vice chair
that money is all gone through
the local transportation
projects on and so
each is happened twice now in
June we have a deadline for
applications so we let people
know April may and June they
submit their applications for
whatever funding is available
this last year there was a
hundred and sixty million
dollars available that was the
highest I've ever seen part of
money for locals locals applied
for that on June fifteenth it
goes through a evaluation
process that includes our
district engineers the locals
use their NPOs in RTP owes to
also provide writings to us as
to what their priorities are
eventually that money is
allocated to the projects that
were submitted we try and keep
it's pretty close we keep every
district about the same amount
of money so that we don't see a
lot of money going to one area
of the state and and then in
September are commission
approves all the projects that
were selected and so this last
September we provided hundred
sixty million dollars worth of
projects those contracts are all
done in October and November and
so it is a competitive process
but
it is something that is done
fairly and and we try and focus
on the areas where the projects
that are most shovel ready.
Thank you madam chair Mister
Terry I once again the I really
appreciate the how you presented
your fuel today is really good
and you have a good staff of our
state employees and all our hats
off to all the workers thank you
secretary.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Pettigrew did you
want to try again.
Sure.
Thank you madam chair for.
Schedule agency presentation
thank you Secretary for would
you do then your presentation.
specifically
But in terms of questions for
the secretary with respect to
the connectivity fees I believe.
Secretary general you talk
about.
More come to eighty five what
I'm curious about.
Is how close are we working with
PSSA with respect to their
connectivity plan.
From a DOT standpoint are are we
we approaching this from two
different departments standpoint
and and looking at things
specific.
Or is there a group think tanks
on board said they're saying
okay do it.
And what they're doing with
respect PSS faced in this so I
will see as their plan to
connect New Mexico is that that
plane and the work we're doing
on the DOT size.
So madam chair representative of
I apologize can you to do is
for.
I'm sorry.
Can you tell me what PS F. eight
those initials stand for public
school.
Finances or okay thank you so
Madam chair representative we
have been working with our
educational partners and so what
we're trying to do that the DOT
is every time that we have a
project we actually have a flow
chart for how it works and who
contact is there a need or is
there a want for con do it as
part of this project and the
folks that we target our local
governments and schools the
educational system and including
the tribal educational system
and then we also try and reach
out to our private partners all
of the the private providers and
say we're gonna be doing this is
there anyone that wants some
fiber conduit in so we are
working with them we are working
also in communicating with do it
in the new broadband advisor
Matt to make sure that we're all
on the same page we're not now
going off on our own just laying
conduit everywhere but we are
communicating before we do that
so yeah we are communicating
yeah we have had a lot of
conversations and I think
they're going to be some
beneficiaries to when we go
input conduit into our projects
including us because we are able
to.
But digital message boards and
have better communication among
our patrols which is our our
first priority but if we can
help kind of the state wants
mentality of just putting
something down that others can
use we think that's a benefit to
everybody.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary for the answer
I apologize anyway my question
came across.
Implying the just going out ****
nilly I know better and and and
and the you guys are working
hard that is is public school
the public schools and do it
have they actually given to
their state lay out there Matt
and in there during if they got
everything that they wanted to
have the they would see the.
Connect to the of the New Mexico
working.
Madam chair representative I
don't know what's been provided
to us I know that we have worked
with do it to put together a map
of all existing fiber in
connective itty I don't know
that that's been overlaid with
everybody and particularly the
the public school folks
wish list or you know what they
want their network to look like
I can certainly find that out
for you but I'm not sure what
they provided us.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you secretary the answer yeah
I'd love to have a offline
conversation.
Thank you know the effort to
move our DOT puts for none of
the effort they're putting
forward and and in really want
to make sure that we're
optimizing everything.
The state of the with that and.
Whatever reason.
There there is some places is as
you look at our state the the
duplicity make sense and
especially in our trucks to be
able to make sure that something
happens with one line.
You know we have a way to.
To go in the back door and go to
another system as well so I'm
I'm I'm just curious about that
a listen to a lot of that over
the interim sessions.
And
I appreciate so much woods with
we are attempting to do and
we're here we're here district
engineer for person for your
maintenance guys ever everything
that their purchase really good
out there and and I appreciate
that.
And
Or do.
Like I said I have a future
conversation instructor that.
Where.
Madam chair and and secretary
one question we have is do we
have one area any anyone area
remote lawyers within the state
we've built is we've already got
that we're completely connected
and we're able to to
Get internet service and
activity to to every member of
that community.
Madam chair and representative.
I have to talk to.
R. C. I Jeremy a lot though and
probably to to Matt Smith the
broadband advisor I'm not sure I
think you know outside of
Albuquerque maybe some places
even inside Albuquerque I think
there's always in the the there
are still locations everywhere
that that need assistance I know
even in Santa Fe there's
locations in Santa Fe that don't
have great connectivity the you
know it's fine for something but
if you on trying to have your
your child do things our work
even in Santa Fe there's
locations that you cannot get
really good high speed internet
service and so I think that's
the challenges there's pockets
everywhere in our state that
still need an upgrade we're at
least that service to be and.
Thank you very much what is that
are going to continue our
conversation offline and just
see how see how some of this is
all coming together from.
From a combined effort
standpoint.
Once again
thank you very much for your
time and I'm gonna madam chair
with your permission I'm gonna
pass you over to a
representative of comparable
progress no you're good okay
so that you'll that thank you
very much.
Thank you Representative
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for your presentation Mr
secretary Mallory the both of
more we're very in depth and
good so.
Mr secretary I I did not catch.
When you spoke of the
infrastructure monies that were
coming into the state.
I didn't catch the percentage of
it that was going to going to
the local project transportation
on can you remind me of what
that amount was what percent.
Yes so the new federal it's
called bill B. I. L.
legislation there isn't anything
that's gonna go into that local
transportation projects fund so
that the way that that's funded
is state funds with some of the
correct some motor vehicle
excise tax money and then of
course and gas tax money.
That goes into the local
government road fund so that the
money that's gonna go the locals
of the new bill at the federal
level they're working that out
but a lot of it will be
discretionary which means the
locals will have to compete with
other locals around the country
and that's why it's important
that they're prepared that if
they don't have grant writers
that maybe they hire someone
we've done some on call grant
writers for us which a lot of
people are doing now across the
nation so nothing is going
directly to them in that sense
but they'll have a lot of
opportunity I'm in this new bill
whereas before there wasn't
really much for them to try and
and access.
Thank you for that clarification
I I really appreciate that so it
sounds like the three point
seven as you said will be a
settlement and they'll be a
competitive process for
opportunities for locals in the
state could get additional on
top of three point seven as well
is that correct okay thank you
for that clarification greatly
appreciate it and that Mr
secretary my other question
madam chair is for Valerie I
think can you tell me how you're
you're a.
Then for salaries for your
employees how does that compare
with.
The employees of of the other
state agencies under your budget
is different from everyone else
years is independent and there's
a proposed both by the executive
see a seven percent
compensation increase across the
board I don't know if that
affects your employees or if
you've contemplated that can you
just help me tie those two
together right quick so I
understand please thank you.
Yes you are correct you're
independent right now our
current budget does not reflect
any sort of salary increase that
is proposed we will that is
passed you will have to take it
out of our fund balance so we
have that internet we do not
have a number of fifty million
dollar number that would affect
the department we do have the
cash balance to at that point if
that were to be passed house
bill two.
Okay it so you do have an
adequate amount set aside so
that you can keep parity within
the the state the DFA would be
on a fair playing with everybody
okay thank you I didn't
understand that appreciate it.
That that's all my questions
madam chair.
Great thank you Representative
Crowder are there any others who
would like to ask any questions.
I do have a couple questions
secretary
One.
Is
related to just how can this
committee and I think some folks
have sort of brushed upon it is
I have a in terms of how we can
be more helpful to you and to
the Department moving forward as
you've mentioned New Mexico is
getting a lot of money over the
course of the next five years R.
four and a half or however we
wanted to call it right now but
I know that in the moving into
the interim there's a lot of
opportunities and hopefully as
this pandemic I keep saying it's
going to slow down I don't know
if it will ever slow down.
All but I I'm I'm just curious
in in in the last three and a
half four years that you've been
in this role what are some of
the things that this committee
can be more helpful in
particularly when it comes to
the federal funds that are that
are.
Getting to hitting New Mexico
and we're looking at roads were
looking at infrastructure needs
is there anything specific that
we could be supportive moving
forward.
Thank you madam chair first and
foremost I want to say this
committee has been tremendously
supportive and I think the
numbers that I laid out.
You know comparing previous
years to what's happened over
the last three years has shown
that I think you know moving
forward what we what what is
most always most important to us
is that flexibility right we
want to be accountable to you
and as the appropriators for all
the money that you find but the
more flexibility you provide us.
The better and you've been doing
that for the most part because
things are fluid right we had.
Projects and you know we thought
we're going to be twenty million
and now they're twenty seven
million and so being able to
move money around and and those
type of things has been really
helpful and so I think over the
last three years we've been able
to have some of that flexibility
that we've needed to make sure
that the projects still got done
but we have that sexy to move
stuff around and and make sure
that we can complete that
project so maintaining that
flexibility I I like what you
did and in house bill two for
the special session when you
give us an idea of of some of
the projects that were important
and that was off the list that
we gave you so you listen to us
when we put that list but you
didn't assign any dollars to
particular project and that's
really the type of flexibility
that I'm talking about is
certainly direction from you is
a great and knowing where your
priorities are is great and
we've been able to communicate
that very well but just giving
us that flexibility so that we
can move money around is
probably the most helpful.
The other thing that I may be
calling on you on you madam
chair is as we start putting
these grant applications
together I think letters of
support from the committee you
as the chairwoman would be
really helpful to us to know
that when we put this
application they can see that it
has provided support I know I do
that for a lot of the locals
from a D. O. T. Secretary
perspective but I think that
carry some weight to show that
we have a good relationship that
we communicate and that us going
after this grant is something
that you support if you do
support it so those are the
types of things less flexibility
and in any No legislative
support I'm talking to our
congressional folks is always
helpful.
Thank you Secretary and yes I
mean I I'm more than happy to to
support US efforts and and and
all of that so please feel free
to to reach out
I did have some questions
regarding the federal funds in
terms of how how does the
federal government then
distribute power what's I guess
what's the formula I wanted to
better understand how much does
each state receive I know that
you said we're going to be
receiving
the three point seven billion
how is that determined and then
so yeah I guess that's the first
question.
Yeah of course so one thing I do
want to to clarify because I
think there's been some
misperception is so we are
receiving three point seven
billion over the last over the
next five years and I want to be
clear that that's not just new
money and so under the previous
bill we received probably just
over two billion and so when you
look at the delta I don't want
you people to think there's
three point seven million of new
money because we are already
receiving some but what we saw
basically is a twenty to thirty
percent increase over the last
bill which was the fast act and
so what they do madam chair is
for formula funds they take your
population how many road miles
you have how many vehicle miles
are travelled in your state so
be recalling the antis and
there's a formula that's applied
to all fifty states and terror
and other territories and then
based on that formula they take
the big pot and divide up that
big paw and so New Mexico along
with probably seven eight nine
other states we usually get the
minimum are out amount right
because obviously California
Texas and Washington and Oregon
have a larger population a lot
more vehicle miles traveled and
so they're going to you know
start getting more and more
money all the way up to New York
California Texas which get the
most money out of everybody so
there is a formula the formula
hasn't changed in quite some
time states really pushed to
keep that formula because it
guarantees a minimum amount and
and so that's how it's divided
up is based on those factors.
Great thank you.
That's super helpful and this is
just a question that I've had
and and as
and I don't I haven't really
been able to find an answer and
some wondering if if you might
know what I know that we've had
our six districts forever right
I wanted to ask you how did we
determine how do we determine
our six districts here in the
state and then also I'm.
How do you how do we determine
dividing up funds equally
amongst those districts since a
lot of those districts are very
different in terms of the way
that you've laid out how the
federal formulas looks at things
like population road miles
things like that do you have any
inside of how we help what's the
I guess the beginning of of how
we determine those
determinations here on state.
Yes thank you madam chair that
was a question I asked when I
first started and I guess
districts were established many
years ago and they're actually
established by statute because
one of the things I just poked
around I for starters can I
change the geographical.
way that districts are split up
in the sense of district five
starts in Torrance County and
then goes all the way up to San
Juan County it's kind of a weird
little sliver there and right
could make it just kind of a
little more.
I want to say equitable but just
make it just a little bit better
but I have to go through a
statue changing there's I guess
a lot that went into that way
back when which is pride twenty
thirty maybe even more years ago
out of need to know so what
happens with the districts that
we have is when the federal
government FH a great provides
us with the money they don't
tell us how to split it up among
districts we at our main office
to look at the districts and
their provided what we call
targets and so let's say we have
two hundred million we don't
necessarily divide those up
fifty million in each district
we look at where that federal
money and what's it's designed
to do and the federal money is
always in our state's first US
highway second state roads third
and so we kind of divide up the
districts and we given target so
one district my get forty one
might get sixty one like at
thirty three but we try and keep
him relatively equitable but it
really is a management decision
on how those things are made and
what projects they have coming
up in that particular area and
and how we how that money can be
used at the federal level so
there's definitely some
flexibility in that but we can't
we don't have flexibility with
how the districts are drawn up
in this regard to statute and
changes.
Thank you Secretary that's been
one of the questions I've had it
since joining this committee a
year ago and so that's that's
really really helpful
I think that's the end of my
questions I know Representative
Garrett did you have a question.
Yes I did thank you madam
chairwoman.
Thank you Mr secretary I'm my
question is kind of a an
observation as these funds are
determined for different roads
there's a lot of different
interests there's state
interests there's you know we
have legislators cards local
government county government and
then we have a lot of lobbyists
and developers and my concern is
that as T. O. T. presents these
large projects that I'm what's
the best way to share our
perspectives recently someone
shared that I supported
something that I knew nothing
about so I'm concerned that we
know what's happening and are
able to give input.
Before it's you know a done deal
do you have any perspectives on
the best way to work on these
larger road issues.
Madam chair and the
Representative Garrett.
I guess maybe you're referring
to
And it is a final management
decision and if there's ever any
concerns or something that you
you know a lot more information
about I just invite you to
either talk to your commissioner
and that's why there is a
transportation commission is to
you know for the public to have
a liaison to go I I don't like
this I do like this I want this
obviously talk to your district
engineer or any of our executive
management R. W. secretary
Justin Reeser me we have some
concerns or questions
but that is the the the process
is we have the this commission
that that we have every other
month where the public can
come and talk and do those
things and if it's in your area
we try and invite you to those
but that really is the purpose
of the commission is to try and
and get public input and make
sure that they're giving us
guidance on you know where we
should go on what projects
important in that particular
area.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chairwoman.
Thank you Representative
Representative Garcia and then
Representative Crowder.
We can we can come back to vice
chair Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to thank you and and
secretary central for providing
us the color print copies in
your office for those of us that
all school that's invaluable and
and I hope we can continue to do
that going forward I went up and
got those this morning and
incredibly helpful thank you
madam chair thank you Mr
secretary.
Thank you Representative Crowder
vice chair.
The manager I'd like to will.
But I need to do it offline if
you could please we finish this
meeting okay thank you vice
chair so are there any other
questions for the secretary
before we move forward.
it doesn't look like there's any
more questions secretary thank
you for taking the time for
being with us the staff this
morning
I'm sure we'll be seeing more of
you over the course of the next
twenty four days twenty three
days not that anyone's counting
except for me if you need to
count up
so yes so thank you Secretary
for joining us this morning and
for your team Loudon Mallory we
appreciate your time here this
morning.
so next we're gonna have as I
mentioned earlier an overview
from mention who's our committee
analyst on house bill three as
was discussed earlier and
Mallory touched upon is that
DFA the legislative finance and
Alexion who's our committee
analysts are working in a tech
group trying to come up with
some consensus around the final
version of what house bill three
will look like before we vote on
it and so all all handed over
dilution and then we'll open it
up to questions after she's done
Lujan.
Morning madam chair good morning
members of the committee.
Thank you.
Secretary Mallory and Long
Island William hello.
I'm just.
Warning yes it is.
Which will will be will be
working an active group.
And finalize everything and
people with presented again on
Thursday as the house bill three
amendment.
Right now the house bill three
if they transportation
appropriation act.
Being injected to the finance
manager so those the HSD and I
on legislative finance committee
billion twenty two budget
recommendations and includes
recommend that the performance
measures and targets.
And then he will have additional
federal funds into the budget
and how we as amended which will
be applauded that worked on in
the sector
the proposed billion twenty
three operating budget but the
department of transportation.
We appropriates the operation of
the NMDOT into for budget
program.
Readers digest thanks
procreation being considered by
the legislature.
One of them would affect the
fiscal impact section
I found.
Provided recommendations on the
LFC but it is still here twenty
three.
Obligation and in regards to the
state real fun and MBLAQ
forecast state revenue every
January and July budgeting
project the revenue in the
request.
One million twenty three and
then you yes Mexico will our
revenue of five hundred twenty
point one million dollars five
point five percent increase from
the billion thank you to all
operating budget of one hundred
ninety three point two million
the largest sources of revenue
to the state run banks our fuel
taxes generating twenty seven
percent of the revenue.
Show trucking accounting for
twenty three percent of revenue
and taxes on the vehicle fell
and registration fees amounting
to twenty six percent of
revenue.
And the three.
And one of the project design
and construction program.
The nation for this program
three hundred sixty five person
includes twenty point seven
million in salaries and benefits
four hundred twenty three point
five million in contracts
services and two hundred eighty
nine point one million in the
other costs that had a very
hello hello billion twenty the
recommendations for the design
and construction program is
seven hundred thirty nine point
three million dollars.
Hi I would appropriations Bagram
recommended appropriation for
this program includes one
thousand eight.
Yeah one hundred one thousand
eight hundred ninety nine point.
Well.
Fourteen point five million in
salaries and benefits sixty five
point one million income
transition services and ninety
eight point one million in the
other category resulting in a
tele doc recommended
appropriation for this program
of two hundred seventy seven
point seven million dollars.
The next section report program.
Appropriation of this program
consisting of two hundred eighty
two point eight person is twenty
seven point six million in
salaries six point one million
in contractual services and
thirteen point one million in.
Emendation of twenty six point
eight million.
In the model program
recommendation.
Thank you.
Thank you but a lot of program
includes one hundred twenty one
person.
Eight point one million in
salary thirty three point nine
million in contact with this
thank you one point nine million
in other words although
appropriation of seventy four
point six million.
The eight million pound balance
the winning Department
identification administrative
fund.
Recommendation for the state
highway and transportation
department twenty million twenty
three operating budget
consisting of two thousand five
hundred seventy eight point five
percent now is one hundred
seventy seven point six million
in salary five hundred twenty
eight point six million in
contractual services one hundred
thirty two point two million in
other costs are total
appropriation inclination of one
point one three eight billion
dollars.
And.
Issues.
According to the information on
the health he is three clients
state match up between eight
percent and twenty percent and
State Farm is used to provide
these matching from.
Funding stagnated over the past
several years however the status
but I think you see a twenty
percent increase for the
entirety three as a result of
access of the instruction
infrastructure investment and
job back.
The legislation passed in
November thank you thank you one
will find a state optimally two
point five billion inform the
funding over the next five years
and cost make increase the
hundred million per year based
on previous format distributions
in addition the bill includes
lots of funding thank you
economic development projects
public transportation and nine
point and then you did not
include additional federal
funding in the budget request as
the federal legislation has not
yet impact.
The recommendation includesd
five one hundred four million of
federal funds for fiscal year
twenty three.
Nine hundred million about the
requested amounts to reflect in
happen of infrastructure
investment and job act.
Federal funding may not be used
for routine maintenance
activities thank.
Axial cracks you what you
however the funding may be used
for competitive rate and
maintenance activities the LFC
recommendations there at that
the entirety of the new funding
to programs and infrastructure
program
thank you to contract the other
categories in the same
proportion is historically used
to reflect the increase in
excess federal funding and
availability.
And the department's Act you.
The state audit bureau findings
demonstrating exceptional
accounting practices.
My.
One of the many.
Thank you.
Thank you mention and just for
folks we can resend it but the
analysis that Lynch and worked
on was emailed to you all
yesterday
we can read we can resend that
so you all have it
but
She basically went off of of
what was written on on the
actual analysis are there any
questions that folks have on
this presentation
chairwoman Lundstrom I don't
know if you have anything that
you want to add to that that you
think might be important for the
committee.
Thank you madam chair I think
the big thing else is that and
what I really appreciate is that
this is a consensus process your
staff of DFA staff and the LFC
staff of worked very closely on
this recommendation.
I I just look forward to hearing
the the full presentation with
the other analysts in their but
no you guys are doing it the
right way and and I believe we
hear this on Thursday if I not
miss it so thank you very much.
Yes thank you chairwoman
Lundstrom Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
This may be better for chair
Lundstrom.
Is is I look at House Bill
three.
Where would I go to in the LFC
reports to to see you LFC drive
up and appropriation House
Appropriations dried up on.
Three as well on top of the
analysis that we haven't chair
for.
Okay generally what happens
Madam chair representative is.
The report is is presented to
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
And in that report we we
generally accept it we accept it
because this committee digs into
the detail of the DOT's budget
so to speak and we make room for
it inside the general
appropriations act so it's
basically just rolled into the
general appropriations act.
We won't do HSC won't do an
independent review of this
because we haven't got it yet
you know we haven't heard it
yet.
Now LFC does do a review of the
department of transportation's
budget and that would be in the
LFC volumes course that's all on
there on the website.
But I think the right now the
the most important thing is is
that we have this consensus
recommendation.
Which is really good.
It'll come in front of a JFC and
the let there might be a few
questions but generally I think
the committee is just pretty
receptive to accepting what's
presented.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew are there any other
questions for luncheon or of the
process
moving forward.
Okay great well thank you all so
much for your time this morning
I know vice chair Garcia I
wanted to give you some time to
make an announcement.
Madam chair we offline now.
We haven't we haven't entered
yet so well will well
Well we'll do that soon
Representative Pettigrew did you
have a question.
Yes thank you madam chair our
website if you go to the NM
Legislature gov website you get
our niti.
at the top of the page.
This we need to say centers
right thirty.
And then as we go down to the
agenda we go to the golden rod.
It says that we meet at nine.
And I'm I'm curious are we gonna
consistently through the the
session the state line or we
gonna move back to the thirty
regional times.
Thank you Representative so it
will be nine o'clock
unfortunately that hasn't been
updated on the website so will
Theresa who's the committee
assistant will we'll go ahead
and make sure that that's
addressed and updated.
So thank you for pointing that
out.
Thank you madam chair for that
and madam chair I don't know if
it's best to ask you or I need
to get somebody else the
food requests that from eight
until maybe eight thirty eight
forty five the the Republican
caucus or have transportation
could have this room in
preparation for the dating me.
I'm Representative I think that
would have to go through the
lane
to get that scheduled because I
know committee staff has to
prepare and I know that things
are evolving
day to day so we can send you if
you want to let your legislative
assistant reach out to you lane
she might be able to figure out
how to set that up.
Thank you madam chair I will I
will have more in line get
together thank you.
Great.
Thank you Representative without
folks we're gonna go ahead and
adjourned on we will see you all
soon thank you.
Recording stopped.
Madam chair.
Make a note.
Sure go ahead.
The.
Well.
Staff well we're having made
all.
Transportation dinner on
February sixth at five thirty at
the boarding school if you could
all join up will be nice thank
you madam chair if you were
sixty five thirty in the
morning.
Thank you Representative and
we'll go ahead and for details
also on to help with that.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you all.
