Not posted for the public and so
we've notify DOT about it
because the presentation was
also not up loaded and
overnight and so therefore the
DOT presentation will be
postponed until Tuesday and will
continue committee work there
after we just what it's
important to provide proper
notice to the public and and
that they have access for that
and so I just wanted to let you
all know that we'll we'll
proceed this morning with the
trolls Committee organization
which I imagine will be rather
brief but we did inform the
department and I do want to
personally apologize to the
secretary to the department
staff and the engineers because
they did have a presentation
ready to go and and so we'll do
that on on Tuesday so again
thank you all for your patience
again it's the third day and so
we're every everybody's kind of
figuring out how to Jaffna
Justin adopt this hybrid session
so I appreciate you all for that
we do have new staff and so I
want to give folks an
opportunity to
I want to give folks an
opportunity to introduce
themselves
if we can have Marvin if you'd
like to begin.
Morning all Martin shot minority
analyst and the side thank
goodness my tenth or eleventh
year that I've done
transportation.
And I'm working from home this
year so I'll be setting up your
lines of communication to get
information passed back and
forced to up everybody and once
we finish introduction is I have
a question later on.
Great thanks so much more than
welcome back again.
I'm Donna.
Yes good morning I'm Donna
Griffin and I am the majority
analyst and I am looking forward
to being a major analyst the
last two years I've been a
committee analyst and it's nice
to switch it up a little bit
this is my sixth year at the
legislature often over the last
twenty years so thanks again.
Welcome back.
to recent.
Yes hello my name is Theresa
McCall and I am the committee
assistant Representative Rubio
and I am new here so.
Thank you for having me here.
You to resend welcome clinician.
Good morning everyone I'm MHM
are still not working so I
apologize for that and that's M.
this is my fourth year and being
on the transportation committee
I was I used to last year I used
to be the house transportation
major analyst this year I am the
committee and others.
So I'm very excited.
Thank you very everyone.
thank you mentioned I'm so
welcome again to all the staff
I'd like to go ahead and have
our legislators introduce
themselves we'll start with
Representative Crowder if you'd
like to start if you could just
give us your name where you're
who you what what area of the
state you Representative and
maybe what your biggest takeaway
would be for this for the
session here in this committee.
Thank you madam chair
representative Randal Crowder I
live in Clovis I represent a
district sixty four which is the
northern two thirds of curry
county all right around the next
to the Texas state line.
I work out of the highway DOT
district to.
Is a Francisco Sanchez is our
district engineer in our area
and I absolutely enjoy working
on the transportation committee
it's it's a tremendous education
and fun so glad to be here thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair is a great
to be here this morning
ministration Harper I represent
the northern Rio Rancho areas
house district fifty seven.
And this is my.
Yes you're in the legislature
and my eight year on this
committee I really really enjoy
this committee and the great.
We all have together I mean we
all understand how important for
structure and roads are and so I
I really enjoyed this committee
and and and I'm sure you did a
great job last year I'm looking
forward to working with you
again this year.
And yeah we all know how you
know for for me.
In other important road projects
in my area that I think really
help your Rancho and west of
Albuquerque you know what
conduct Risco this that these
kind of things
and and whatever we can do to
help our amazing department
transportation they do great
work
I'm happy to help in that way as
well so thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Harper
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Andr√©s Romero I represent house
district ten which is the far
south balloting Bernalillo
county part southeast
Albuquerque
I'm happy to to be able to join
you again for this part of the
legislature in the
transportation committee I think
we've done a lot of good work
the I certainly appreciate
having a lot of bipartisan votes
in this committee and being able
to work on on some of the other
members that are vital
infrastructure in the state
whether roads
things like that and our public
works so I look forward to
working with you all and thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chairwoman it's
great to see everybody again
congratulations to luncheon on
coming as our committee our list
I represent house district
twenty nine it's northwest
Bernalillo county roughly and
I'm happy to say it'll still
include many of these areas with
the redistricting I forty two
the Sandoval county line I'm
cert to the mighty Rio Puerco
river this committee is change
my life I can't drive down on
any road in the state without
thinking about the quality of
the gravel
the new I've been thrilled to
see the note five fifty and of
five twenty eight interchange
from Bernalillo
yeah we have a lot of good work
to do so it's it's a joy to be
here and and thank you for doing
such a great job as you and your
second year madam chair.
Thank you Representative
chairwoman Lundstrom.
Good morning everyone hi nice to
see everyone this morning my
name is Patty Lundstrom I
represent house district nine
which is on the west side of the
state it's the city of Gallup
and McKinley County nice to be
here I've served on this
committee this will be my
twenty.
First twenty twenty second sep
twenty second here I think is
serving on this committee and
it's great thank you everybody.
Thank you chairwoman of last but
not least vice chair Garcia.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Jerry Garcia Representative
health issue sixty nine which
covers parts of San Juan
McKinley civil ability what and
stuff as a whole colonies this
is my sixth year the legislator
is my six year transportation
and I work with mostly people
that read look forward to keep
on doing what we've been doing
for the last six years of my
term and madam chair look
forward to working with you and
that members of the committee
welcome back of the gentleman
that are in the audience good to
see you here or a keep up
asking us to do so if you will
give under the thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
wall and and lastly I'm Angelica
Rubio I representative district
thirty five which is the most
dense part of the city of Los
crucis as it's it's a very small
district in terms of
of the size but the population
is pretty significant I'm one of
the lucky ones that I can can I
can actually walk and do door
knocking unlike many of you all
who have to drive and and do all
those things around the around
the state and to various
counties I this is my second
year serving in transportation
as chair I've been serving in
the legislature first this is
also my six year I like folks
have mentioned already I I'm I'm
really excited about this this
committee it is as
Representative role metal
mentioned one of the places
where there's a lot of
nonpartisan work and effort that
is is being done and and that's
something that I really
appreciate from this committee
and so I hope that we can
continue to do that this year I
do want to to share the fact
that we obviously we know that
there's a ton of money that's
going to be coming into the
state over the course of the
next few years and I hope that
this committee can be central to
being sort of a vision of of how
we can we can distribute that
funding throughout the state to
really improve roads and and
infrastructure offered many of
the communities around the state
that that really need it
and and so I'm I'm really
looking forward to you to
working with you all on on that
moving forward I know that we
have folks from the department
of transportation Valerie I can
move the I I'd like to promote
you to panelists if you want to
introduce yourself I'd I'd love
for for the committee members
and for
the staff and the and the the
public to.
To get to know you all and and
the work that you all are doing
in preparation for the work next
week.
Good morning everyone this is
not a month's notice on the
issue for the department we were
looking forward to meeting with
you guys this morning but we
will be with you guys next week
we'll have secretary Santa Fe
presenting regarding an update
on our federal funds as well as
our state funding and then wrote
projects that are going on
without the throughout the
department thank you.
Thank you so much more.
I'm are there any so we'll go on
to we'll go on to
but just committee organization
for folks in the public we
follow pretty general rules of
Robert's rules of order here in
in our committees I am still
learning a lot about that
process and and I'm I'm really
grateful to many of you all have
been able to help me my new for
some of the challenges that we
had when it comes to vote
counting and things like that
I'm sometimes not very good at
math when we're if we're doing
that so thank you all but I did
want to just offer up the as you
all have mentioned this is a
very.
Of a good Committee when it
comes to our collaboration and
and things like that and so I I
want to continue that process
here this this year I know that
we'll be discussing house bill
three over the course of the
next couple weeks as that's the
transportation bill that will
eventually get to House Bill to
on the budget bill but then
there will be
a number of other pieces of
legislation that are either on
the governor's call or folks
have
introduced due to appropriations
we will follow the order in
which those bills are introduced
and how they're brought took to
the committee I know that
there's always conversations
about agendas and making sure
that we have plenty of time for
the public and for the
legislators to have that
information ahead of time will
stick to that twenty four hour
period that we've all the
following before I don't foresee
us hearing an incredible amount
of bills towards the end of the
session which is where usually
that time frame has to be sort
of limited because of the time I
don't imagine that being a
problem here for this committee
but I'm hoping that
folks are flexible enough to
have that conversation if and
when we do run into any issues
that we can we can talk about it
prior to a committee hearing and
figure out how we address that
but I don't I don't again I
don't foresee any of those
issues
for this session at least
towards the end of the session
where we have to rush through
things so I'm hopeful that we
can get a lot of the really big
important have the work done
early on
in the session so I I want to
open it up to folks if there's
any
input inside that you are like
to share from.
Your own experience that maybe
we can apply the session this is
my first chair of this is my
first thirty day Cherry so any
insight that you can find I'm
I'm I'm very happy to to to to
hear you all out and see where
we can make some adjustments if
necessary.
I'm more than.
Yesterday house joint resolution
number one which Brad and
assigned to transportation just
looking at it briefly it has to
do with the anti donation
clause.
And this is in essence what it
is is adding language that says
The central household services
the state funds and resources
can be spent to make access to
that and I'm just wondering if
that is appropriate for
transportation.
Thank you for those comments we
did hear a version of this
legislation last session
it it was brought forth by
Representative Chandler and
representative Allison and and
they are from from what we from
what I understand is that it
does speak to a lot of
infrastructure issues that we're
facing across the state and so I
think there was a lot of really
fruitful conversation that we
had last year in this in this
committee so I I I think that it
I I wasn't expecting anything
else from its assignments so I'm
hoping that we can will be
probably be hearing that
legislation sometime next week
okay good I just want to make
that point thank you madam chair
all thank you so much more and
Representative Garrett did you
have a complimentary thing.
You madam chair and and Marvin
thanks for bringing it up
because it was very robust it it
related to broadband to
Gosh.
Do you ever have one of those
moments when you forget a word.
It was so tied deeply to
infrastructure
I'm just happy to see it come
back again thank you madam
chairwoman.
Thank you Representative.
Are there any other questions
comments from members of.
Representative.
You madam chair woman yesterday
Representative Pettigrew asked
if the private public
partnership bill could come here
instead of two labor military
affairs I did request
the speaker to put it here I I
agree with
Representative Pettigrew there's
the five sponsors which include
sure sure woman Lundstrom the
it Representative of hydro coal
birch I'm Catherine brown body
Gonzales and myself were all on
transportation or have been on
transportation so I did feel his
request was appropriate just a
heads up thank you madam
chairwoman.
You representative Martin.
Madam chair of the these are
private public of bills we've
heard them in the years past so
this is not nothing new for us
being heard and transportation
thank you.
Thank you Marvin.
Are there any other questions
comments from members before we
adjourn.
Madam chairwoman.
Sorry.
I'm I have a practical question
so today the link required us to
be moved into panelists what we
have a direct link or will this
be the protocol for future
needs.
I thank you Representative know
you should have in an email that
will be sent to you individually
and directly and what will also
look at that will provide you
with that panelists link when
you log in I know that there was
folks who did have some issues I
know Representative Madrid was
having some issues as well
that's why he's not yet on so we
will make sure to take care of
that I also know that
many of us speak we we we have
a hard time logging into our
legislative email at times and
so
our our my assistant Theresa
will be reaching out to your L.
ladies on on getting your an
additional email from you so
that we make sure that if you're
unable to access the information
to your legislative email that
we also have that email back up
so that you're able to access
that information as well because
yesterday all of the details
were sent to your legislative
email which I know that many of
us there it's completely
bombarded right now and so will
we'll make that adjustment and
make sure that you have the
appropriate links from Tuesday
and moving forward.
Chair woman from.
Thank you.
What I wanted to ask is I want
to make sure that the link isn't
is not sent to my provided email
and
you know I'm happy to tell right
now the email addresses if that
works and
It's Patty
PA TT why dot Lundstrom at G.
mail dot com that would be so
much easier for me to use that
one thank you guys.
Thank you chairman and what we
can do the same for everyone
else if you have additional
emails that we can send out so
we'll be in touch Representative
Crowder.
Madam chair minds almost as easy
as a chairman Lundstrom it's
just Randal Crowder at G. mail
dot com there's no dots one L.
on Randall.
Thank you Representative we
appreciate that.
And Representative Fajardo right
do you have yours and I do have
everyone else's so we'll we'll
be sure to update that moving
forward.
so with that folks if there are
no other questions or comments
well we will go ahead and and
gentleman we will be back here
on Tuesday at nine AM the
department will do there
their presentation and we will
post that presentation online so
you'll have it if if you decide
you want to do some kind of
homework over the weekend but
that will be there and then and
for attendees who came on after
my intro that we had some
technical difficulties of
getting that that presentation
upload it through I. T. and then
the the item of the department
of transportation presentation
wasn't noted on the golden raw
of golden rod A. KA the the
agenda and so we want to get the
public some time to to be able
to to to know about that so
we'll have that done on for
Tuesday so with that folks I
think that's it for us we will
see you all on the floor at any
given eleven thirty.
Have a good morning.
