Members roll call is closed we
have a quorum.
Members please rise for today's
indication offered to us by
Representative Anderson.
Let us pray.
Heavenly father we gather this
evening to ask for your guidance
as we seek solutions.
We pray for your guidance
strength respect.
Commitment and wish them all the
tools we will need.
To provide the best path
forward.
Or a great state.
Heavenly father we just this
evening for you.
Hold your protecting hand over
the men and women serving our
country at home and abroad.
Mothers we just issues in that.
Thank you gentlemen
Representative Castellano would
you please leave us in the
pledge of allegiance.
And there's a Strickler reduces
the distance saluting New
Mexico's flag.
I think Sicko is all.
Generally familiar.
You Mr speaker.
Can we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered.
Members who sent an email with
the bill list we're gonna go
till about ten this evening and
then we'll take up where we left
off we reconvene tomorrow it's.
Especially hard on staff we go
late as we did last night so
we'll give them a break this
will make any difference in
terms of bills progress in the
Senate the Senate has recessed
until Monday so whether we pass
a bill today or tomorrow will
make any difference in terms of
the bills likelihood of success
or failure in the Senate so we
we thought we to wrap up the
reason why our this evening.
The gentleman from Chavis and
you know terrible within us
thank you and good afternoon
Mister speaker and body.
Full of things first and
probably for most.
I learned the this morning.
Of an issue over in the Senate
side that I I thought the body I
don't know about
I was informed that are Majority
Leader of was prevented from
entering the Senate chambers
yesterday without notice and.
at that time for no apparent
reason.
And that just I mean Mr speaker
we can vote is a.
Eight council the put a fence
around here keep the public out.
But when the leadership over in
the Senate stops members
especially the Majority Leader
for manning over there I said
enough's enough I don't believe.
that should occur nor do I
believe we should prevent them
from coming over here and
working on legislation I mean it
goes without saying.
So Mr speaker I.
I would urge
You
To help us get that restored I
think the.
membership especially the
leadership of the house not have
right over and work.
Secondly Mr speaker we've been
here for forty five days and we
haven't seen hide nor hair of
the governor.
And I think that's probably the
first time in history that we
haven't seen the governor on the
floor.
telling us what's going on.
standing for policy decisions.
And so I would urge
That to occur I think we
desperately need to get the
state help and I've said it ever
more and.
Or every afternoon for the last
week and you're probably going
to hear me say it of this yield
over with.
But Mr speaker.
All around us.
Our families and our children
and our businesses.
Are just struggling and we need
to get schools up in New Mexico
we need to get businesses open
in New Mexico and we need the
governor to come tell us what
needs to be done why she's done
what she's done and and allow us
to help her get what's good for
New Mexico that thank you Mr
speaker thank you John as the
first I I believe I need to
confirm this I believe it was a
bit of a misunderstanding with
regard to has members access the
Senate floor
so I think that has been
resolved I will confirm that as
the second half the gentleman
at I appreciate your comments I
will duly noted pass on how much
you look forward to appreciate
the governor's leadership and
wanted to be here.
Or the lack thereof.
Well I'll pass on this on the
gentleman here looking for to in
your need for her leadership and
the and help.
Here here digitally Virgilio
Representative Stansbury.
Representative Stansbury.
Okay John curry Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I noticed on tonight's list of
bills was item eleven which is
house bill one ninety two and
Mister speaker the look the FIR
on that bill it's about almost a
nine hundred thousand dollars
financial impact in twenty two
almost nine hundred thousand
twenty three yet the bill did
not go through house
appropriation finance committee
so Mister speaker with us at the
perhaps you take a look at that
and and see if we need to send
that bill to prop House
Appropriations thank you Mr
speaker thank you John we'll
take a look at it the gentleman
from civil and McKinley.
Representative Alcon.
Speaker I don't have anything I
mistakenly did that.
Okay I'll jump levers and Scott.
Going once going twice.
Okay the generation captions
gore and violence yet
representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker
I just wanted to do
Just tell a little story really
quick.
I wanted to acknowledge.
All the businesses in New
Mexico.
My husband and I'm ourselves on
a few of those businesses.
Are the job creators of New
Mexico.
The employees.
Their commitment commitment to
coming into work every day.
Providing for their families
being the backbone of so many
businesses.
The small to medium.
A large to extra large.
At one point in time they were
all small.
They started with two people.
Coming up with an idea.
Willing to take a chance.
Willing to take the pressure.
The risk.
The responsibility and the word.
Making decisions every single
day the fact.
They're not only their bottom
line.
But their employees and the jobs
that they've created.
And their employees take home.
Providing for their families.
The employers promoting and the
employees promoting honesty.
And hard work respect
compassion and consistency every
day.
Working to improve the quality
of life.
Of employees and their families
and their communities as a
whole.
Mexico Moting financial
literacy.
Setting promoting goal setting.
And most of all promoting
family.
Mr speaker and body.
I just wanted to do a shout out.
And out and the.
Let all the businesses no in New
Mexico.
That I and several of of people
in this body support.
And no the struggles that you're
going through.
And to let them know that we're
there for them.
And the all the businesses in
New Mexico.
And so all the backbone the
employees thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady the gentleman
from Colfax more Rio Arriba and
to send me go Representative
Roger Montoya.
Mr speaker and the body I just
want to give a a counter take on
a governor's work and.
Dedication in in my perception
she is a courageous leader she's
made difficult difficult.
Decisions to keep our our state
and our nation safe.
They have been on popular.
But we are on the rise and I
think our duty as leaders across
all stripes ideologies is to be
respectful to advocate strongly
and fiercely for what our
communities need we all want to
see our schools open.
Our business is vibrant and they
will spring is coming times are
changing let's bring a sense of
unity in deep respect for
elected leaders all of us
especially Michelle Lujan
Grisham who is a tireless
advocate and I so admire her
work and I think you for the
time I yield back.
The gentleman the gentle lady
from Dona Ana Representative
Cadena.
Thank you Mr speaker I race
today on a point of personal
privilege.
Last night they were exhaustion
and our best energy as we work
to show up for New Mexico
families.
We debated and passed an
important bill for New Mexico I
voted in favor of that bill
because I thought it was the
right public policy and took our
state in in an appropriate
direction but Mr speaker I
raised I rise today because over
the course of this bills
movement through the house
someone was centered as an
expert on this bill that has
that is facing credible
allegations of sexual
harassment.
Mr speaker when I became aware
of this
My heart started racing just
like it is now.
Because I like to many New
Mexicans I'm a survivor.
And when I thought about my
response and role as an elected
official as a mama as a New
Mexican as someone knows that
knows that each of us deserve to
walk into our workplaces are
places of government and
certainly the roundhouse and be
able to shine.
I knew that I just needed to
shout out tonight to all the
survivors in the case that they
had heard and seen that in our
body we would make a decision
like that that that we would
Center someone
Who is said to have heard one of
us and so Mister speaker we are
working progress we as humans
are flawed we certainly make
mistakes I among many but I just
wanted to say and honor to date
that there's so much goodness in
front of us and I know that
myself and you Mr speaker and so
many leaders and colleagues we
have here in this body are
working to make sure that our
legislature and our round house
is a place where all of our
families and communities show up
and have an expectation of
safety and respect and dignity
also Mr speaker thank you for
allowing me to my time and and
my room to make these comments
tonight thank you.
Thank you gentle lady.
Originally from the area.
Thank you Mr speaker we can go
to reading of messages.
Hearing no objection it is so
ordered.
Cllr to read.
Message from the Senate.
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house that the Senate
has concurred to house
amendments to Senate bill two as
amended with emergency clause
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is really interesting.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill seven as
amended Senate bill forty one as
amended Senate bill seventy two
as amended with emergency clause
Senate bill one to Senate bill
one fifty two.
Senate Bill to twenty two Senate
bill three oh four as amended
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk.
This is Richard.
Gentlelady from you.
Thank you Mr speaker if we got a
committee reports hearing
objection it is so ordered.
to read.
Mr speaker Education Committee
term is been referred house
memorial eighteen has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that you
pass respectfully submitted G.
Andrés Romero chair.
Unanimous consent that the
committee point read together
acted upon a single vote and
reflected in the journal so
they're acted upon individual
hearing objection it is so
ordered the clerk to read.
Senate bill forty two as
amended.
Do pass and then see
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill one forty four do
passed as amended and then see
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee reports we're adoption
of the favorable committee
reports on house memorial
eighteen Senate bill forty two
as amended in Senate bill one
forty four submitted all those
in favor please signify by
saying hi.
All this was made committee
point our doctor.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee to home is
been referred house health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to
seventy two has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted this
Martinez chair.
Yes consented Enforcement
together acted upon a single
vote reflection journals of
their act on individually
hearing objection it's ordered
clerk to read.
House Bill to ninety nine as
amended.
Do pass respectfully submitted
however to Mr.
Would you.
Dealer.
Dealer.
Transaction the favorable
committee reports and house
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill two seventy two and a
favorable committee report on
house bill two ninety nine as
amended all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
Does all this process a Ferris.
Reports reduction.
Mr speaker your state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to miss been referred
house bill two thirty four has
had it under consideration
forcing this recommendation that
it do not pass but that house
state government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty four to pass and then
stripper referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Georgene Louis chair unanimous
consent of the committee point
read together act fund with a
single vote and reflective in
the journal so they're acted
upon individually no objections
so ordered surgery.
House bill two fifty do not pass
how state government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill two
fifty do path.
House Bill three hundred.
Do not pass how state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill three hundred do pass and
that's the appropriations and
finance committee.
Senate bill four as amended.
To pass and then to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two eighty six as
amended to pass and thence to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Georgene
this chart.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
an option of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
two thirty four but a favorable
committee for the state
government elections Indian
Affairs Committee such a
prostitute for an approval
committee for hassle to fifty
but a favorable committee for
the state government Alexion's
in Indian Affairs process you
for us to to fifteen and I walk
in report on house bill three
hundred favorable commute for
the state government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
subsea for House Bill three
hundred.
And if they will committee for
the Senate Bill endorsed amended
and on Senate bill two eighty
six as amended all those in
favor please signify by saying
hi I'm.
The state.
Reports are that.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred Senate bill one twenty
two as amended has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted over
Armstrong chair unanimous
consent that the key point for
the other act fund some of those
reflecting the journals of their
act on the visually no objection
is so ordered click to read.
Senate bill one forty as amended
to pass.
Senate bill two hundred as
amended do passed respectfully
submitted over Armstrong chair
move adoption production of the
favorable committee reports on
Senate bill one twenty two is
amended Senate bill one forty
IST amended in Senate bill two
hundred is amended all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye I'm.
Well this was nay reports are
that to.
Mr speaker you're enrolling in a
grossing Committee too is been
referred house memorial eight
House memorial nine House
memorial eleven House memorial
twelfth house memorial fourteen
House memorial fifteen House
memorial sixteen House memorial
seventeen has had them under
consideration reports that same
have been duly enrolled in gross
preparatory signing by the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted Christina
are yes chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We are on adoption of the
favorable committee reports on
house memorials eight nine
eleven twelve fourteen fifteen
sixteen and seventeen all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
All this was named three point
reductive.
But the record reflect the
Julian Wilson gross copies of
house memorial eight nine eleven
twelve fourteen fifteen sixteen
seventeen have been signed by
the officers of the house in
open session.
Gentlelady from going into.
Thank you Mr speaker we can go
to introduction of legislation
projections order thirty three.
Senate bill seven as amended
introduced by senator Wirth and
act relating to driver's
licenses changing the penalties
for the suspension of a driver's
license Senate bill seven as
amended Senate bill seven as
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill forty one as amended
introduced by Senator Stewart
for the legislative education
study committee and act relating
to public school finance
eliminating local and federal
credits when determining the
state equalization guarantee
distribution changing the face
to formula value calculation
when determining the local and
state match for capital outlay
projects including proposed use
of federal and local revenue and
educational plans and reporting
student outcomes from those uses
providing a contingent effective
date.
Senate bill forty one is amended
Senator forty one as amended
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Education
Committee that's appropriations
and finance.
Senate bill seventy two as
amended introduced by senator
Neville and potentially leading
to industrial revenue bonds
changing the method for
determining an annual in lieu
tax payment for an electric
generation or transmission
facility project providing for
the sharing of include tax
payments among certain school
districts clarifying that
certain payments to the state
for an electric transmission
projects shall be made by the
person proposing the electric
transmission projects declaring
an emergency Senate bill seventy
two as amended.
Senate bill seventy two is
amended.
Having been read twice by title
is referred to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee.
Senate bill one oh two
introduced by Senator Pirtle and
potentially leading to time
exempting the state of New
Mexico from the reversion to
standard time from daylight
savings time federal law is
amended to authorize the state
to exempt itself from reverting
to standard time Senate bill one
of two.
Senate bill one oh two.
Having been read twice by title.
Is referred to the commerce and
economic development committee.
Senate bill one fifty two
introduced by senator Tom in an
act relating to aging require
providers to include closure
plan descriptions in continuing
care contracts requiring the
Attorney General to accept maybe
alleged violations of the
continuing Care Act reported
from any source Senate bill one
fifty two.
Senate bill one fifty two having
been read twice by title is
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee.
Senate bill two twenty two
introduced by Senator Hickey and
act relating to health care
amending definitions of the
health information system act
Senate bill two twenty two.
Each.
Senator T. twenty two having
been read twice by title is
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee.
Senate bill three oh four
introduced by Senator McKenna
and act relating to elections
directing the secretary of state
to collect and make publicly
available the geographic
information system data for each
voting district in the state
Senate bill three or four as
amended.
Senate bill three oh four having
been read twice by title is
referred to the state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
Gentlelady from you.
Thank you Mr speaker if you get
a announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objections so ordered at the
request of the sponsor
Representative Lewis at the
request of the sponsor
Representative Louis House Bill
two oh nine house bill two oh
nine is referred from the floor
of the house to the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee House Bill to
a line is.
Sent to state government
elections and Indian affairs at
the request of the sponsor.
Also at the request of the
sponsor house bill one two four.
Representative Garcia house bill
one two four at the request of
the sponsor representative
Garcia that bill is removed from
the calendar and placed upon the
speakers table.
Finally
House Bill.
Three to five and I'm to go to
the distance slowly this is one
of our generic bills.
House Bill three to five
Representative Lundstrom.
The two oh two number is two two
zero four eight seven point one.
And to a two number two two zero
four eight seven point one.
House Bill three twenty five
Representative Lundstrom.
Hi were removed from the rules
in order of business committee
printed and referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
Bill two three two five removed
from the rules committee printed
and referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
Generally familia.
Thank you Mr speaker we ended
the third reading of legislation
you're no objection it is so
ordered.
Gentlelady from the cells are
you ready on item number one.
Gentlelady from Los Alamos
Representative Chandler on item
number one.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
of would you like me to that
point that's the record reflect
all action necessary for placing
House Bill seventy six as
amended on final passage has
been taken gentlelady to explain
it all.
thank you very much Mr speaker
and body house bill seventy six
grants authority to the
environment department and local
agency to deny or revoke an air
permit when there is a history
of significant non compliance
with environmental laws house
bill seventy six will allow the
environment department address
significant non compliant the
same way many surrounding states
to and will provide consistency
between the New Mexico air
quality control act in the year
so in the New Mexico solid waste
act hazardous waste and water
quality control acts and with
that Mr speaker I'm happy to
answer questions I do have an
amendment is this your
proprioceptive to address the
amendment Mr speaker is.
The amendment Mr speaker has a
two oh two number of two one
nine nine zero five point four
and this amendment amends the
bill so that
on the one second generally I
believe it's been passed out and
it is on the website just want
to point that out of the members
I generated to explaining that.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
the amendment limits the ability
of the environment department
and the local agency to deny or
revoke a permit when someone is
found to be in violation of the
air quality act by constructing
a facility without first
obtaining an air quality permit.
Okay is there debate on the
amendment.
Gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
County you'll.
yes Mr speaker and gentleman I
will gladly leave yield to get.
Mr speaker gentle lady are I
want to thank you for working
with me on on the amendment to
address some concerns from the
independent.
The drilling associational New
Mexico the independent grocers
in New Mexico.
This bill required give me were
where I wanted to go but it it
gets me part way and so I
support the amendment I really
do wish that would address the
situation where
Mr speaker gentle lady we were.
In the oil patch many are.
Thanks.
Get done in a certain way and
there's a lot of construction
activity that occurs the for the
operator knows what to some of
these are going to ultimately be
needed for that particular well
and.
Want to do a production that
that facility is going to have
to deal with because we don't
know how well the well is going
to produce ram the construction
drilling operations occur so
this this gives us a little
comfort maybe not as much
comfort as I wish we'd done but
the I do appreciate your working
with me we have our PNM yeah and
getting this ammendment forward
and appreciate you bringing that
up Mr speaker and solid thank
you.
Is a further debate on the
amendment.
Surjection to it.
Every night house floor
amendment one to house bill
seventy six as amended is
adopted.
Gentlelady flaws almost you
still have this more
thank you very much Mr speaker
as I said I'm happy to answer
any questions about the bill.
Resubmit generated from grant it
although and Sierra
Representative Dow thank you Mr
speaker religion radio.
yes gentle lady of yield thank
you thank you Mr speaker thank
you generating what what does
significant non compliance
meeting you mentioned that this
would be used in cases of
significant non compliance I
don't see a definition
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady criteria for in
up for the HSD.
Who deny an application are
listed on pages eleven and
twelve of of the ledger is the
proposed legislation gentle lady
and
The phrase that I use was no
company compass in raised that
was intended to refer to those
items thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady and on on
page eleven in online twelve
numbers three and section asked
it says has been convicted in
any court within ten years and
neatly preceding the date of
submission of the permit
application in court in New
Mexico or any court in the
United States.
gentle gentle Mr speaker and
gentle lady that had provision
has been amended and it was
amended in state government and
I it now rates I believe been
convicted in any court of the
state of any state or the of the
United States thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady so
a company can be in a one
hundred percent compliance all
New Mexico laws in regards to
both air quality control and
emissions every provision in
this bill and can have their
permit revoked if they broke a
law or had some sort of issue
and another any of the other
states in the US.
I'm gentle lady Mr speaker that
is correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
it and they can retroactively
apply this when this bill passes
back ten years.
gentle lady
of Mr speaker I'm sorry the ten
year vision of yes ten years
correct Mr speaker and gentle
lady how often do at how often
are COVID submitted.
You know how often
the lady Mr speaker if I might
consult Hey expert to for the
information of the body is is
Sandra Ely E. and Sandra is the
direct division director for the
air quality
And she is assisting me you're
now.
And with the general question Mr
speaker the Sanchez consulting
her expert witness.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
The current page the bureau
receives approximately fourteen
hundred permits per year
applications for permits per
year and I believe that answers
your question gentle lady thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady and and again on page
twelve and number five lines and
under five it says that they can
revoke a permit for any
suspended or any because under
environment laws in the state of
the United States Mr speaker
gentle lady what was your
consideration and not just
someone is completely compliance
with all provisions of the state
of New Mexico why would revoke
their permit yes they had a rig
with an issue or some sort of
issue in another state.
give me one moment gentle lady
Mr.
and the lady Mr speaker there
are mitigating factors that you
the HSD is allowed to consider
in the fat if indeed they are in
compliance in our state would be
a mitigating factor that would
would impact the decision on
revocation are
of.
Option of an application thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady that was my next question
was on light thirteen inch you
just what you just said the
aggravating or mitigating
factors seems to be very broad
and gets a lot of discretion to
the environment department or
whoever is tasked with revoking
these permits are their
definitions or is the subject
of.
A lady speaker provisions of the
law guide the department on
making their determination thank
you Mr speaker and then
discussion generating.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm not
sure I know what you mean by
that Mr speaker gentle lady so
my question is is there a
hundred percent compliant with
all the laws of the state of New
Mexico it sounds like we're
giving the department the
ability to revoke their permits
in the state of Mexico if they
had an issue in another state in
the past ten years.
A gentle lady and Mr speaker I
think that's correct thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
ask the sponsor of the bill what
was your reasoning and that what
was your thought process and why
is this purpose section
necessary
gentle lady Mister speaker I
think the philosophy behind this
bill is is we do not want
entities or companies operating
within the state who have shown
whether in this state or in this
country a pattern or the
propensity to not follow
appropriate environmental laws
and so whether or not they're a
bad actors here or a bad actor
elsewhere the state that still
should be a consideration for
our state when we are making a
determination as to whether or
not to approve an application or
result in application Mr speaker
and gentle lady and is that in
renewing an application as well.
Mr speaker gentle lady I believe
so that less let me just double
check with my ex.
Mr speaker gentle lady of ring
it would also apply for a
renewal was an issue.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady how many so what
is a business changed owners and
the previous owner had a an
issue in the last ten years with
that be considered in the
renewal or issuing any permits.
Mr speaker going to give me a
moment I do believe that is
addressed in the bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady it would
apply to whomever is applying
for the application or the
renewal of the app application
for the permit thank thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
how many permit applications
have there been where the
environment department health
department should have been
denied but they lacked the
authority to do so under
existing statutes and rules.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
number is indeterminate because
we do have do not have this
provision in line at this time.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Are there any cases that you're
aware as.
Where there is like a litigation
or something necessary.
Mr speaker gentle lady let me
consult my expert.
gentle lady Mr speaker thank you
for that question because we do
not have this provision in law
under the air quality permitting
process we do not now we do have
a similar provision in the water
quality act and we know of
instances where the issue of up
for compliance history has
impacted the applicant's ability
to obtain a current thank you Mr
speaker thank you Gillian how
about that hazardous wastes Act.
Gentle lady Mr speaker No went
no instances that we are aware
of thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady and if we
do not have any instances at
least for air quality act and
the hazardous waste I'm sorry
for the yes for the hazardous
waste act why do you believe
that this necessary this
legislation is necessary.
Mr speaker generally I don't
think your question is quite
accurate or the way you phrased
it what we said with regard to
the air quality act is we have
not sought this information
before through the application
process therefore we do not know
how many instances there may be
so I think just to clarify
gentle lady was the answer my
answer to that question and with
regard to your more global
question and the lady I think is
a provision that exists in other
states in our neighboring states
that have similar operations and
it was just another additional
tool for the environment
department to ensure that
operators and permit teas
are of of equality if you want
to call that have integrity are
inclined to follow our
environmental rules in the state
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and do those
neighboring states that have
similar laws in place also have
retroactive ability to pull
permits back ten years even if
they are a hundred percent
complied with in their own state
and with our own state rules.
gentle lady Mr speaker let me
consult my expert.
Mr speaker gentle lady I can't
answer that question my experts
it does not know that level of
detail about their surrounding
states loss thank thank you Mr
speaker thank you lady so.
Is the department do you think
that there's an existing rules
that you've put in place
regarding permits maybe those
requirements ability that night
the ability to revoke R. do we
have rules in place that are
exceeding the statutory
authority.
Mr speaker gentle lady I am
unaware of any rules and under
the air quality act that exceed
the statutory authority of the
agency thank you Mr speaker
telling me how about the
hazardous waste that.
gentle lady Mr speaker again I'm
unaware of any such rules.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I am not either I so
the existing rules already
provide that a permit to be
terminated if the applicant is
knowingly misrepresenting
material fact an application is
that true.
Mr speaker gentle lady up no
that is not the case that's why
we're seeking this legislation.
We need a gentle lady Mr speaker
we need this legislation to give
the authority to the agency to
be able to revoke or deny a
permit based on the various
factors described in the statute
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you generally but doesn't
existing rules already require
permanent can be denied if the
application is incomplete isn't
that already in the rules.
Mr speaker gentle lady one
moment please if I may consult
my.
Mr speaker gentle lady AT
the agency we will not approved
an application that is
incomplete that is distinguished
from denying an application.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady but if the
information is that's requested
is not properly disposed would
be incomplete and they're not
there for the night so it seems
to me that the existing rules
are sufficient to deny if people
did not disclose the proper
information that would be an
incomplete application in my
what am I missing Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady an
incomplete application as an
incomplete application an
application that has false
information or failed to
disclose a history of
noncompliance which is not
currently on the application
form is what we are talking
about Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady the the
the proposal also gives it seems
very broad especially on page
twelve line thirteen section of
Q. it seems very broad in giving
rights to deny a permit in the
event that the applicant has
never had a permit revoked or
suspended or any had any
environmental law anywhere in
the United States without
reference.
It it just seems extremely
broad.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
discretion as broad and the
retroactive time frame is ten
years a decade Mr speaker gentle
lady why so brought in why so
much retroactive ability to to
go back.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
disagree with your assessment.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlelady I I I guess we
disagree on the definition of
brought in a decade of
retroactive being a pretty long
time frame it seems pretty
punitive that someone has
completely follow New Mexico's
laws in every way and shape
could have a permit denied or
revoked based on something that
happened in the past ten years
in another state a state that
may have much more lenient rules
than ours.
They could have an issue in
another state.
Hours could be much more
difficult to comply with and
they can be a hundred percent
compliant and as I read this
they could still be denied or
have a permit revoked because a
something in another state it
seems is it seems odd a lot of
discretion and it seems brought
thank you madam Mr speaker madam
next generation Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos reiterate that send
fallen Santa Fe yield place.
Mr speaker gentle lady I will
yield to the lady from Travis.
Mr speaker I have been regained
your bill live I've said all the
amendments and if that were put
in by state government elections
in Indian Affairs that Mr
speaker this bill still in my
opinion is not right Mr speaker
gentle lady what I would like to
give you is is an instant that
happened about fifteen years ago
first off I'm going to ask you a
question.
I'm assuming that you do travel
throughout the state and I don't
know how long you have been in
the state of New Mexico.
But in the past.
Because I'm involved with
agriculture and the oil and gas.
Cotton was king in the state of
New Mexico because it was very
drought tolerant lots of people
grew it there were cotton gins
all over the place you can go up
and down I forty and see old
abandoned cotton gins down my
part of the world.
And southeastern corner there's
lots of them down there and done
in a County same thing that Mr
speaker this is a problem that
we run into with the air
quality.
Fund.
We're not the fund actually that
their quality permit.
There was a ten and one of my
precincts money and former
senator Jennings.
Districts.
And.
Those farmers around there
relied on that cotton gin to be
able to.
Thanks for they took their
cotton to have a process for it
would strip the seat from the
fiber is self.
They had made application to
upgrade the system in March of
that year.
They never heard anything never
heard anything they finally got
hold of the environment
department's plus going down
with a permit well we can't find
it you'll have to submit
everything he can and then we're
going to penalize you because we
cannot find your permit.
Well this was a cooperative down
there with those farmers that
relied on it as the owners Mr
speaker gentle lady what
happened after that.
It all of us in going through
the former administration the
two former administrations ago.
To get this Gen open because it
was the end into October before
they could get the permit with
cotton trailer stacked up with
these farmers going there
I don't know the need to pay
their hired hands need to rate
bank loans state and type that
fuel distributor need to rate
the lending company for they
have bought the machinery the
list goes on and on and on.
It got to the point.
Whenever these cotton chan's
located throughout our state
could not keep up with all the
regulations that the environment
department put on the and they
went out of business Mr speaker
gentle lady do you know how many
cotton gins are left operating
in the state of New Mexico right
now.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Travis I do not.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
The answer is to.
To.
Right now these farmers that do
grow cotton that are in the
vicinity of these two gents and
I'm not about to say their name
over there because Environment
Department will probably slow
down on them too and set him
down even though they strive
every year to upgrade the
system.
These farmers that are still
producing cotton in the outlying
areas are taking their cotton
either into Texas.
Texas is business friendly they
are taking their cotton and to
Arizona where Arizona is
business friendly.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Whenever you're going back to in
years with that amendment to put
on a.
On page eleven under P..
I'm really really bothered by
that.
Because these cotton chance are
imperative for these certain
farmers to be able to make a
living and to meet their
obligations Mr speaker and
gentle lady whenever we're going
go on over into the oil and gas
part of it.
I see that there was some
opposition to this bill from.
Some people that know the
industry far better than I do
and probably far better than you
do.
Mister speaker whenever what
type of regulations that cannot
be met that can be.
Retro actively.
Onerous to foot they are trying
to do Mr speaker there is a
problem here.
I'd I don't even know if this
bill can be fixed Mr speaker
gentle lady.
We all want clean air I'm not
denying that.
I've also seen what has happened
in my part of the world.
From the environment department
on a certain cheese plant.
And the threat was there because
that permit was not issued in a
timely manner by the environment
department that that she's plant
was going to be shut down.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
We are put in so many rules and
regulations on our businesses
that do the most good for the
state of New Mexico.
Why would any company want to
come to New Mexico.
We have people out there working
that are doing their best try
and be in compliance with
everything but we just keep
adding more read today.
Mr speaker.
I happen to be one of those
people and I'm getting fed up
with it thank you Mr speaker.
This further debate the
gentleman from Chavis Eddie and
Terrel Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield.
Gentleman from Chavis I will
you.
Thank you ma'am I
The broadness of this is very
troubling and let me give you an
example that is.
Kind of haunting me as I just
think about it.
Regulations vary from state to
state.
Our quality.
Water from me all sorts of
regulations they very.
And under.
The language in your bill.
It would be possible.
Well.
That a
Operator could be personalized.
It's it's it's possible that an
operator.
Could be penalized in New
Mexico.
For failing to follow a law in
another state or comply with the
law in another state that's not
as stringent or is more
stringent than what their
facility in New Mexico would be
choose the track you see that
troubling portion of this for
example in
Say if you operated a
A refinery in California the
regulations around that refinery
are very are very different from
operating of.
Refinery in New Mexico.
So under your provisions would
you.
I believe that.
An operator.
Who was doing more than New
Mexico law required.
But less than another state you
would still believe that they
should not be an operator within
our own state that we could pull
that permit.
Mr speaker and gentleman a
couple of points
We call remember that the
provisions that are provided
here allow these factors to be
considered they are not
necessarily determinative and as
we stated earlier in our
discussion of this bill
mitigating factors can be
considered and will be
considered by the agency
secondly Mr speaker and
gentleman
the issue of whether at a
company that does and national
business and you know business
in many different states
is of interest because we would
be concerned if that company was
not compliant or honoring the
loss of another state because it
has the potential to
identify that company as a
company that is a non non
compliant actor and I hope I'm
being clear but the point is if
if they're compliant here but
not compliant in another state
that that raises the question is
how diligent are they in meeting
their compliance obligations
whether it's here or elsewhere
the fact that it's elsewhere may
be something that's taken into
account depending on the nature
of the non compliance in the
other state and so on so thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman I
yield back to you.
Thank you gentle lady and Mr
speaker I think that needs.
More.
Representative.
Action in your bill I mean this
saying that it will be
considered you you know as well
as I do.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
that hearing officer that you're
before.
Varies in that way that they
want to interpret.
Or in force varies.
And so it it would seem to me
like.
We need to be more definitive
than this piece of legislation
it does operators in New Mexico.
We'll have
The expectation of fairness it
just it seems very troubling to
me and I'm I'm trying and I I
agree with you wholeheartedly
nobody wants bad actors in New
Mexico but this will Yvonne.
It it would give the the HSD.
The ability to target.
An operator.
In New Mexico.
For something that they did in
another state.
That just seems awfully unfair
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Do you not agree.
Mr speaker Madam from child as.
Just to be clear.
The this provision allows the
agent to see to take non
compliance in another state when
that non compliance led to the
revocation or denial of a permit
so we've been speaking in
shorthand I understand Mr
speaker and gentleman but for
the body let's be clear it's not
simple non compliance it's
compliance non compliance to
such a degree that the agency
and the other state needed to
take action.
And to your question I do not
think it's unreasonable to take
that into account when when
someone when a company wishes to
have the privilege of doing
business in the state.
Well Mr speaker and gentle lady
in the.
In the world of construction
today there are many.
Types of construction yet these
engineering construct.
Contracts where a company will.
The higher
A third party.
To engineer design and construct
a project.
And during a construction
project especially long.
Longitudinal projects across
many states there will be
excursions of the US control or
all these other issues.
including
Endangered species claims.
And are any of those actions.
Complicated by your bill I mean
are we only talking about
environmental.
Permits and and where does that
stop that's when I'm trying to
figure out.
Mr speaker gentleman let me
confer with my expert.
Mr speaker gentleman from Travis
if it were a violation of an
environmental plan provide such
as a violation of the Endangered
Species Act that rock rose to
the level of an environmental
crime then indeed these
provisions might kick in.
Well Mr speaker and gentle lady
that is.
Very troubling.
And and I don't think you
intend.
To imply.
The the the hardship that this
bill will be but because for
example.
In many areas of the United
States when you're building up
along longitudinal project if
you are going to.
Enter the habitat of an
endangered species.
The US fish and Wildlife will
issue a takings permit.
And the taking permit allows.
a number a certain number of
those species.
could be taken that they can be
killed in the and in the process
of construction.
And many long largest general
projects are are so broken up
into many segments.
So you can have operator
constructor Hey working in.
Segment one.
And he can have an occurrence of
a taking he can I have at Burger
turtle or something can can be
killed and it's charged to the
project.
And.
In that one section the M. and
that and they will stop you they
will give you a notice of non
compliance and they will stop
the construction until remedial
actions are taken in order to
prevent the death of the next
species.
But what will happen is that
Project this stop in under this.
Legislation is proposed
legislation that could be not
only a re some.
To prevent.
A similar project in New Mexico
or if they operated a facility
in New Mexico and had I mean
it just seems to be true brought
gentle lady and I'm I'm very
concerned.
That that language.
Will trap.
Of someone in New Mexico.
Will cause them to lose.
And us to lose a good employer
and good jobs and I I just think
that
needs to be addressed issue go
for gentle lady I do not believe
that's in the best interests of
this legislation.
Or any operator that's operating
Under under this legislation if
it if it passes so gentle lady I
I understand what you're saying.
But I don't believe
The environmental guy's in New
Mexico.
Have had the.
Of.
Maybe if not had been exposed
to Sam or big projects in states
that have much more restrictive
construction.
An operating and I I would just.
Do you.
Do you believe that this
language what's gives them the
latitude.
To ease our.
Use this are not would be
utilized.
Equitably across all of the.
Hearing officers that might here
K..
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The provisions in this bill
provides standards which all
applicants upon which all
applicants will be reviewed if
there is the perception by an
applicant that that the law has
been misapplied that applicant
has the opportunity to appeal
that decision through I believe
at first an administrative
process and then through the
courts so there are safeguards
in place Mr speaker and
gentleman.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
would they be able to collect
damages.
Mr speaker and then let me
refer.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you please indicate what you
believe the damages would be.
Sure Mr speaker and gentleman a
gentle lady.
The damages could be no multi
million dollar damages if the
project.
Let's just take a pipeline
project for example one that
I'm.
Most familiar with F. I had.
Contracted.
Obligations to move another
person's drugs from point a to
point B..
And because a hearing officer.
Mr read.
Misused or misinterpreted the
intent of this regulation and
shut my project down.
I'm may be losing the terror
that you of three four million
dollars a day.
And if it took me thirty days
you can see it or it gets into
some money pretty quick.
What would a for whether a
defendant be able to to.
Sen for damages and did you does
your bill provide them that
opportunity.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman the
scenario that you described does
not fall within the traditional
description of damages and I do
not believe any any of the the
financial descriptions would be
covered by this bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
provisions would be.
Mr speaker John and I am not
familiar with every provision in
New Mexico state law so I cannot
answer that question.
In that there analyzed my
concern is that we have the
provision of law that we're
proposing that we don't
understand how it's going to
affect everyone and that throws
me a curve ball.
That I just cannot supported
piece of legislation that will
run businesses from New Mexico
and will cause people not to
deploy capital in our state
because of the risk of this type
of legislation thank you gentle
lady Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from our channel
rather from also want to.
General only I'd gladly you.
The gentle lady on page thirty
two of the.
Of the amendments and context.
There's a progress here.
How about the middle of the page
sure we call it.
For quality control lacked
shortfall of disclosure
statement with the department
for Lara cool agency with the
information listed in subsection
of this section.
With that to subsection.
Our goal.
A compendium of dell Shelton
lofts.
Is.
Mr speaker a gentleman
essentially yes I mean the
applet the disclosure would
inquire as to whether of the E.
any of the
activities that are described in
P. have occurred with respect
that applicant and it would be
expected that those that
information would be provided to
the agency when the application
is submitted.
Mr speaker gentle lady is
proactive that is part of.
Quality permanent subject to
revocation.
For
you faster disclosure list.
And failed to mention all of
those I didn't do that I didn't
do that is that then more
permanent could be subject to
revocation.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The application that you're
referring to was it truthful and
accurate.
I believe that petition was
submitted before this
information was required.
Yes I I guess I misunderstood a
gentleman from Lee I thought you
were asking me if it's just an
operator in applicants had
submitted an application before
and what could that somehow that
information
use as part of this evaluation
process is that what you're
asking me John.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady that
is exactly the question.
Thank you a gentleman for that
clarification let me consult my
experts.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee if an applicant has had
previously submitted an
application that included false
information or inaccurate
information that could be a
basis for the denial if there is
a renewal request.
Mr speaker gentle lady so.
In good standing today.
With the department soon the LFC
a form requesting yes
disclosure.
And with accurate
representation health more
permit revoked.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee could you repeat that
question please.
I just tried to get to yes the
business.
Rating with the permit in good
standing that's my current
situation.
And to the Department sends out.
This disclosure form that I'm
required to fill out.
In fact Hey.
Five years ago.
A run in with the.
Quality board in Texas.
Currently disclosed.
Is a possibility.
More.
Could be revoked in that
circumstance.
Mr speaker gentleman I am not
believe so because this
provision on page thirteen to
which you refer gentleman is
would only apply if they were re
applying for and a permit or
renewal in the disclosure
statement would then be
presented to that the applicant.
Mr speaker gentle lady let me
first question a little bit.
And so I have a current permit
in good standing.
Hi.
Not permit.
This information is required.
Is
not filled out accurately.
And I.
And if you will on one more of
those provisions your those
grounds for more currently
active permit.
Are those requests for that
permit application not being
renewed.
Mr speaker gentleman it it could
be of the basis for a denial of
the renewal depending on what
the particular item once.
Do not see an issue with the
current permit holder of
a permit good standing.
Complying with all of the laws
of New Mexico.
And
by virtue of some information
required.
On a renewal.
I'm so.
Actor permit.
Application for renewal revoked
is does not.
Cause you any concern.
Mr speaker and gentleman and
previous discussions of this
item we pointed to the fact that
that would likely be a
mitigating factor is that
company and and soon
that they were operating when
the state within the state for a
period time in good standing are
following the little rock laws
of the state of New Mexico the
fact that they had had a past
incident that could fall within
these categories with would
likely
that would likely be all of
those factors would be
considered before any action
were taken on the the permit.
Mr speaker and gentleman I want
have millions of dollars.
Welcome to this facility.
Can you understand.
Hello all of business might have
some consternation.
With this process and that
important that they have to fill
out if they are currently in
full compliance.
Mr speaker and gentleman I also
would like to refer you to
paragraph R. which was part of
some amends amendments that we
were working with with the
industry allows an application
to submit an action plan that
would show that they they will
you know we continuing to
operate in and that could be a
conditional permit that would
first issue and then
after a period of time of final
application would be
Approved.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Let us not think of quality
heard the answer to this
question all of their
appointments.
Are there any permits these are.
Being applied for or active and
up for renewal that will be
easier to nod will result if
this bill passes.
Mr speaker a gentleman is of the
essence of your question
does the agency already have the
money certain operators that
they intend to apply this law to
is that the essence of your
question Mr Mister speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is exactly my question.
The answer to that question is
now.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
could one.
One speculate that this is a
solution in search of a problem.
Mr speaker and gentleman up I
I know that you're aware that.
Our surrounding states have
similar provisions this is not
an unusual request by an agency
to have the ability to deny or
revoke a permit based on that
compliance records illegal
conduct miss representation on
applications and no I do not
believe this law the provisions
we are suggesting are a solution
in search of a problem.
Mr speaker gentle lady bird.
No circumstances there are no
instances there is no situation
where this bill will.
And I believe representatives
there are.
Four hundred quality permits
active in state.
Mr speaker and gentleman what I
believe I said was there are
fourteen hundred applications a
year for these permits and I
believe I also said we do not
know who it is not in compliance
with these terms because we have
not order this type of
information before because it is
not indebted in our laws.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
gentle lady so can you tell me
how many active.
Quality performance there are in
the state of New Mexico today.
Mr speaker John let me consult
my expert.
Mr speaker gentleman from Lee up
there about five thousand act
permits.
Mr foss director of permits in
the state today and how many
calls.
These are under review by the
environment department for send
form of non compliance.
Mr speaker at this time there
are none.
Thank you for the.
Gentlelady could you describe
the recourse of someone that
runs aground on this piece of
legislation would have in the
event.
Is revoked or denied.
Mr speaker gentleman let me
confer with my expert.
Mr speaker and gentleman first
they could request a conditional
approval yes I referenced
earlier in our discussion and
then they could first appeal
then appeal to the environmental
improvement board if they were
not satisfied with the outcome
of the environmental improvement
for they could appeal to the
court of appeals Mr speaker and
gentleman from point.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
well just finally one last
criminal records yes all the
questions are made to of her.
The words of redemption and
rehabilitation used.
On this floor with respect to
the criminal justice system.
Many many times during this
legislative session but no.
Soon opportunity in this
legislation for a quote that act
and and you I believe you
mentioned earlier in the
discussion.
This was an attempt to get bad
actors or perpetual of violators
off the bricks in New Mexico
what you're legislation does it
say that it looks like a person
can make this bad actor list
with landfall location eight
years ago in another state.
Yes thank you.
Mr speaker gentleman I'm not
aware of any lists being kept.
Let me.
Is the question.
As.
And I'm gonna.
Yes this.
In the context of
rehabilitation if you will.
Happening with.
And.
Of environmental environmental
regulation.
In another state one time.
Many years ago.
Is subject to revocation or
denial of a permit in the state.
And the gentle lady.
In the context of
rehabilitation and remorse and
trying to do better.
We all the.
Thank you for.
Justice system.
Doesn't seem to be applicable
here is that correct.
Mr speaker excuse me Mr speaker
gentle and firmly I do not
believe it's accurate.
Energy and had a good good
discussion on this
I know I believe I asked to.
Here we are expert witness sure
right Missy late
if this
If this is never come up before
it deserves the compelling need
to have have this that actor.
sit you know provision and and
and place and if I remember
right
so far so good there's there's
no one that
that she she knew of that would
fitness situation is is is that
right to the gentle lady Mr
speaker you might.
Ask a Missy Lee that's a that's
a current situation now.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan I believe I answered that
question before and the answer
is.
Not that we know of however the
year these provisions are not
presently in place therefore we
do not know whether or not there
are applicants out there who
fall within these provisions.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and and appreciate
you you clarify that a that
that's important and and we're
looking at Texas.
Yeah I'm looking at their a bad
actor law in they go back five
years why we choose ten years
and and your law.
Mr speaker gentleman let me
confer with my.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan is consistent with
provisions and other of our and
their fundamental provisions
you'll recall that I mentioned
that by including this in the
air quality statute it it brings
it into conformity or similarity
with some of our other
environmental provisions.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
We
and I've been trying to listen
to the debates on college as I
missed a few items that we have
fourteen hundred permissive we
renew each and every year and is
a satellite.
Mr speaker gentle and I believe
what I said is we received
fourteen hundred applications
approximately fourteen hundred
applications a year.
And how often thank you gentle
lady and thank you Mr speaker
how often do we we renew the the
current applicants how many how
many current out air quality
Permission we have in the state
I think you mentioned that to
but just just remind me gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentlemen I believe I
said there were five thousand
active air quality permits.
Five thousand activity quality
permits.
You give them an idea of what
industry
the make up that five thousand
would be you know water nag you
know power plants
you know natural gas facilities
it would really be helpful to
know the scope of the permissive
we deal with on a.
Continuation.
Mr speaker John give me a moment
to come for.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
for that question energy
manufacturing power plants
natural gas refineries
landfills.
And there's one more but I don't
recall.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady of low of
the five thousand this going to
do some ballpark guessing I
would imagine most of them or
only gas facilities we have
about
twenty thousand active wells in
the San Juan basin.
we have about
Sixty thousand active wells in
the Permian basin.
that not all those wells have to
have an air quality permit but
they have gas processing plants
and in refineries it just you
know sort of those survey
production so
can here would just kind of give
us a.
Out of a percentage ballpark
percentage of you know of of of
the predominant air quality
permits it would be and and and
the only gas industry
primarily.
Mr speaker gentleman my witness
does not have an exact number
but she would say that probably
over the fifty percent are in
the oil and gas industry that's
thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady I was kind
of gas in the building in that
ball park for twenty so twenty
five hundred of these permits
are in those those for those
facilities and and and all
guests
in those facilities I would.
Just estimate
would cost quite a bit to to
build a construct and maintain
Are are we guessing about a
million dollars per of for put.
Facility
with the exception of some large
natural gas plants are you know
they're much larger they process
two three hundred maybe two feet
guests today in those those
would be catalog of many
refinery but
Which your witness no the
average cost of those facilities
and
just to give us a ballpark
figure the investment required
to to put in these air quality
the control enhancements.
Mr speaker and gentleman my
witness cannot provide that kind
of information because there are
too many variables that would be
in play.
This is just like a house you
know you got small houses large
houses you got commercial
buildings you got high rises
obviously is going to be a wide
range I I think the point I'm
trying to make gentle lady is
that there's a there's a.
A high investment in a high cost
of compliance and these
companies have to be on top of
their game and there's a lot of
self compliance that any
department whether it be the
Environment Department the state
engineer the of all conservation
division they they really rely
on those companies to to follow
the rules and what I'm concerned
about is that we have such a
large facility makes in
southeast New Mexico it it joins
taxes and their their
compliance
That actor whatever you want to
call this.
Is much more reasonable they
have a five year limit its it's
it covers any violations of the
within the state now and have
granted the gentle lady Mr
speaker taxes large state in it
you know it's twenty nine
million people we have two
million people they they have a
you know it's a different
different market if you will so
they're they're compliance is is
of.
Is confined to the state of
Texas and then this bill goes
beyond that and it goes beyond
the five years and I would would
love to have this more in tune
with the Texas state you because
most of those operators gentle
lady and Mr speaker
they they either they're pretty
much headquartered in in in
Texas and they operate in
southeast New Mexico that we
have offices they have offices
in New Mexico but their their
head offices is it is usually in
Houston are you know meddling
Dallas in in one not SO
I think
This
This statute.
Is trying to address the problem
that we we don't know if we have
for not so it's it's kind of a.
A tough the tough the.
Road for these companies and
they like to be.
Treated in in a fair manner and
it seems like there's.
There some arbitrary
aspects to this if and I think
you're well representative
mentioned that we we want these
companies to comply sometimes
you have mechanical difficulty
sometimes you have you there and
that's why we have person on
these facilities to make sure
they're properly maintained and
and that's a good thing they
employ a lot of a lot of
technicians lot of mechanics lot
of compressor operators plumbers
pipefitters electricians keep
these facilities up and coming
because if I don't gentle lady
you Mr speaker you know they're
gonna they're gonna lose their
gonna lose money and they they
they can't afford to do that was
such a
a tight you know margin so I
would much rather this this
bill.
Kind of a mirror the the Texas
bad actor bill I think just what
they call it
the index put us on the same
page so appreciate appreciate
your your answers so I had that
you had to kind of prepare
yourself but it's kind of good
two for the people now for this
body to know that roughly twenty
five hundred of these
installations serve the only gas
industry and if you shut those
facilities down.
You're gonna lose your lose
production you're gonna lose
revenue for the state of New
Mexico because of these
facilities help produce natural
gas and oil and and and and of
course they they pay severance
tax that we so desperately need
with this you know with our
economy being kind of a.
you know her right now so thank
you gentle lady and thank you Mr
speaker.
Through the debate the gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln
Representative number two.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
yield once again.
and gentleman from Lincoln I
will.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
just a.
Two point seven but I would like
to make that have already been
discussed.
In paragraph Q. which is the
Representative the deals with
aggravating and mitigating
factors I'd like to discuss with
waves.
If we have this resume of a
variety of things that if you.
R. for lack of a better word
guilty of any of those items.
And your permit could then be
denied or revoked what would be
some other aggravating factors
that we're going to
consideration for the the Nile
or revocation of that permit.
Mr gentleman if I may confirm I
witnessed with my witness.
Madam and Mr speaker types of
things that would be considered
is if the permit T.
had had engaged in
misconduct with the intent with
intention.
if there were also told
violation or multiple counts
that would have given rise to
the replication of the permit in
another state and how long ago
the
The problems occurred so of the
problem of the year ago with the
with a bad intents with multiple
counts would would be considered
more serious than one that
occurred let's say nine years
ago Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady if I read
the bill correctly those things
are already covered up above
those are those are set forth
and with specificity as reasons
why you can't deny or revoke a
permit and I was just trying to
think of what we're some other
things be in that regard Mister
speaker July let's move on to
mitigating factors what would in
in your opinion or in your
thought in crafting this
legislation.
What would be some of the
mitigating factors that would
come to mind that and I assume
when we said mitigating were
worth thinking of things that
will go in favor of the
applicant not to the aggravating
things that go against the
applica but what would be some
mitigating factors of that you
would be thinking of that would
be considered by the agency and.
Maybe overcome in some of the
other of missteps that may have
been made.
Mr speaker and gentleman please
give me a moment.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
kinds of equipment mitigating
factors that would be considered
was whether there is a good
compliance record within the
state whether or not the company
assist systems in place to
ensure that compliance tenured
good compliance how long ago I
know I mentioned that before but
obviously that would continue to
be a mitigating factor.
Mr speaker.
Gentlelady could some other
mitigating factors the a new
management team one that brings
some experience with respect to
these issues on board could
could some of it be that
The.
It to do is being acquired by a
new company that has a good
track record with those things
be mitigating factors that of
the agency would consider.
Mr speaker me one moment Mr
speaker John please give them.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady on I'm
glad to hear that because I see
this legislation in the major
concern that I'm hearing from
from my clients and my
constituents is with respect to
the oil patch and in because
that's what I do and and that's
where I come from but the the.
There's a lot of situations that
I think are very foreseeable
within that industry that
we need to and I said we of the
oil and gas industry generally
there's not one bad actors.
Among its ranks.
And we recognize that there are
some bad actors and friends and
in a variety of of there is an
and they cause problems for the
entire industry so trying to go
after bad actors is is not what
we're objecting to.
But I do want to get a good
comfortable feel that when we
have good companies companies
that are trying to abide by the
rules that they can enter into
agreements with those companies
that are provided by the rules
and they themselves won't get
penalized for the actions of the
entity that there are requiring
or the entity that they are
merging with or what have you
have the you have the new
management team on board for you
have a company that's basically
trying to do the right thing
taking over the bad actor for
lack of a better word and so I'm
pleased to hear your answer Mr
speaker gentle lady that those
things would be favourably
considered because as I
mentioned in committee I think
we're going to see more more
consolidation within the oil
patch in the state of New
Mexico.
Economics are driving that.
These additional laws and
regulations that are being put
on the industries are driving
that so you're going to see less
and less independent oil and gas
company's you're going to see a
move toward the bigger companies
that can afford to hire big
regulatory
Have big regulatory departments
teams of lawyers tames of
regulators and go out and can
monitor all the stuff and so
that's the direction we're
headed that those companies
certainly don't want to get in a
position where they're buying a
property and then having to pay
for the sins of that.
Bad actor that formerly held the
property
Madam chair Mr speaker and
gentle lady I'm really pleased
that you put in the section
regarding corrective action
plans I think that really helps
us
and maybe it's not is a.
Of.
It is not as generous as maybe I
would like but the I certainly
appreciate your putting that in
there because I think that gives
at least some hope that a
company who permit is looking
like it's going to get revoked
or permit that's not going to
issues that they may be given
that chance to prove themselves
to the agency and prove that the
despite maybe some of this other
stuff that has happened in their
past for whatever that they be
given the opportunity to show
the agency that they can comply
with the agency rules and
regulations and allow that
permit for the temporary
permitting issue hopefully
followed by the regular permit
so I'm pleased to see that the
provision in here and then one
last thing before so that in the
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Our.
I appreciate the amendment to
put on.
And I've already given my word
I'm supporting it.
But I really think that there's
still that little hole that
exist in this legislation.
And that is with respect to the
oil patch.
Facilities.
well gets drilled and we need
some facilities on site to
handle that production we don't
know what it is yet.
And yet.
We're we're having to file for
permits maybe that we don't know
what we have to deal with and I
still see that as a as a
loophole in this in this laws
written I'm supporting at but
I'm still a little bit concerned
and I just hope Mr speaker and
gentle lady and I'm specifically
speaking to your axe for I hope
that there will be an
opportunity as a saying roll out
and plays out if it gets enacted
in the law that she will be
particularly sensitive that
issue and yes there's some
tweaking that needs to be done
in the future I hope that Missy
we will call me and and work
with me on getting some language
to deal with that specific issue
that and with that Mr speaker
and gentle lady thank you very
much for the debate appreciate
you particularly bring in the
amendments for.
There's further debate the
gentleman from the Indiana grant
and Sierra Representative to
access.
Russia's Mr speaker will the
kind lady whose yield.
Yes indeed I will yield.
How are you I get to see twice
today.
Listen the you know I I thank
you for bringing legislation I
mean we know that everyone has
their things that they're trying
to accomplish and and so but.
You know Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm very concerned about this
one this one I said you know I
sometimes say I I I this one is
tough and I'll tell you why
I'm very concerned about my my
my tone you know I come from a
mining town source city and we
that is a big big deal here in
our town the wonderful company
here that
employers is is a large import
by the largest employer here in
Grant County and so I worry
about that because
ten years is a long time when
you think of of having a
violation of of of some sort and
it also I was just sitting here
I was thinking I said you know
you can have of violation of one
of the of of their quality
what are your air quality
control yield despite having a
of I don't know a power outage
or maybe mills malfunction
requirement could be other
things that could be a human
donor and and then there's going
to be those people who
absolutely R. just
of violating what worries me is
is is a language is very
Kind of open ended and it scares
me when one
we can think that just one
violation ten years ago could
could affect any permit so my
question to you Mr speaker
gentle lady is so if there's an
existing company like the the
one that supports our our our
community which is responsible
for a lot of our tax base and
stuff you know.
People question that whatever
but let me tell you that they're
big part of our community and
our schools need more are
counties or municipalities they
depend on so they have an
existing permit what would
happen if if if they had.
Well they did this in twenty ten
years ago something within ten
years what they lose their with
their permit be revoked on an
active from.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
If I understand you're correct
question correctly you're
saying.
If one of your company's in your
community that was subject to
this permitting process and a
violation
could you be more specific Mr
speaker and let's just say they
will just cut to the chase is
just stated it Donald nine years
ago they the weather the the
quality and and this is what
it's about one of the things
okay or it sounds to me it could
be other violations of
of of environmental rules but
let's just say that whatever for
whatever reason they think
violated that nine years ago and
and today they've cleaned their
their work very hard these
mitigated all those things and
corrected things and try to do
everything we can run a good
clean company and and all of a
sudden what they're permit be
revoked.
Because Mr speaking to and if
this legislation came to
action.
Mr speaker and gentleman just to
clarify
the basis for a revocation is
embedded in this statute and so
if you look on page eleven it
lists the items that the HSD
mate may consider when
determining whether to revoke a
permit or not the example that
you gave was not tied to any of
the items listed within
provisions of this bill Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady so let's
just say it was on one of the
items in the bill and I'm sorry
you know I'm a freshman so I can
learn this stuff so it's on your
it's it's one of the things on
there anyone of those things but
it was it was nine years ago so
what if they had an no active
permanent could it be Arribo
when this got past.
Mr speaker and gentleman I guess
my answer to that is it depends
you recall in our previous
discussions and we referenced
paragraph two of the bill which
allows the Asian agency to take
into mid mitigating and
aggravating factors and if it
was one violation of the items
listed in in paragraph PED of
this bill and it was nine years
ago
those items I think would be
viewed as likely to be
mitigating and would be taken
into account when evaluating
whether or not to revoke the
permit.
Okay thank you physicists it's a
little scary for me to know that
it depends on a particular
person it'd be the agency that
just decides you know you get
sometimes people up given your
you go to the DMV this person
over here you know that this
some sometimes one of the people
there in line help people a
little bit better than others
and I just I'm I'm not trying to
what that person is in charge
now is a is a bad person but it
it could sway depending on who's
who's in charge of that
department and I can I I guess
that that that that that
language because it's looses
cactus it's a little scary to me
that's that's what my my
concerns but
so what made you bring this up
Mr speaker gentle lady what is
it specifically because I read
on the FIR the said that that
was see what I can find it it
was to protect people from all
risk of illness or death from
breathing harmful air
contaminants so what it is that
the reason for your bill what
what what May brought this on
that you felt compelled to to
bring this.
For.
Mr speaker gentleman.
I believe it's very important
that we have entities operating
when they get state that comply
with the air quality act the air
quality act is designed to
protect
human health and safety and we
want to ensure that companies
doing business here R.
respectful of our citizens in
the state and our diligent in
their interest in protecting the
lives and safety and health of
our residents in this bill helps
remote that I think very
fundamental principle is so
important to all of us
protecting those individuals
live in the state.
So thank you for that I mean I I
I get that I think it's just I
think for me the big thing is
it's so broad and it's such a
long period of time ten years
and you know it you know the
example so we just discussed
some
Mr speaker gentle lady is it our
our situations were the hat to
mitigated impose it probably
have to re file for a permit
probably within that time in the
middle the standards that were
necessary yes unfortunately they
they
they could be denied you know or
Arribo and I and that's I think
that's the one gets me is is I
want to stick to Arribo so even
though that that got all
straightened out of the took
care of their business and maybe
make things right with the with
the people and and yet they
could go back in and and and
punish them because I mean
that's one of the what what
moreover worried about all the
money workers and families that
that that are need that job and
and and and their children that
they supported that the the
mortgages and the car payments
to go along with all that I mean
we're all connected here Mr
speaker gentle lady well
connected here when you know
sometimes when we.
Something like this happens
where it it takes out a big
employer let that because of
mistake that was done
eight nine ten years ago boy
that the whole community is
going to pay for pay the price
for that that very much concerns
me so my question to you I'm
gonna Mr speaker gentle lady
walked if this bill passes.
In.
Make sure S. is right okay so if
the bill passes with the reasons
listed for the Nile river
quality permit application would
that be the only reasons why a
permit could be denied.
Get in and I guess all the
giants for the first.
Mr speaker the gentleman the
bill defines the basis through
which the HSD made deny a
permit.
Among other reasons.
And that was my next question I
mean is it.
Not everyone gets issue a permit
I mean surely they turn some of
these are from is down as are
being applied for is that true.
Mr speaker John let me refer to
my expert.
Mr speaker and gentleman on
another reason might be that the
applicant and not establish that
they can comply with ambient
health's standards your health
standards.
And I was looking here on the on
the FY are also losing you know
on the application said that it
was incomplete it could be a for
all whole number reasons I mean
it could be I was reading in
that without me knowing because
I've got the short of course as
I move it and I don't want to
make sure can you can hear me
clearly it was a number of
reasons that they could deny an
incomplete application somebody
forget something on the
application
I don't know that's what I read
on the fire so but anyway
So
Mr speaker Mr speaker gentle
lady so it's my understanding
that the number that that New
Mexico has not implemented the
administrative procedures act
across all state agencies which
makes New Mexico the only state
that doesn't have a uniform set
of rules that apply to how you
deal with enforcement actions
like you build us therefore the
true that The New Mexico
environmental department and
environmental improve
improvement board get to
establish their own rules on how
to enforce this
Which is different from the
other forty nine states in our
country.
Mr speaker let me come for.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
department has a formal rule
making process through which the
public can participate in it it
proceeds through the I the the
environmental improvement for.
Yes ma'am Mr speaker gentle lady
I I understand that but I guess
what I'm saying is it creates it
creates a situation where New
Mexico is an island or separate
from all the other forty nine
states in that here because of
this language they can they can
create whatever regulations they
feel this is loose you know they
they they can it's it's not firm
that if you do this this this
this means that it meant as
we've been discussing or as I've
been listening to the discussion
what worries me is that well it
could or it may and it depends
and so that's tough you know Mr
speaker gentle lady is a.
I mean as a person that you know
I I always believe that we're
all connected I mean businesses
and people people need jobs
businesses need people to work
for us we're all connected and
and so I mean I'm I I came up
here thinking that we're going
to try and I keep hearing that
we want to invite and and and
support businesses because we
need good jobs we need good
incomes for those people some of
these places provide very good
incomes for our families in in
New Mexico and and I I I'm I'm
gonna go on to say you know
imagine it it is this company is
a great company of New Mexico
like you know like some of the
ones we work and and and all our
districts it doesn't matter I'm
not talking about just like this
but I'm very concerned I bought
mine because I I came up there
to recruit Representative the
the constituents of my of my
district in the money falls
directly in in in my area and
that worries me and and I feel
that I need to speak speak up
and and and stand up for that
because it's just R. this very
very generalized I guess you're
you're.
Legislation here but imagine if
if we had a family member that
got a D. W. I. over the New York
City and now the whole family is
considered drunk drivers and I
go that's kind of what I'm
getting from this legislation I
just you squint you going what.
By that Mr speaker up a gentle
lady is we can have a company
it's like a family.
One person one one one one
company could could goof up over
in in another state having
nothing to do with New Mexico
and and how it's how it's
functioned get it could possibly
lose its or report either lose
or are they can revoke their
license or be denied so I worry
about that I would worry I
really do worry about that I
think that's I I understand what
you're trying to do Mr speaker
gentle lady I I I like to
breathe clean air I don't smoke
I don't smoke and I mean I I
looked the more I live in a
beautiful area and and we want
to sustain that and and and and
hope people that are being
Sure been breaking the rules on
purpose but I I feel that that
this is just so so far reaching
and so
You know I just I just I'm sorry
I I I will be able to support
this because it's just to me
it's so broad and so far as like
I was just thinking to myself
why it this this sometimes in
some respects of could be that I
got a speeding ticket in another
state for two or three five
miles over the speed limit and
the whole to hold me accountable
ten years later to either to
renew my license and so that's
how I'm seeing it and and it's
just a bit of or fixed or not
far fetched but far reaching is
a better word and so you know I
Mr speaker gentle lady I up the
caution everyone that that that
is is here in our legislature if
you have a business that they're
in your in your district and
you're worried about you know
one violation in the last two
years not even from your local
company but a company from
another state or the same
company filing something another
state that could really cause a
lot of opinion suffering to your
constituents by them losing
their job thank you so much for
us having this interaction with
me and and and god bless you are
you.
Thank you.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Serrato.
Thank you madam speaker of with
the gentle lady from Los Alamos
field.
Yes I will yield from the
general for the gentle lady from
Santa Fe thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady I wanted
it checked
I thought this is a case that
director on does the water
quality act how this provision
or similar provision in it
already.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes it
does thank you Mr Madam speaker
and gentle lady and are there
any examples of cases that you
have because I understand that
of course this is the law
already after the air quality
act and so I just want to see if
a similar provision in another
act would kind of give us a
little eight I idea of examples
up.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I think
I know the answer but the just
let me double check.
A gentle lady that there have
been a few violators under the
water quality act in an example
that might expert provided was a
a meat rendering facility that
improperly dumped waste into a
landfill and as a result
threatened the the ground water
for that for those those those
kinds of violations.
Thank you I gently lady miss
madam speaker I think that's
pretty significant I'm also
curious do you feel that this
provision would impact or or but
I would say assist our
burgeoning outdoor recreation
industry in our state.
Well it Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I do and for this reason
we have beautiful landscape we
have beautiful air we have
beautiful water and we want to
maintain a refuse reputation for
high quality and environmental
laws because that impacts on
maintaining beautiful air
beautiful water thank you know
just the environment and that is
a huge draw gentle lady for
people to come here either as
tourists are ultimately as
residents thank you Gillian
thank you madam speaker I I
actually couldn't agree more on
that I mean it is one of our
fastest growing employment
fields I believe since two
thousand eighteen it's grown by
five point nine percent every
year it's outpacing the national
growth of that industry and I I
mean like like percentage points
which is just so impactful of
you know when you're looking at
employment numbers and you know
as you mentioned a few times I
know that it's running states
have similar provisions in here
and so when folks are looking to
establish you know the other
outdoor recreational businesses
you know they may look at that
states that have these
considerations in place and they
may they may consider the more
highly we may lose out on those
types of jobs and so I I think
it's really important that again
you know outdoor recreation this
body had made and and and
investment in that efforts in
the past and again we I don't
want to see that street that's
the future part of part of the
future economy of our state I
don't want to see that go away
you don't I I know if you folks
early on had mentioned that you
know what what if not another
state there was a violation
other state on the they're not a
strict us as us and I think one
thing that this consideration is
that we think of you know when I
look at babysitters then kid and
I always talk with the kids I
think it Mr doing all this but
you know I think to myself if
somebody is is that is not a
strict of a parent as I am or
you know I I don't think the the
you know that we have the same
standards if they don't trust
the babysitter I sure as heck
I'm not gonna just be center at
that level and and again this is
the air she.
Degree this is you know the the
world she's going to go up in is
this the future industry that
she may decide is is what she
wants to invest in and so I
really kind of see that same
thing that Madam speaker gentle
lady that you know was we're
looking forward to the future
economy that we're really
holding ourselves holding our
state to the standards that are
deserving of our kids in the
future industry so I appreciate
your answers on that and all the
time thank you madam a check
madam speaker and gentle lady.
There's further debate the
gentleman from curry county
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam speaker of the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
please you.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
pre County I have yield.
Thank you John
I think the current oil and gas
and and I don't know very much
about all the guests except kind
of put it in my truck and so I'm
I'm gonna talk about a little
bit different portion of this
bill and hopefully you can help
me understand that
Madam speaker gentle lady you
mentioned that there's about
five thousand act permits we
heard testimony about half of
those two thousand five hundred
probably have to do with oil and
gas so I'm really curious about
the other twenty five hundred.
Where where those permits are
and
Generally speaking I I would
think that that a lot of them
are tied to city government
county government military
installations
Actor culture different things
is that a fair statement only
can you tell me how many of the
twenty five hundred remaining
are tied to other governmental
agencies.
Mr speaker and gentleman if you
give me a moment I'll come for
with my expert.
Mr speaker a gentleman from
curry very few air quality
performance go to other
governmental agencies in the
state.
Thank you for that Jollibee so
that I I'm even more curious now
where the other twenty five
hundred for apply and I and I've
also begin to wonder but here's
are some of them tied to the US
for service for burn permits or
other federal government
entities that have to do with
fighting fires or or those sorts
of things the fire departments
that have to get permits to do
Barnes of of different kinds of.
Where are the other permits
primarily.
Mr speaker gentleman is give me
a few moments.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
agency does not issue air
quality permits for for burning
burning activities of the kind
that you described in your
question Mr speaker and
gentleman the types of other
industries include
construction.
Our manufacturing and food
processing.
Thank you the lady I I would
assume then the licensure would
be and construction because I
don't know that we have that
many food processing plants a
fairly large cheese plant down
my country.
but I don't know that we have a
lot that would fill those other
two categories in the state of
New Mexico so I'm gonna send
most of our construction of I do
want to talk about a little bit
in a minute about road
construction.
My my searches to really find
out who is impacted by this bill
we know oil and gas is impacted
the that's become very very
clear.
I believe that some of our local
governments are going to be
impacted I believe.
Many many many years ago I met
your expert witness
and event in Clovis we're
garbage truck was driving around
the landfill and kicking up dust
off of caliche road and then the
big created quite an ordeal for
the city of Clovis.
But
I would like to know who's
impacted and then I would like
to know about the make up of the
park departmental improvement
board.
Are those all governor appointed
people are they.
I know some have to be from the
environment apartment I assume
some of have to have specialty.
The qualifications to be on that
board can you help me understand
who's on the board it's
mentioned several times in your
bill but I didn't see it
definition and your bill so I
just wonder if you could let me
know who's making the rules and
the decisions on that board July
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe it's defined in another
area of law but that let me
consult with my expert if you
will but I can get some
definition for you.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is a
seven member board that is
appointed by the governor no
more than four appointees may be
of the same political party.
Thank you for the gentle lady I
I did not hear that there's any
kind of degree or or
certification for any of those
members it just.
Seven members is that correct
gentle lady.
All.
Excuse me Mr speaker and
gentleman it is body comprised
of the citizens of the state of
New Mexico.
Okay thank you the lady I I was
hoping here there would be some
type of qualifications.
But I don't hear that so that's
okay gentlelady the last thing
I'd like to talk to you about is
is
Transportation I I think when
you mentioned some of the air
quality permits have to do with
the construction.
I know that in the road building
industry.
There is a lot of effort put
into controlling dust.
When they're driving.
On and off the the highways that
they're building you have to
have dust control they have a
lot of effort to control of the
air quality.
And I know that there is a a
great deal of road construction
planned for the southeast corner
of the state and as well as many
other places around the state.
And and the question that became
it.
Some of those large road
projects on our interstates on
two eighty five some of the big
areas.
That we have very limited
contractors within our state to
handle the great big jobs.
In order if if someone from
Arizona or Texas or Colorado
came in a bit one of those for
transportation projects.
And in the regional manager for
that company has no idea that
the company's somewhere back in
Tennessee or somewhere else or
Texas or Arizona had of
violation could they have other
permit pulled.
But because of a violation
within that company.
Over in another state.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
In your example is the the road
company construction company
Subject to a permanent it hasn't
applied for an air quality
permit not all activities in
construction required air
quality permits.
Thank you very much aware that I
I care to contractors license
for forty years so.
What you're aware of that one
but yes a lot of the road
projects in different
construction projects do require
permits quality permits.
If you're a going out and then
grabbing the land or or
stripping off the the top of the
land and cutting the vegetation
out of the way so you can get
better compaction higher density
underneath your roads.
That that work and don't work in
in a when the state does require
permits it requires a lot of
effort to to keep water on that
ground so this doesn't belong
there there is a lot of effort
for that but.
All I'm asking is if a
contractor is awarded a bid on a
on a project in the state of New
Mexico they get a permit for
their work they find out that
they have a a violation in
another state can their permit
for the road in New Mexico be
pulled.
Mr speaker and gentleman if the
in your example the contractor
did not comply with the
provisions of paragraph PED.
there is the the potential that
the permit could be revoked.
Thank you June
I'm hopeful that the bill that's
before so I will not discourage
some of the large corporations
and companies that we
desperately need to come help us
there are roads built I hope
they're not discouraged from
what we're doing tonight so
gentlelady thank you for
allowing me to ask my questions
and inquire about your bill and
I appreciate you help me
understand it better thank you
madam speaker thank you gentle
lady.
There's further debate the
gentleman from all those
counties Representative Garcia.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Hello.
You have the floor.
My did not have my hand up I'm
sorry.
Okay we have further debate the
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair does the
gentle lady yield.
and from Lee I yield.
Thank you.
Trying to decide where to start
here.
Madam chair gentle lady.
Do you recall the.
Final budget number that we
approve from the house several
weeks ago.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe it was seven point.
Four billion.
This is what I recall as well
madam chair and gentle lady.
And you recall.
Madam chair generating.
How much of that budget.
Came from the oil and gas
industry.
The majority of which is Lee at
the and San Juan County.
Up Mr speaker and gentleman I do
not.
Madam chair gentle lady that
numbers right around forty
percent or just.
Shy of three billion dollars.
And.
I think it's important that we
talk about this.
Because.
We'll go this way over the last
few nights madam chair
gentle lady of her words used by
different members of our bodies
such as
A third and angry and mad over
what over
debate on bills and
Tonight gentle lady and madam
chairman of bring another word
to the table.
And I'm gonna use or front.
And I have to be honest.
Is the continual of front.
From this body.
To the oil and gas industry is
getting tiresome.
Madam chair gentle lady I.
I understand the reason why this
bill was brought forward and I
do believe that we need to
continually improve our
processes and procedures and
ensure that.
We are.
Madam chair gentle lady
insuring.
The value of our environment.
The so many things madam chair
and gentle lady with respect to
this bill just
It's just straight up front
frontal attack.
With no room for forgiveness.
Several weeks ago.
We passed the cannabis bill here
madam chair and gentle lady.
That should this bill make it
all the way through to the
governor's desk.
This bill for for minor
possession and a few other
things expunge is.
The records.
The multitude of people in the
state The New Mexico.
Tonight madam chair gentle lady.
We want to go the opposite way
was of one of the very industry.
That.
Has helped to build.
New Mexico.
And the rate.
And.
Put effort in to.
Provided for this body to be
able to turn around madam chair
and gentle lady to the whole
state.
To the education of our
children.
So instead of.
Putting a
Hello state this a grace period
in place.
Let's go back in time.
Find anything that we can Madam
chair gentle lady and hold them
accountable for the sins of
their past.
Chair gentle lady every night
before every day before we start
this.
We say a prayer.
Different people prayed a
different and deities but we say
a prayer.
And I would I would say madam
chair and gentle lady that the
majority.
These deities have.
Sason forgiveness peace to their
teaching.
Yes as this legislative body
continues to show we want no
face and no forgiveness and the
oil and gas industry.
This continual front.
On the very members of and
businesses that provide for this
body to set up here.
Behind the chain link so it's
totally protected from the real
world.
We want to go after the.
Senator gentle lady.
Five pages of notes that I
wanted to cover tonight and
don't ask me why I'm going down
this road because this was not
where I wanted to go.
I just I'm I'm confused as to
why we cannot madam chair gentle
lady.
Think of legislation in such a
way that if we find something
that a person has done wrong and
while we're doing that we're
doing that bill's done it for
three weeks and bills with that
done something wrong we want to
forgive them for that we want to
change the definition of fourth
fifth sixth degree felony we
want.
We want to put people that we
Madam chair gentle lady we want
to
Pull people out of car
serration.
We want to reduce our time frame
we want to forgive here the but
we don't want to forgive here
and I don't understand that.
My mind cannot wrap around that
concept.
And so it is very.
What's the Batman movie with the
guy that's got to faces on.
That's my perception of what
this body is doing right now.
Madam chair gentle lady.
During your testimony
use words like patterned
propensity and multiple.
And.
I I and in those words were used
specific to.
The concept of non compliance of
the company potentially some and
some other state.
But madam chair gentlelady
assigned nothing in this twelve
page bill that references a
pattern of propensity or
multiple violations.
And so I'm concerned that the
that we want to use these words
in their testimony but we don't
want to put these words in the
bill that ultimately are going
to be acted upon when this bill
passes over.
From this house to this to the
Senate.
And so madam chair gentle lady
I get my first question.
This is I read the bill there's
no difference between the type
of air quality permit when I say
that.
We as as we look at the
punishment side of this bill.
We don't make a difference
between.
A person that could own Concord
ready mix plant.
In New Mexico and a dry cleaning
facility in Texas they both
require quality permits.
But we don't make a difference
between that so we have the
company.
A dry cleaning company in Texas
others had some problems over
the years they've rectified and
they're in good standing they
have a permit with the state of
Texas for dry cleaning.
We won't pass a bill Madam chair
gentle lady that because of that
history.
And ready mix plant that could
have been around for twenty
thirty years here never had a
problem.
We want to hold them
accountable.
For the issues that they worked
with and corrected within the
barman Department in another
state.
In my reading that correct
Levinger gentlelady.
And then
madam chair and gentleman I must
contest on a little bit confused
by your example did the dry
cleaning company have it's
Permit in Texas revoked for
violations of Texas air quality
laws.
The gentle lady and this simple
test that that happened and they
corrected it in this example
madam chair and gentle lady and
we came back into good standing
with the state of Texas.
So we have an issue we corrected
it.
We're in good standing in the
state of Texas we enact a law
here.
In the state of New Mexico the
hold them accountable for
something they've already answer
to paid for and corrected in
another state that's where I
read this bill is that correct
Madam chair gentlelady.
Mr speaker Mr madam speaker and
gentleman.
Representative Chandler I think
you are muted.
Madam speaker I am muted I was
conferring with my experts and
so Madam from from Lee yes yes
the dry cleaner who which happen
to have an air quality permit
and I understand from my aunts
but that it's rare that
I cleaners have air quality
performance but I'll go with
your example had violations that
were so extreme that they had
their permit revoked yes that
could be taken into account
should they wish to apply for a
permit to do in New Mexico.
Madam chair the only appreciate
that answer and not yes
different states have different
rules as was pointed out tonight
and so.
Madam chair gentle gentle lady
unlike my colleague from Chavis
and Lincoln I'm not.
I'm not really happy with the
amendment that you that was
submitted and and approved
Brought in to this bill to that
tonight I do believe that it
does get part of the way madam
chair and gentle lady.
But I don't think that it goes
far enough and.
I would say madam chair and the
lady the hi is this bill
continues its way
That I would ask that you
consider a
Another amendment.
That madam chair and gentle lady
provides for grace period and
removes a single.
violations from other states and
so madam chair and gentle lady I
think that it's critical that we
look back and with the same
faith and forgiveness that we're
giving.
So many residents in the state
The New Mexico right now that we
try and do the same thing for
the very entity that keeps this
body alive.
Madam chair and gentle lady and
so with you know how some of the
I think I'm gonna finish your
madam chair and gentle lady
One of my other colleagues
tonight said that we need jobs
we need to work together as a
state and the reality is madam
chair and gentle lady as much as
many of the people.
Seem to act in this body from
time to time we need the revenue
from the oil and gas industry to
survive and so in lieu of.
Months we should find madam
chairman gentlelady ways that we
can achieve our goal.
Was a common.
With with common words.
Degree where we can.
Come together and and put
legislation out there that we
can live with and we would find
that grace.
To the the the the that we bring
to every night gives us.
In some way or another instead
of.
Being punitive to the very.
Organizations out there madam
chair and gentle lady that keep
the state to float.
With that gentle lady I
appreciate your time madam chair
I yield back to you.
Thank you there's further debate
the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
field.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I to yield.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
first off I'd like to
say help concerned I am that so
much of of the questioning that
I had prepared Representative
Pettigrew
so it's it is scares me when I
line up with the senator from
Lee so closely but miss madam
speaker gentle lady.
That is exactly where I want to
go with this and that is
over the last week and a half.
We have
Had discussions about actual
criminals.
People in New Mexico who have
been judged guilty.
In the courts.
Actual New Mexico citizens who
created who committed crimes in
New Mexico.
And as was stated by the
representative from the the
words we've heard our
rehabilitation.
expungement.
restorative justice.
and that we need to give
discretion we take away things
such as minimum sentencing.
But.
Madam.
Speaker and gentle lady what I
see here.
Is the punishing of what would
be considered adjoining
businesses.
Madam speaker and gentle lady we
are in the midst of a shut down
of business in the state.
And yet there have been some
businesses that have been
allowed to remain open but even
during that time if a business
had too many violations or had
too many cases.
Of COVID in their business in a
short period of time we shop
those businesses down so
The way I'm reading this
legislation if we were applying
this standard to comment right
now.
A business
he's a good example in
Farmington the home depot had
too many cases of of COVID.
within a one week period.
And so they were required to
shut down.
We did not.
Punish.
A.
Home depot in Rio Rancho we do
not punish a home depot in
Bernalillo.
Not punish.
Home depot.
And
Dona Ana County it just.
It's this is a.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
This is like punishing.
Someone.
For.
At a relative's.
Infraction I mean it's the same
what you're talking about here
is the same umbrella company.
But in another state not even in
this state I mean we have we
have businesses that are all
across New Mexico that are that
are.
Under the same umbrella they are
under the same company.
But they have different
management within a single town.
Are you can have multiple
watermarks you can have
multiple.
Whatever in New Mexico in
particular the oil and gas
industry you can have one
company who has a business in
San Juan County and Chavis
county in Lee County.
And
What we're looking at doing here
is.
Punishing.
And a company that may have the
same title the same brand but is
essentially under different
management.
From community to community.
I mean this is way past this is
this is so far beyond what we've
talked about for the majority of
the last week and a half.
Of.
Bring the people.
Restorative and I love that word
restorative justice.
I'm just wondering why with
business.
We would not look especially
since we're looking at different
management from community to
community much less state to
state why in the world would be
we would be looking to do the
opposite.
When there may have not I mean
if we have to reach outside of
our state to find a violation.
I'm just trying to find the
logic behind that if they've not
if they've been in our
communities.
And they've been there for years
and they don't have a violation
yet they go for a new permit.
And in Oklahoma or Alaska.
There's a violation I mean I
think if you could please help
me understand the logic of that.
Mr speaker I mean Madam speaker
and and gentleman from San Juan
I'm I'm assuming we're not
talking about COVID anymore are
we now talking about entities
that are subject to the air
quality Act that our subsidy
subject the states permitting
process I just want some clarity
because I was a little confused
and how we how we got into the
Walmart questioning so could you
help me understand are we
talking about a business that is
subject to the air quality act.
Yes Madam speaker and gentle
lady if you want me to I can go
through it again if you don't
understand.
I think I understand your
question to be if there is a
company doing business in New
Mexico that may have been also
have business outside the state
where they have had have been
found to have engaged in such
egregious conduct that they look
had their permits revoked and
they're doing business in the
state what's the logic of that
is that correct characterization
of your question
Madam speaker and gentleman from
San Juan yes madam speaker and
gentle lady that is very close
to what my question was.
thank you madam speaker and
gentleman the the logic is that
the company has shown itself to
have not consistently observe
environmental laws in the
country and that will be it
would be considered by the
permitting agency and in this
case the air quality bureau in
determining whether or not it of
of permits should be issued
again
we have discussed madams Madam
speaker and gentleman that the
bill provides a number of
opportunities for the company to
show if you want to use the term
rehabilitation for example that
line paragraph Q. there's
discussion of the agency
considering aggravating and
mitigating factors
miss madam speaker and gentleman
it also permits the applicants
are permit T. to
submit an action plan that would
indicate how it would proceed in
the future so I disagree with
the contention that this bill
does not contain opportunities
for companies that have had
issues in the past to establish
reestablished themselves as
good
I'll use the word loosely
citizens or
companies of the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you madam chair and gentle
lady I I think a.
I'm gonna stay away from COVID
this time I'm gonna make this so
maybe a little simpler
comparison.
would it be fair would be just.
If a person who committed a
crime in Texas.
Ten years ago.
And they're living in New Mexico
for us to punish them in New
Mexico for a crime they
committed ten years ago in
Texas.
Mr speaker I mean Madam speaker
and gentleman for Billy and I
apologize madam speaker for
continual miss miss
gentleman from San Juan.
Is not a punishment statutes so
I I can't answer the question
that you're you post.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I I guess a instead
of asking a question I will make
a statement.
And that statement is.
For actual criminals in New
Mexico.
This body this legislature time
and again during this session.
Has pushed.
And passed legislation out of
this body.
That would not only as soon
rehabilitation when there's no
proof.
Would want to expunge the actual
criminal.
The.
Convictions.
Of people who have violated
crimes in this state not another
state.
But you don't want to comes to
business.
What is perceived as to be evil.
In business.
None of what is considered to be
the good work that these
businesses have done in our
communities employing our
citizens providing tax dollars.
None of that is account is good
we assume.
That practice.
And to prove that we assume that
practice we're willing in this
legislation to go back ten
years.
Even in another state.
To try and deny them from doing
business in this state.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
there's an article that came out
from the
The national thinker.
We asked the question it it
described some of the policies
in New Mexico and ask is this
the dumbest legislature in the
country.
And it talked about how.
We.
The contributors in New Mexico.
And madam speaker I can not.
In good conscience continue to
vote.
Legislation that continues to
punish.
Businesses we need those
businesses the businesses that
provide jobs.
And so madam speaker and gentle
lady iris the body let's quit.
Trying to tell businesses
they're not welcome in New
Mexico.
For the debate the gentleman
from Chavis Lee and Roosevelt.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
yield.
Mr speaker did you hear me.
Copy.
Of the I am a victim of the mute
button Mr speaker and gentleman
and gentleman from all those
counties I do the.
Thank you of the lady in Mr
speaker I I'm gonna do of I'm
gonna say I'm I'm not at all
familiar with the details of the
of the air quality permitting of
in New Mexico and so I'm going
to try to of of us with the some
broad questions seeking perhaps
brought a answers of one of the
one is an observation and
perhaps no answers necessary
it's merely whatever we apply
the word bad actor it
immediately strikes me that
there is a subjective.
component to a bad actor when we
see a movie and people agree and
disagree on whether there was a
bad actor or good actor in
various parts of the movie I see
that is subjective so my
question.
The sponsor Mr speaker is
are you satisfied that in this
bill we have removed in a
subjectivity on determining what
we will need more Klay called a
bad actor under this permit.
I'm.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
not
It turned bad actor is I don't
think necessarily appropriate
although I will confess to
having used it it is a bill that
articulates a number of reasons
we have a lot of reasonably high
degree of specificity that call
that gives the Environment
Department grounds to consider
denying or revoking a permit and
I believe those criteria are
relatively specific and
Subject to review.
Is there no subjectivity in the
bill there is subjectivity and
nearly everything we do Mr
speaker and gentleman but the
bill as crafted as a number of
very detailed criteria upon
which the environment may apply
this provision.
Thank you thank you for that of.
So during that one step further
by good Mr speaker lady of.
If we have five thousand permits
outstanding today and there are
no pending investigation to
permit violation.
I'm saying.
Is that because we're being too
subjective or to objective in
the analysis of those five
thousand existing permits
question.
Mr speaker and gentleman I mean
one moment.
Mr speaker and and gentleman I
need to clarify a previous
answer up my expert informs me
we have fifty basis enforcement
actions they may not all be
issues of permit violations and
I was reminded that we have Mr
speaker and gentleman only two
inspectors and I'm sure the body
as heard on number of occasions
the environment department is
short on resources and on a
number of levels.
Thank you thank you for that
answer
lady I'm gonna move on and and
make the observation as I've
listened to the debate this
evening I've heard it said what
should twice that of
justification for ten year
of use on past violations is
league is a regulatory concept
that exists in New Mexico
environmental lawsuits that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe that's correct okay
thank you Mr speaker lady I I
rarely leave with the
observation that for this
Representative that does not
necessarily be justified in my
mind at least the up.
The the the the rationale or the
judge or the the or that in here
that decade being of a
sufficient or insufficient
period of time and I to worry
that ten years is a long time
and it almost goes lady Mr
speaker to record retention of
the is is is if we're going back
ten years on on environmental
laws in this state and other
states are all the other states
retaining their records for ten
years so we can pursue that
question.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I I'm
not sure was that a question on
well no I think I'm gonna leave
without a question Mr speaker
because no one knows what forty
nine other states are doing and
record retention on
environmental law violations
relative to air quality but it
makes me really wonder about the
How that determination will be
accurately of maybe if of.
a person receiving a permit were
to be of dishonest or untruthful
I'm gonna go now if I could Mr
speaker to the next question it
goes like this is my
understanding that a false
filing
of information on an air quality
data permit would be in
violation of this law.
Mr speaker a gentleman I think
it would be more accurate to say
The HSD had may deny or revoke a
permit if the per permit T. has
knowingly Representative a
material fact an application I
think that is more in line with
what is actually criteria Mr
speaker and
Thank you mistranslated for that
clarification and up up on that
line the end of if a disk.
Let's say you're a large
corporation and you have many
employees and a disgruntled
employee making knowingly makes
a false filing on New Mexico air
quality data permit application
does that not in in a in a in a
Broadway the end reply could be
a false I.
Of the filing that you describe
for violation question.
Mr speaker gentleman if the
individual was charged with
completing the application and
has already too full complete
the application that individual
Mr speaker and gentleman was
acting as an authorized agent
for that company in the conduct
of the agent can be imputed to
the company.
Thank you for that answer ended
in certainly goes far beyond air
quality permitting because
disgruntled employees if they
knowingly commit in file and
have the authority to do so.
The corporation or the.
employer would be at risk of
losing of basically having a
permit revoked and therefore no
longer able to conduct of their
operations in a in a facility
that they've made a large
capital investment and I at that
comment Mr speaker lady gives me
some concern.
Moving along and trying not to
spend too much time this evening
I I wanted to just go back to
these five thousand permit
holders and that I was I was a
little confused with some of the
earlier responses got confused
I'm just in Matt lady at I'm
trying to understand.
Who else holds these permits
other than the this.
Once we talked about earlier
this evening so yeah my correct
up first in military
installations there are no
military installations within
the state of New Mexico they
currently have an air quality
permit question.
Mr speaker gentleman if I may be
given a moment consult with my
experts thank you.
Mr speaker gentleman there are
some facilities in New Mexico
military facilities that do have
some air quality permits.
Thank you very much for that
answer I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm.
If I could Mr speaker and in the
interest of time because I'm
think I'm satisfied with the
with the debate in answers this
evening I did want to talk about
two other main really to other
questions in one is
If this law is enacted.
And if decisional air air
quality permit regulations or
expanded and requiring more.
More information more data more
responses to permit renewal and
application.
are we not.
Why that action expanding the
scope of the of the violations
that can be imposed under this
law I think that was a rather
poor question but if you could
take a swing at it I would
appreciate it.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
sure there's a correlation
between
other regulatory provisions in
this provision at least a direct
correlation Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I will say again
this provision.
Defines the basis for denying or
revoking a permit in the base
cease that are described are
things like misrepresenting
material fact or feet refusal to
disclose information required
convicted been convicted in a
court.
Of a felony related to an
environmental crime a crime
defined by state or federal
statute in
Construction of the facility
without
Wiring a permit for which one
was acquired
so Mr speaker and gentleman I
don't believe there is a
correlation there are very
specific types of activities
that would trigger the potential
for this provision.
Thank you lady for that and I'm
looking at what our junior all
page twelve of your bill and
under items for I'm looking here
and and it's you to be repeat
you it says constructed or
operated the facility for which
a permit in order without a
permit.
without a permit required.
By the air quality at the end in
mind my question is really one
that perhaps didn't have an
answer this evening and it goes
like this if if I put up a
facility on my ranch and I'm
burning whatever that I need to
burn and it turns out that an
air quality permit is required.
I have violated the New Mexico
air quality act why I operating
the facility without a permit.
I believe that's an accurate
statement question.
Mr speaker gentleman that is not
a violation of burning on your.
Property would not fall under
this act.
Okay.
HM to a mortuary that had that
puts you in a crematory in that
I don't know they require permit
or not I know that there has
been local pushback from those
kind of additions within
communities to me the burial
needs of New Mexicans so I guess
the first question is do you do
mortuaries have to have air
quality permits if they have a
crematorium questions.
This Mr speaker and gentleman I
and I've been informed by my
experts now okay thank you very
much for that then I'm gonna
close if I could Mr speaker was
one question and it is.
Under the existing law that we
have today on air quality
permitting.
Does the agency have the
authority to deny renewal and
issue first issuance in in
revoke air quality permits.
Mr speaker give me one an engine
on please give me a lot.
Mr speaker and gentleman up the
agency has the ability to revoke
up a permanent for on.
Thanks for an ongoing compliance
issue.
It would require hearing and
other process before the
replication occur I would note
that that is distinguished from
this act this proposed amendment
to the act Mr speaker and
gentleman and because this
provides the agency to deny or
revoke of a permit for a number
of things that I mentioned
before violations of law
Mr knowing misrepresentations
omit material fact operating
facility without first obtaining
a permit when one was requires
and so one Mr speaker and
gentleman so Mr speaker and
lady.
Then I think I heard in your
response that.
Although this is an expansion
of.
Those reasons upon which a
permit can be revoked or denied.
That in fact the agency
currently already has that
authority.
Not to revoke in the north.
Air quality permission New
Mexico question.
Under different circumstances
not for the circumstances Mr
speaker and gentleman as
described here.
Thank you for that response lady
I'm going to give this
consideration as we move to
completion this evening but I am
troubled by the need for this
law and I appreciate the debate
thank you Mr speaker say no
further debate gentle lady to
close.
thank thank you very much Mr
speaker I I would like to to
make some closing comments I
don't normally but I think it's
very important in this case.
And I'd like to say the
following imagine two businesses
doing business in the state
are subject to the air quality
Act.
Business a.
It has been following the law.
It has never been convicted of a
crime has completed a full and
complete and honest application
has always thought a permanent
when it was supposed to during
construction or otherwise and
it's operating in its doing
business in the state of
business we want here and
encouraged to be here we have
business number two who files an
application with material
misrepresentations may have a
histrionics for your non
compliance here or elsewhere and
is not cooperative or compliant
with with the air quality act.
To me businesses who are
following the law and that is
the vast majority of businesses
in the state example number one
should be delighted and happy
that we are enacting a law that
supports and encourages their
conduct we are reinforcing that
and we're supporting them those
businesses should not be happy
with this business and not be
happy because they are not on a
level playing field with the
business who willingly violates
the law and for that reason may
have its air quality and permit
denied I view this as a pro New
Mexico business law because it
places everyone on a level
playing field by encouraging
compliance with the law in and
ensuring that our environmental
laws are complied with so that
our citizens are safe and
healthy and so I disagree with
any implication that this is an
anti business law it is
absolutely appropriateness law
because it's a it encourages and
supports those many many many
businesses in the state were
subject to the air quality act
to comply with the law it was
that I would I move that house
bill seventy six twice amended
do now pass Mr speaker we are on
final passage of house bill
seventy six as amended the vote
is.
The vote is now open.
When we need to close.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty two in the affirmative
twenty six negative house bill
seventy six as amended has duly
passed the house.
Next we'll move to item number
nine.
The gentleman from Chavis Lee
and Roosevelt leader Anderson
are you ready on that item.
Mr speaker yes I am ready.
With the record reflect election
necessary for placing House the
one sixty five on final passage
has been taken.
Gentleman to explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
this evening we have a built in
front of us that is a pilot
project involved in New Mexico's
up budgeting process.
As you know under the New Mexico
constitution each year the
legislature bus convene and pass
a budget.
this year our budget is
currently
over the Senate nonetheless you
Representative seven point three
nine million dollars the general
fund.
And there are other.
Budget items.
Involved in HB two HVB three
other than just of the numbers
so in the course of this I've
been on the house Appropriations
Committee now
for five years under three
chairmen I have seen time and
time again of in this process we
get bogged down on small budgets
and leaving little or no time to
consider larger budget items
this bill addresses that in
addresses it with a four year
pilot project which would be two
two year cycles this is a
biennial budget project for the
agencies of state agencies with
annual operating budgets of five
million dollars or less.
that number is thirty nine
agencies in total.
I thank each member of the
Appropriations Committee
All except one of bloated for
the bill in committee agreed
that we should go forward with
this pilot project as submitted
by as submitted.
Up to the legislature by the
legislative finance committee.
So
I think with that Mr speaker one
co sponsor is representative of
Sweetser.
And I'm not positive she's going
to be able to offer any further
comments on the introduction of
H. B. one sixty five but I would
ask her now if she would care to
to please up join the debate.
General got R. one moment I'm
gonna interrupt to take a
private is the chair to announce
that the subcommittee meetings
on the supplemental
appropriations bill for members
are canceled tomorrow all
members in their supplemental
appropriations requests followed
all of these guidelines are set
forth by the Appropriations
Committee and I've just been
informed by the chair and vice
chair that the test of mental
appropriation meetings are
scheduled for tomorrow are
canceled.
So no need to fear ever did a
good job on the forms and this
meetings are not happening okay.
Gentlelady from.
grant Hidalgo Luna
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Travis yield I
certainly will Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentleman from Chavis I just
rise and support as a co sponsor
of this legislation it is a
pilot project endorsed by the
legislative finance Committee
and we're what we're trying to
do is really see if if it is.
Feasible for some of the smaller
agencies smaller budgeted
agencies to be able to put
together a two year budget
the US cutting down the workload
on both the appropriations
committees in the house and
Senate but also on the staff on
the LFC staff to DFA staff and
the staff of the small agencies.
And again it's a pilot project
will be divided into two
separate groups and the
gentleman from Chavis explained
and I think it's integrate our
attempt to go to streamline our
budget project process rather
and also have a really good
product when we get to the and
with that I would yep my co
sponsor and I believe we're
ready to stand for questions.
That's correct.
There is debate.
Gentleman from Chavis Eddie in a
terror Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker of.
And Representative is I have a
For our substitute.
for House Bill one sixty five it
so
Mr speaker.
Do you have that.
Gentleman I do hang on just a
minute let's make sure it's been
passed out and this on the web.
General jury the two oh two
number please.
Yes Sir the two oh two number is
two two oh five to six point one
R. as in passed out on a
gentleman to explain the for
substitute.
Thank you
Mr speaker and gentleman the the
floor substitute
Order by the I see the
importance of the work.
And and it is.
Not something that I believe
should be taken lightly.
The original version of house
bill sixty one sixty five.
Creates a pilot program with
various state agencies
including.
LFC in the DFA to the pilot
program on the work ability of a
bi annual budget to.
Hello this legislation is
identical to legislation that
was passed in.
Two thousand and eighteen
and was pocket vetoed by the
governor.
I can go through the whole list
but here's what.
The proposed legislation I do.
I believe enhances what you're
trying to.
Rather than moving forward on a.
But I believe is a flawed pilot
project.
This for substitutes simply
appropriates five hundred
thousand dollars.
In fiscal year
twenty twenty two.
Have a legislative finance
committee undertake a study.
A biannual budgeting and zero
based budgeting this would
provide the basis of the next
step.
That I believe is critical to
the state of New Mexico and that
is zero based budgeting in
formulating a far better pilot
project.
In the future on how bi annual
budgeting and zero based
budgeting can assess the
legislative budget process so.
What it does.
In that that is appropriates
money for the effort.
And would support the efforts of
what you're trying to do an
includes zero based budgeting.
All right well let's see if this
is friendly I will go to the
gentleman Representative
Anderson is the state friendly
floor substitute or do you want
to defer to the New York Mexico
Sanchez.
Mr speaker of I see this I will
take this as an unfriendly or
substitute because the bill has
Been vetted in both the
legislative finance committee as
well as the house appropriations
and finance committee and I do
believe a an appropriation is
not required for the task and he
at so I would for all those
reasons asked it the body
considered this as unfriendly or
a substitute and would leave
Any additional comment to my co
sponsor Representative Sweetser.
The lady you want to add to that
Representative Sweetser yes
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from Chavis I think
the the idea of the biennial
budgeting is actually cut down
on the cost certainly the time
spent by the analysts and for
both the FAA and LFC they've
already supported the idea of
the biennial budget and I don't
know that we need to have an
appropriation to study at when
when actually it's already been
indoors also as you well know
what we this body is already
voted on the budget the budget
is on the Senate side it would
be responsible just add another
appropriation at this stage that
would simply do what we've
already determined would be an
ideal private I want hope we cut
down on our state budget not add
another appropriation R. with
that I concur with my co sponsor
from Chavis that this would be
an unfriendly for substitute
thank you Mr speaker there does
appear to be debate on the
amendment and I just have to ask
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan I have you on the board
is that on the amendment for the
bill it on the amendment first
Mr speaker on I gentle lady
please proceed.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
I'd be happy to Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen my first question
is gentleman.
What is your understanding of
the current budget process.
Well currently the budget
processes I witnessed is an
arduous process of collecting
actuals.
Historical actuals.
going to.
Hartman heads.
And and a crying there.
Budget based on.
Their operations.
plans for the fiscal year.
And on top of that.
Incorporating that into the
executive plan.
And then through all of that you
get the.
A great privilege of trying to
play mediator and and find
middle ground and all of that.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What zero based budgeting.
Zero based budgeting is a
budgeting process that has been
used successfully.
And many businesses and I think
some legislature's where they
back off
historical sites.
And actually budget based on
their plane so it's not taking a
historical plus three percent or
some number like that you you've
just pushed that aside look at
your planning your manpower
requirements in the base of the
budget based on the operating
goals and plans for that fiscal
year.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
not zero based budgeting as I
understand it but I would have
have a question Mr speaker and
gentleman can you tell me how we
would re calibrate zero based
budgeting into the current
budget process.
Well Mr speaker before we go
forward can you tell me what
your understanding is of zero
based budgeting and where I
where I messed.
Mr speaker gentle generally
that's not part of the process
when when were allowed to ask
questions about a document
that's being presented on the
floor Mr speaker gentleman what
generally happens is we get to
ask questions as it is your lan.
And the I'm just curious because
it's it's interesting to hear
what your definition is of zero
based budgeting so Mister
speaker gentleman I'm going to
ask you again how would the to
be integrated.
And before we answer that
gentleman the gentle lady is
correct is your for substance
she has led to ask questions so
the questions are directed in
one direction so the gentleman
last question answer that
question please.
I understand that Mr speaker but
in the effort to get find middle
ground and a better process that
was the reason for the question
and I still think it's important
but with that said.
Your question is how you would
incorporate that is that correct
yes Mr Spender.
Yes Mr speaker gentle but my
question is is that I don't
understand why we would need to
study something if the
conclusion is to change the
budgeting process so the
budgeting process is to include
zero based budgeting I'd like to
know how would be re calibrated
into what we're already doing.
I think it would be an effort of
time.
It would take the experience
that you and others have on LFC
it would require that the.
department heads.
Learn.
What I consider zero based
budgeting and we can we can
argue about.
The definition of zero based
budgeting but I think it would
take time but you're going to
have to.
Get as our.
State changes and as we are
modified.
Taking historical send always
billing from historical as
you're changing the plan going
forward seems a little bit of.
Convoluted I think zero based
budgeting would enhance the
ability to produce a budget that
was based on actuals.
So Mister speaker gentleman
actuals of expenditures from the
previous year Mr speaker
gentleman.
Actuals based on what you plan
on but sure.
Rates are elector salaries are
what the cost of your contracts
are all of that would be listed
in that to me as as I was.
Raised investing is one zero
based budgeting is is when you
take and go to the ground floor
figure out what it costs for you
to operate and and build a
budget based on that.
Mr Mr speaker gentleman how does
zero based budgeting address
changes in the economy.
Well I think it's very simple.
When you say.
Mr speaker gentleman this but
based on a projection or plan Mr
speaker gentlemen how is the how
does it recalibrate when you
have changes in the economy such
as.
Changes and
our taxes are changes in
employment costs or product
changes or pandemics Mr speaker
gentleman.
Well Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's exactly the purpose that
I was trying to get to was that
we needed zero based budgeting.
You have to know your department
in great detail.
You have to know what your third
party contracts are.
Not just what they were last
year you need to know what they
are.
You need to know.
Exactly what your wages your
scales are you don't rely on B.
A. ours and things like that the
balance which is still a
requirement I would have to
admit that you have to get down
to the point if you have a
budget that identifies your
costs going forward for each
department I don't think it's
that difficult.
Mr speaker gentleman how would
you have proposed call speak
calculated for the department of
health from last year to this
year.
Under zero based budgeting I
would ask that that department
secretary bring a detailed
budget of what is in current in
their department detailed.
So that you have the support.
Of the document that says this
is what I need detailed
budgeting is would be included.
Mr speaker gentlemen in that
same in that same example how
would you re calibrate and how
would you change.
In terms of meeting economic
changes like the pandemic how
how how does zero based
budgeting how's that done in
those situations when you have
such a major changes in in cost
estimates.
Well.
and gentle lady every business
that I've ever been involved in.
Has met.
Different challenges.
In a fiscal year certainly not
as severe as the pandemic that
we've gone through but there are
market upsets there are.
The stock prices that ups that
you have difference in
operating costs that you have to
adjust you have fires and you
know instances within facilities
that you have to address that.
It clearly makes the the
legislative finance committee
more involved in in tune to
upset them in departments and
you have to react to did you got
to fund them because they have
to they have to be able to react
to those upsets.
So Mister speaker gentleman
under zero based budgeting
notice your revenue determined.
Revenue would be determined not
much different than what you did
today you take a.
A price that is driven on
that is that is agreed upon as
what the target would be.
And you utilize that.
As your revenue forecast I mean
you'd have to pick a number on
crude oil based on production
based on.
Of what you believe the economy
would be and you would pick a
consensus number very similar to
what you do today.
So Mister speaker gentleman
you're saying that under zero
based budgeting the revenue
projections are based on the way
that we do currently.
Is that is that correct Mr
speaker John I I couldn't tell
you that that I would see much
different now I think the answer
the question is yes.
So then I need to again Mr
speaker asking gentleman what's
wrong with the way we did
budgeting today.
Well.
That to me I'm glad you asked me
that question.
Sitting on LFC M. and of course
on probation.
There is
as you well know.
Eight.
A couple weeks at least maybe
three or departments coming in
present a plan.
And it comes up with the total
number.
And then the and you wind up
with the LFC budget and
executive budget.
And the the process is has
always be on.
we typically just pick the
lower.
And to me
Under the under what we do.
Most of the people sitting on
committee I really wouldn't be
really stretched.
As I lost.
To be able to identify.
What's in there and what's
what's what's that department
doing.
Why is there budget three
percent down three percent it
just give you more detail
and I think committee members
ought to have more.
In.
And expect more.
Out from the department heads.
In the in the details of their
but today it's not criticizing
madam chair and Mr speaker what
you're doing that's not my
purpose my purpose is to try to
make it better.
Mr speaker and gentleman and.
You know we're always open for
for good suggestions which is
what this piece of legislation
that.
Representative Anderson is and.
Gentlelady Sweetser caring this
is an out of state indoor has
endorsed
a
is
five PM or online let me let me
interrupt you for just second
you cut out for about fifteen
seconds so you can start again
if you don't mind all right
thank you Mr speaker I apologize
that my computer has sent me
messages of that my internet is
is unstable so I appreciate.
I apologize for that Mr stern
amenities have always been open
to hearings suggestions are
looking at better ways of doing
things Mr speaker and gentleman
and.
I candidly that's what this bill
is about is possibly looking at
better ways of doing things.
But I would be concerned about
this and.
Amendment Mr speaker and
gentleman if we can't be much
clearer than what I've heard on
the floor tonight about what
we're actually asking for and
what that would actually mean in
terms of of
In their grading that into the
existing system Mr speaker
gentlemen as it and and I know
you are close to business
accounting and and and
and what have you but my but my
feeling is is that you just
can't cut one system office
start brand new and without some
transition time.
And still transition work
actually run in two sets of
books to make sure you don't
lose anything so Mister speaker
John that I I I still at this
point I'm not clear as to how
that integration would happen
I'm not clear from what you said
tonight what zero based
budgeting is in that in the
context of state budgeting.
And I and my hope Mr speaker and
members is that this
Course would be seen as I'm from
land and it would not be
supported appreciate the time
tonight Mr speaker and gentleman
that I'm sure there's others
that may want to ask some
questions thank you there is
further than the gentleman from
Dona Ana Representative small.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
Mr speaker with the gentleman
from Chavis Eddie in Ontario
you.
I'll be happy to yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen yacht Mr speaker and
gentleman in body I'm looking at
the NCSL course at the
nonpartisan national conference
of state legislatures Mr speaker
and gentleman they have looked a
little bit of zero based
budgeting Mr speaker gentleman
it seems to me that this would
be every single year Mr speaker
gentleman every single entity of
state government would
essentially have to almost start
from scratch Mr speaker
gentleman
that is there as the the
gentleman from
Eddie Otero only outlined you
don't really look at past
history
and so Mister speaker gentleman
it leads me to some concerns I
want to ask briefly about Mr
speaker gentleman.
Whether it's educators whether
it's it's our law enforcement
with the state police and with
others.
Mr speaker gentleman whether
it's a whole host of folks who
perform critical state services
it seems like.
at least what from what NCSL as
saying zero based budgeting
would almost make them come
every single year every single
teacher almost and say keep my
job Mr speaker gentleman does
that sound fair to you.
Mr speaker and gentleman John
it's an unfair description of
what zero based budgeting what
you said laws would be unfair
because that is not the intent.
The intent and zero based
budgeting.
Is a process where you would
have departments that would
quite frankly develop as I have
been used to spreadsheets.
Where you detail exactly what
your expenses are you know what
they are based on last year.
Then you take those expenses in
new forecast I'm going forward.
You're not laying off people if
you're not that's not the intent
of zero based budgeting zero
based budgeting is not something
to be afraid of zero based
budgeting us what you do when
you want to get into the nuts
and bolts the nitty gritty of
what it cost you to run your
department.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
Mr speaker and gentleman in
terms of the detailed
spreadsheets detailed
presentations detailed down to
the the kind of the programmatic
level Mr speaker gentleman I
think all of our members see
that in the subcommittee process
through house appropriations and
finance Mr speaker gentleman is
you know as we can share with
the body that New Mexico is one
of a select few states that has
both the legislative the LFC and
exec base budget so there
actually is already more detail
and Mr speaker gentleman it in
the NCSL article that I'm
looking at and obviously we
can't share this on any sort of
big board with the body
that
ignoring of historical precedent
it is one element frankly Mr
speaker gentleman that would
cause me deep concern in that
person services and employee
benefits category because Mr
speaker and gentleman it seems
very much the case that
individual jobs perhaps hope
losses of jobs could be on the
line year to year Mr speaker and
gentleman I want to move on just
briefly it seems like this
this approach may actually
entail more paperwork Mr speaker
gentleman more back and forth
just not about outcomes not
about efforts but in fact Mr
speaker gentleman just a whole
lot of bureaucratic back and
forth looking you know it every
fifteen minutes of the day and
certain departments seeing how
much paper that department is
using that sort of thing Mr
speaker gentleman do you think
maybe we should actually focus.
More on outcomes more on some of
these big topline programmatic
things perhaps.
Speaker and and.
Gentleman I think you would
find.
As most entities that I have
worked with yes found.
That when you require your
manager's.
To become.
Very involved in the budgeting
process.
And you require them.
To.
To detail.
What they're doing.
You're not throwing away
historical
Mr speaker and gentleman you're
not at all throwing away.
Historical information but the
budget you put forward is based
on the plan that you have.
And I
You know insinuating that there
would be layoffs and things like
that that that just not factual.
What you would do.
Yes maybe you would prefer me at
I think you would prevail.
You know our state employees
went ten years without a raise
not too long ago.
Ten years.
And if that was detailed in that
was brought into this body in
people understood the stress
that we put on.
The system sometimes with the
decision to make you just have
more people involved in making
their decision in that
Mr speaker and gentleman I know
it's a big project.
And I know that as the
chairwoman said you're gonna
have to have both of the systems
up and running for a while you
can't just forget one and go to
the other.
The job that you guys do is to
darned important for that.
And that's why it had a half a
million dollars in to so we
could do it and do it right.
And you guys would have the
funding to do something that was
this important.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen Mr speaker gentleman
you're right you put a five
hundred thousand dollar
appropriations on this piece of
legislation Mr speaker and
gentleman we can agree on that
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
unfortunately we would have to
end up disagreeing on the on the
potential for.
Why intense and destructive
swings year to year Mr speaker
gentleman that going to this so
called zero based budgeting
system proposes Mr speaker
gentleman unfortunately.
It seems to me that it actually
dives into
a very bureaucratic back and
forth.
That is yes third to this or
that Mr speaker gentleman that
could be not as connected to
both historical precedent
precedent or to
a a broad sense of future goals
in Mr speaker gentleman I I
think there may be other
discussion but the analysis that
I'm reading is that it is it
could be overall too time
consuming too expensive and
potentially divert the focus
away from some of these outcomes
that Mr speaker gentleman we
should all be working on it
creates an Mr speaker John when
I'm just going to quote now from
NCSL that's the national
conference of state legislatures
great extreme competition and
conflict among and within
agencies over resource
allocation the speaker gentleman
you may think that that wouldn't
be employee a teacher a versus
teacher be state police officer
a versus state police officer be
worried about their job it seems
to me that that is actually
quite possible in this system
and Mr speaker gentleman.
When we step back look at the
extreme rigor with which the
budget is developed now the that
for all legislative and strong
bipartisan approach of the
legislative finance committee
both in the inner
And the staff the year round
staff that's always looking for
efficiencies working to get Mr
speaker gentleman the best
programmatic
Precedence and best practices
from around the country it just
seems to me that this would
divert critical time critical
money Notley necessarily Mr
speaker gentleman to a better
outcome actually a worse one at
a time when we should be working
together under some very
challenging circumstances so I
appreciate Mr speaker gentleman
the discussion Mr speaker
gentleman.
The targeted approach from the
gentleman from Chavez the gentle
lady from Luna any Dogo which is
gone through this vetting
process process focus on
ensuring smaller agencies have a
strong voice in a consistent
voice at the table seems to be
more targeted more tuned less
disruptive but I appreciate very
much the chance to to talk
budgets this evening thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlemen.
is further debate on the
amendment of the Representative
of the gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will
gentleman from.
Chavis to review of the happy
yield Mister speaker.
Speaker and gentleman from.
Then in true the.
Well the concept of zero based
budgeting.
When it comes to public sector
accounting.
Mr chairman this isn't much in
the public sector.
I don't believe but it is
universally done.
And small and large businesses.
This.
Wonder why that is why.
Is the.
Is the disconnect.
In budgeting process is there
and successful companies the
bowling six on state the current
goals the all of those folks.
Start with the budget every
year.
For every agency.
Has to justify has to set up.
Project each.
And.
Yes two Oklahoma.
Is this.
Our storage for rural.
What they had last year.
It starts from.
To be in existence.
The process is that we.
Have a stab list if they don't
get the full four percent that
could be considered so they can
only get three percent.
That could be considered a three
percent.
So.
So.
Budgeting forces.
Agencies in question.
To.
Can we be more effective do you
see that as a positive.
Characteristic of this.
yes Sir Mr speaker and gentleman
my my
My point was by submitting this
Substantive was not to
To throw rocks it was to try and
make the system.
Better.
To make it to where we had.
More detailed.
Where we constantly looked at
how we operate.
And I am I I am constantly
plagued by the thought of every.
So when you go through the
states and you look at how the
state is doing on this on that.
Our state is is not well
represented on those charts.
We're almost.
We're down on the bottom of of
most of.
And I think in order to.
Get us up off of that we're
gonna have to make some changes.
And I changes we shouldn't be
afraid to.
And we shouldn't say that we
don't have time to do it because
that's what we're still Senator
to do is to take the time to do
it right.
And to discuss.
The options that we have in
order to do that right zero
based budgeting in my opinion
will make you a much better
operator.
Speaker and gentleman our group
with you.
Sign.
My perception of that process
would be much as it is for the.
Zero based budgeting.
Would be primarily engaged on
the expenditures.
Where we ask ourselves were
agency just
hopes
how do I do this year.
Where can I do for work and less
expensive.
What can I do better and less
expensive we simultaneously.
When you start from the budget
last year.
Much as justification going all
would you agree Mr.
Mr speaker Jim I agree
wholeheartedly Mr speaker and
gentleman I budgeting should not
be about incrementalism it
should be about looking at our
cost.
M. and trying to make sure that
the tax dollars that we're
spending are being spent in the
most effective and why is this
method.
This legislation a triple for.
Yes.
Actually the trading the change.
What is.
Who is invested.
What the change would be
beneficial.
Four agencies and verify.
The citizens of the state is
under absolutely accurate also I
was trying to do is put the
funding into the process where
we could have the expert
capacity within the process to
do it in a very efficient manner
without taxing the people that
we already have a doing full
time jobs.
There is the potential for
making.
Show full and agencies in this
process is critical for
there's a potential there to
make some people and agencies in
the state uncomfortable.
Well I.
I would have to say that.
If you were doing your job
right.
This should not be stressful at
all.
But because most.
Good managers that I have.
worked with.
Works for and some work for me.
Those people spent the time.
To detail what they were
proposing and and they could
answer the they could answer the
operating questions about what
what it costs so.
I again.
Also this amendment does is put
the The appropriation to where
we can have a good process
vetted out in know what's the
right for the state.
I think
Anything less than that we're
not going to get much for.
Mr Chairman.
Paul discomfort I think this is
thinking of the box.
The process of throwing more
money at a problem that remains
unsolved with more money that
remains unsolved the definition
of insanity.
Mr speaker and gentleman is
the same thing over and over
again expecting different
results.
This.
Advocates for the box solution
that provisions.
Some different results Mr
speaker and gentleman I'll be.
To support your.
Hi there is further debate on
the floor substitute the
gentleman from Cibola McKinley
Representative Akan.
Thank you Mr speaker was the
gentleman from Travis yield.
I'll be happy to.
Thank you.
During other secular going to
get my.
My my computer's computer there
because a.
I'm here at home and I have to
do.
So many different things some.
I want to ask you about your
amendment gentleman.
I'm interested budget amendment
the other gentleman talked about
throwing money away thank you at
five hundred thousand dollars in
you're not going to throw away
and all this doesn't mean others
about zero budget.
My question is about your
amendment.
And the other gentleman jobless.
And the.
Representative this we Original
bill of the one person to us.
As relating state budget
providing for a might Israel
budget by project.
Providing for my annual value by
and you know what.
But.
Brought in the term efficiency
of by annual budget.
Let me go to my other
information paper here other
piece of paper and I'm looking
into our.
So you.
Relating to state budgets
thank you appropriation for the
legislative finance committee to
study the efficiency of my
annual budgeting is zero based
budgeting for state agencies.
Do we gentleman from Chavis.
Why you're supposed to do how is
the same thing as the meal and
the other gentleman from Chavis
percent intuitive.
Certainly Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The the.
The processes are not and
similar.
The process is identify the
need.
To look at.
A different budgeting process
that that most
of the original bill and the
substitute bill identify as bi
annual of.
Budgeting.
The difference is.
My for substitute also includes
the process of zero based
budgeting that's the real
difference.
Mr speaker Travis but your meal.
The.
The fire the.
The project you need to.
Then by annual data bank I see
on the slide into budgeting
so what you're saying is.
The state loan bill committed
some of the bill with the your
name on it
House Bill whatever instead of
the.
Doing this.
Well
Mr speaker and gentleman I did
about three years ago if you go
back and look
also
It's.
The the process is to.
Fund the study.
Process.
That would look in depth and our
budgeting process and try to
figure out what is the best way
to do it and as you well know.
This is a big project.
And doing at.
For nothing without an
appropriation seemed
Seemed like a real stretch I
think we we need to appropriate
for this effort and not put this
at put this workload on the
backs people that are done full
time jobs already.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman in question because
they're not even similar.
Going to be just like that.
Somebody should taken time to
have made a hose reel is trying
to.
Legislation.
I don't know what you would call
it.
If you just do your own
legislation and you're not even
close to the other gentleman
from Travis is.
The answer but I I just do not
understand how you can just.
Get the bill and made it into a
substitute that's my problem
thank you Sir.
All right is there further
debate on the for substance.
Thing on the gentle lady from
during the downturn
Representative guy Mr speaker I
move to table.
There's a motion to table.
a vote in the affirmative and
the four substituted house bill
one sixty five will be tabled
both the negative and we will
return to the bill is now open.
New Mexico.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the remaining
members.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Fajardo.
Vote of forty five in the
affirmative and twenty one of
the negative the floor
substitute is table.
Chavis Eddy and Otero you still
of for thank you Mr speaker
I am
And
I guess not.
Surprise
That this was never intended to
short cut or to second guess the
process in place it was only to
make the process that we're
doing better and bringing
factual information to the
forefront shouldn't be something
that that
Causes any of us in the hand
grant so thank you for the time
Mr speaker and gentleman gentle
lady.
There's further debate on the
bill are the gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr chairman will the
gentleman yield placed.
Representative Anderson.
Madam chair yes I will thank
you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman for yielding I I don't
have any questions just a couple
comments I want to thank you and
Representative Sweetser for
caring this bill hopefully it
will make it through the process
can be signed and be signed by
the governor we're always open
Mr speaker and and members to
doing things veterans and
smarter and I think this is one
of those ways of doing this is
by taking some of the smaller
budgets and looking at those
every two years much like you
would a in in large
corporations.
With that I'm hoping that this
passes and I I appreciate the
time and again I appreciate both
of you carry this bill thank you
there is the gentle lady from
any Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Chavis Lee Ann
Roosevelt please yield.
Yes Mister speaker I will you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so I remember the
discussion we had on this show
in House Appropriations
Committee.
And I I remember the time
thinking that you know we have
to be open to new ideas and that
this this is this by an annual
budgeting is is worth looking at
and
Mr chairman Mr speaker we
understand that the bill was
pocket vetoed in twenty eighteen
by governor Martinez and in
fortunate fact about that is
that usually if there's a veto
message we get to some insight
into why the bill was vetoed in
this case because it was pocket
vetoed we don't have any
information to to help have a so
you know try to understand so
and that's a little bit
unfortunate but I recall in in
Appropriations Committee the
discussion on the bill and then
there was a motion to pass the
bill.
After that motion was stated I
believe that the the chairwoman
asked for any input from I
believe it was the DFA analyst
and department of finance
administration and we were
informed at that point that I
think it's DFA has moved to
acquire some new software
reporting system I I don't
recall the exact name of it.
and the analysts see really
excited about the possibility of
some improvements and
efficiencies coming in with this
new system so Mr speaker and
gentleman do you recall any of
that discussion what we were
told at that point.
Yes Mr speaker lady from Eddie I
do recall of the brief of
of COVID from a DFA analyst and
of.
We.
that issue is that really it is
an issue I believe that Madam
has been resolved and I would.
Be happy to give you further
information if you wish but it
was a COVID I believe perhaps on
on timing and I believe that we
are
I won't say the DFA is is is
completely signed on but I think
the C. has been of discussing
this biennial process is and so
sort of a win win we're by in
the short sixty day and thirty
day sessions we will be able to
vote further comment debate
discussion consideration of our
larger budget items and not drag
these smaller agencies and their
Representative she and four per
log delayed
rolled rolled over budget
hearings in the process so
I'm satisfied that that up there
is no
issue there that that gives me
concern going forward.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman so
thank you very much for that
answer I have I was not aware
there's been some discussions
after the committee hearing and
I just remember thinking that
some I need to have the
information from the analyst
before the motion was maybe we
might have
call back on on the bill to some
extent and my only concern is
that we don't want to be working
at cross purposes and so I will
And Mr speaker gentle take you
up on your offer for some
discussion about this and at
this point just haven't quite
made up my mind on the bill yet
now and I'll just keep listening
to
Other debate so Mister speaker
thank you very much gentleman
thank you.
Seeing no further debate the
gentleman the club's.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm going
to ask in the spirit of the
white tent but bipartisan
passage that Representative
Sweetser make the motion thank
you.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
gentleman from Chavis and
this pilot project is four
thirty nine smaller state
agencies for better budgeting
this bill supports departmental
staff an analyst more
efficiently utilize time and
money in an effective budgeting
process to the gentleman from
any counties point any biennial
budgeting process would have to
be worked into our current
system or the new system to be
acquired by the FAA and I think
everyone is geared up to do that
should this bill pass so that we
do have a more efficient and
effective budgeting process and
with that I move that H. B. one
sixty I do now pass you're on
final passage of house bill one
sixty five the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to the end of the
electronic portion of this vote.
But the remaining members
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong yes Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong both yes
Representative Cook.
The vote is now closed I go to
sixty one in the affirmative
seven the negative.
House bill one sixty five has
duly passed this happens.
I'm gonna move to item number
fourteen the gentle lady ready
on our house bill two twenty
seven Representative Roybal
Caballero.
I yes Mr speaker will you get me
to that point.
But the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill to twenty seven on
final passage is been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment for substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank.
House.
For you house bill two two seven
which is an act and as described
in the description it relates to
public education it defines
ethnic studies.
And it requires ethnic studies
meet the Public Education
Department content and
performance and it provides for
an ethnic studies counsel to
assist the department with
curriculum development and I
will mention I'll quickly Mr
speaker members of the house
that this bill has been
introduced many times throughout
the past few years and I'm happy
to say that it has evolved and
improved each and every time to
the point where we are today and
it incorporates the our ethnic
studies council which will work
directly with the department in
order to be able to standardize
ethnic studies in the public
education from K. twelve K. to
twelve and with that
Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
The gentle lady there is debate
the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady could you just briefly.
describe.
What could be contained in
ethnic studies.
Mr speaker and
Gentlemen I think the best way
to explain
Ethnic studies is from the
promise of community centered.
culturally relevant
linguistically relevant on
historically relevant.
Material educational material
and curriculum that
Elevates and centers.
The gold.
Two interviews and equitable and
more fully Representative
content to our students in all
subject areas.
The purpose of this it's the
purpose of this bill and why we
needed it is so that we are able
to connect all of the
curriculum that's offered to
date.
And incorporate
The R. elements that I just
described in a in a responsive
in coordinated and strategic as
well as systemic ways so that
in it we can institutionalize
our ethnic studies.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I heard you say several
different things that are.
to some degree or another
already taught in our schools I
heard you say.
linguistic.
heard you also say Mr speaker
and gentle lady historic.
So I'm I'm trying to figure out
the the for this to be a half
hour.
Course.
I'm trying to envision what the
course would be what under what.
Category of studies in schools
would this be I'm because once
again I'm hearing history as
part of it.
And
And and linguistics which we
already have language courses in
New Mexico.
So
I guess I'm looking for a little
bit more specifics.
instead of what it could include
maybe I should ask the question
what what do you for see this
including or is there are there
are books out there already is a
Christian after already
Written for for this said type
of study.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
How we tend to or want to
describe ethnic studies commonly
been referred to or defined as
an inter disciplinary approach
and study of race and ethnicity.
And it's understood through the
perspectives of
many different racial groupings
in the United States and it's
used as a means
to understand what I was just
describing the social cultural
intellectual and historical
experiences as they have related
and then constructed in terms of
our racial gender and cultural
identities it's very important
to recognize that as this.
Coach.
It makes studies
takes on
Excuse me.
The study it in it's an
interdisciplinary study of the
history of art social sciences
of the literature humanities and
it it embodies
on the strengths of all and
takes it from the perspective
and the lands of our racial
gender and cultural and
Other identities.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
in San Juan County we we do have
a large the native American
population.
And some of what you're
describing.
Is already available in San Juan
County schools are in particular
for for native American students
language can be taken up all the
way from.
grade school from kindergarten
literally all the way up to high
school.
native American culture classes
exist currently that are
optional this is electives for
kids in in middle school and
high school as well as language
courses and the reason I am.
aware of this is my two youngest
sons both the.
A qualified received the chief
manually to scholarship that's
offered to native American
students
To Navajo students.
in in our area and they took
these courses but they were
separate the.
The language courses were under.
Language electives.
And the the cultural courses
were.
Courses that were.
just electives in general so
what I'm what I'm hearing from
you.
And maybe you can clear this up
if I'm wrong but this appears to
be a half hour.
or a
The half semester.
Course.
that.
Has multiple things in in one
courses that is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
understand it may be difficult
for
For the body and others to
understand the the way in which
Regula is developed and
approaches are developed in
terms of the field of of ethnic
studies so and that's why I was
Explaining that it incorporates
and empower students and gives
them the critical thinking the
sense of empowerment
their wellness and academic
success and build up their
knowledge about race and
ethnicity and their histories
and embodies and integrate that
into the various subject matter
coming from Mr speaker and
gentleman.
From a sense of their own
identity so that is integrated
in all of the subjects feels in
a manner in which it challenges
not only and not it not only
educates but it challenges
critical thinking and it allows
the cultural identity of that
student to be identified with
within the processes and the
historical
Evolutions of all of our
academic feels and subject
matters and so it it has to be
seen as an integration.
An inter disciplinary so it's
not.
A linear object Mr speaker or a
linear subject but it is an
approach that encompasses.
The regular curriculum and it
uses books and articles and and
general.
Our taxed the Tereos that are
able to integrate that approach
within the subject matters that
are being talked Mr speaker and
gentleman.
the speaker gentle lady.
I I know that
as well as in San Juan county is
as well as the.
A native American and and the
and specific Navajo curriculum
that we have in our school
systems we have the same
curriculum for Hispanic students
Hispanic culture.
As well I I'm I'm just saying
redundancy here as far as there
being an electives that already.
Do much of this some trying to
see.
What the what the differences
between what you're offering up
and what is already in school so
maybe you could.
Maybe you could differentiate
between.
Those language studies and and
and and history.
That a Hispanic and native
American students in New Mexico
are already able to take in
across the state.
So Mr speaker and gentleman I am
all alone.
Recall you to the introduction
of the bill and in the
introduction of the bill I
indicated that the objective is
to
Work with in in require ethnic
studies.
In content and performance as.
The public education department
develop sits curriculum so that
it's not just next thirties for
parade at but not necessarily
stand alone there's no
redundancy ethnic studies as a
quarter cent an approach.
Is a general framework for
approaching.
Subject matter.
The.
Perspective.
On.
The cultural racial historical
and ethnic identity.
All of the communities that are
represented by the students so
it seems that.
In Navajo the country that you I
mean the Navajo in the county in
San Juan County Mr speaker and
gentleman that you're describing
they actually
Are
a good example an excellent
example if in fact
that is the way in which and the
extent is is being incorporated
within the curriculum and
approaches as they exist now
what this bill.
Attempts to do is to.
This time is institutionalized
this right approach integral
approach
In a manner in which it will
Remain long term.
Systemic insisted and
institutionalized with the and
how we approach our public
education so Mister speaker and
and gentleman it's not like
we're taking a course so to
speak of ethnic studies
we are taking an approach to
integrate.
This these that we've just
described in your describing as
well into the curriculum and how
that will come about Mr speaker
and gentleman is.
Putting.
The brilliant minds we have and
talent that we have and
professionals in the field.
To be able to work with the
public education department in
order to develop those
approaches.
In a manner in which we can then
find that curriculum.
In an integrated manner and
that's you know what Mr speaker
and gentleman if you were in if
if all of us were in the
profession of curriculum
development at the level.
higher education that does this
on a day in and day out basis it
would be
something that we could
exemplify in a manner on.
In a manner in which we can use
the examples that you've used
and be able to further described
them and so the purpose of the.
Ethnic studies council which
will be comprised of all of
these rural experts and
professionals in various fields
of education and higher
education and that are already
involved in curriculum
development their charge will be
Mr speaker and gentleman to.
That integrate these approach
into the day today curriculum so
that students will have.
From what we know it's been
successful educational
attainment and that is when we
integrated at the earliest stage
of education.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Throughout.
Excuse me
we know then that we are
solidifying the child the child
from early childhood through
high school through elementary
high school and middle school
middle school and high school
and on with the foundational
I'm just that ethnic studies
being incorporated.
Yes value and importance to what
that child.
Total unity brings in their in
their wholeness Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The speaker and gentle lady
So.
I am a little confused it it
appears as if what you're
talking about is integrating
ethnic studies.
Into every.
Subject but I believe the way
the bill is written is is it as
if it's a course.
and.
I mean if it's if it's courses I
I believe they already exist in
electives so
if that's if that's incorrect.
please explain that to me a it
it does it appears to me what
we're talking about is adding.
An extra credit.
Here but it sounds to me what
you're describing is.
That all of education every.
Every subject would have ethnic
studies incorporated into it or
is that is that wrong.
And I've already
I think taken different ways in
which to answer your question
and I was hoping that you'd be
able to
Clarity for the clarity again
it's an approach and it's a tool
it's a mechanism
that we the educational
curriculum
can use and integrate so it's
it's not it's not any of the
things that you just brought up
again it's it's an approach it's
a way it's an integration of a
field of studies within every
aspect of curriculum there's no
other way that I can describe it
I can keep coming taking
different ways of doing it Mr
speaker and gentleman but that
that basically is what
thanks what this bill attempts
will be doing is further
Further allowing the council the
communities a professional
communities and the PED to
integrate this approach.
Thank you Mr speaker and
generally I think I think what I
heard of that is that it it's.
An approach to teaching all
subjects is that correct Mr
speaker gently.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
that's correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so.
All state all courses math
English science history.
Language all of it.
Would be funneled through the
lands.
Of ethnic studies.
Is that correct Mr speaker
gently Mr speaker and gentleman
that that's another way to put
that
It yes because it's taking the
approach of the
What I just described to you so
that is another way to put it
that's correct you could put it
that way.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady from from that standpoint
All.
Of so I think studies coming
from the standpoint of a new
minority.
Let's say for lack of a better
word minority point of view.
Whether it's
native American African American
and Hispanic American.
All of that role together as a
and approach to teach all
subjects is is that correct Mr
speaker gently.
Mr speaker and gentleman will
you restate that please.
Speaker and and gentle lady it's
Using the broad term of ethnic
studies.
It would be from the standpoint
all subjects would be taught
from the standpoint.
Of.
Being a minority whether it's
Hispanic and native American
African American Asian American
it's this whole.
Collage of some of.
Being a minority and then
teaching these subjects through
that lens is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
When we speak of ethnic studies
were speaking of ethnic
identities.
Ethnic identities that are
associated
with race and culture and and
our identities and these are
ethnic identities Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady at to me it seems like this
could.
Actually dilute.
The perspective of someone who
has.
A very specific identity if
their native American or if
they're Hispanic or if they're
African American.
It seems if we're taking this
approach.
That it will actually.
Has the potential of of having
folks who have a specific
identity if this is all rolled
into the overall.
Concept of ethnic studies it
seems to me like a we could
potentially.
Harms the individual identity.
Of a specific minority groups
who can take.
Currently.
Electives that are specific.
To their ethnicity or to their
race.
do you disagree with that Mr
speaker gentle lady and so.
why would you disagree with
that.
Mr speaker and
Another wait I think that you
might add clarity to you.
is that it is a way of including
more diverse view.
Communities in the state and the
country and so that every
student benefits from this
approach so it's a way in which
we can begin to break down
racial barriers all racial
injustice us we can begin to use
By having this diverse view of
the communities incorporated and
all that we do then in
incorporated and all of the
interdisciplinary approach us
then it provides from multiple
perspectives
as the students examined social
ethnic cultural gender and
historical experiences in
history so perhaps that's more
helpful to you
Mr speaker and gentleman.
So thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady the reason I'm I'm
confused is because in the
legislation it's.
Going to be considered one half
unit.
in ethnic studies one half unit
twenty appears that this goes
beyond.
A single subject matter it when
I'm hearing approach.
I'm trying to figure out how
that Dan would boil down to a
half of unit of credit.
For for ethnic studies if it's.
As of what I'm hearing a blended
approach in multiple.
Disciplines.
Mr speaker and gentleman are you
asking half is that your
question now.
Yes Mr speaker generally how how
we able to consider that one
half unit if it's not the
course.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
these these are the kinds of
questions that.
The
Public Education Department
along with
The council and all the
professionals.
Will be.
Developing right now as the
curriculum standards stand of
stand.
and the high school requirements
and graduation requirements
this is the.
Point five credit out of the
entire four credits of social
sciences in that arena that
that's where that.
Will be given to be afforded
were offered however this is
exactly you're you're you're
hitting on Mr speaker and
gentleman exactly what will need
to be continue to be developed
and what will have to evolve out
of the public education to
departments professionals along
with our higher educational
professionals those that are in
the research and in the school
of education and all those that
will be involved in further
developing and directing the
development of this makes any
sense interdisciplinary approach
into our school on curriculum.
Some speaker gently maybe maybe
I finally understand we may be
introducing it as a course
initially but what we're looking
at doing is it.
Not just being a a a course for
a.
half credit.
That the student would be able
to receive but.
Eventually by putting this
council in place.
We would be looking at
integrating.
Ethnic studies.
Into into disciplines into
history into language into what
what wherever else it would fit.
Beyond just a half credit it is
that what you foresee Mr speaker
generating.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
could be the result of this
process I am it's hard to did
make that determination at this
point right now we do have
effective programs
that are in place that have been
in place and they will obviously
be in involved in the
evaluation and the incorporation
as the council explores ways in
which to integrate the ethnic
studies with the public
education department so it's
hard it's hard to tell how this
will leave off at the objective
is to begin to institutionalize
this effort so that it becomes
a fully are you developed
curriculum approach and that
students will have the benefit
from.
The elementary school level all
the way through high school and
then they'll know what the
expectation is in terms of by
the time they get to wherever
the credits begin to on the wall
for on various requirements Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady as mentioned earlier my.
For voice
through school the the courses
that they took that were
offered.
And the electives that were
offered and and
my wife and I always make sure
that they took language courses
both has been both Spanish and
Navajo and took the specific
courses that were there that
were culturally relevant for our
family.
but the Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Going all the way back to when I
was in school that is a long
time ago.
we lose all of that was
integrated already.
In studies that it at least in
San Juan County I cannot speak
for the state but because of our
large native American population
are large spanning population
entering the population it was
kind of all mixed together but.
Well I was in school it was.
All part of what was
Considered to be New Mexico
history.
And just through New Mexico
history able to learn about
quite frankly the good the bad
and the ugly of our country.
And
The.
A couple of weeks or be about
two weeks ago
we passed another bill out of
here
that took high school credit a
half unit credit.
For New Mexico history removed
it.
from.
the curriculum requirements for
New Mexico.
students graduate high school.
And we replaced it with what was
half unit of economics for
financial literacy was widely
supported by this body as so
widely supported I'm the only
one who voted against it because
what we were removing was New
Mexico history from high high
school curriculum
interestingly enough.
I've received over a lot of the
controversial bills during the
session I received a lot of
emails texts and phone calls
from people who had my phone
number on these other
controversial bills and
expressed how that.
You know I should vote on
different topics but when when I
of.
Fought for New Mexico history to
remain as a requirement for for
high school students ninth to
twelfth grade.
for that half units of credit I
received more positive.
texts emails and phone calls
from people who said yes New
Mexico has a very unique diverse
history and we need to continue.
Teaching that we and the at the.
A bit of exasperation I heard
from folks that.
How in the world.
Can the New Mexico legislature.
Do away with New Mexico history.
As a credit.
For high school.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
based on all of the phone calls
and emails and contacts that are
received from constituents
across the state.
I have an amendment that I'd
like to submit for consideration
and basically it takes exactly
what you have.
in your bill.
The only difference is it allows
for
Students in New Mexico to either
choose.
One half unit of ethnic studies
or one half unit of New Mexico
history and Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
As I have a brief
Bit of debate on that bill
couple of weeks ago
New Mexico history is amazing.
It is good bad and ugly and so
Mister speaker.
I would like at this time to
submit.
House floor amendment one to
house bill.
Two twenty seven.
And the two oh two number is two
two zero three oh two point one.
K. Germans contest that is on
the website gentleman to explain
the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker once again
just briefly it takes the
legislation that's been
introduced and it leaves in
place what was passed a couple
of weeks ago of the one half
unit of economics and financial
literacy remains in place that
is I believe very important that
and and the body including
myself support that but not at
the expense of New Mexico
history so instead of looking to
replace what was a passed out of
this house a couple weeks ago
what this legislation would do
it would allow a choice for New
Mexico students to choose one
half unit of ethnic studies or
one half unit of New Mexicos
incredible history.
Thank you we'll go to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo is this a
friendly amendment.
Mr speaker I looking at the
requirements on right now and
the suggestion that the
gentleman is making an amendment
and it is and I'm Planning
amendment Mr speaker because New
Mexico histories already in
ninth grade
requirement and Mister speaker
it all of the points that
the gentleman presented in his
amendment
Are already afforded all his
arguments solely New Mexico
histories already all part of
the requirements so Mister
speaker it's and I'm from the
amendment.
The the gentle lady is there
debate on the amendment.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from San Juan you'll.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman my neighbor and San
Juan County.
Mr speaker John from San Juan as
I understand the underlying
bill.
Of the the new course called
ethnic studies is required in
order for all students to
graduate is that correct.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman and
Mr speaker and gentleman just to
briefly correct what the sponsor
of the bill
just stated currently today.
A half.
A credit.
Of New Mexico history is
required in ninth grade but Mr
speaker and gentle lady the
legislation that passed out of
here just two weeks ago removes
that requirement so that
as incorrectly stated that that
that will be what is required of
students going forward if the
other bill passes out of it
passes out of the Senate and
goes to the governor for her
signature and she signed it.
Mr speaker.
As I understand it anymore
though it it still allows a
student to take ethnic studies
if your seat she needs so she is
that correct.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
that's exactly what it does it
still allows for anyone who
wants to take that particular
course to take ethnic studies
but it also allows.
For a student to have what quite
frankly I think you and I and
everybody who graduated in New
Mexico schools had as a version
of ethnic studies as we grew up
and we went to the schools here
in New Mexico New Mexico history
is very much.
About the different ethnicities
and different cultures and how
we all live together in New
Mexico.
Mr speaker John from San Juan I
think one of the the changes
we've seen in terms of
legislative offices in education
is more of a move towards
flexibility for students
Are we like to think of students
being able to take control of
their own education.
And it seems like to me that if
you give them an option students
that are interested in and one
half you of ethnic studies would
have the option if they thought
that was a good choice.
Otherwise they can choose New
Mexico history.
But it seems like also the
underlying bill by adding this
is another required course.
Reduces the number of elective
classes that a student can
choose from is that correct.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
that's that one of the reasons
that I believed that if we
introduce this as an option it
would essentially it would just
be really just a
eight and elective but you are
still directed into something
that is going to teach you about
cultures and so ethnic studies
it one way to teach it and other
would be through the lens of New
Mexico history.
Thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate clarification and I
do support the minutes thank
you.
You for the debate on the
amendment the gentleman for San
Juan Representative Strickler
thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from San Juan please
yield.
Yes Mister speaker I yield to
the other gentleman from San
Juan County thank you challenge
other
You know I have seven kids
graduated from Farmington
schools and and the they they
took will history they took they
took New Mexico history and they
learn a lot about our our
ancestors in the state and and I
think this is a good amendment
because it's an option I don't
think I think parents need that
option.
we we stress Advanced Placement
classes in math and science to
place other credits when you go
to college and helps helps mom
and dad pay for your college and
to not have an opt out or not
have an option.
The end of the that the
underlying bill has just.
I don't think that's appropriate
and and I love education I know
you do too you have you have
four kids graduated from a
formed in schools so all I can I
to me it's a if you want to a
Catholic studies you may do so
our New Mexico history that
incorporate sent I can't I can't
imagine.
having any more courses and one
course through twelve years of
study I mean what can you go
over a committee for the spring
basic so thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentleman.
Next to the gentle lady from
granted although in the Sierra
Representative Dow thank thank
you Mr speaker
with the gentleman yield.
I yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from grant Hidalgo
and Sierra counties thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen and
I served on the Education
Committee and there has been a
handful in half a dozen or so
bills that looked at revising
our graduation standards which I
think Mr speaker and gentleman
your ability Russ's what grades.
Mr speaker gentle lady high
school so ninth grade to twelfth
grade thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen and one of the
bills that we discussed with
financial literacy and I don't
know if you're you're not
education but I assume because
we will eventually vote on these
bills that you've received the
justice full lighting of
requests to support financial
literacy education Mr speaker
gentle and have you experience
not.
I yes Mr speaker generally we I
have this matter fact I I think
it's required I think with the
Of the with debit cards.
replacing that checks.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think today there's a greater
need for financial literacy
because
the way I see
A.
New
Self sufficient let's say it
adults people who have left
their homes and are now making
their way on their own
Z. way that that I see many of
them budget is based on.
Plus what they see as the number
of the ATM machine on the day
that they go to the ATM machine
so I I do believe and I have
received a bunch of calls about
financial literacy and I do
believe that is something as
prime necessary more necessary
now than than ever thank you Mr
speaker thank you John and I'm
and I agree with you
and so it was interesting to me
in the committee that part of
the discussion was there was no
appropriation bill there is no
way to provide financial
literacy even as of elective and
Mr speaker and gentleman it it
had opposition people voted no
on the bill people supporting
this bill and signed on to this
bill voted no for financial
literacy causes that there is no
funding for the curriculum
development Mr speaker and
gentleman and I thought it was
interesting because you can do a
Google search in the nearly
every bank every
credit union every financial
brokerage offers free financial
literacy course for youth and
many times their staff will
teach the courses so not only
was the evidence that was the
curriculum that aligns with our
construction standards handed to
PED at no cost provided to the
schools at no cost to community
schools after school programs to
extended learning at no cost
sometimes even with the
volunteers to into the
instruction the bill still had
opposition and the reason from
the committee was we are going
to do a comprehensive a study in
the interim of the change the
high school graduations and this
bill doesn't have appropriation
Mr speaker gentleman there is a
comprehensive look that's coming
out curriculum standards I
support what you're saying and I
understand the need for it but I
think some of the folks that
again I financial literacy we
have to take because I building
for this bill when they were so
adamant that we must provide
funding and time for PED to
implement such dramatic changes
in financial literacy is already
elective Mr speaker gentleman is
your.
Your proposed amendment already
available as early curriculum is
already approved what what
across the state to implement
your amendment thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady
currently this is being taught.
Of New Mexico history currently
is a requirement for graduating
high school and so Mister
speaker July there there it
would be no cost to implement
this as it is Mr speaker and
gentle lady I don't serve on
education but the phone calls
that I received after our vote
on the floor on the last bill
that introduced at put financial
literacy in place and pulled out
of New Mexico history as a
requirement I received a bunch
of phone calls a lot of contact
and I made some very specific
points on the floor that night
about New Mexico history and its
value and I and on those issues
I had many people reach out
because of how passionate they
were about New Mexico history
and is not affected speaker and
and
the gentle lady I had the the
people who are in around this
building who also came and
talked about how important New
Mexico history was to them and
the speaker and gentle lady said
a couple of points that were
repeated back to me about New
Mexico history as being
important was the fact that New
Mexico has not always been.
The size and shape that it is
today Mr speaker and gentle lady
New Mexico used a compass almost
half of the continental United
States under the New Mexico
territory.
The New Mexico territory Santa
Fe was the capital of nearly
half of the United States.
so if there's one state in the
nation that should talk about
that it is us.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
it's something that that would
that would that to me is that
was always a sense of pride.
That New Mexico was.
All the way from Texas all the
way to California and Mr speaker
generated just a very specifics
of that of our unique history
our unique blend of ethnicities.
Once again as I stated earlier
the good the bad and the ugly
our history is not been.
Always at a shining star but
miss and gentle lady I've I've
always held to the saying that
those who forget their history
are destined to repeat history
and so Mister speaker and gentle
lady I I think that one of the
things that New Mexico history
has taught us over time is how
different groups can learn to
live together maybe not in
perfect unity but with
forgiveness with compassion and
with us empathy and with a sense
of belonging together so Mister
speaker and gentle lady just to
let you know that
It are some of the comments that
I heard back from constituents
across the state.
But to to your initial point it
is already paid for it is in our
schools and has been taught
since I went to grade school
here in New Mexico.
Years ago thank you Mr speaker
and thank you John and so it in
this particular bill of which
you are proposing an amendment
it creates according to the
sponsor integrates into every
aspect in every subject to the
whole student approach and just
makes just make a curriculum
which is going to take time and
money for my counsel and would
and Mr speaker gentleman your
proposing that New Mexico
history is ethnic study and I
think I'd have to agree to
because I'm on page fifteen of
the bill M. and your amendment
aligns with the intent of the
bill Mr speaker gentleman the
definition of ethnic study in
this bill is inter disciplinary
study of multiple perspectives
through the examination of
social ethnic culture gender and
historical experiences to build
critical thinking skills Mr
speaker and gentleman what in
New Mexico history is left out
of this definition.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think that is a great definition
of at least what I was taught in
school and what even today or as
few as ten years ago when my
youngest son graduated high
school was still being taught at
least in Farmington schools I
cannot say what's happening
across units across the the
state.
But at least in Farmington
schools that's what's being
taught.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John and does your amendment
change any of the other aspects
of the visionary
perspective of the sponsor for
this institutional change the
systematic change does it affect
any of the commission or the K.
three curriculum that she would
like to see happen in New Mexico
and no Mr speaker and gentle
ideas matter fact that that was
the initial line of my
questioning of the sponsor was
that currently you can take
courses
in New Mexico that are very
specific to especially racial
identity and so so language and
hissed history and culture are
all taught currently
in in schools across New Mexico.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you John so what your
amendment does is give the
option of ethnic studies or New
Mexico history as a choice of
those two credits are required
but it doesn't preclude either
ethnic studies or New Mexico
studies from including ethnic
studies they would both include
ethnic studies but the focus of
the New Mexico history credit
would be more geography a little
bit more at folks that are fun
New Mexico okay that wouldn't
preclude it from including
anything that examine social
ethnic culture gender historical
experiences that building
critical thinking skills no as a
matter fact Mr speaker and
gentle lady as we have heard
more about ethnic studies over
the past several years are we
seeing New Mexico history in
particular be taught with a
little bit more of that
perspective so it's already at
least in New Mexico history but
US history as well US history
also takes a little bit more
broad view not just what New
Mexico the the the mix of races
in the next of histories and the
we were mixing of cultures in
New Mexico United States history
has
also has what you might call the
greater
ethnic studies already
incorporated into it.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John so it seems like the
amendment is a win win it
doesn't preclude.
Anything proposed in the bill
for being accomplished because
the purpose of the bill is to
have ethnic studies integrated
in literally everything as is
described by the sponsor
including it sounds like math
home you know literacy and so it
doesn't preclude just expertise
reincorporate into Mexico
history but it does give
response to the public outcry
that we keep New Mexico history
as part of our our high school
graduation requirements and so
it makes a lot of sense it seems
like a win win win for the
sponsor who has a
Of.
Commitment to culture and ethnic
groups and a commitment to New
Mexico citizens and parents have
asked that their students
continue to receive New Mexico
history so thank you very much
for the minute.
Thank you Mr speaker
I.
Of I appreciate that and and
that is the very purpose of what
I'm trying to do is just keep
New Mexico history as an option
the gentle lady from guardian.
Thank you Mr speaker I move to
table.
Generally is in motion is to
table the amendment voted yes.
The member will be tabled vote
of no we will be back on to
debate their of the vote is now
open.
Forty five seconds to close.
Search other members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes to table Representative
Harry Garcia both yes
Representative Lewis.
Those close by a vote of forty
two in the affirmative twenty
for the negative.
The amendment has been tabled.
Our members we said we're gonna
stop at ten o'clock so the
gentle lady from Bernalillo can
I ask you to please roll this
bill and we'll pick it up
tomorrow it's ten oh eight so
we're a little past our window
one wanted to stop but I think
folks on on staff appreciate if
we could pause we've had an hour
of debate on this measure we can
pick it up in the morning.
Mr speaker and it is entirely at
your pleasure and I agree thank
you.
I do agree actually gentle lady
I've got a message from the
Republican floor leader that
they will not come off the board
was going to vote that okay
Sosina further debate gentlelady
to quickly close we can let the
staff go home.
Mr speaker and for the sake of
the one involved in specially
our hard working staff I now
move house bill two to seven do
now pass.
House Bill to twenty seven the
vote is now open.
Will.
This report.
One minute to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Anderson.
No Representative Anderson votes
no Representative Lewis.
The vote is now closed by the
forty four the affirmative
twenty five negative I'm sorry
forty two in the affirmative
twenty five negative house bill
two twenty seven has duly passed
the house at ten ten PM.
Gentlelady from Dona.
Thank you Mr speaker for you go
to announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered.
Are there now since the gentle
lady from McKinley and to San
Juan chair woman Munster.
Thank you Mr speaker good
evening everyone tomorrow nine
AM HDFC thank you.
Members say no the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
chairman Garcia.
Thank you as the most Baker R.
as the more speaker the tall
dark and handsome and lovely and
who local government land grants
and cultural affairs committee
will meet promptly at eleven
o'clock tomorrow not one minute
before not one minute after so
members and presenters be there
or be sponge Bob square pants
members take note are there
other announcements.
Jelly belly Representative
Chasey.
With the generators running and
representative Cadena.
Mr speaker.
House judiciary will meet at
nine thirty tomorrow morning.
Members take note are there
other announcements.
I have one we have a.
generic bill this is house bill
three three one house bill three
three one.
Representative
undressed Romero.
Two oh two number is two two
zero five three five point one.
Again the two oh two number is
two two.
Zero five three five point one
this is house bill three thirty
one.
House Bill three thirty one.
Representative address Romero.
Is ordered removed from the
rules committee printed and
referred to the Education
Committee House Bill three three
one.
Remove from rules printed
referred to the Education
Committee two oh two numbers two
two zero five three five point
one.
Are there any other
announcements.
Gentlelady from million.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we adjourn until tomorrow at
twelve thirty.
The members thank you for today
work.
Please be sure at folks at home
to watch our committee meetings
happening tomorrow enjoy the
rest of your evening stay safe
wear your mask the house is in
recess until twelve thirty PM
tomorrow.
