Members roll call is closed we
have a quorum.
Please rise for today's
indication offered to us by the
gentle lady from McKinley San
Juan Representative Johnson.
Creator Holly Madison Holley
deity's holy instruments on this
beautiful day and through our
life creator you know us you
know what is in our hearts and
you know our purpose in life.
And as you know us creator we
ask that you alert us in a week
just to you your word and your
actions creator we asked only
for a good way.
Lester Holmes toucher families
and our hearts with your ways of
strength wisdom protection and
love.
Creator as you know us we thank
you and we ask all these
blessings and we always include
our homes our families our
communities our veterans our
elders are advocates are
constituents and the staff that
we work with everyone we work
with here in the legislature.
In beauty it is finished amen.
The gentle lady Jennifer curry
Representative Crowder would you
please leave us in the pledge of
allegiance.
Generally familiar
Representative Figueroa are you
there would you like to leave
this in the pledge of allegiance
and just by your.
Or.
Our system also needles
Dominican yeah we got ten person
to.
Still the holy ghost in the
same.
You received those.
And the generally from grand
augments year would you please
this and saluting New Mexico's
like.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr.
Mr speaker and members of the
house Mr speaker I move that we
go to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hearing objection
disorder.
Good afternoon everyone.
This is our last day standard
time.
Don't forget to set your clocks
forward tonight.
Are there any nonsense.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee reports.
No objections were.
to read.
Mr speaker Education Committee
team is been referred Senate
bill two ten as amended has had
it under consideration point and
was recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair.
Unanimous consent of the
committee force rescue other act
fund single vote reflection
journals are directed funded
visually hearing objections work
where to eat.
Senate bill two seventy one to
pass respectfully submitted G.
Andrés Romero chair.
The speaker move adoption a
committee report right of action
favorable committee reports the
Senate bill two ten is amended
and Senate bill two seventy one
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye hi right
this was may three point
reduction.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to miss been referred house bill
three twenty seven has had it
under consideration reports in
with recommendation that it do
not pass that house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill three
twenty seven do pass
respectfully submitted a tunnel
master's chair unanimous consent
obviously point right the other
act fund single both like to the
journal so they're acted upon
individually hearing objections
order where to eat.
House Bill three twenty eight do
not pass House commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill three
twenty eight do passed.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
six.
Do passed as amended
respectfully submitted on twenty
Maestas chair.
Move adoption Mr speaker we are
on an option of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
three twenty seven but a
favorable committee report on
commerce and economic
development committee says to
for us for three twenty seven
unfavorable committee report on
house bill three twenty but a
favorable committee report of
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House of three twenty eight
in a favorable committee report
essentially sure twenty seventy
percent of those sixty six as
amended all as a favor please
signify by saying aye.
I think.
Committee perspective.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill seventy one.
Has had it under consideration
poor thing with recommendation
that it do passed as amended
respectfully submitted over
Armstrong chair unanimous
consent of the three percent
together act on a single vote
reflection journal so they
rectified individually hearing
objections order clear to me
Senate bill one twenty three two
pass respectfully submitted
Deborah Armstrong chair.
Move adoption your adoption fee
rules committee for the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute.
For a judicial censure Curley
substitute.
Percent of seventy one is
amended.
And what the point of the one
twenty three all those in favor
please signify by saying aye I.
This was nay reports doctors.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to is been referred
Senate bill thirty four has had
it under consideration point
image recommendation that a D.
pass respectfully submitted a
heck of a real chair.
The move adoption Mr speaker
we're adoption of state wrote
the report on Senate bill thirty
for all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
Right.
Reports about the.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee tomb is been referred
house bill two eleven has had it
under consideration for state
with recommendation that I do
passed as amended.
And then through for to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Gail Chasey chair unanimous
consent that the reports are
together acted upon a single
vote reflection the generals and
directed on individually here
match actions order click to
read.
House memorial thirteen to pass.
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill
Senate bill fifteen and one
ninety nine as amended to pass
as amended.
House joint resolution thirteen.
Do you pass.
House joint resolution fourteen
two passed.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
twelve to pass.
Senate Bill to nineteen do pass
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
With someone like to that
option.
We are adoption favorable
committee for sensible to eleven
is amended house more thirteen
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill
fifteen and one ninety nine as
amended has tried resolution
thirteen house joint resolution
fourteen Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute.
A bill twelve the Senate bill
two nineteen all those in favor
please signify by saying aye I.
They reports are drafted.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker for you go
to messages.
no objections so ordered.
Regionales Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation no
objections were click to read.
Senate bill twenty three as
amended introduced by Senator
Padilla and after laying to
health coverage and acting
sections of the health care
purchasing Act The New Mexico
insurance code the health
maintenance organization law and
the nonprofit health care plan
law to establish limits on cost
sharing and co insurance for
chiropractic physician services
Senate bill twenty three as
amended.
Senator twenty three is amended
having been read twice by title
is referred to the health and
Human Services Committee.
Senate bill sixty one as amended
introduced by Senator Gerald
Ortiz Y. Pino for the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and after
leading to health and acting the
role primary care clinician loan
repayment act providing for loan
repayment program to assist
rural primary care organizations
to recruit and retain eligible
clinicians creating funds making
appropriation Senate bill sixty
one as amended.
Senator sixty one is amended
having been read twice by title
is referred to the health and
Human Services Committee.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
twenty nine and act relating to
economic development and acting
the healthy food financing act
creating the healthy food
financing program in the
economic development department
creating equitable food oriented
development advisory board
establishing powers and duties
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
twenty nine.
Senate finance committee such a
two percent bill two two nine
having been read twice by title
is referred to the health and
Human Services Committee.
Senate bill two eighty five
introduced by Senator Ivey Soto
and act relating to behavioral
health allowing emergency
medical technicians or emergency
responders to transport a person
for emergency mental health
evaluation and care in the
absence of a court order if the
person provide consent or at the
request of a peace officer under
limited circumstances Senate
bill two eighty five.
Senate bill two eighty five min
read twice by title is referred
to the Judiciary Committee.
Senate for substitute for Senate
bill two ninety nine act
relating to special registration
plates requiring the taxation
and revenue department to
establish a design element that
did not significant mobility
limitation and to issue that
design elements on another
special registration plate if
requested by a person who
qualifies.
Creating a standardized
registration plate for where the
public purposes providing for
specialized registration decals
for supporters of where the
public purposes making
appropriations Senate for
substitute for Senate bill two
ninety nine.
Sen forces you resent go to
ninety nine having been read
twice by title is referred to
the.
Taxation and revenue committee.
Senate bill three twenty eight
introduced by Senator Gonzales.
An act relating to taxation
removing the six year limitation
on imposition of the water and
sanitation gross receipts tax
Senate bill three twenty eight.
Senator three twenty eight
having been read twice by title
is referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
The generator's going into.
Thank you Mr speaker for you go
to third reading of legislation.
Hearing no objection it is so
ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative parents are you
ready on item number one.
Yes I am Mr speaker can you get
me to that point let the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing Senate bill fifty one on
final passage is been taken.
Gentlelady to explain it all.
Mr speaker Senate bill fifty one
would allow charter schools to
give enrollment preference is to
children of employees of the
charter school whether their
custodians are teachers starting
in the twenty one to twenty two
school year this is a widespread
policy at every public a
traditional school across the
state and so this would expanded
to charter school employees and
with that I stand for questions.
The noted right gentle lady to
close.
Mr speaker I move a do pass for
Senate bill fifty one.
We're on final passage of Senate
bill fifty one the vote is now
open.
Those are closed my vote of
fifty I'm sorry the clerk to
call members without a recorded
vote.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong votes
yes Representative Brown.
Representative Cadena.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Cook yes
Representative Cook both yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
votes yes.
Representative Stansbury.
There isn't closed by.
A vote of fifty seven in the
affirmative.
Three the negative Senator fifty
once passed the house.
That's a good idea to as
gentlelady from Rio Arriba Santa
Fe inTaos are you ready on that
item.
I am Mr speaker will you give me
to that point.
The record reflect all action
necessary for placing Senate
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee substitute
percent bill two seventy three
on final passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker this bill
is just relating to libraries
and guessing clarifying language
in some definitions that two of
the word rural library and dealt
with and I stand for questions.
C. noted right gentle lady
close.
Mr speaker I move that sent in
the in rural and cultural
affairs committee says to pay
for Senate bill two seventy
three do now pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill two seventy three
the vote is now open.
The clerk to call members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lara votes yes
Representative Nibert.
Representative votes yes
Representative Stapleton.
Eight six is yes.
One Representative Anderson both
yes sixty one refers urinated
Senate you were on cultural
affairs for the subsea resemble
to seventy three has passed the
house.
Next read item three gentleman
from Bernalillo Santa are you
ready on Senate bill one forty
Mr speaker I'm ready if you get
me that point that the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing Senate bill one forty on
final passage is been taken the
gentleman to explain it all Mr
speaker this modernizes child
support payments and is
consistent with federal law on
with that'll stand for
questions.
Seeing no debate the gentleman
close Mr speaker I'm out now I
now move the Senate bill one
forty stress amended do now pass
on final passage of Senate bill
one forty is amended the vote is
now open.
The director of the member
without a recorded the.
Representative Chasey.
There is a closer to sixty to
the firm is here the negative
Senate bill one forty as amended
has passed the house.
gentlelady from may not are you
ready item for.
I am Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent of the house but the
rules be suspended in the record
show that all action for placing
Senate bill two hundred as
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution.
Gentlelady to explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
two hundred incorporates the
telehealth definition in the
dental practices act and will
ultimately increase access to
dental hygiene care throughout
the state I allowing dentists
hygienists and dental therapists
utilize modern technology to
assess and treat patients The
New Mexico dental association is
in full support and I stand for
questions.
See no debate gentle lady to
close thank you Mr speaker I
move that Senate bill two
hundred as amended do now pass.
We are final passage of Senate
bill two hundred is amended the
vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
that are recorded the.
Representative Anderson.
Anderson GS Representative
Anderson both yes what is closed
but to sixty four the formative
zero negative Senate bill two
hundred as amended has passed
the house.
Next good item I generally defer
Santa Fe are you ready on that I
thank you Mr speaker can you get
to that point with the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing Senate bill twenty seven
with an emergency clause on
final passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain it all
thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
twenty seven the preservation of
housing act is a bill introduced
by Senator Rodriguez and the
Senate would expand the purpose
of the housing trust fund to
allow the mortgage finance
authority to assist New Mexicans
with a variety of needs
including rental mortgage
assistance housing council
housing counseling our down
payment assistance horrible to
rehabilitation weather is ation
and many other pieces it
simplifies any appropriations
process also for MFA as well
it's sorely needed by the agency
to truly protect New Mexicans
whose housing may be at risk
especially as half of our
renters on spend more than
thirty percent of their monthly
income on housing with that Mr
speaker stand for questions.
He noted right generated close
thank you Mr speaker I move that
SB twenty seven with an
emergency clause do now pass
you're on final passage of
Senate bill twenty seven with an
emergency clause the vote is now
open.
Representative closer to sixty
for any from it is here the
negative Senate bill twenty
seven has passed the house with
an emergency clause.
Next we'll go to the generally
specific on item number six or
seven Hani ready on that.
Mr speaker can you get to that
point the record reflect
election necessary for placing
Senate bill sixty four final
passage is been taken the
gentlelady to explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker
Senate bill sixty four
this.
Both of the technical amendment
to
statute section six and dash
cam.
Moving the phrase registry
service and replacing it with
the phrase placement services.
Which are the counties
municipalities would be
authorized to invest funds in
certificate of deposit account
placement services and with that
Mr speaker stand for questions.
I see no debate the gentle lady
to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move now
the SP Senate bill fifty four do
now pass we are final passage of
Senate bill sixty four the vote
is now open.
The clerk to call the number
without a recorded.
Representative Lara.
Representative close by within
sixty forty for it is here in
to negative Senator sixtyforce
passed the house.
Next we will go to the
gentleman.
From San Miguel Santa Fe New
torrents Representative you are
you ready on item eleven yes Mr
speaker can you get me to the
let the record reflect election
necessary for the Senate bill
twenty on final passage is been
taken gentleman to explain.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
two I mean Senate bill twenty is
sponsored by Senator Gonzalez
relating to the taxation changed
by distribution of motor vehicle
excess tax from the local
government road fund to the
transportation project for and I
will stand for questions senior
gentleman close.
I know that Senate bill twenty
do now pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
bill twenty.
The vote is now open.
The clerk to call member without
a recorded vote.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative Quinn both
yes.
Representative closed whether
sixty five the formative zero in
the negative Senate bill twenty
has passed the house.
Next we'll go to item twelve
generation Indiana
Representative Cadena are you
ready on that I don't yes Mr
speaker would you get me to that
point the record reflect on
necessary for placing Senate
bill one eighty three of final
passage is been taken gentlelady
to explain it all thank you Mr
speaker Senate bill one eighty
three would implement a uniform
act from the uniform law
commission and acting the
uniformed collateral
consequences of conviction.
With that I stand for questions
C. noted gentle lady to close Mr
speaker I move that SB one
eighty three do now pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
bill one eighty three the vote
is now open.
But the member with that are
recorded.
Representative Trujillo.
The vote is now closed five of
sixty one in the affirmative
three in the negative Senate
bill one eighty three has passed
the house.
Yes I'm sorry.
I'm sorry generally we we just
closed.
next item fifteen the gentle
lady from Santa Fe Rio Arriba
inTaos are you ready on Senate
bill seventy.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I'm sorry
Representative Herrera on the
list apologize for that that the
record reflect election
necessary for placing Senate
bill seventy on final passage is
been taken gentlelady to explain
the bill.
Mr speaker Senate bill seventy
came out of the New Mexico
finance authority's oversight
committee during interim moves
funds from the public project
revolving fund into for other
funds for its use and with that
I will stand for questions
seeing no debate the gentle lady
to close.
Mr speaker I move that just be
seventy do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill seventy the vote is
now open.
The clerk to call the members
that are recorded the
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Presenting Hochman Vigil votes
yes there is a closer to sixty
six the firm is here the
negative Senate bill seventy has
passed the house numbers were
into one more item please turn
your attention to supplemental
calendar number one.
Gentleman from Valencia are you
ready on item one thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker let the
reference record reflect that
all action necessary for placing
House during resolution fourteen
on final passage has been taken
is now subject.
To amendment substitution and
debate.
Seeing no debate that's right
this general to explain the
resolution Mr speaker the the
picture of senator census is the
former senator Sanchez not the
current senator Sanchez same
district two great guys but the
wrong picture.
I have to call Clemente speaking
very bad omen for your
resolution.
Thank you Mr speaker this is a
joint resolution it's
The resolution to establish a
corridor an easement along a
road called Morris in one
sentence it's a in conjunction
with our and I. twenty five
interchange that's proposed for
the village of listeners and
river crossing the R. if you
think in your mind you think of
the the state president and also
this right alongside that is
where this road will go and so
the land that the village needs
for the project.
Runs along state owned property.
This resolution would
would create an easement
approximately thirty two acres
the first two pages of the bill
are are easy and interesting to
read the bulk of it is is a
bunch of recitals of.
Legal descriptions describing
the tracks and how wide
eccentric such a Mr speaker and
body and then and then at the
end you have some not not for B.
B. for the results paragraphs
that's what the resolution does
this is an easy then it's not a
it's not a sale it will
eventually develop into a sale
after the get an appraisal in
the the project moves along but
it's critical that we get this
done so we can keep planning and
moving this wonderful project on
for those of us in this with
that Mr speaker stand for
questions the gentleman in
general this is a government to
government transfer is that
right this Mr speaker this is
the state of New Mexico transfer
introduce meant to the village
of Wilson's yes.
In general and is this this this
is not a sales this is just a
transfer there's no Mr speaker
correct it's an easement it will
probably end up in a sale at
some point down the road but
right now
it's designed this way so we can
keep things moving Mr speaker
thank you John and I I told you
you said as a question I was in
committee this morning so I
appreciate your answer senior
further debate the gentleman to
close thank you Mr speaker I now
move that house joint resolution
fourteen do pass we are on final
passage of house joint
resolution fourteen the vote is
now open.
Representative closer to sixty
six the Fuhrman is here the
negative house joint resolution
fourteen is passed the house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hearing objections
ordered.
I and we have the Senate bill
one fourteen on the calendar
Senator one fourteen I am
removing it from counter
referring it to the Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one
fourteen is referred to the
house Judiciary Committee.
Are there other assets.
The general patrons of coral
influencia Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to wish on my second
daughter he looked receipt happy
thirty third birthday.
Happy birthday.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Santa Fe towards influencia.
Thank you Mr speaker the House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning at nine o'clock
noted later money all the
committee members to move their
clocks ahead in our and we're
still meeting at nine o'clock
thank you Mr speaker.
Members take note the gentleman
from Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
Sikora San Juan and let's see a
Representative Harry Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
just like to wish my oldest
granddaughter I have been
working today she's twenty seven
years old let me use some pretty
old myself thank you Mr speaker.
Members take note.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis.
Thank you Mr speaker the house
state government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee will
meet tomorrow morning at nine AM
thank you.
Members take note.
Are there other announcements.
Okay members that is it for the
day we will be back tomorrow.
Thank you go a day without
seeing on your happy faces.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until.
Next week.
House stand in recess until two
thirty tomorrow afternoon thank
you members for the good quick
afternoon.
please tune in for our committee
meetings tomorrow will be back
at two thirty tomorrow afternoon
to do some work third reading
Everyone enjoy the rest of your
afternoon and evening stay safe
wear your mask.
As in recess until two thirty PM
tomorrow.
