Here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Here.
Representative how.
I'm here.
Representative Barreras here.
Representative Garcia.
Vice chair Sarinana.
Here here.
Chairman.
Here Mr chair we have made
court.
Okay good morning everyone first
off but if you have not already
heard Representative Barreras
has resigned from the
legislature.
So we are now a ten person
committee.
I believe.
The the that C. will be sold by
the currently okay mission I
don't know if it will be filled
by the end of our current
session might be.
but for the foreseeable future
we are a ten person committee.
so we has forced thank percent
press for her service.
We're here to bills today the
first bill we will here is a
house joint resolution
resolution to burn all rights
the second is house bill six the
future act.
and the currently the team to
track wasn't showing up on the
legislature's website.
I believe that this takes it was
how are on the agenda it will be
hard.
Mr lemay.
Representative Townsend yes
thank you Sir that the it has
long been a standing practice.
and I believe
Substantiated many times that
committee substitutes are on the
calendar for twenty four hours
before they heard this bill has
not been.
On the calendar for twenty four
hours.
And I don't believe they should
be heard today.
Representative Townsend.
The the bill has been on the
calendar.
The committee substitute was
circulated twenty four one.
We we don't put we don't publish
the committee substitute on the
website.
because it's not the committee
so students so we adopted as the
substitute and that's a it's
district are a problem that we
have.
Fairly often that we haven't
really salt.
But I do think we are in
compliance with our standard of
process.
Well we would disagree on that
but the Mr Chairman
I.
It's it's my opinion that does
that practice.
Is that they.
They are available so that we
have our analyst have a chance
to look at them in detail.
And that they're on the
committee website the the
decision is yours as chairman.
I would.
I would respectfully disagree
with that really.
Yeah I appreciate that it wasn't
in the was in the share I also
was access.
Was available to the members it
just wasn't available to the
public.
And that's something.
You know that's something we
should look at Texas honestly
right like if you for circling
into the member's question we
all certainly it's public.
But it was circulated to the
members and that of course
includes the analysts.
Well I I think we will find
today.
Mr chairman that there is
an overwhelming interest in this
bill from both the public and
private industry and they should
be because that will have a
dramatic impact on their their
lives going forward and.
You know meeting on the share
file this is one thing.
but having the ability for all
of the public to have access to
have time to read it.
you know going from Friday into
Saturday morning hearing just
doesn't do much for our our.
Credibility in my opinion.
Thank you Representative
Townsend I know your comments a
I'm going to.
Follow up on the overall process
Later.
Thank you.
So I think I think that's all my
plumber there is that's the the
additional questions or comments
from the committee.
Okay says so seeing that we're
going to begin with house bill
two
we need to.
Is present do we have
Representative Ferrary and
Senator Sedillo Lopez and there
were a number of other Sanchez
perhaps.
Mr chair representative Lujan is
here she.
Presenting the bill.
Mr chair is Representative
Ferrary here.
Yes.
Nation.
I'm a co sponsor on the bill to
read I defer to her to start Mr
chair okay and then we have
Senator Lopez as well.
Yes Sir thank you.
So Senator Representative those
four years.
Representative Ferrary you're on
mute.
Okay I'm sorry.
And.
For some reason I'm not coming
through on my camera there.
Thank you at.
Mr chair I'd also like to have
brought on okay Mr Eric chance.
Nicole online of it sh.
Cliff via.
Norm gone.
Okay we'll work on
You want them on this panelists
is that correct Representative
Ferrary yes Mr chair and then
Representative Gail Chasey will
be joining us but probably not
until
and I apologize I have committee
that starts at ten o'clock.
So
Chair Ferrary
that is the cherry on Community
teclado I understand that you're
gonna begin with our
presentation hopefully will.
The initial presentation done by
then they'll go to the public
and and your co sponsors will
take over secretary yes thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you to a representative
for okay thank you
House joint resolution two the
environmental constitutional
amendment also known as the
green amendments will add to the
bill of rights sections of our
constitution constitutional
right to a clean and healthy
environment and it will
establish a clear trustee
obligation on New Mexico
government officials to protect
the state's natural resources
for the benefit of both present
and future generations and by
placing environmental rights in
our constitution's bill of
rights we are ensuring that we
are we are given the same legal
and constitutional standing as
other rights of fundamental
importance to all New Mexicans
and we all recognize the
importance of protecting our
speech rights our religious
freedoms and our civil rights
and it is just as important to
protect the rights of our people
to clean water and air a healthy
climate and environment.
And having a New Mexico green
amendment will help ensure that
ex existing environmental laws
and regulations are implemented
to their full potential.
And it will provide a basis for
advancing new needed
protections.
It will also make clear that
protecting environmental rights
is the duty of all government
officials and not just our
legislature and the amendment
will not undermine economic
development in our state it will
just make sure that economic.
Industry and business growth has
to protect our environment which
is.
Is it self the central to a
healthy economy and is essential
for the health safety and
happiness of all New Mexicans.
I'd like next to have Senator C.
deal Lopez go ahead and say a
few words Representative Ferrary
I mean you're at so we smother
the district and Mr chance and I
I didn't write down the other
two needs could you could you
repeat that for me sure Nicole a
lot of it.
Okay.
Do we have cliff via.
You we will the
for them what what you perceive
all we do okay thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee it gives me great
pleasure to could to stand
before you to talk about the
green amendment
when I talked to when I talk to
people about this ammendment I
often ask them do you believe
that you have a right to clean
air land and water and most of
them say yes yes of course I do
and I say yes you have a moral
right however in our in our
founding documents in our in our
state constitution it would be
really great if it were at the
table at with with the other
important rights that we have
just up there and most people
say yes and they say yes because
they believe that the state
should be protecting our air
land water R. healthy climate
so this this is what this
constitutional amendment does
now I know that you will have a
lot of technical legal questions
but the only technical legal
point I wanted to make now in my
opening.
Is that because of the passage
of the of the civil rights bill
it became necessary to put a
clause in here that said that
monetary cap damages will not be
allowed and that's very
important because every other
constitutional it in New Mexico
you can enforce the constitution
but you don't get monetary
damages for it and so while
there are rules of civil
procedure and are lost for
administrative to enforce the
constitution they don't provide
for many damages and that's
exactly how we want this
ammendment to to work so people
can ask the state to do what the
state needs to do in protecting
our environment but they don't
get money damages
I will stand ready for questions
I know there will be a lot of
technical questions and with
that I will turn it I will
you'll back to Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you Mr chair I didn't know
of Representative Lujan is one
of our co sponsors would like to
say a few words.
Representative.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you committee members for
having this this morning my
voice is a little worse than
that at this morning I want to
thank I want to thank our
sponsors everyone that is signed
on to this bill and you'll note
there are there I believe twenty
four co sponsors on to bill and
I want to say this is a bill
that's that's widely supported
is it's widely needed and thanks
to
the civil rights the state so
right to act we implemented last
year just give this gives rise
to to how we can implement the
green amendment and give the
give the voice to our voters
this is what this this is what
we are trying to do with this
constitutional amendment is to
give the give the voice to our
voters and let them say how how
they're going to vote for and
therefore endorsed this measure
thank you Mr chair thank you
committee members.
Thank you Representative
next I'd like to introduce
Mister Eric chance.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
good morning my name is our
chance thank you Representative
Ferrary
I am a staff attorney senior
staff attorney at the New Mexico
environmental law center and in
my opening remarks I'd like to
make a few highlight a few parts
of the house joint resolution to
New Mexico's green amendment
that I think are important most
important and beneficial for New
Mexico and New Mexicans.
Section one AA of the great
amendment creates a right to a
clean and healthy environment.
Section one B. states that this
right is fundamental so in other
words this rate will be able to
other fundamental constitutional
rights that we're all more
familiar with for example rights
free speech and free association
the process
and professor be able discuss
these constitutional aspects of
the agreement more detail in his
remarks.
I'm the fundamental right to
clean environment is also
crucial in my view in the
environmental justice Khan
context is a lot of H. will
discuss this issue in more depth
in her remarks but just briefly
I want to say that it's
important to that environmental
justice context because the
current framework of statutes
and regulations environmental
statutes and regulations in New
Mexico really reinforces
inequitable power structures
the administrative process set
up by our environmental laws and
regulations is resource
intensive it takes a lot of time
and money to go through them and
it's usually contention our
technical expertise.
at the same time the communities
who are most likely to be
affected by pollution that is
low income communities and
communities of color have the
least amount of resources to
protect themselves so it's this
vicious circle of pollution
inability to vindicate rights
that great amendment is will
remedy that by allowing
communities to District Court to
vindicate constitutional right
allowing for more equitable
process.
The second.
Part of the agreement that like
to highlight is the creation of
a natural resources trust in
section one C..
this trust framework creates a
trust corpus the natural
resources of the state New
Mexico that must be conserved
for the trust beneficiaries the
people of New Mexico.
distrust remark also provides
additional guidance to
government on its obligations
regarding management of natural
resources and environment
because there's already
developed body of trust law in
the state.
The trust framework also creates
a fiduciary duty as
Representative Ferrary mentioned
that extends all branches of
government not just the
legislature so the executive
branch and the judiciary also
has a part to play.
The fiduciary duty created by
the amendment also is important
for long term planning.
Because this duty extend
specifically to future
generations the needs of future
generations will no longer be
subordinated current expediency
whether that's political or
financial.
The fiduciary duty is also
important in the environmental
justice context because the
fiduciary duty of impartiality
means that low income
communities communities of color
well no longer be singled out to
bear the burdens of
environmental pollution.
duties of prudence and
impartiality created by the
judiciary
framework also create the
obligation to consider
cumulative impacts that is the
sum of existing and reasonably
foreseeable environmental health
impacts on command and none of
that current statutes or
regulations in New Mexico
environmental law create that
obligation to consider
cumulative impacts which is
critical for communities that
are already over.
Of with pollution.
The last point I'd like to make
is that house resolution to as
Representative Lujan mentioned
is an ideal of the month
democracy it's a constitutional
amendment where the people of
New Mexico will votes on
ratifying it so in my view
you're not voting today on the
substance of H. J. R. two what
it does what it doesn't do but
really you're voting on whether
you trust the wisdom of your
constituents to make the right
decision for themselves so with
that I appreciate your time
thank you and I look forward to
your questions.
And my name chairman and members
of the committee is now called a
lot of it my family has been in
New Mexico since prior to its
statehood I have an MSW an MBA
and I said before you as a
member organizer of les New
Mexico the administrative
director of the Adelante
progressive caucus and a member
of the environmental justice
caucus moreover I come to a
disabled veteran who was exposed
to toxic air in Iraq has forever
changed my life currently
environmental pollution
primarily affects historically
marginalized by talking working
class communities in a minute
minority majority state that is
struggling during the pandemic
that's many of us sections of
job growth in our state come at
the cost of our health of our
people especially in rural New
Mexico and our indigenous
community.
If we look at New Mexico's
current Peter plan dashboard the
numbers speak for themselves low
income populations in the fifty
to hundred percentile
concurrently minority
communities in the forty two
hundred percent percentile are
very one hundred percent of
environmental pollutants this
means being physically harmed by
our state being open for
business without proper
precautions being taken to
ensure the safety of our most at
risk community communities this
is not a bipartisan bill farmers
across the state have been
devastated by environmental
polluters veterans active duty
military already been exposed to
toxic exposure come home to a
state that is further damaging
our health this week alone
residents of Albuquerque have
been get been given hazardous
air warning for the Albuquerque
journal and kale B. news
imploring us to stay inside
folks who live in northern New
Mexico are perpetually subjected
to methane leaks and more
alarming in a water resource
care state average person should
only consume water has a fifty
two hundred fifty parts per
million of foreign matter right
now here in Albuquerque the
average home ranges for two
hundred eighty to three hundred
and sixty parts per million if
you look at the average New
Mexicans and you ask them about
water they would assume that the
water they are drinking is safe
like the water our children
drink in schools is safe
unfortunately rural communities
disabled communities and
veterans like myself know
otherwise the water regulators
would say it's okay to drink up
to four hundred parts per
million and that's what happens
when we allow industry to guide
the law Furthermore outside of
the individual and environmental
consequences of our state
lacking preemptive measures to
stop bad actors in our track we
know the court that would be the
first in line to battle the
consequences of continuing to
allow industry to harm our state
this would be my fellow military
family who are already stretched
thin ventrally all hands on.
Jack will be needed if we do not
take action now finally this
joint resolution is one where we
want to grant the people of the
state the right to make a final
decision on whether or not we
want to go into our constitution
as early as November given the
power to the people of New
Mexico to decide how they would
like to govern themselves all we
are asking from you here today
is allow this to go forward so
we can truly listen to the
people of our great state
putting our voters priorities
first at its core this isn't
about jobs litigation or fossil
fuels it's about our right to
clean air soil and water all
right to decide if we the people
want to prioritize healthy
environment over industry has
literally been killing us thank
you for having me here today.
Representative Ferrary did you
want one of your other experts
to speak yes I'm sorry I forgot
to I mean thank you to call it
Mr via.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee good
morning my name is cliff via I
was born and raised in New
Mexico after college and law
school I spent twenty two years
in federal service before
returning home to join the
faculty UNM School of Law.
Right there made my individual
capacity and not and it's
reflective issues something
right now or the school of law
school mom I teach and write in
areas of Environment want
constitutional law I
specifically teach courses in
constitutional rights and
environmental justice to
subjects of the heart the grant
amendment proposal today based
upon my understanding of
concerns from elected justice
New Mexico.
The power of the green
amendments that Mexico state
constitution I support the
proposal reflected in each state
are to.
Justice is been fine in many
ways but in general require
severe treatment and meaningful
involvement of all people in
decisions and actions that
affect the quality of the
environment where people live
work and play at least the
nineteen eighties as well
recognize that many groups of
people have not been treated
fairly or not to participate
fully in decisions that affect
their environment such groups
most often includes as you heard
low income people and
communities of color including
black brown and indigenous
communities in New Mexico for
example indigenous communities
on the Navajo Nation around the
grants money districts have
suffered disproportionately
impacts from urinating
animation.
In the south valley Albuquerque
Latino communities struggle with
the community impacts of air
pollution from surrounding
industry and within colonia us
our southern border people
suffer from the indiscriminate
use of pesticides in
agricultural areas of the
Fourteenth Amendment to the US
constitution no state shall deny
to any person the equal
protection of the laws.
Really many people of color are
in fact not the protection of
environmental laws every single
day all across the country.
The circumstance has been aided
and abetted by decisions of the
US Supreme Court which since
nineteen seventy six have
allowed on equal protection of
the laws unless the challenges
able to prove not just a
disproportionate impact
a discriminatory intent.
For the last forty five years
this requirement for proving
discriminatory intent has proven
insurmountable in almost every
case alleging unequal protection
of environmental laws in one
recent case for example a
federal court ruled that
relocation of a large fleeting
scrap metal operation from an
affluent largely white
neighborhood of Chicago two
major minority community of
Chicago and not violate equal
protection clause of the US
constitution because quote thank
you so not shown a
discriminatory purpose behind
the move of the facility.
The New Mexico state prosecution
will reverse this paradigm in
some ways the great amendment
will help restore the rights
that New Mexicans should have
all along constitution in other
ways it will help expand rights
to protect other values we hold
dear including our unique
indigenous and Hispanic cultures
of New Mexico as a professor of
law as well as a native New
Mexico I look forward to
supporting agreement just
becomes the law of our land of
enchantment.
Thank you for consideration I
look for discounts.
Thank you Mr mia next we have
nor Galle.
Thank you Mr chairman the queen
and members of the committee I'm
norm Gaume and I'm fortunate to
be no Mexican I've lived in
Anthony Deming Hobbs Los crucis
Santa Fe and Albuquerque my
spouse and I now live in rural
Sandoval County.
I'm a professional expert in New
Mexico's water service
Albuquerque water resources
manager and director of the New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission.
New Mexico's water laws are not
doing the job of protecting our
water resources and water
systems.
Agencies are not using the
statutory authority that the
legislature has given them to
protect our water resources so
that adequate good quality water
will be available for our
children grandchildren and
future generations.
As a result our natural systems
are suffering.
So to are are people.
Businesses have been impacted as
well and with climate change
reducing our water supplies
everybody will be impacted
unless we make difficult
changes.
Let me explain some of the ways
to ways that people are natural
systems are being harmed.
Oil and gas and liquid oil and
gas waste is one example.
Responsible agencies have
statutory discretion authority
but they have not.
past the needed rules nor do
they enforce the rules that they
have.
Bills are illegal but there were
about a thousand last year with
no effective enforcement.
Someone gas companies have much
better still records than others
and that's number of spills per
million barrels of energy
produced others are allowed to
externalize the cost of controls
built and it is to be able and
our environment but some for.
Uses of water is my other simple
climate change will make over
use much worse.
I'm controlled overuse of water
is draining offers control over
use of water in the middle Rio
Grande will cost another the
compact violation unless
emergency actions are
implemented it truly is an
emergency over use of water in
the middle Rio Grande is also
depriving New Mexico's
downstream of elephant Butte dam
there legally questions share.
Mexico what would strengthen the
laws we have on the books in the
ability of our government to
protect the precious waters of
New Mexico.
Please let New Mexico voters
decide thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and with that
we will stand for questions.
Okay thank you Representative
Ferrary
so I I see people already
raising their hands just all on
not there yet.
We at the here's how this is
going to go first renewable you
know everyone will get to vote
in the fall it is a I see not
scientific it is determined the
sustenance of where people where
people stand at least those who
are in attendance then we will
do we'll do one hour of public
comment you'll do thirty minutes
In opposition to the bill and
then thirty minutes in support
of the bill.
each member of the public the
has opportunity to speak we'll
get one minute there will be a
clock on the screen that you
should be able to see at the end
of one minute you will be needed
the US you're in the middle of a
sentence and that's just the way
we have to do it in order to
hear from as many people as
possible.
And so for everyone who's
raising their hand now.
Please know that we're doing
opposition first so if you
support the bill please picture
in that.
Augustine are you ready with the
full.
Yes Sir.
If you can all up thank you keep
it open for twenty seconds.
Okay Augustine can you for
support please.
Okay so we have a seventy nine
percent in support twenty one
percent in opposition that's a
hundred fifty seven and support
in forty two in opposition.
now we'll go to the public but
once again we we are beginning
with those in opposition to the
bill.
The first step we have patients.
Okay Representative McQueen
thank you so much are your
ankles this restatement we
already have a green amendment
of nineteen seventy one
committee the opening statement
of this resolution I'm very
ready coverage and what I've
heard now I did personally
confirm this with the during my
acting and brought some answers
Senator Sedillo Lopez via
telecom while I thank you Mexico
pregnancy for do not want to
wait is currently nine point
provided guidance on
reenactment requirement all
right.
Therefore section C. and the
need to be deleted in their
entirety having this amendment
do self executing as we parted
do with no further provided
guidance and instead allowing
grant agencies like New Mexico
our staff board and requests for
water conservation district
health rich character each
county governments would be
arbitrary capricious.
District as well as on equal
protection under the law this
line monetary damages would.
Thank you for that and that the
you can you can hear the
speakers fashion I appreciate
that I do would like to remind
people that we will not engage
in personal attacks on any of
the Sanchez or the members of
the committee those the prior
comments were passionate but
also we're.
The dressing the bill which I
appreciate next up we have sixty
Rivera.
Mr Chairman can you hear me yes
thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
comment Rehm is to you're a very
registered lobbyists New Mexico
farm and livestock bureau I want
to thank the sponsors for their
work on this effort in trying to
secure clean environment water
and natural resources the other
thing that we all want however I
do respectfully stand in
opposition as we do not believe
that this is the correct
mechanism for achieving that
goal although this
constitutional amendment seeks
to protect environmental rights
of residents it provides an
opportunity for infringement on
the rights of others
particularly are private
property rights.
The language is ambiguous and
vague and leaves much up for
personal interpretation as to
what is considered clean and
healthy further New Mexico
already has specific statutes
rules and policies in place to
protect the environment for the
greater good for these reasons
we stand and respectful
opposition thank you.
Thank you next up we have Jim
Winchester.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is Jim
Winchester with the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico we do stand in opposition
of this bill we feel that the
the language and it is brought
in a gives tremendous discretion
to the entrance to the act that
would stifle development in all
structures using climate change
and we feel that the amendment
puts the duty on the state as a
trustee which gives brought
ability for groups to bring
litigation against the states
and and for that reason and many
others we do respectfully stand
opposed thank you.
Thank you next up we have Linda
start.
Linda you are muted I'm here at
I am not opposed to I am a
supporter okay we're doing
opposition so when the time
comes you can raise your hand
again.
Next up we have G. belong to.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee good morning this
is JD Bullington speaking to you
today on behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
the chamber believes this
proposed amendment is
unnecessary and that existing
laws and environmental
stewardship agencies and even
environmental organizations are
doing a good job to protect our
an air land and water if
additional environmental
protections are necessary in the
future and they might be the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce supports having that
issue addressed within the
existing regulatory framework if
this resolution were to pass the
chamber believes it will result
in increased litigation.
Fostering a climate for more
litigation without guaranteed
Environment outcomes is not the
best growth strategy for New
Mexico to pursue the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
respectfully opposes how joint
resolution to.
Thank you that we have loro
Silva.
You are muted on your end.
Yes my name is out of state law
I live in the south valley
Welker you and we have.
I am I'm speaking in in in
support of the amendment is
this.
Now Mr so but we're we're in
opposition right now if you can
raise your hand when we get to
support that would be fine.
Next up we have Jerry.
Jerry Keating energy's yourself.
Yes
you.
Junior I'm a.
San Juan basin operator in New
Mexico for over forty years can
you hear me OK yes.
I am a second generation company
what that started working summer
late sixties we are a.
Good pair of school severance
and ad words income tax in New
Mexico on the call residents are
turning oil and gas company
operations are are based in New
Mexico.
Dollars others to grow my
company I do this by developing.
Sound cleans New Mexico based on
gas energy projects for the
majority wells reliant outside
dollars graduated from outside
the state so readers the state
to be determined what's the best
way to play capital.
Mexico along the lines of this
case are
still the investors will get
wary and turned their backs Drug
other states.
You guys want this to be the
land of enchantment for the land
of litigation.
Sorry about that I was muted.
Thank you Jerry you got me as
well use the timer next up we
have coming from well.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Kevin roll all
the CEO The New Mexico real
active Cooper Association
We stand respectfully in
opposition to this
constitutional amendment as co
ops we serve twenty two percent
of the population in the state
in eighty percent of the land
area and clean water clean air
and clean lands is a fundamental
tenet of what we have to do
because that's our livelihood we
take it very seriously we do not
believe this is necessary as
rural electric coops we are
regulated through the public
utility act and through the are
you just mortgage covenants and.
These things are fundamental and
they also have the ability that
penalties so with those things
in mind if we're not being good
stewards we will face penalties
we take it very seriously so we
stand in opposition to this
constitutional amendment thank
you.
Thank you we have Tom Shelley.
I'm here muted on your end.
Mr chairman and committee.
I'm Tom Shelley I'm a veteran
the cattle rancher and a copper
miner in a rural.
Community in Grant County.
Contrary to the testimony I've
heard today.
You're in the middle of copper
country we enjoy some of the
cleanest air is measured and
reported by name the New Mexico
environment department in the
state.
I agree with the analysis posted
on the bill this that's on the
legislative bill finder that
this.
This constitutional amendment
unfortunately stands to
undermine permits we rely on.
And that will.
Affect our prosperity in in the.
Rural community where we rely on
agriculture and.
Mining as the as the foundation
of our economy and I
respectfully propose this.
Joint resolution thank you.
Thank you next up we have Lauren
Patterson.
Chairman McQueen members of the
committee thank you for your
time this morning my name is
lord Patterson speaking on
behalf New Mexico cattle growers
association our members stand in
opposition to house going
resolution to article twenty
section twenty one of the New
Mexico constitution already
allows for environmental
resources and health of our
residents in balance with Maximo
database.
For example under the new
proposed amendment to article
twenty section twenty one wind
farm development like in rural
Torrance Guadeloupean Lincoln
County would not take place due
to the light noise pollution and
destruction of our scenic
landscape.
Qualities that electricity is
being transferred out of state
on controversial power line
affecting sensitive flora and
fauna areas of the state like
where the power line crosses the
Rio Grande river at Laughlin
this is just one example of how
the joint resolution might
hinder resource development.
Thank you for your time this
morning.
Thank you we have seen in the
past.
I'm actually for not opposed so.
So so so once again members of
the public we're doing
opposition so if you're in
support please lower your hands
because of course I don't know
why I'm calling on people
whether you're exporter
opposition let's hearing that so
next up Bronson corn.
Mr Chairman can you hear me yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is brought
to court I am speaking on behalf
of New Mexico oil growers.
I would like to start off by
saying we respectfully oppose
house joint resolution two
there's a lot of unanswered
questions in this for such a
short builder sure a lot of
statements that have been made
in that
You know there's there's some of
the stuff that was said like
creating a trust fund stuff like
that was not in the bill.
The whenever it talks about
discrimination there's there's
discrimination in this bill
against agriculture and
agriculture is made up of all
peoples and races.
Of the it was spoke about the
hydrogen the the use of water
hydrogen have is going to be a
great use of water there's just
a lot of a lot of statements in
this that are that are not
clearly defined and we would
like a lot more a
So on what to what's going on
with that being said I'd like to
respectfully up oppose house
bill house joint resolution two
thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Michael Miller.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Mike
Miller and I am a registered
lobbyist for the Permian basin
petroleum association.
This resolution has many
unintended consequences and
although I am a registered
lobbyist for PED pay I'm also
the mayor pro tem of the city
forecast.
Because of many of the things
that have already been addressed
we see so many issues with this
from both perspectives and that
therefore respectfully opposed
this joint resolution thank you.
Thank you next up the need for.
You need your muted I'm here at.
Okay let's move on next at this
Jason Espinoza.
Chairman members of the
committee my name's Jason
Espinoza and I'm the state
director for the national
federation of independent
business NFIB stands in strong
opposition to the proposed
constitutional amendment the
core tenet of a strong business
environment is predictability
and certainty however the
proposed amendment does the
exact opposite as noted by the
New Mexico environment
department in the fiscal impact
report.
That will need to expend
significant resources to resolve
both the confusion and conflict
created by the house joint
resolution to the legal
uncertainty created by this
legislation will reduce the
investment in the state and
severely undermine economic
development and job
opportunities across New Mexico
on behalf of the small business
community and part B. asks you
to reject the joint resolution
additionally I am the registered
lobbyists for New Mexico
coalition of conservation
districts which also stands in
opposition to the proposed
constitutional amendment for the
reasons outlined earlier by
Mister Vera and then Mexico
farming livestock here thank
you.
Thank you next up we have
currently markets.
Yes Mr gentleman can you hear
me.
Yes.
My name is Charlie Marcus I am
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico business coalition also
known as an NBC.
In N. B. C. represents hundreds
of businesses and thousands of
New Mexicans or focuses
to make to Mexico a better place
to live and work we have an
abundance of good paying jobs to
provide for our families and NBC
and NBC respectfully opposes H.
J. R. to.
All our members and followers
support a clean and vibrant
vibrant environment but they
want to see that accomplished in
a way that provides balanced and
allows businesses to provide for
the needs for creating jobs for
New Mexicans.
This bill does not accomplish
that.
In our opinion.
If approved by voters this piece
legislation would alter our
state constitution which is not
a desirable way to address the
environment The New Mexico the
person unintended consequence
resulting from this legislation
there's no way to address those
types of issues well going back
to the voters.
So we stand respectfully in
opposition to this resolution.
Thank you next up we have
Jennifer Weber.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes thank you good morning
chairman cleaning committee
members my name is Jennifer
Weber and I'm here on behalf of
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce the chamber has
supported efforts to address the
climate crisis from the passage
of the Energy transitioned Act
the efforts to develop an
effective methane rule and from
supporting income tax credits
for renewable energy
installation to the development
of a hydrogen infrastructure we
understand and appreciate the
intent of this legislation but
it is what this history
commitment of money that we
oppose H. J. R. two which would
repeal the existing New Mexico
constitutional environmental
provision.
New Mexico faces many challenges
and giving its residents
opportunities to stay and work
and raise their families in the
state and to diversify its
economy making the economy more
equitable housing availability
and affordability for example is
a growing challenge H. E. R. to
would stifle the construction of
housing given that anyone could
oppose diminished view corridors
or built.
Sorry about the timer next up
Matthew party a.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Matthew how to
meet with the public service
company in New Mexico we agree
the people in New Mexico have
the right and should demand to
have clean and healthy
environment as well as the
protections of our natural
cultural and helpful qualities
of our great state however to
consider constitutional
amendment that would preclude
policies that are already in
place many of which are
consistently discussed in this
committee that would create that
are created to protect our air
and water quality hazardous
waste control containment
emissions and environment is a
huge step back in the effort and
momentum to protect New Mexico
for next generation for this
reason we stand opposed to this
effort thank you very much.
Thank you we have John
Alexander.
Thank you chairman for taking my
comments ari just a sense of our
product in New Mexico.
And our I am opposed to this
amendment I think many of the.
Could you have any questions
about exactly what's gonna be
involved here it transfers to
government why to much of forty
vetted the states are protected
by existing rules existing
regulations.
And our we should we should let
that stand the ability to give
government more control over
what we do is certainly
warranted in this case.
We all want clean air clean
water I support that thank you
very much for taking my
comments.
Thank you next up we have
generate this person.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Doris
person I'm a registered lobbyist
and deputy executive director
with New Mexico counties for
many of the same reasons stated
by previous individuals we stand
in opposition to this
legislation we are task as
counties to protect the health
and public safety and take that
authority quite seriously one of
our concerns is even though we
are Christians that monetary
damages will not be allowed in
light of house bill four that
doesn't necessarily limit the
amount of time and resources
that would be spent to litigate
some of these undefined things
identified in this
constitutional amendment we
would maintain that there are
existing rules and regulations
that have been vetted at great
length such as the solid waste
rules and regulations with
industry environmental groups
and citizens and that those
should be affected so the
question came as to why are
these agencies potentially not
using the authority they've been
given we would raise the
question if that is an issue of
resources such as funding and
other personal matters so we
would feel that that's a much
more appropriate place to look
for these types of environments
rights to be protected thank
you.
Thank you next up we have
Bernalillo treat.
Good morning chairman the queen
members the committee Burton are
treat governmental affairs for
Xcel energy.
Thank you for having us today.
I DO.
Representative Ezzell energy
also known as S. P. S. serving
what Tricity to southeastern New
Mexico.
Xcel energy is a very
environmentally focused company
working daily towards a.
Clean energy future.
The energy transition act passed
in twenty nineteen is now our
compass we are ahead of these
goals and we respectfully stand
in opposition to house
resolution to thank you.
Thank you the next step we have
George short.
Good morning my name is George
sharp and investment manager for
more and all guests in
Farmington New Mexico thank you
for letting me speak.
Yes this legislation and let me
give you an example why there
over two hundred fifty gas wells
within the state Senator so
drilled and operated by Merial
and gas there in our parks are
neighborhoods near schools I was
born and raised in and around
those wells playing those parts
going those schools as did my
kids and hopefully my grandkids
I am healthy as are the
thousands of others in the city
of grown up in and around those
wells nobody in Farmington New
Mexico is in danger.
All two and fifty those wells
operate cleanly and within the
laws of the state of New Mexico
someone has an issue there are
means to raise those issues and
their means to address years and
that's the deal there are
questions a bunch of issues.
With this ammendment operators
like Merrin could be sued by any
disgruntled system or group who
tell their offenders harm
somehow I appropriations will
turn into an expensive
litigation nightmare that will
ultimately be back for all New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you except Taylor
Reagan's.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Taylor regained some I speak on
behalf of my family and myself
ranching well with the county.
We propose HA are to the joint
resolution does not clearly
define a clean and healthy
environment and would find
anyone the right to sue an
individual for any perceived
environmental wrong.
As a member of the act as
members of the agricultural
community this concerns us in
the instance that we're miss
understood for our time tested
methods of producing food and
fibre.
For these reasons my family and
I propose a chair to thank you
for your time.
Thank you Schering very.
Okay.
Hello Sharon I thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I am
Close to this bill there are
word there's waiting in this
bill that is rather ambiguous
We we have we already have a
bill in place repealing it which
is what we would be doing and
adding some of these warnings as
is ambiguous self serving I'm
for instance the work cultural.
There is no definition for that
and if we look over Harris our
New Mexico's cultural history.
Yes.
We have a lot of different
cultural history a lot of
different and removing
legislation having no oversight.
That that's just wrong.
You're gonna end up with
lawsuits that go on and on and
on tie up the cords and really
there's.
There's no way to stop that.
It's going to hurt our.
Sorry about the timer next up we
have early change.
Good morning chairman claim
members of the committee my name
is burly Jane on a registered
lobbyists and state director for
Americans for prosperity New
Mexico Americans for prosperity
New Mexico seeks to help every
New Mexicans large at their
highest potential.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak on house joint resolution
two which seeks to amend the New
Mexico constitution.
On behalf of thousands backed
this across New Mexico we
propose house joint resolution
to for reasons already stated
and asked that you build up
thank you for your time.
Thank you we have prince made
that.
Right here we are thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is broadband
I cracked farm and ranch with my
wife in southeastern New Mexico
and I'm speaking on behalf of
our farm and ranch operations I
stand up is opposed to this bill
because New Mexico's
agricultural us.
Undoubtedly are the best
stewards of the land but because
of weather patterns that we have
no control over a lot of do no
consequences of a resolution
like this could devastate the Ag
sector in New Mexico we live in
Lake County my mother's ninety
three years old lives on our
farm so obviously health is good
so we must be doing something
right I respect the Sanchez Bill
but stand and opposed to it
thank you very much.
Thank you next up we have any
parity.
Good morning chairman McQueen
and members of the committee my
name is Amy Barrett B. and I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico oil and gas association
representing ninety percent of
the industry operating in our
state hello this members are
committed to the responsible
development of natural resources
in accordance with the numerous
statutes protecting the
environment passed by the
legislature and the pollution
control section of the New
Mexico constitution New Mexico
is deeply concerned that the
proposed legislation strips the
legislature of its authority to
protect New Mexicans in the
environment as explained in the
FIR shifts the responsibility
currently entrusted to the
legislature to the courts and
burdens regulators with
defending their professional
decision I potentially great
cost to the state it would be a
mistake to undo and call into
question the carefully and
thoughtfully developed laws
enacted by the legislature
throughout our state's history
in favor of turning authority
over to the judicial system so
that our state can be party to
furthering the national it
agenda with very little case law
know the logo appreciate that so
legislature's work and therefore
strongly opposes this
resolution.
Thank you except we have
sneaking.
In the year muted on your end.
Can you hear me yes.
Okay thank you chairman and
committee members my name is
Cindy king I am a sixth
generation New Mexicans living
descendant of Pancho via I am a
member of low and I'm also the
owner of the Bernalillo farmers
market I stand in opposition of
this bill if you compare our
existing nineteen seventy one
green amendment but the current
one please read both you will
see that we do lose a lot with
this change I believe culture
needs to be removed many
cultural practices can be
extremely detrimental
destructive and harmful to our
natural resources and
environment and it should not be
mixed together these are two
completely separate issues and
our culture is already protected
through many loss.
So I think we're cultural needs
to be removed along with
political subdivisions we cannot
have been experienced non
qualified political subdivisions
in charge of our natural
resources and environment.
my mom who was a huge advocate
for minorities in the state of.
Sorry about the timer we have
been smart Tina's.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee on Vince
Martinez with tri state
generation and transmission
association we respectfully
oppose this bill we believe
there are adequate remedies in
place to bring environmental
cases and we echo the comments
of rural electric cooperatives
thank you.
Thank you we will do one more in
opposition and then we will be
at our time.
Caitlyn Hart.
Good morning chairman the clean
and committee members I
represent long over the
coalition and member
organization representing over
two million acres of C. and
lease land in New Mexico article
twenty section twenty one of the
constitution already states that
the protection of the
environment as a matter of
public interest in a public
right an act of this amendment
as currently written as far too
broad with potential unintended
ka impacts such as infringements
on private property rights this
amendment could potentially
allow the courts and state
agencies to extend regulatory
authority over traditionally
private property in land use
rights well we think the Sanchez
for bringing forth this
legislation and appreciate the
intense we have to propose the
current version answer and thank
you.
Thank you so that brings us to
the end of the public comment in
opposition if you still have
your hand up in opposition
please put your hand down.
We will now do you public
comment in support if you'd like
to speak in support.
Please raise your hand.
as we do with opposition will do
thirty minutes a minute each and
of course I remind everyone to
be respectful.
First in support we have June
persons.
Owner bill chair and
representative can you hear me.
Yes my name is Jim Parsons from
Rio Rancho New Mexico thank you
for giving us the opportunity to
speak today requesting that you
both yes in support of HB sex
being placed on the ballot so
that New Mexico voters have the
right to decide on equal of
Bayern mental rights for every
New Mexicans your vote yes on
this bill is your vote yes for
democracy and will demonstrate
your trust and respect for every
process persons in your
constituency that your
constituents are fully capable
of making the best decisions for
themselves their families and
their communities New Mexicans
should without question be given
the opportunity to vote on
legislation so critical to the
health and well being of every
New Mexicans living today and
our future generations please
please vote yes on H. B. six
thank you.
Thank you we have read part.
Well good morning I've legally
tickets Eckert and I'm a member
of the three fifty Santa Fe core
team we strongly support this
amendment I'm here today on
behalf of my daughters and my
granddaughter my daughter Simona
card visit Albuquerque took me
regularly that we our generation
had a pretty good job of messing
up the climate and the
environment it's pretty hard to
argue with that it's time for
you and I do something about
that will be better than to
guarantee my granddaughter clean
air clean water protections for
great national environment are
you support this amendment for
the people of the state we owe
them that as we as a way to be
to repair but we have done thank
you.
Thank you we have Terry slow.
Good morning and thank you Mr
chair
and thank you committee members
for supporting the split Justice
of legislation my name is Terry
Sloan I'm director of novelty
and director of my and you'll
stop the state of cultures
the people the state have the
right match on Herrin and eight
in alittle right to a clean and
healthy environment including
water air soil flora fauna
ecosystems and climate and to
the protection of the natural
cultural scenic and helpful
qualities of the environment.
Action the state's environment
should be declared to be of
fundamental importance to health
safety and the public interest
protecting New Mexico's pristine
landscape must be should be a
goal of our responsible and
caring New Mexico lawmakers I'm
a natural born Mexican insurers
are beautiful majestic mount
Taylor not Wheeler Santa Fe
amounts Santa crest Sierra
amounts to name a few I love our
life giving Rio Grande river are
beautiful Tom ridge are powerful
San Juan river all of our state
could blue water lake health and
beauty but family Canaveral X.
name of.
Sorry about the timer next up we
have Elizabeth Smith.
Hello I am a tribal member of
the Laguna pueblo and the UNM
senior I represent Mother Earth
all baby creature nations as
well as a seven generations.
Right now our local honey
contains radiation.
Listen to the bees.
I speak for those who cannot
speak for themselves the green
amendment is the beginning of a
new earth.
We are all connected.
We are all in globally motion
see.
Thank you.
Thank you we have seen the past.
My name is Cindy passed and on
from Muslim in Eldorado area of
Santa Fe I'm a member of the
Democratic Party of Santa Fe
County as well as a vice chair
of ward four eight my husband
and I moved here because of the
diversity and the beauty in this
state.
When this constitutional
amendment to go forward these we
might lose this premium a
healthy environment yes there is
article two section twenty one
but it has no enforceable
elements to it so to me this
constitutional amendment is a no
brainer why not give the
citizens of the state the
opportunity to vote on it let
the vote happened please because
in the end what gets enumerated
gets done thank you very much
for this opportunity to come
out.
Thank you next up we have CENIC
up.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Senica and any representative of
yucca are used at economic
crisis action you can use these
members that are New Mexico and
when strong support right here
to the coming crisis is one of
if not the biggest threat to our
future despite scientist and
community members calling for
change for decades what should
be our intrinsic right to help
the environment has been
violated over and over again
some violations are terribly
visible with oil spills the
secretion sacred sites cultural
resources insecure health
impacts often concentrated in
communities of color and some
violations are more existential
hunted hard to comprehend but no
less deadly you must wishing and
unregulated private industry my
generation's being denied our
right to our future and I'm
terrified to see what the future
look like reduces crime induced
food and water shortages
superstorms wildfires force
displacement resource force
behind the on the course of what
we are you know each time I see
my cousins I know that their
lives would be projected in more
risk money this is unacceptable
the service interval in the
future and to know that our
younger siblings and cousins to
children we may bring to the
world we have the opportunity
for a long and healthy life need
to Green amendments to protect
our lives and futures and.
Sorry about the timer next step
we had you need it.
The service wadi
Speaking on behalf of myself and
my three children from us for
the all of government of New
Mexico regardless of
administration has proven itself
unable or unwilling to protect
the people of our state from
environmental harms.
In dangerous climate emissions
produced water spills ozone
precursors P. fast contamination
of our water and more.
Permits for oil and gas drilling
continue being issued regardless
of a company's failure to adhere
to the law or the amount of
contamination they're
responsible for all of the
people of New Mexico but
especially impacted communities
who live in or near fossil fuel
facilities suffered debilitating
and life threatening damages
because of this lack of
regulation and enforcement the
environmental Rights Act will
allow the people of this state
to decide for themselves if they
want an enforceable
constitutional right to protect
themselves from harm please vote
yes on the environmental Rights
Act.
Thank you we have Michael sabar.
Michael you are muted on here
at.
Thank you very much I support I
I strongly support our state
being open for business.
But.
Cost.
There are those that profit from
the businesses and those rate
with ourselves with their health
and their lives and they're
never the same.
This is a moral issue I support
the H. R. P. J. R. two thank you
very much.
Thank you next up we have Paul
Gibson.
Thank you chair German McQueen
and committee members thank you
for bringing this bill forward.
The opposition is reputedly
assure that we have laws on the
books that will protect us yeah
we've also heard from norm Gaume
about a thousand toxic leaks
last year with the state taking
no action we've also heard about
radiating bees radiated bees and
water that's polluted with P.
fast
the other opposite so apparently
are.
Misting legislation is not
helping us very much.
We have also heard from the
opposition that the rest are
that it with if we pass this
bill there will be a deluge of
irresponsible legislation in the
state of Montana in Pennsylvania
this is certainly not been the
case they have not had a deluge
of ledges of our lawsuits and
all and indeed they are what
they have done is protect the
the citizens from conversions on
the environment I strongly
encourage support for the show
still share our to thank you
very much for your service.
Thank you next up we have keenly
shoot.
Hello my name is Kelly shape and
I'm a community organizer with
citizens caring for the future
eleven Carlsbad I will never
forget the first time I attended
a public meeting held by the
NMED discussing implementation
of HB five forty six the
produced water act my mother
just been diagnosed with ovarian
cancer fifty many other young
people in my life been affected
by cancer and I began to get
concerned about why do so many
people that were falling out a
family with two young children
was there that night and they
stood to speak about trucks
stopping to produced water on
their land long story short they
were essentially told that there
was no action they could take to
amend this dangerous practice
that was hurting our health it
was clear there was nothing
nearby community could do to
protect ourselves from the
danger the produced water or the
dangers that would come with
eventually selling at that what
was already set in motion
without our consent and the
leaders that day didn't seem to
share the same concern I did for
the health of my community I
look at meaning terrified it
agreement would have been in
place and perhaps I am not
family would have left the
meeting feeling empowered
instead of endangered and
completely out of control we all
deserve a right to clean
environment we all deserve to
have a shot enjoying good health
into our old age right now
everyone in the state gets to
enjoy that right and the
cleaning and I have the power to
change that thank you.
Thank you next up we have Jim
needle.
Hello can you hear me chairman.
Yes can you hear me
thank you chairman acquainting
Committee members my name is
James Segal and I live in Santa
Fe County and I'm a board member
of three fifty Santa Fe.
I strongly support H. A. R. to
in the green amendment for three
main reasons first of all it
represents in my you and
expansion of the rights for New
Mexico state assistance in
particular it says the people of
the state have a natural
inherent and inalienable right
to clean to clean and healthy
environment that sounds very
good to me.
Secondly the green amendment.
Provides the New Mexico state
government with additional
responsibilities to protect
these rights it says that the
state's Health Service trustee
of the natural resources New
Mexico that also sounds
reasonable to me.
And finally this is really
important the voters of New
Mexico ultimately decide if the
green amendment passed and for
something this important this
critical I'd have it no other
way thank you very much Mr
chairman and committee.
Thank you this represents the
petitioner or about a year.
Can you hear me yes thank you
very much.
Committee on labor organizer I
have lived and worked in poor
neighborhoods of color severely
impacted by industry with high
lead emissions leading to tile
would love to be the and
neighborhoods wrote in the
stench emitted by chemical and
refinery our children tell but
impacted by pollution many
having to live into their adult
lives with asthma and other
serious life threatening
diseases as a result industry
should not be allowed to operate
in a way that is environmentally
harmful The New Mexico green
amendment will ensure that
economic development industries
and businesses did not advance
to be expected the environment
and people's right to clean air
water and land into a climate
that is livable and protective
of that people's lives are
children's lives are worth more
than increasing profit and the
people of New Mexico have the
natural inherent and inalienable
right to make the decisions I'm
a co sponsor programs co sponsor
I urge you to vote yes thank
you.
Thank you we have chili yes the.
I am sure all the from
ship rock my credentials are
grant farmer and the fender one
thing I tell my grandkids is
that their future times do not
bode well I tell them that there
may not be enough water and food
for everybody that they need to
prepare to do with with all the
fixings the luxuries that they
take for granted that the world
may not have the flowers trees
and animals that we have today
that perhaps they should not
have children there will be
little rain or no snow.
That they must enjoy what we
have now ladies and gentleman
that is the trajectory that we
are on I come before you to say
you have the opportunity to help
or Byrd that verdict that
impending dangerous world for
our grandchildren yours and mine
and I respectfully demand that
you do the right thing but chair
and this legislation is approved
and implemented.
Thank you next up we have no die
at Brent.
Can you hear me yes.
Thank you chairman and committee
members this is feel so is store
just to have the opportunity to
comment.
What happened to our dreams
about New Mexico being a leader
for eco tourism.
And our potential to export
sustainable energy.
We know that this is not the
right path to go down we know
that drought and fracking.
Are incompatible.
We already see that we're
running out of resources we know
it's not going to get better
unless we take serious action I
can't understand why that isn't
commonly agreed upon I am so
thrilled that we have the
opportunity to vote as citizens
to protect our environment and
those who are most vulnerable
thank you.
Thank you we have Luke but mass.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is the
path and I'm educational
assistant working for APS I'm
hearing before you today to
speak strongly in favor of the
green amendment we live in
unprecedented times for the jets
the jets with the generation of
our Clemente poses an
existential threat to us all and
our children however the virtue
of democracies and its ability
to adapt to unprecedented times
in intense challenges the
foundation of our systems our
ability is the ability of our
lost reflect the needs of the
people rather the desires of the
powerful few and if ever there
was a time for the framework of
our lost change to reflect those
needs it is now we need the
ability to hold those damaging
our climate responsible we need
to the highest Water State our
very constitution to protect our
environment and its most basic
level agreement is exactly what
our state needs and ask you to
vote to advance it so the will
of the people we serve as the
final arbiters of the highest
law in the land thank you for
your time.
Thank you next up we have Linda
star.
Linda your muted on here at.
Thank you Mr chairman
representatives for the
opportunity to comment today.
I have observed the Revenue
should be aired Carlsbad from
your road near the entrance to
Carlsbad caverns following a
hard day of volunteer work this
guy was totally great and like
the brilliant blue recalled and
former digits this is not the
whether it is a result of carbon
emissions in the air from
industry building in the
distance with Dante listing to
health care workers Navajo
community called counselor you
speak of unrelenting medical
problems occurring at higher
rates than ever before we're
sorry cancer cases.
Those launches with school
children reproductive harms
behavioral mental health
troubles.
You're not open to keep the
polluted air outside coming in
we need the screen measurement I
am in support of the HSA are too
and I hope you will be also
thank you.
Thank you Patricia Cardona's
next.
Thank you for this bill
chairperson committee members my
name is Patricia Cardona I have
lived in Albuquerque and Santa
Fe and I am an advocate for
environmental responsibility and
consumer responsibility I am
here today to support house
resolution to point to the
voters I would like to thank
representatives the bringing
forth this memorial as an
amendment to our constitution
this memorial sits an important
signal New Mexico is not
indifferent to our people and
our natural world and we want to
protect its diversity of people
wildlife and plantlife this
memorial elevates the reality of
how we are dependent on our
environment for survival we need
to be get centering our actions
that practices on conserving and
protecting healthy water air and
soil for current and future
generations in the way we
conduct our business this
memorial begins the process I
urge passage of this memorial
and place that on the ballot as
a constitutional amendment.
Thank you VK Revenue.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is vague
about the policy director at
less me food etcetera rules on
Ana County we support the green
amendment because we work to
cultivate and equitable and
sustainable food system that
exists in harmony with our
desert ecosystem not in a way
that the plea to pollutes that
we grow food for our community
with low water use healthy soil
practices without poisonous
chemicals we know everyone
deserves that federal cultural
producers in the communities
that respect everyone's right to
clean water air soil an entire
ecosystem and we know that
private property rights are not
more important than human rights
for my entire lifetime
policymakers have been telling
us they cannot and our economic
dependency on extractive
polluting industries overnight
but we never asked for that
we've been advocating for
meaningful transition and we
hope this bill can be one way to
start making the drastic changes
that need to be made not because
these changes are easy but
because they are necessary to
sustain life thank you for your
time and I'll ask you again to
please support the building
amendment.
Thank you we have planned
Griffin.
I am blind group and from
Silvercity member of the state
democratic party's environmental
justice caucus.
In southwest New Mexico reports
Tyrone copper mine has I opened
its existing government for
proposed all within a mile or
two of each other in the
environmental review with the
state's mining and mineral
Division each new or expanding
money is considered separately
for its environmental impact the
significant adjacent
environmental changes should be
considered together the five
deaths were brought down wells
to nine hundred feet long heavy
metal dust with intense noise
from blasting two huge trucks
this is exactly what the green
amendment can address that
mining and minerals cannot
environmental justice means
adjacent neighbors not losing
their homes water wells for
property values say yes to the
green amendment let the public
vote on their environmental
rights in November thank you.
Thank you we have lane should be
a.
Hello hello yes.
Thank you chair and committee
Representative as a resident of
New Mexico I have worked on land
use issues for the last twenty
seven years there have been
equity and justice issues that
have not been addressed nor has
the cumulative it our
contamination impacts from
developers and industry the
regulator's job has been to see
that industry server permits
issued rarely worked to the
benefit of the community impact
because of the lack of
enforcement it is our hope that
the green amendment will finally
address community concerns the
environmental impacts and serve
to protect our water air and
earth we are all connected to
the open support of the green
amendment thank you.
Thank you next up we have David
Graham felt.
Thank you can you hear me.
Yes.
David Graham Phillips with the
water culture institute in Santa
Fe New Mexico the backlog of EPA
Superfund sites steadily
degrading environment are
leading to a recognition that
the bat that the rights to a
healthy environment are
fundamental to establishing
health east sustainable and
equitable communities.
What message are we sending
young people and future
generations if we tell them that
they don't have a right to safe
water air and soil.
Let's allow our New Mexico
voters to decide whether to
adopt the green amendment or not
in the next election thank you.
Thank you next up we have that
the listening to do the.
Good morning chair committee
members my name's of the
necklace to do and I'm a retired
navy energy and environmental
engineer first off I want to
thank the electric companies to
transition to troop carbon free
electric renewable electricity
is key to preventing climate
catastrophe and to the farms and
ranches that bring food on our
table all of you also want clean
air clean water and clean land
and don't realize how important
this is when I arrived here in
New Mexico I saw the abuse that
was happening as from the
environmental engineering
perspective we were being
exploited.
By industry and even our very
governments who would just be
protecting us this as Senator
Steinborn mentioned and said and
stated this can constitutional
amendment will bring the power
of judgment keep all levels of
our government on alert let's
give the voters the chance to
vote on this do passed H. A. R.
T. thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Maryland asked.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Marilyn Massey executive
director of new energy economy
new energy economy supports H.
J. R. to having our
constitutional rights elevated
and inserted into the bill of
rights section of our
constitution will ensure
government decision making seeks
to prevent and avoid
environmental harm as opposed to
after the fact management the
individual rights granted to all
New Mexico to New Mexicans
coupled with the trust
obligations of the government to
protect the state's natural
resources for the benefit of all
people will provide prioritize
environmental justice
considerations.
And ensure environmental justice
protection the courts have and
will be able to an interpreter
trustee obligations to protect
New Mexicans from industry abuse
if industry follows the law they
have nothing to worry about
thank you very much please yes
H. G. R. two.
Right.
Thank you we have more leading
of.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee I am
sister Marlene Roach sister of
mercy and member of the
partnership for a spirituality.
We have relied on federal and
state legislation to fight for a
cleaner environment which is a
moral and ethical issue.
The sad truth is our laws are
designed disproportionately in
favor of dirty energy dirty
energy industry giving them
permission to pollute and
targets.
The on those communities most
affected by pollution thus
resulting in in part
environmental degradation
contributing to climate chaos we
have the right to clean water
clean air and healthy soils.
The people of New Mexico
addressed I'm just and
unsustainable pollution vote to
pursue and secure constitutional
protection of environmental
rights in New Mexico ultimately
at the federal level support
this joint resolution
environmental Rights Act thank.
Thank you next up we have stuff
you wise for.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I am steep
widespread representing the
Democratic Party rural caucus in
the three fifty New Mexico world
advocacy here in support of H.
J. R. to I recently moved from
Albuquerque to to harass right
discovered there are far fewer
protections for access to a
reliable clean water supply
wells are drying up and I've met
people who cannot afford to
drill deeper or remedy
contaminated water supplies
residents were powerless to stop
Edgewood commissioners from
green lighting the first step in
the addition of four thousand
more homes and a golf course
from taking water from a rapidly
diminishing aquifer they're only
six thousand people who live
here already please give us a
tool to ensure that our voices
are just as powerful as those
who do not have the future of
the land air and water in their
best interests thank you very
much.
Thank you next step we have back
at Davis.
He to the representatives and
senators who have brought forth
the green amendment my name is
Rebecca Davis and I'm here today
and strong support of HA RTO I
think about this bill as a
second grade teacher in
Farmington and how the pollution
created by my generation and
others before me will negatively
affect the lives of my students
for generations to come it must
be acknowledged that the dentist
students and their extended
family members that live on the
neighboring Navajo Nation
experience pollution at a
disproportionately higher rate
because of the harmful
pollutants left behind by so
many things like the uranium
mines San Juan generating
station forecourt corners power
plant and the gold king mine
spill that led to livestock
watering restrictions because of
the police.
Accern industry fueled by the
green rather than the well being
of their workers and
constituents are no longer
acceptable please support HA are
to and let us vote on this
important matter ourselves thank
you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you except for is John
Brown.
Thank you chair committee my
name is John Brown in the
Franciscan sister and director
of New Mexico interfaith power
and light.
You're in New Mexico are larger
based on ethical principles to
care for our sacred land water
air human dignity health and
current and future future
generations but we are failing
these principles there are too
many legacy pollution sites to
many current polluting projects
and communities living and
sacrifice zones with pollution
and many health problems the
green amendment addresses
environmental justice and
impacted communities I've seen
too many people suffering I've
seen devastated land water air
I've heard parents and
grandparents read for future
generations somehow we are
failing communities our soul's
purpose god's creation and we
must do something if we care for
rights good and just economics
will follow give the people a
chance to speak thank you.
Thank you next up is my up and
Rawson.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Maya van Rossum I am an
attorney.
Are you not hearing me we can
hear you okay.
I am an attorney leader agreed
amendments for the generations
author of the book the green
amendment New Mexico does not
have green amendment protection
at this time the assertion that
I have said I otherwise it's
neither true nor accurate a
green amendment will
tremendously strengthen
environmental protection in New
Mexico simply editing article
twenty section twenty one will
not find green amendment level
protection the green amendment
will not result in an onslaught
of litigation states that have
green amendments have a mere
three to nine lawsuits in any
given year where the green
amendment is a fundamental claim
and the basis of final court
decision making.
In those states there are been
zero for less lawsuits based on
agreed amendment cases brought
in those states are protecting
water air land soils and human
health and they're protecting
lives and livelihoods of the
people of the state they're
protecting state and local
budgets farmers and businesses
agreed amendment will ensure
economic development does not
take place at the expense of the
health and happiness of present
future generations I hope you
past the green amendment thank
you.
Thank you and our last speaker
from the public in support to
the green amendment will be
these are.
Hello thank you so much for that
Mr chair members of the
committee we've got a with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande the
chapter
Visitation of over thirty five
thousand members in New Mexico
we are standing very strong
support and ask you to vote yes
and H. C. R. two I would
recomend it will make a real
discernible make real the right
to a clean and healthy
environment for all people in
all parts of the government's
jurisdiction will mandate the
government work practically to
prohibit and remedy degradation
and ensure that all residents
have equitable access to pure
water clean air and the many
benefits of healthy environments
the amendment is important for
current and future generations
you've heard from you and
grandparents and parents
speaking on behalf of those who
cannot speak today of this
climate crisis is very real and
it's true and it is here now and
we are ask you to vote yes then
give of course not for two
ninety to vote for this on the
ballot thank you very much for
your time.
Okay Representative of our time
for public comment there are
still many people on the list
there were people on the list to
speak in opposition I thank you
all for joining us.
All judges that we don't
There we can accommodate
everyone.
Well before we go to the
committee.
Is there a for the Sanchez is
there anything you would like to
address response to.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
thank you members of the
committee.
We do have article twenty
section twenty one in our
constitution.
However it doesn't do the
complete job I've state I've
stood on the floor of the Senate
and I've read it out loud to try
to get my colleagues to look at
and see how important protecting
our beautiful but fragile
environment is.
Contrary to what was said this
does not affect private property
interests we have lots of
constitutional
a constitutional provisions for
property interests but we don't
have anything protecting our
right to clean air land and
water.
And property interests have to
be I mean are cleaning our
constitutional interest always
have to be balanced this is not
an amendment that is going to
trump everything else this is an
amendment that's going to
require the state to include
clean air land and water and
healthy environment in the mix
of considerations that it has to
balance.
In addition it was investors
when one invest here if we
didn't have a claim amendment
and that is a real concern I
don't believe that they stopped
investing in businesses in
Montana and in Pennsylvania and
New York is just passed it the
claim amendment I don't believe
that they stopped and I wonder
about an investor who only wants
to invest in the state that
doesn't protect the environment
I really appreciate the
opportunity and I'm very I'm
very much value the comments
that were made I believe that
our rural state needs to protect
its the quality and the quantity
of the water we have and the
green amendment will be a
guiding principle for the state
to prevent environmental harms
and not just have lawsuits
against industry after they've
they've made mistakes this will
prevent harm and that is one of
the reasons that I supported so
strongly thank you Mr chair and
I we all are welcome any
comments and questions from from
the.
From the panel.
Okay.
Thank you senator still Lopez.
Members of the committee.
The two of our members
I think currently in HSD
and we'll call them back when
the time comes for you of
hopefully they will get back to
here before that first we have
Representative on so yes we just
large and.
If you have questions.
Yes thank you Mr chair I.
Didn't see that my hand was
raised I raised it right into
that was raised by lower lower
it thinking that was raising.
So thank you Mr chairman.
Yes I have a.
A couple of questions.
For
for the Sanchez.
And actually Senator Sedillo
Lopez just stated that this.
Would have the effect of
preventing harm I don't see
this.
I don't see that the joint
resolution as I don't see where
it's written that there would be
any prevention of harm
so maybe you could expand.
Senator on how this ammendment
it if it were effect would
present harm.
Thank you thank you for that
question that Mr chair
representative that is a great
question that the trustee I put
placing that the trustee
obligation on the state and
state agencies will require the
state agencies to consider the
to consider the environment
protecting our air land water in
every decision that they make
and that will will caught that
will just be transformative I'm
I have read every single I have
read every single lawsuit that
has been published that has come
in under the green amendment and
none of these
Basically what they are
reversing permits that were
granted I'll just give you one
example in Montana there was
going to be an expert
Exploratorium.
Really for a gold mine and they
that permit was granted for the
struggling but they had failed
to take into account the impact
this was going to have an
increase in Yellowstone and also
on the water that farmers use
downstream and so that that
permit granting was reversed
just so the agency could
consider that impact so that
presented that prevented just
horrible damages to really part
of special places in Montana so
that's an example have how we
can have prevent harm.
Thank you for that answer
Senator I actually think that's
the problem with this I think
this is meant to have a chilling
effect.
Business from doing anything
from and that's why the
discussion about business
deciding not to to participate
or come to New Mexico or even
leave New Mexico I think that's
the exact problem with this
it's just it is meant.
For there to be a threat that
anyone in the state for any
reason.
Can bring litigation.
And without any.
Without any consequences so
Mister chair.
That I think is it is the real
crux of the problem with this
with this joint resolution is
exactly what was stated by.
Our homeowners I think this
would be developers I mean yeah
and yesterday's in Thursday's.
Committee we are we're
discussing the hydrogen and
It was mentioned by
Representative Dixon.
What environmental
Problems there were.
With that is with that with the
idea of of.
Getting to net zero as.
Another piece legislation
discusses is that we can't get
there because just in the
building process the amount of
emissions and carbon that
that cannot be controlled in
that process so what would
happen to the and this is a
question what would happen to
someone who wants to develop.
Just just for housing that would
be disturbing land that will be
digging that we'll be using.
Seamount which I know was
described the potential steel in
buildings especially office
buildings.
I'm with those folks who are.
just building infrastructure I
mean for goodness sake
Putting asphalt.
Laying asphalt take care of
roads the state doing that what
are the protections that someone
could not bring a personal right
of action against.
Against the of the government
even for these businesses that
are just building and we have a
lot Senator we have a lot of
treatment thank you members who
work in the trades in their
their job is building hi hi
fetters
C. Matt years
Carpenters.
I just don't know it I I don't
see any restrictions whatsoever.
That that they.
That that any of the businesses
and construction.
Would would be protected from
potential I'm I would like to
say frivolous.
Litigation.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Montoya
the first in a constitutional
case the first thing that a
plaintiff must show is what is
the state action that because
that that gives rise to the
cause of action so this this
this ammendment does not allow
any lawsuits against private
industry it's just against the
state and the kind of the kind
of you know suing your neighbor
or whatever just would not be
permitted under this under this
lawsuit in and when we look at
the litigation that has occurred
in the other states that have
agreed amendment not a single
one has been demonstrated to be
frivolous and they have not
they've done some really
important things to protect the
environment in their states and
they only average I would say
between four and twelve a year
and the published cases the only
resulted in I believe like.
Twelve cases it is a law
professor you look at the
published cases as the law that
has been created and each of
those cases involve a balance
between the state interests in
protecting the environment and
the state interest in economic
development all of the state
interests are are brought to
bear in considering this and
that's all this amendment would
do is require the state to put
the environment into the balance
and not ignore it that's all.
Thank you for that answer I do I
have been told that this our
particular house joint
resolution goes far beyond the
others that have been enacted
but the the question then is who
controls permitting permitting
of developments who allows for
permitting and the state
obviously that taking care of
the roads that goes out to bid
the state would be directly
responsible for any disruption
of land
even potentially we have we have
eminent domain that could take
place because deem to be for the
public good so but there's
nothing that I see.
That limits the bringing of the
case just because there's not a
just because it there there is
no collection of the damages to
the individual.
I believe the lawyers fees will
have to be paid and the cost to
the state or whatever local
government entity
any of those can be brought up
for any reason that and there's
no I don't see that there's a
provision in in in this to allow
for the prosecution of someone
who brings a frivolous case so
there's not anything.
Hindering a frivolous case from
being brought it just means it
might be dismissed but that
doesn't mean there's zero cost.
to the government entity.
Four right thank good public I
thought you were done Mr chair
Representative Montoya we have
this doesn't change anything we
have prohibitions against for
with cases now lawyers are are
prohibited from bringing
frivolous cases under the under
the principles of the epic their
ethical rules and courts dismiss
frivolous cases all the time
this doesn't change that and
interestingly in the state
Senate have that there hasn't
been an influx of frivolous case
basis and I know that the courts
have ways of motions for summary
judgment motion for judgment on
the pleadings to get rid of any
frivolous cases are brought by
individuals so any time we
passed law people can try to
make a case out of it and that
happens a lot I agree with you
but this isn't going to change
that with the protections
against frivolous litigation are
still in place and this doesn't
change that.
It also
Mr chairman and senator it also
doesn't put in any penalty for
bringing a frivolous case.
Missed Mr chair Representative
Montoya constitutional
amendments are by IP design.
Broad principles of policy so
they don't set out a little
rules of procedure or we they
they come in the context of the
rules of procedure that exist
now and and usually
constitutional amendments do not
go into that level of detail.
It's implementing legislation
that might but constitutional
amendments normally do not do
that.
Thank you for that answer
I I was.
Looking at.
There being no protections for
government.
if they are moving forward under
existing laws.
It this would put in place an
extra layer of going whatever
the individual who might be
making the decision on behalf of
the state as to whether or not
to grant.
A permit.
because the permit.
The permitting process is pretty
straightforward for any of the
departments that grant permits
so this puts in place that the.
That much harder that much
longer maybe that much more of
an expense.
there already has to be studies
done if you're going to if
you're going to disturb the
ground there there's an
environmental impact study it
already has take place but now
there's gonna be the extra.
Okay well I may have done all
these eyes and crossed all the
teas however is there the
possibility.
That some group it or some
individual.
Is going to.
Even though I even though I've
done all of my work within the
bounds of the law existing law.
That they can be said that the
that that the state can be said.
Miss Mister chair representative
Montoya if they comply with the
law the age that the existing
law a lot of these cases are
really requiring the agencies to
comply with their own
regulations and their own lost
that's that's what it does and I
of of Mr chair if you'll indulge
me my experts have texted me and
said saying that they would
they're chomping at the bit to
make a response so I'd like to
call on a Mr Eric chance.
Etcetera you can defer to your
experts that's fine okay miss.
I.
Thank you thank you senator says
city of Lopez
Mr chair Representative Montoya
I think you want to address
the issue
Senator prevalence lawsuits from
the perspective of someone who's
practice environmental law for
the last twenty years in the
state
and that is that there are safe
so first of all the current
regulatory framework statutory
framework
it has is is going to have the
same protections that this
constitutional amendment will
have to prevent that right and
that's one rule eleven that the
New Mexico rules of civil
procedure prevents from most
lawsuits
if that will get sanctions for
sanctions for parties to bring
lawsuits that have merit but
more important I think in this
case is the issue standing so a
party cannot bring a lawsuit in
my state have standing to do so
under constitution and that
means that they would have to at
least have a showing of harm to
them
and that they would have some
sort of interest in the
development that is happening
again I want to echo Senator
Sedillo passes
Clarification that the great
amendment is a limit on
government power it doesn't it
seems would only lie against
government not against private
industry
and so the the
The safeguards the guard rails
to prevent frivolous litigation
apply equally to.
The great amendment as they
would to any other
constitutional litigation or any
other statutory.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman question
Mr Janse so what are those
current.
limitations on frivolous
lawsuits other than them being
thrown out by Merrit.
It is someone who brings a
frivolous lawsuit.
in other areas that individual
brings a frivolous lawsuit and
that lawyer who brings a from us
lawsuit what are those in other
and by and by the way I don't
assume because I've done that
before assumed that we passed a
constitutional amendment and
then the supporting legislation
would follow that would put
place that would be put in place
we know this with the our our
del Bond what
Amendment that with that went to
voters N. Y. and was ratified
and what's happened is.
Zero.
Are are are are supporting
legislation that was put in
place
did not correct in any way what
the public really doesn't want
which is catch and release
system were so I am not I am
unwilling to assume that a
constitutional amendment cannot
have.
Limitations in the actual
amendment I almost at this point
afraid to pass constitutional
amendment and hope that the
supporting.
Legislation would be put in
place that would then have
limitations that we are all told
will will result that that
happen with
Even just regular legislation
where.
We're one of things I'm
concerned with is the.
The sound generating station we
were told through that whole
process that what will happen is
the community that was harmed
within benefit from future
natural gas power plants in
their place in this area and
that has not resulted is not
affected PNM not even looking
here so the idea of trusting
that.
The.
I enabling legislation would be
there after the fact I am I'm
just unwilling to believe that I
just and the consequences are
too high to so so if you could
tell me in other instances are
there any is there anything.
Unitive.
That could be brought against
the individual.
This lawsuit absolutely with
that directed to me or are too
Mr chance I I can answer as well
you know what I like to if if I
could have you both answer that
would be great if that's if
that's okay Mr chair.
So.
Mr chair Representative Montoya
so yeah I mean at.
I think that that one of the one
of the the places where we're
sort of tripping each other up
is on what frivolous lawsuit it
so a lawsuit isn't being
frivolous and tell such time as
a court that makes that
determination right.
So they're only lawsuits at the
beginning of the process that
said the threat of fines from
the court having to pay the
other parties attorney's fees
are content losing your license
all of those are
disincentives for lawyers to
bring suits that have no more if
they do so the court can
determine that date under rule
eleven that in fact a lawsuit is
frivolous that it has no merit
and then those sanctions get
employment so the party could be
forced to pay the other parties
attorney's fees and frankly
coming from a small nonprofit I
would not look forward to having
to pay attorney's fees for state
PM.
R. so that is that that is a big
disincentive for bringing are
frivolous what made later
determined to be frivolous
lawsuits and then again we have
the standing guard rail hi there
has to be some sort of hard
otherwise they could could get
skate that once he gets kicked
out right away I'm so yeah I
mean I think that
that.
Those are the those are that are
research currently exist are in
passing the green amendment for
passing H. J. R. two and
ratified agreement wouldn't
change those those guardrails.
Mr chair.
Representative the that was an
excellent so the only thing I
will add is that the other risk
that an attorney faces is that
they'll be turned into the
disciplinary committee and and
they lose reputation and clients
so there are a lot of
protections against frivolous
lawsuits.
Thank you madam
Senator Mr chair also Mister
dancer for Senator Sedillo Lopez
the question of standing.
I believe what we would be doing
here is granting.
Position standing almost I mean
not not quite but almost but to
every to any citizen
individually.
Is is that incorrect.
I'm.
Mr chair representative standing
is kind of a a little bit of you
can get a little bit complicated
but generally in New Mexico
people have the right to enforce
the constitution if it harms
them if the failure to enforce
the constitution arms felt and
that's true now nothing would be
different by passing this people
would be able to enforce the
constitution if and and this
concept of of harm
there's a lot of case law on it
and it's it's complicated
especially in the environmental
area but that is a guard where
rail for just random people
suing for random things and the
harm has to be tangible
something that the court can can
look at in so just saying well I
don't like this.
Power plant.
Emissions and if the if if
they're not doing anything to
you that that's not going to go
anywhere.
Share members of the committee
to add to Senator Sedillo Lopez
is answer the this this
ammendment doesn't confer
standing it doesn't actually
have a perfect standing at all
it provides a cause of action
for people who have standing but
it doesn't affect expanding
in and of itself so in order to
vindicate rights under the green
amendment the plaintiff was
still have to demonstrate
standing under the existing case
law in New Mexico they have to
show the harm that they're
within the zone of interest
protected by the the statute or
the amendment
so in other words a road being
built in Farmington wouldn't
necessarily be somebody and and
not Santa Fe wouldn't
necessarily be able to challenge
that right.
They would necessarily have to
be able to demonstrate any kind
of harm and the case would get
kicked Committee.
so standing is is not impacted
at all by.
H. C. R. two or ratification of
the agreement.
So thank you for that madam
chair and around the center and
so Mister chair and I have a
question of the question Mr
Janse and that is.
Do the public.
Already is there are there any
folks in the public to already
have standing based on.
Because.
Act cause damage to them.
And who is that against and who
and who do they have that yes.
Mr I'm I'm sorry senator please
I'm Mr chair I want the question
clarified what do you mean under
that everybody who has a lawsuit
has to show that they have
standing to bring the lawsuit so
I'm I'm unclear about what the
references to.
So I understand what the extra
right that would be given and
what I'm hearing now is that.
the same hoops that have to be
jumped through.
I don't see why a person with
the an individual would have
less of the case them say a
corporation I excell what with
this find what with this then
provide you just you're saying
that.
What I'm hearing.
And maybe it misinterpreting
what I'm hearing is that there
would be no change.
What would be the change.
The change would would be that
an individual if the state were
to fail in its responsibilities
an individual who was harmed
could bring a lawsuit to to
force the state to do it an
example you gave the example of
a permit is a permit was granted
and let's just hypothetically
say that that permit was granted
despite the fact that that there
was no consideration of the harm
like just hypothetically of a
permit to worst case scenario to
allow
nuclear waste to be Department
deposited in an area that was
not suitable for the deposits of
nuclear waste just type that in
a landfill for example now that
maybe it wait different
hypothetical because I I can't
imagine any state government
allowing that but let's say for
some reason they did then the
neighbors who would be affected
by the the radiation from the
nuclear waste with David ring of
bring an appeal or appeal that
permit which they can appeal now
but they would have standing to
raise the issue of failure to
Kate take into account
environmental harm because of
this ammendment and that is very
important so that we can protect
against that and I just made a
variation against of the
hypothetical that I gave you
about the or that real life case
the gold exploration I just
change the hypothetical of
little bit to give you an
example of the kind of thing
this would do and it would allow
them to intervene in case in in
a permit and say look you're not
taking into account our harm the
harm to our community by this
new asphalt plant and we already
have five of them in the area so
those are some examples of of
the kind of things that this the
individual can do to hold the
state accountable to protect our
air our land our water and I.
I also noticed Mr chair that
professor via has his handout
and he teaches constitutional
law at the university of New
Mexico so I would be happy to
also defer to him.
Yeah stand thank you for the
question that really is
important Sir bring about
important point for the constant
viral Justice it might actually
be that there are several
industrial facilities that are
all act and in compliance with
the permit but it may be that
the chairman of the impact of
all that air pollution is having
a real effect on the health of
local residents
that the impact is something
that may not be prevented under
environment regulations that
might be something that could be
addressed under great amendment
if your adversely impacting
health of that community there
is a case where we might really
need this kind of rain
amendments to ensure the
protection of people's health
you also asked about how does it
actually prevent problems so
that might be a great case for
the permitting authority whoever
it is and take into
consideration existing
contamination take into
consideration health of of
people who are effective now and
perhaps either declined to issue
the permit for issue permit
conditions that will ensure
protection of health doesn't
mean the the it industry has to
stop operating just needs that
maybe they need a new perfect
condition to ensure that we keep
people safe so there cases where
environmental regulations are
great and helpful and just cases
where they just don't do the job
that we intended them to do and
that's what the great amendment
was about thank you Mr chairman
and
and commenters.
Hey I'm looking that in the case
that was brought up the by
Senator Sedillo Lopez about a
nuclear facility or a that that
already exists the ability to to
have to intervene and be able to
question the permitting process
already exists.
well we're look at that and have
a right of action against
government now for it because it
is the those environmental
studies there's not a single
home.
That.
That has to be built at that
some sort of environmental
consideration either by the
developer initially.
has already handed to be
considered so what at this point
we're talking about is future
business.
So I think that was a great
example was a new asphalt.
And you can permit for an
asphalt.
location but I'm looking at a
quarry for example which is
essentially mining mining for
for rock there's already
processes that have to go in
place and and usually one is a
new location is found when
they're starting to run out of
room on their current location
they don't duplicate.
For the purpose of duplication a
duplicate for the purpose of
running out of the stock and
having to go find another place
that's I believe that's already
considered and I I just the idea
now is the threat the threat of
litigation again rural at so so
I'm I think the.
The the the we can always
throughout nuclear and all of
these other things but it
doesn't seem to be like there's
a limitation if it harms and
this is what I heard from the
from center city Lopez if it ha
if there's the potential of it
harming the environment.
How many of Marmon to the
subdivision it goes in and
there's gonna have to be trees
that have to be removed that
could be they gonna footprint
where there's going to have to
be the grounds gonna have to be
dug out because a parking garage
needs to go in
there's already environmental
impact studies that are in place
in the building process.
So what we're saying it now is
okay we disagree with you now
we're gonna sue M. am I is that
is that not where this goes
thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative Montoya
for the question I'm really glad
you asked that because it's the
fear that is unfounded if they
are complying if the if the
industry is complying with the
the environmental laws and
environmental laws are are are
enforced there should not be a
problem the problem would be
when if if a committee because
they didn't want terra if a
commission did not take into
account the environment in
granting the permit.
That's where you would have an
issue and you possible tension
Lee a constitutional issue but
and and and but just regular
business I always like to say we
should be open for business not
open for exploitation and as
long as businesses are doing
what they need to do there's not
going to be a problem.
So I'm looking at this and I
look at industries that are.
Regulated I I worked for a
company that that.
I sold explosives so explosive
storyline.
That in itself.
Is destroying I mean literally
it's exploding the ground.
The unintentional consequence I
could see is explosive company.
Being
maybe losing a license or
something like that to be able
to deliver to to
to my place I used to work at a
a coal mine that is owned.
By the Navajo Nation.
so in effect Navajo Nation
could.
Even though they're a sovereign
nation and even though they own
power plants and electric and
electrical fire power plant they
own a coal mine.
They own
oil and gas facilities
So I I mean.
It's interesting I heard someone
talking for the Navajo Nation
earlier as if to protect them
and they own these businesses.
but if they were to.
Kill the ability for the.
Our company that sells
explosives because it then is in
the process it could have the
and she can just it could it
would have the result of
limiting eliminating.
The.
the Navajo nation's ability to
own their own businesses and
their and their self
determination would be would be
could be affected by this not by
regulating them because they
can't.
But by regulating another
company to sell something to
them so.
And someone who lives.
In the area.
Who says I don't like that big
hole in the ground.
Because it's mining.
I'm just looking at this as how
these and I don't believe that
the meeting frivolous I believe
that it would have to go through
the whole procedure even now.
I think most of us would agree
the Navajo Nation has the right
to do essentially whatever they
choose to do which is why we're
doing things to other people
that are outside of the Navajo
Nation that we're not doing to
the Navajo Nation so I'm just
looking at this I don't see that
this limits which would in
essence.
Be looking to hold something
that they don't like even though
the Navajo Nation.
Unless they produce everything
that they use for their
operation on their own site.
They could be limited and
already in the process of making
explosives and this is this is
something I can there are only
two places one of the main.
The main component in making
ammonium nitrate is making
money.
We only have two in the entire
country of ammonia plants.
The rest of them are either in
Canada or in Russia are in China
so we're still getting ammonia
it just means it's not be
introduced in the United States.
But.
If someone could then make the
case against one of these
ammonia plant that's or if if
one of them gets old needs to be
decommissioned another one
coming up might not be able to
happen because of.
Something like this so I I don't
know how we there are certain
things we need there are all
kinds of chemicals I have under
my.
In my kitchen in my pantry in my
bathroom there all kinds of
chemicals that we use.
Fertilizers I think was
mentioned by one of the
presenters as and not
fertilizers
yes decides.
So for a commercial.
Yes the size that are necessary
in being able to produce enough.
Education that you know that
that doesn't get ruined.
they can be really hard.
It doesn't mean that the person
on the other end doesn't
themselves.
Have a.
Maybe a personal impact the
neighboring the net up somebody
has a neighboring home so I I
don't know how we can limit all
the way down to a single
individual and make fun I think.
The government has to look at it
sometimes as.
What are the other needs of the
many many and so I I don't know
how this gets balanced when we
do this when we take this
personal right of action all the
way down to the individual.
Mr chair
and Representative Montoya and I
I see lots of hands up from
presenters I I think
Representative Montoya is.
Questions are reasonable no I'm
not your update to the truck
that I would like to be
conscious of the time.
We're not gonna be able to run
through every.
I.
Thank you under understanding
they were trying to flush out
the scope of this I I
Representative Montoya again I
your questions are resolved
You can also just on the the the
bill before us.
This specifics we create the
person.
Thank.
There it to respond very briefly
that parade of horrible's has
not occurred in Montana or in
Pennsylvania I don't expected to
occur in New York and I don't
know what would be different
about our state that that pro
rated portables would occur a
balance is with the
constitutional amendment
requires all constitutional
rights are a balance and this
will just put up unfortunately
the environment hasn't been.
Is strongly in the balance we've
been very very up.
Open to to industry and
sometimes not considered the
constitution I mean not
considered the environment and
that's what we want to do is
make a policy statement the
people have the people of the
state of New Mexico make a pile
of really important policy
guidelines for our state that
can be enforced
thank you.
You for that
Mr chairman I will that will be
the my final question I there's
I know other folks try asked the
same things that are going
through my mind so I'll I'll
conclude my my question here
however I would like to say in
the in the words of former
territorial governor Lujan
Wallace seen things that seem to
work everywhere else fail
miserably in New Mexico and so
just because of past or other
locations where maybe it's not
fully implemented yet The the
idea.
That granting greater standing.
For individuals.
I think the real concern that I
have is that this is way too
broad.
And that in the end it will
result in a frivolous or or
maybe not frivolous but maybe
drive by drive by lawsuits so
all in all Mr chairman taken
under advisement and I will
allow and other number to.
To ask questions thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative Montoya
next year Representative
Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you panel and I've got
serious concerns about this
house joint resolution two
you know I I I hail from San
Juan County and we have a large
gas field appear we have to call
coal fired power plants and and
I've lived up here twenty seven
years and and and we have we
have a clean air clean water and
clean land really proud of the
industry and and how they comply
with all the rules regulations
that are that they have to deal
with.
This this resolution is broader
than in Montana I'm not familiar
with Pennsylvania or New York
montanus kind of in our
neighborhood there in the west
and the Attorney General pointed
this out.
Article twenty section twenty
one
is stripped from this this
particular
resolution and and I suggest
that should not be extracted we
need to we have good regulatory
agencies in place the state
engineer or water issues the
environment department we're
quality the energy and natural
resources or mining and oil and
gas in the state for saying that
that the cities and the counties
oppose this
from there rulemaking insulting
and in development
they're concerned about it I've
never seen so many business and
industry.
and and the cities and counties
oppose universally opposed this
bill and and and and that we
need the account to pay
attention they're on the ground
they take care of of the
citizens of New Mexico our
legislative authority stripped
from this bill and and that's
not good Montana there bill is
it is this is a pretty a pretty
interesting what they do is that
they have a in environmental
component to their constitution
but they do allow the
legislature they do allow their
legislature their rules they're
they're governing regulatory
boards authority to enforce
clean out clean water clean air
and clean land the the the water
at the agricultural community is
concerned about this and and we
were such a were big air prepare
cultural position state so.
again our surrounding states
have.
They they don't have anything
close to this they rely on the
legislative their legislatures
to
Delegate rulemaking to the
experts to the engineers to the
challenges to the
the council what not to come up
with a good regulations that
everybody can live with
everybody wants clean air clean
water clean land I guarantee it
in a couple of the same one
economic I'll show you this
country side it's it's gorgeous
and we got the some of the
cleanest lands in in the
country.
in our state.
For sure so
I'm gonna have to lean heavily
on the attorney general's
opinion their comments on this
on this this proposal and and
you've gone too far in remember
New Mexico was trying to
recover.
Mr of Mr chairman and I panel.
From the from the pandemic from
the from shut down over
surrounding states should
recover their unemployment.
folks and we're still fifth
highest in unemployment yeah we
can do better and we're trying
to do that this government is
trying to repeal
taxes also security to track
more citizens to our state our
folks to our state we're doing
we're really trying hard and
this is going the wrong
direction we have strict.
Rules and regulations on the
books now I'm sorry that you
some folks don't feel like
That is strong enough.
The boy.
It's tough and I work with
people in the field that
administer these rules and
regulations they love the clean
air clean water and they do a
great job out in the field.
Administering all these
different facilities so I don't
have a question of you snap a
publisher bill appreciate bring
it up but it's just it's just
too much thank you Mr chairman
thank you panel.
Thank you Representative
Strickler the next step is
representative dot.
Thank you.
Mister chairman Senator and
presenters very.
Interesting conversations so
for.
Yes.
I'm looking on the Webster's
dictionary the definition of
clean.
Can understand the objective.
This piece of legislation is to
develop clean air clean water
clean land.
Should claim this free from dirt
marks or stains.
As an alternative morally
uncontaminated.
You are innocent so I guess my
question would be.
Check.
Apply.
Two more water plant.
Senator.
Or perhaps one of the presenters
provide.
Check.
Definition.
What we're trying to accomplish.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Scott
in the other states the way
they've looked at the guide
stars of existing legit like
legislation about what
constitutes clean air land and
water we have regulations about
it and that's what would be
looked at so it as long as
industry is complying with the
existing regulations and laws
you should not be a problem.
I don't know why I have I guess
if if I see that
When my experts.
both of my experts both with the
legal experts want to jump in if
Mister chair if you permit that
that's fine.
I'm.
Representative you have
identified one of the the most
challenging questions are but a
lot how clean is clean is sort
of something that agencies on
every level have rest for a
while but one thing that we have
learned is that particular we're
talking about not just clean
being free from verified clean
being at in able to protect
people's health isn't really
challenging bangs the kind of a
solution that might be okay for
you and me might actually have a
very kind of adverse effect for
children's brains are developing
right and so we really do need
to understand with the people
who are being affected by this
pollution and then how are they
being affected and that's that's
not the same way for every
different person we have
elementary schools that might be
effected you think about that
where you have assisted care or
elderly people you need to be
thinking about how to protect
their air so it's not always
easy to say you know one certain
level is is clean or not really
consider where these people left
who they are and then how we're
gonna protect.
Mr chair Representative Scott to
add to professor yes answer it's
it's also contingent on
the the exposure right so
different different exposure
mechanisms can be
the different level it's very
levels that are considered safe
considered healthy so it it
really is contingent on
the pollutant exposure the
exposure pathway and exposure
level and sciences the got to
that epidemiology toxicology
and medicine.
That would.
Make it so that courts could
make a particular determination
about particular pollutant
particular circumstance thank
you.
Mister chairman Senator and
presenters.
This very broad constitutional
right.
And the subject to.
We.
Is the heart of my concern in
that.
Mechanized activities every
thing we do from making coffee
in the morning.
To one of well.
Is some effect.
On a clean apartment and.
And that is a concern to make
because I see the potential.
Four calls to action.
Developed.
As a consequence of this very
broad constitutional amendment
that.
Okay.
Hi to behold basically.
Which would.
Which would lead us.
To arena.
For the litigation we might
never skate which will address
that concern.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Scott.
We may be in the eye of the
beholder but toxic is not toxic
is dealt with by science and as
you were talking I was thinking
about the produced water that
rain down on picking a point in
her family's farm that of kids
that resulted in the death of
her and she can go and her dog
they got pustules on their skin
that six inches of their top so
it was taken off the ground I
think we could all agree that
that was not clean and that's
what this ammendment is going to
go after what we know is not
clean and very toxic.
And so when you talk about
subjectivity the guy still is
the existing law and the
science.
And so I think it's really
important for the state to
understand that it's taken into
account and they have in
regulations that's another thing
this amendment does is it
protects the legacy of of really
good regulations that have
resulted in what you describe is
cleaning up the industry and so
I it is such an important
amendment for that reason and I
really appreciate the question.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and madam chair let
me.
Now I could.
In the substance of the bill.
Would it be accurate to say
that.
Yes legislation what caused the
state.
It's political subdivisions.
To serve as a trustee.
Of the natural resource.
Absolutely and we have the bill
was presented this summer
in in the the interim committee
and we have some of I and I
asked about it when we had our
trusty our state trustee and
what's really important about
the trustee language is two fold
is to bring the environment into
clear focus and to make sure the
decisions are not tainted by
conflicts of interest or other
issues that a trustee should
have and there is also a well
developed body of law about what
it means to be a trustee for
natural resources its well
developed in our state with
regard to well fairly well
developed in our state with
regard to water and so what this
brings into is a really good
good way of measuring with
whether the state is doing is
putting the environment I mean
our natural resources to the
best use has it has a trust you
should on so that language is
very important and it's also
there to to reverse some
unfortunate language in in the
case aware of of particular case
not I would say it was dictum
which means it wasn't essential
to the case but in Sanders
review Martinez the court went
out of its way to say the
legislature is not not a trustee
for the environment and I and I
think that that was really
important in fortunate language
so the result of that case needs
to be reversed as well has that
unfortunately which.
Mr Chairman Senator so this.
This piece of legislation would
create a fiduciary relationship.
Is that accurate yes.
And.
Mr Chairman.
Does it have your produce here
our relationships and
obligations that could be.
Which.
In conflict with its obligation
to the environment.
I don't believe so I believe
that the fiduciary relationship
to the water is of the public
trust doctrine with regard for
water is in harmony with its
fiduciary relationship so I
disagree with the with the idea
that there would be conflicting
do share a relationship what
what there is is we have the
courts developing this with no
constitutional guidance and this
will provide them some
constitutional guidance in the
context of the policy decision
of protecting our air land and
water.
Mister chairman Senator I have
to disagree because.
Has reduce your responsibility
to manage its assets.
For the financial care of New
Mexicans.
Let me start with education.
If we're is if there's a
conflict between that
responsibility and the
responsibility to the
environment.
Which.
Is the controlling factor.
Has it all constitutional
responsibilities in future
responsibilities there needs to
be a balance I'm I'm glad you
mentioned I'm really glad you
mentioned education because of
one of the problems with what
we've been doing with education
is relying on such a such a
source of funding that realized
that will boiling gas which
really depressed depends on
circumstances beyond our control
and so we built programs and
then we kill programs in the
bill programs just depending on
on the price of oil I'm and so
basically what this does is
instead of just looking at.
Well how can we maximize income.
This will look at the entire
balance how can the state
balance it's responsibility to
its children with the
environment with with the with
making money so that's what's
really important about this
amendment is injecting
protecting our environment for
future generations into a factor
to be considered in these kinds
of cases.
In these kinds of situations as
you said.
And this meant I I don't know if
you're implying that this would
bring industry to its knees it
hasn't in Pennsylvania it hasn't
in Montana and and I don't
expect that it will here.
Mr chairman and senator the.
I have yet to find you but I
know that there are significant
differences between what we're
proposing here and what.
Has been enacted in Montana.
I'm not sure I fully up to speed
on those differences are going
let other legislators to address
that issue but.
What we're.
Actually talking apples to
apples comparison sure.
Sabol.
For example.
In search of the balance sheet.
That.
The state in conflict with those
two.
Reduce your responsibilities.
Would would be faced with.
These are not permitting new
drilling activity on state lands
or.
Realized revenue.
Activity was allowed to
continue.
Likening conflict.
Mr chair representative Scott
two things one is I want to read
the Montana declaration of
rights to you if persons are
born free and have certain
enabling all persons are born
free and have certain
inalienable rights include the
right to a clean and healthful
environment and the rights of
pursuing life's basic
necessities enjoying and
defending their lives and
liberties acquiring possessing
and protecting property and
seeking their safety health and
happiness and all lawful ways
enjoying these rights all
persons recognize corresponding
responsibilities.
Then goes on the people have a
right article as section twenty
seven the people have a right to
clean air clean air pure water
and to the preservation of
natural scenic historic and
aesthetic values of the
environment Pennsylvania's
public natural resources are the
common property of all the
people including generations yet
to come as trustee of these
resources the Commonwealth so
conservative and train them for
the benefit of all the people
that's the language in
Pennsylvania.
which is
which use you all that is a
model and I I think that that's
terrific with regard to the
constant debt to the conflict
thank you state.
It needs to it is the
responsibility of the state at
all times to manage that that's
your responsibility as Rick
legislator in my
responsibilities the legislature
to use our best judgment to
manage what our children need in
terms of education but also in
terms of health.
And in terms of having a healthy
environment so that they can
thrive so
I agree with you that it has to
be a balance and it will be a
balance and and this just puts
the environment into that
balance which I think has had
unfortunately in some
circumstances hasn't happened
during the Martinez
administration there was a
summary reversal of regulations
that have been painstakingly
passed over the eight years of
the Richardson administration
and within ten months they were
all gone that was not balanced.
Mr chairman and senator.
This legislation takes.
The purview of the legislature.
The executive branch and the
regulatory agencies the
responsibility at all.
Into the court system.
Now.
Once course of action.
Mr chair representative Scott
the courts will not be making
the substantive decisions the
courts will be reviewing actions
of the state to ensure that they
comply with the constitutional
provision just as they do every
day when they're asked to review
constitutional provisions so
It I you know I don't see the
change that is the court's role
is to make sure that we do our
job to make sure that all the
agencies do their job and this
just puts our responsibility to
the environment into that mix of
doing our job.
I I noticed that one of my
experts have to stand up.
The.
Yes Mr chair
Thank you senator Senator I I
just want to
I think the dress maybe one of
the assumption under represented
Scott's.
Comment or question
and that is the the
Fiscal impact report
comments by the Attorney General
and Simon Department
you know frankly I'm baffled by
both of those because the great
amendment doesn't strip the
legislature or the executive of
any our responsibilities right
in fact it codifies those
responsibilities in the it and
in the context of the fiduciary
responsibility
further the R. green amendment
doesn't
impact at all article for the
constitution which vests
bride.
Powers it to pass legislation in
the legislature so.
That the attorney general's.
You in a FIR as well as
introduce opinion in the FIR
which I should note are
unsupported by any case law or
constitution citations
Are are are very confusing to me
because they they absolutely
this ammendment absolutely will
not divest any authority or
power from the legislature for
the executive branch thank you.
And I apologize I want to
mention that the constitutional
provisions I met with the first
one was Montana and the second
one was Pennsylvania.
Just just to clarify realize
that wasn't clear about that.
Thank you for that Mister
chairman Senator let me offer
for example and this is this is
the example that.
Most seriously concerns me is
that appropriate proposed
operation yes I or the drilling
project.
That is absolutely fully
permitted and in full compliance
with all regulations currently
in place in the state a project
ready to move forward.
Could still be challenged on the
basis of this constitutional
amendment as impacting.
Very subjectively.
The land and water place project
in limbo for some.
Specified period of time until
the court's good.
Is.
From from a business standpoint
from a regulatory certainty
standpoint.
It's a deal killer.
Could you address those
concerns.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Scott if they are
in compliance with everything
that they need to be in
compliance with I don't think
that they should be concerned.
The problem is is so many of
them are out of compliance and
that's what needs to be remedy
is the he the all of those that
are not in compliance.
We don't have a problem with
their meeting that the methane
and the produced water and
they're they're doing everything
they they should do and I
understand there's been
improvements since the the
hydration administration as fast
methane rules and produced water
rules so they're in compliance
they should worry about it and
because the state has taken
action to define what they need
to do and so then they now have
certainty and so they should be
fine and I don't understand the
the the fear as I said we need
to be open for business not
exploitation.
Mister chairman Senator I
appreciate that but we use the
exact language in the bill there
would be nothing to stop.
These actions.
Developing with.
Very subjective evidence
not going to be as clean as it
was before the project was
approved.
Don't.
Well heard.
One.
That would give the.
Welcome.
This would not occur.
Thank you.
With all due respect I'm not
sure that anything would get
give you comfort however
however I will say that it
didn't happen in Montana it
didn't happen in Pennsylvania
and I see that my expert
professor cliff yet has his hand
in the air so.
The center and representative I
think we've established that you
disagree that Representative
Scott has warned you Senator
look Sedillo Lopez it's
different you I would suggest we
leave it at that and we move on
Senator Representative stock has
additional questions.
Mister chairman Senator.
This a private right of action
is something.
Still like to move forward to
discuss with us the other hands
up so this time there are will
yield my time thank you for your
answer Senator and presenters.
Thank you Scott we have
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks to.
And all them.
Of the Legislature bring this
forward.
I I have a number of questions
one I'd like to just circle back
on.
That I think was
Over a while ago
Mr the.
Talked about.
The potential.
I think he is a.
The analogy of some asphalt
plants
four five of them being.
All permitted.
All meeting all of the laws.
that were applicable.
For their construction their
operation.
And
and their business.
But someone might of shoe.
But because they would take the
position that humiliating all of
the emissions from each.
Of those collectively might be
in excess.
Of.
Of a regulation considering
those types of operations.
My question is.
If that were to happen.
We could decide which one of
those.
Plans.
Might have to shut down.
Who decides what employees are
terminate I mean how does that
work.
If you had I plans some are
small some are big.
Their ability some are owned by
private industry and private
people summer owned by giant
corporations their ability to
to.
Stand up to one of these
lawsuits it's certainly
You know not well their ability
to deploy capital is certainly
not the well but that young that
that independent family owned
business may have been the first
one that was there and you know
a big company then moved down
the street how does that work
how would you see that being how
would you see that unrolling
It seems awfully unfair.
Thank you Mr chair open well I'm
just going to defer to my
experts thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Townsend for that for that
question but the way the
permitting process works and I
was thinking specifically about
About the to the south valley
which is to become kind of a
sacrifice them for the city but
the way is it permitting new.
Facilities and that area is is
really congested with toxic
industry and so the question
would be the cumulative aspect
would be what is another one
going to do to the health of
that community and that's
something that should be
considered in a permit but I
will defer to since I realize
that your question was directed
to professor yes I'll defer to
him.
Well before you go.
Faster data of Senator that is
not what I said and that was not
the
That what would that was not the
analogy use their.
The professor was talking about
existing businesses not in the
business.
Existing businesses and what I
believe will be impacted as a
loss of.
Individual rights individual
jobs an individual fortunes.
Okay I will go ahead and let
professor via respond and I
apologize if I did it but but I
was just trying to explain how
permitting works and it it
should not shut down
permitting you normally doesn't
sit down existing businesses a
professor yes.
Professor yet before you begin
Representative etcetera I will
go through the chair.
Really noted professor yes
noted.
Thank you well I would just echo
Senator Sedillo Lopez that the
first thing you do is you do not
put another political
personality in an area that is
already experiencing polluted
air right that is hurting
people's health but for just
existing facilities if they're
all in compliance with the
permits that one thing you might
look for me since no permit is
ever good for ever right
sometimes are good for five
years sometimes are good for ten
years and sometimes you may
it next time either permit
renewed and they do you think
you need to look at the impacts
of them and you find some fair
allocation for how you're going
to reduce pollution across the
board and I think a lot of
companies in your neck today
would be happy to help you
contribute to that right that
they understand that they're
going to have to be good
neighbors sometimes actually
into what's called a good
neighbor agreement to allow them
to continue operating but
operating in a safe place I
think it's really important for
everybody to understand just
because someone's operating
plans of the permit doesn't meet
a local community is safe some
people may have heard about the
flint drinking water crisis
where the state of Michigan
decided it was a good idea to
use the flint river as a new
source of drinking water the
state granted permits to use the
flint river as a drinking water
source twelve people died eight
thousand kids replacement just
because a permit is issued does
not mean people are safe what
we're talking about the great
amendment it's giving people
rights to ensure that their
health is protected children
grandchildren other people who
live there healthy environment
for people and for companies.
Or.
Professor yes.
My my issue is.
And I believe there have been
other people mentioned just the
deployment of capital in New
Mexico.
That creates jobs and
opportunities for New Mexicans.
Is often hampered.
In will be hampered.
By the.
Uncertainty.
Of these type of operations.
Whether apartments good for
five or ten twenty thirty years.
You have to think about.
Recovery capital.
The well being of your
employees.
Your your customers that depend
on you and develop downstream
businesses according to you and
I I think that.
Dr a terrible risks to the
future of many jobs in New
Mexicans.
Senator I have another question.
Is there any.
For example.
State trust land.
Has a lot of oil and gas
production mining operations at
center many of them as you well
know our existing.
A person.
In Santa Fe.
Follow the lawsuit on an
operation in eighty County.
And what they have standing only
because of state land being
considered
Public domain.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Townsend
that goes back to the issue that
we discussed about standing
whether that individual would
have standing and I think that
have maybe maybe a hard time a
showing that I'm really glad
that you raise the issue of
state trust lands and in the
context of this environment
because we have been reading
about how much it's going to
cost to
To deal with the abandoned wells
in the abandoned drilling pads
and wells in that area and what
we what we know is that there
wasn't sufficient bond that was
required when they drilled these
wells and so now that that that
that the company's of left
abandoned wells going bankrupt
whatever on the state's going to
be there to pick up the tab and
it's going to run into it
billion if not millions of
dollars
to do that and we're looking for
resources I know that the end of
that the division is applied for
federal funds with this
amendment would do we take what
would hopefully encourage the
increase of those bonds for the
state to take that into account
because in the balance we're
we're paying for something that
industry should be paying and
I'm really glad you raise that
because it's an important issue
that that should be addressed
and again this ammendment that
would necessarily require them
but I think it would put the
issue on the radar screen so
that we can take action.
Thank you for that Senator so
you believe a person in Santa Fe
would have standing with that
answer I'm no I believe that I
said that the question is is
very complex I think I think
probably not because that
individual in Santa Fe would
have a hard time showing that
they were harmed I was raising a
whole different issue when I got
off on that and I apologize for
that but no I in again I hate to
predict report would do but
normally in the state any case
you have to show some tangible
harm.
Well I think we agree on that
Senator I think we both would
hate to predict what a court
would do or what an attorney
might do in order to economic I
is a.
I a regulation that allowed them
to.
A further their ideological
beliefs that may affect someone
hundreds of miles away.
And it should not happen.
Senator
So once again it's tricky on as
soon as you can see me but do
please go through the chair.
I apologize Mr Chairman
Mr chair and Senator.
Is there any time limit on how
far back litigation could occur
of for example could someone
under your.
The proposed let it legislation
this H. A. R. good day.
File a lawsuit against the state
for historical decisions.
Mr chair Representative Townsend
no the law is forward looking
and this law is not it
retroactive.
And does Mr chair and senator
can you show me where that is
and this legislation where it
prevents that from occurring.
This these are just general
principles when we when we pass
statutes they don't they don't
go backwards unless they're
specifically identified as
retroactive and this ammendment
is not specifically identified
tracked.
Thank you for that Senator
Do you believe that this
proposed legislation
Mr chair Senator.
takes away in the authority of
the legislature.
No.
Mr chair.
Chair Mister Johnson no.
Mr chair and
Senator
Just we talked a little bit of
not.
Education.
The state land office for
example is one of the probably
one of the few probably only
state agency that acts like a
business.
And their job is to create
income for education.
Do you see your proposed
legislation affecting the State
Land Office and if so how.
Well it would I believe bring it
into the mix I think that our
current State Land Office
Office
the secretary has done a really
good job of of the.
It do and of raising money for
education and also I know that
she's considered this issue
because I've talked to her about
why are net why these up.
Why we stuck with these huge
bills for reclamation of
abandoned wells and so those are
issues that that she's conscious
of and this would empower her to
do something about it.
Our further if she's not already
empowered and I I actually
believe she is.
Mr Chairman representative and
senator I believe she has so.
Substantial power to address
almost anything she has a.
You know made statements to
prohibit the use of
State Land for drinking water to
be used for all and gas
operations there's been
statements about not allowing
gas pipelines to be used the on
state land so I mean.
That that issue has already been
weaponized and my my point is I
think yes piece of legislation.
Is.
I don't know that it's
constitutional to be real honest
it seems to be
It seems to stretch
And take away from the
legislative capacity to to
protect.
The population
You see a private system with
standing showing the
legislature.
If Mr chair Representative
Townsend
there are situations where the
legislature has gone too far
there is a cancel case in
Pennsylvania where I would
describe it has a basket of
giveaways to industry allowing
them to frack wherever they
wanted your schools anywhere
else I just a basket of
giveaways and I a conservative
judge judge because steel
Look at that legislation and
said this is gone way too far.
And.
And we did the legislation told
the legislature's to go back and
strike a balance and at least as
I read that legislation it was
really over the top
in terms of what it gave to to
industry so.
Our legislation always has to be
in compliance with the
constitution and that's why this
is needed is our legislation
needs to incorporate the
environment into the balance so
that we don't
You know in the end it I know
that the legislature is a
diverse place and considers a
lot of different issues but it's
conceivable that the legislature
can go too far and so while I
would not describe that is
taking away our power I would
describe it if this is passed is
putting a guard rail on our
ability to give away the state
as I always say we need to be
open for business not
exploitation.
Mr chairman and senator and I'll
just refer to something that
happened.
We're reasonably
there was a group of legislators
some of your colleagues and I
think maybe some of money.
Went to the Supreme Court.
And had and and but forth before
the court and issued.
And the court ruled in that case
in the favor of the legislature
other times it has a but there
is a process that is.
That has been tried.
many times am I am is is a valid
process it is happened on all
sorts of issues not just
governmental over reach of
hazard it is.
It is talked about education
Yazzie Martinez said that a lot
of the issues that have come up
I I.
I'm really concerned Senator
that your bill.
Jeopardizes almost every.
Business whether it's ranching
farming industrial.
renewable energy.
Why couldn't that be a
justification for a person to.
Right down the highway and look
out and see hundred wind
generators over there he's lost
the scenic beauty he can't get
you know a date it's not a place
at the place he grew up he
enjoyed that place
he thinks it's taken away from
the from the natural
The ability of that land I mean
there's been birds killed in all
sorts of other things like that
could that be a lot of reason
for a lawsuit.
Mr chair Representative Townsend
this has not happened in the
other states and so that created
portables I just think is
unlikely here and I noticed that
representative of Lujan would
like to speak to to that issue
she just texted me.
and and so I will just go ahead
and defer to defer to her but I
feel like we've we've answered
that question it it hasn't
happened in the past and the
truth is is industry needs to
stop passing on its costs to all
of us it needs to pay its way
and and protect the environment
but maybe Mr.
Mr chair of as
the center for the.
Representative Lujan would like
to speak Mr chair if that is
okay with you.
Representative since you are a
the sponsor of the bill.
Okay I'll let you speak but
please do pre right.
Yes thank you so much Mr
chairman thank you to
Today and I just want to remind
everybody that there there's
actually a Harvard Business
Review article that reads
research has shown that
companies with effective
corporate social responsibility
programs are more profitable
than those that aren't and over
the last fifty years we've seen
corporations move into that
realm of responsibility but.
We have to create even more
accountability upon them that
they are doing the right thing
and we're not saying that this
is a blanket that we're not
making accusations here were
saying that there are bad actors
out there we need protections
real protections within our laws
so that we can address those
issues and that's what this bill
does now.
The.
Having constitutional rights is
the everybody gets to have the
opportunity to to use those
constitutional rights to protect
themselves and the discussion
today we know and we back to
what Willis is what what what
standings are and I think we
address this issue Mr chair and
I think we need to move on from
from this conversation and
dragging Drug happens issues and
all the the hypotheticals
because the matter is that's
what we have our courts in place
that's why we have legislators
in the legislation process in
place we are not.
Two years of Townsend's question
if I may thank you Mr thank you.
So Senator Lopez.
Yeah Lopez apologize.
I I think Representative
Townsend if I may have a fairly
specific question and that is
could the green amendment as we
call it can be used to challenge
the approval of wind turbines on
the scenic basically.
Well.
Thank you for that.
Thank you Mr chairman chairman I
appreciate the qualification
again that would have to go into
the balance
it scenic.
If you look at the cases that
have
been brought in this case scenic
is usually not considered
although I consider it precious
it goes into all of the balance
of the state interest so here
you have an industry that is
trying to forward to two.
A dress environmentalist use and
address climate change an
address energy so what ways very
heavy in the balance and scenic
just has not been
I I don't recall.
A single case in which a court
stepped in to protect the scenic
of the scenic quality of the
environment I I just and I've
read all the case I cannot
recall when professor via may be
familiar with that but I I just
don't recall ever reading one.
I'll defer to professor yes.
About scenic.
You're you're in the Mr chair
may I respond.
Professor yes yes thank.
That and I I do appreciate that
I would say that yes the the
sighting of any industrial
project including renewable
energy can be challenged I am
aware that in fact it is subject
to challenge among other places
on the island then we why if you
for all the industry whatever it
is renewable industry in one
certain community to the
disproportionate impact that
community absolutely the people
who live there should have some
rights to the challenge and say
why are you putting all of these
things in our backyard and not
distribute them in other places
as well there are cases
particular brought by indigenous
students who have challenged
among other things the placement
of wind farms as as an offense
to a sacred landscapes separate
separate spaces and there's
claims that have not been filed
but just committees are really
unhappy about that not every
claim has to result in a loss of
course but you know the the idea
is that you should always
working with communities and if
you refuse to work with
committees they should have
rights to engage in a process to
help resolve these problems.
Thank you Mr chair I appreciate
the the clarification what I was
referring to is I haven't read
any case under the green
amendment which all right
amendments have some kind of a
static or historical.
element to them and those cases
have not resulted in in that
case so that so money was
related to that and I really
appreciate a professor yes
clarification.
Forster.
Excuse me.
In the forest years thank you
Sir another question
Mr chairman and senator do you
believe that
a standing could be order based
off of your religious beliefs.
Thank you again Mr chair I I
would request a clarification of
the context we do have a
constitutional right to freedom
of religion and we also do have
a constitutional right or
constitutional freedom from the
government establishing real
religion those that are in the
first amendment is that what
you're referring to.
That is correct that my question
is under your proposed
legislation does it prevent
anyone from finding standing
based off of their religious
beliefs.
I.
Miss Mister chair I'm having
trouble trying to figure out how
to how this legislation the
green amendment would interact
with
With the first amendment.
So I I and and expanding the
standing under the first
amendment is is conferred when
the government tries to
interfere with the religious
belief or when the government
tries to establish a religion
and the individual would have
standing if they were affected
by that kind of government
decision.
Under the first amendment and it
would have nothing to do with.
With my with my and I said my
only because he's a chair with
house joint resolution to.
Mr chairman and senator I think
the door is open under this
piece of legislation for that to
occur and and on top of that.
I I think the process it within
our courts Mr chairman and
senator allows
An individual to challenge.
Almost anything that we did on
the legislature but the
constitution.
That we have lived I for a
number of years settles the
legislature and the court.
With the ability.
To protect the people.
To provide a fair baseline for
the people to protect their jobs
and protect their well being.
I don't believe this
legislation is in their budget
one more question.
I noticed.
In some of the comments that
that was the.
Thought about developing
communities.
And developing communities in
more water use more.
Sure how are but several.
Do you believe you're you're
legislation would in any way
jeopardize existing homeowners.
From.
These type of lawsuits where
they had.
In France on someone's
Scenic beauty of of the mountain
that they built honor up at the
side of this the wrong or I mean
it just seems like to me
Mr chairman and representative
of the door is so wide open on
this piece of legislation.
That you're talking about.
A business exploiting New Mexico
you don't think that should
happen.
I am the attorney should exploit
New Mexico.
And in this particular piece of
legislation I think that's
exactly what would happen I
I respect your right been yes I
I honor your right to be able to
bring up piece of legislation
forward but I can't support this
because I don't believe it's in
the best interest of
that don't.
Additional so thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you Mr chair just Pacific
Lee this would not give any
rights of over an existing
homeowner by as I told you the
amendment is not.
It's not retroactive and and be
I can't think of a any kind of
basis for that but I I
appreciate the question and
thank you Mr chin.
Thank you Representative
Townsend except we approach to
Thank you Mr chair and Mr chair
of.
Bill Sanchez I just have three
major points to bring up right
here we've had a robust
discussion today about the
application of this ammendment
at through this joint resolution
but what I do want to point out
is that if we look at the
numbers that were taken at the
beginning of this presentation
it said seventy two percent of
the people on this attending
this hearing today said
legislators let us decide
whether or not there should be
an amendment to the constitution
based upon what was presented
today and with that in mind I
don't think we should stand as
gate keepers the state no you
cannot come in and make that
decision so I put that out as my
number one item and my number
two items that I want to bring
up is that I think that we as
legislators have a duty and
responsibility to make sure that
we are enacting policies that
help to prolong life a long and
healthy life and in that regard
I I just I just share with you.
My conversation or knowledge
with a woman who is the a a
professor at the UNM School of
Law and along specialist in
Albuquerque and one of the
things that she says is that you
know the air that we breathe
absolutely affects our health
and dirty air causes things like
as my COPD heart attacks strokes
lung cancer and other illnesses
and in addition our children
elders and other people with
diabetes and those with heart
and lung disease are the most
vulnerable when we don't have
clean air and my third my third
point that I was to bring up is
to ask Miss Mister chair and
members and bill sponsors to
look at section one eighty of
the joint resolution that is
before us today and then bed
joint resolution it says of the
people of the state have the
have the next role in here and
and inalienable right to a clean
and healthy environment
including water et cetera so I
agree with everything that is
that that provision I do
question the use of the words
natural inherent and in eighty
loan level I don't know that
they add anything to this to
this joint resolution at all and
not just the bill's sponsors Mr
chair and and Sanchez those
three particular terms if you
would amend this resolution to
remove them and then that the
rest of paragraph HB at that the
in such a manner that it will
say the people of the state have
the right to a clean and healthy
environment including water
error so flora fauna and and the
rest of those items I think it
becomes a more clear and
distinct provision in terms of
what is being proposed here and
so Mister chair.
A bill sponsors that make that
request.
Thank you
We had a discussion about this
and I appreciate it and I had a
discussion with the chair about
this the reason natural inherent
and inalienable are there are to
emphasize it is our moral
responsibilities the state which
has had since time immemorial
however I agree with you
Mr chair representative of
Herndon that has a lawyer and I
know that you're a good
technician in drafting it is not
necessary and and is unnecessary
and so if you I and I don't have
power to amended it has come
from the committee but if you
were to
To make an amendment to delete
natural inherent and inalienable
from closet from the first
Clause from I mean from where
you pointed out I would consider
that a friendly amendment and I
believe our my co sponsors would
consider it a friendly
amendment.
So Mr chair I would like to make
that amendment please.
So you move that amendment yes
Mister chair I move that
amendment their second.
Second.
The motion and the second to
and.
The.
In the bill and I'll.
Print out of it but I don't have
the number print out.
December print out one moment
please.
I believe it's a twenty one
twenty three.
So the proposed amendment is on
one twenty three and twenty four
strike the words.
Natural inherent in the that
correct that is correct Mr
chair.
Okay
We have a motion and a second
Sir any opposition this is a
friendly amendment is there any
opposition.
To this ammendment.
Okay seeing then you haven't
been the.
Thank you Mr chair Billsponsored
other than that I have nothing
else to add but thank you for
bringing this force and then
allowing the people of the state
of New Mexico to make the final
decision.
Thank you Representative heard
and before I go forward I do
have some comments in my own.
Before I go forward with those
are there any other questions or
comments from committee.
Senator Sedillo Lopez the first.
Yeah let me thank you for your
work on this Nibert working on
this diligently for number of
years.
Thank you and I just had some.
Conversations about this and so
I have.
I don't I don't want my time to
ask you questions that are asked
you.
but I would like to explain my
position on this bill.
They're sort of the the big
picture.
Concerns and then specific
concerns about the draft.
So the big picture concerns.
Are the.
This.
It was adopted by the voters
this bill could be used to
challenge any governmental
decision.
Your small.
And it certainly would get used.
on significant projects in New
Mexico subdivisions of
factories.
There's water pipeline the for
the Intel plant in Albuquerque.
The survey.
And I believe the language of
this ammendment.
It I disagree with you center
that is balanced.
analysis I think by making these
things rights.
You're inviting chords.
To substitute their judgment.
For that.
What would be the sit the
regular decision.
whether it's.
The city or county or state
agency the project there might
be multiple decisions.
In order to to build something
like that.
Yes.
It's not you know what the
tourney knowledge the Gator have
been involved in.
So what you have neighborhood
challenges things like that.
Yes.
When you challenge a decision
the it's process oriented most.
I think usually when you kill as
owning decision it's.
assist substantial evidence
basically.
The decision maker had has
substantial evidence.
And if they have substantial
evidence.
That then
the court one such students
judgment.
That's not what the Senate's.
Process that.
This is what it's saying people
have a right.
And so if people feel that the
decision is wrong and certainly
have been among those people
that feel certain decisions are
on.
The state we have the ability to
challenge that in court we have
to evaluate that not in terms of
process.
But in terms of substance.
I worked on the case.
as a lawyer but also affected
the community I live there is a
proposed subdivision upstream
for us yes my community is very
fortunate to have.
The small creep which trickles
through.
This proposed subdivision.
went to the county commission.
County commission voted five to
zero in favor of the sept.
We challenge the court.
And we have the number of I
thought very good arguments well
What the county has failed to
comply with that students.
Yeah.
The court actually ruled in our
favor.
On one of the arguments didn't
reach the other.
Per person court take the
easiest for.
And that was that the process
they were using allowed for
administrative review of the
subdivision of twenty four lots.
And this subdivision at twenty
five.
The reason twenty five is the
breaking twenty four lots
possible larger parcel.
But you got to count the larger
portion.
So twenty five.
Thank.
In person do that.
I'm confident that point don't
want to get in the business.
Determining what's states.
Because they're not equipped for
that.
They don't.
The resource.
They don't have the expertise
they don't have you don't hold
public hearings.
Yes we tell on our local
governments in our state
agencies to do those things.
And in the way I read this.
It is not a bouncing thanks on
the process but did you right
reach the rights decision.
In rescue just make that
decision so that.
And like the government.
What my concerns about those
specific drafting.
We just fix the natural hair and
nail million will rights but as
you indicate you are appreciate
that
Representative project.
I'm very concerned about the
inclusion of cultural.
And my understanding is this is
to protect.
Cultural resources in New Mexico
in particular Chaco.
And your percent support
protecting talking in in
protecting.
Historic resources and
archaeological resources and you
know New Mexico we're fortunate
now I have a place like talk
about all the the history of our
state in the people's you've
been here for so long.
I think you're worthy of
protection.
But I don't you talk about as
part of the environment.
Thank you S. historical and
archaeological and certainly
cultural.
S. religious.
But it's not.
Berman to same way of you more
and more.
Yeah I think including cultural.
In here is.
It's a bridge too far.
Yeah I think it's also could
have
You know the unintended
consequences right.
In one of a site is this frankly
ranch.
Ranching is a cultural act.
With respect.
There are times when.
Reason the limitations need to
be put on a ranch.
Maybe we're in route.
We don't have the Jerry passed
there is a fire hazard with the
presence of that the injured
species.
This bill I believe.
Will allow people to say that
they have the fundamental rights
in gauging ranch.
And I think that's problematic.
Finally
races four centers a lot of us.
The words on.
The bill says people have a
right.
To help the environment
including water.
Which in my mind is water to
drink.
More.
Which is here to bring me.
And this is on.
Yeah that.
And I think about the work I did
in the last session.
The band trapping on public
lands.
I believe that people have a
right to fana.
That is it can sometimes right.
Certainly could be argued that
such that they have a right to
hunt your right to trap.
We've seen bills and in front
distributed that with stylish or
extra.
This.
No it's not your intention.
Sen.
That's how I read this.
And that's
Something I find briefly
concert.
So so those are.
Those are my issues with.
We I will energy emotion and
moment.
but as is my practice I I would
like to recognize the center
for certainly welcome to respond
to my comments or any closing
you remarks you might have
before I accept the motion.
In your.
Thank you Mr chair I I
appreciate I appreciated the
discussion with you and the care
that you brought into the
discussion having read the bill
and studied it reading some of
the cases but I fundamentally
disagree with you about balance
that that about rights being
unfettered.
Even our first amendment rights.
if we if you look at the
analysis that the court has the
state has to have a compelling
state interest and so it's a
balance between whatever the
compelling state interest is in
and how it affects that right if
you look at the right to bear
arms which is another right it
is not unfettered justice Scalia
said in the last decision the
last from court decision dealing
with that that the right needs
to be balanced in the state with
the state interest in public
safety and protecting
protecting the public and so no
right in our bill of rights in
the in the federal constitution
is unfettered and that's
certainly true for the rights in
in our state constitution they
they are not absolute and
unfettered and so I do not read
it that way and I would be very
surprised if the court would
refuse to engage in a balance
and find that somebody had an
absolute right in this area and
that's what I kept responding to
the representatives who kept
raising will can I sue for this
I can't and can I do for that
The courts and the courts
exercise of restraint and and I
know that you you talk about a
substituted judgment of the
court.
the the court cannot be
substituting its own judgment
the court needs to use the
guidance of existing the the
framework the existing framework
that protects the environment
and and and the constitutional
right and that's what they do in
all litigation involving
constitutional rights they look
at the existing framework and so
this is it this is an
opportunity for a court to
reverse over reach which they
have now but now the over reach
would be anti environment over
reach and that is really really
important for the future of our
state.
With regard to the issue of
culture.
We included a culture in in in
Pennsylvania what they talk
about is a static and historic.
Quality of the environment.
And historic and and the static
I don't think captures what we
have in New Mexico what we have
in New Mexico is cultural
relationships to the environment
such as chocolates such as blue
lakes such as we we have a
really incredible rich history
and native American activists
asked us to recognize that and
we honor that cultural history I
and we caught we honor that
cultural relationship to the
environment so it is not culture
in it in an abstract again it is
a balance and ensuring that it's
it's considered in the state's
decision making and then if the
state gets it wrong.
Accountability for that for that
failure that's what this is
about and I believe that we owe
it to future generations and the
people of New Mexico to give
them the opportunity to vote on
what's valuable to them.
And I believe that the people of
New Mexico will vote to to put a
duty on us as legislators and on
state government to protect the
quality of their environment.
And that's I feel passionately
about this ammendment I am very
concerned about our future in
New Mexico and this will be a
guide star that will serve
generations.
For ever
thank you Mr chair I appreciate
the opportunity to respond.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez.
This your closing statement as
well yes.
Thank you center city Lopez
someone here to make a motion.
The gentleman are.
so move that is a pro do best
recommendation of the measure
before us.
Make a sense to motion to table.
So we have we have a substitute
motion table which takes
precedence.
My understanding is we don't
need a second for the substitute
motion table.
Seeing.
So we will we will take that
those.
This is yes.
To table the bill in the there
is no we will go back to
Representative Garcia.
Thank you to take part the vote
please.
Representative Dixon.
No to table.
Representative Garcia
Representative Herndon.
No.
Representative Montoya.
Yes table.
Representative what.
No to table.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes to
table.
Representative Townsend and.
Yes.
Vice chair Sarnia on our.
No to table.
Chair McQueen.
Yes.
Hi I took part.
So that motion details.
So we go back to Representative
Garcia.
Representative Garcia you have a
motion to pass as amended is
that correct.
That's correct estimates
chairman the best recommendation
as amended their second to that
motion.
I second that.
You take that the vote on the
motion to pass as a man.
Yes.
Representative Dixon pass.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative one point out.
No.
Representative what that yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative.
No.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative our vice chair
Sarnia.
Yes.
And chair McQueen.
No.
Tied five to five.
So that motion feels as well.
And unfortunately that's.
The bill limbo.
Sanchez experts members of
public thank you very much.
So I'm.
Never going to move on.
The.
That bill only took about four
hours we have another very
significant bill to tackle today
I'm hopeful that that won't take
four hours.
Full.
Our next bill is
house bill six.
So let's see if
Representative small is with us.
So just give us what we get
situated.
Good afternoon Mister chairman.
Representative small
Well so am I looking for to
promote to the panels.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
we what we have in a few
different folks Mr Chairman
there will be
Dillen fuel from the energy and
from EMNRD
We get to that hi tech I will be
there it sorry Mr.
Okay.
Madam secretary Probst of course
will be offering comments as
well this Lara cats
as an expert along with miss
Sandra Ely.
And then also secretary
James Kenney to offer comment in
support of the our legislation.
It was just a minute all the
Those people.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The last one was secretary Kenny
James Comey yes Mr chairman.
Okay so as you are cats I see
secretary Prost C. secretary
Kenny C. center.
You are usually.
I think I think that's a real.
Menacing anyone representative
all.
Mr Chairman I think that is
everyone and I will certainly
let you know if there's other
the I believe this is everybody
thank you forget and everybody
and quickly Mr chairman.
Currently.
Very small the four years thank
you so much Mr chairman and
committee I am incredibly
honored to be here before you
today I appreciate you taking
the time to hear house bill six
Mr Chairman we have a committee
substitute that has been
submitted to you and to the
committee
I would I think I'd love to move
that when it's appropriate so
that that is the subject of our
discussion today.
the small actually members the
committee was elected needs the
committee substitute for
representative Paul.
Mr Chairman.
Their second.
You
small could you read the to to
number for me please
yes Mr chairman thank you very
much the two oh two number is
Point two two two one four seven
point two K. thank you so
Sir sorry is there any objection
to the daunting to me sub for
discussion.
Seeing none so we're on the
Canadian side if we would
reminded committee if we do get
to a motion it's we would be do
not pass the bill to pass
committees so let's try to
remember that because I know I'm
that the remember you.
Representative small back to
you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and committee the house energy
and natural resources committee
substitute for house bill six is
a piece of legislation that
simply takes New Mexico.
Continuing to move forward based
upon the strong climate
leadership of governor Michelle
Lujan Grisham
that has been taken in several
recent existing order executive
orders and yet continues that
work Mr chairman and committee.
Which is critical work I want to
briefly summarize why this work
is critical and because the work
is critical Mr chairman and
committee because as we
acknowledge as New Mexicans
across our state now the effects
of climate change in the
increasing effects of the
climate crisis poses a daily an
increasing danger to New
Mexicans to our family to our
economy.
To our way of life as we know Mr
chairman and as governor Lujan
Grisham's executive orders are
based upon we have a very strong
opportunity to interrupt and to
slow the worst effects of the
climate crisis and we know how
to do that Mr chairman committee
we need to take the two thousand
and five greenhouse gas
emissions get to half of those
Mr chairman committee by twenty
thirty this is a place where I
would know committee and Mr
chairman that we've slightly
increased the target the
governor Lujan Grisham first set
in this signature piece of
legislation initially was set at
forty five percent reductions by
twenty thirty below two thousand
and five levels we've set that
at fifty and then to get to full
net zero Mr chair and committee
by twenty fifty.
Doing that in New Mexico doing
that across the United States
doing that on a worldwide basis
Mr chair and committee preserves
the incredible benefits and
opportunities we enjoy within
our current climb
so Mr chair committee the way in
which house bill's six does that
first I want to emphasize and
will repeatedly emphasize and we
were very fortunate to have our
experts here today from the
energy minerals and natural
resources department songs in
New Mexico environment
department because they are
already very actively engaged in
this work with in a very
collaborative stakeholder
process with key stakeholders in
our state the work that they're
doing Mr chair and committee is
already helping to lower
emissions increase innovation
and continuing to power a robust
economy here in the state of New
Mexico that is so vital for us
as we
confront challenges and seize
opportunities.
So Mister chair and committee
within the committee substitute
we have made a few
key areas that I want to
highlight briefly Mr chair
committee these are ensuring
that there is an expanded
rulemaking with the
environmental improvement board
that include at all times
careful consideration of the
impacts to disproportionately
impacted communities including
Mr chair and committee New
Mexico Environment Department
to host at least three meetings
and such communities we've heard
and we acknowledge and we
strongly support building in
community especially with
disproportionately impacted New
Mexicans across our state we
also have heard and we want to
embrace the potential market
based mechanisms that allow us
to reap the economic benefits
for New Mexico for New Mexicans
to create J. create jobs in New
Mexico well being a key part of
solving the climate crisis and
finally Mister chair and
committee we wanted to make sure
that both we
make very clear that for those
industries and there is an
increasing number who are
actively and really robustly
engaging in the innovation that
it takes to cut emissions grow
their businesses create jobs
that we want to ensure they
receive appropriate credit
in those endeavors and also Mr
chair and committee we wanted to
make sure that we opened the
gates of innovation that we
encourage the kind of investment
innovation technology
development and just ingenuity
that New Mexicans are known for
as we confront really the
defining challenge and the
defined.
In crises that we and the rest
of the world face.
So Mister chair committee
members.
This is an ambitious bill that
builds upon well established
science that continues work here
in New Mexico that's been going
on robustly under the
administration of governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham with
incredible technical expertise
and strong stakeholder
collaboration we're very proud
to be here today we look forward
to the hearing today with you
and your committee members
knowing that we are doing to
course things we are
safeguarding the future for all
of us as New Mexicans for
families here families that will
move here because the
catastrophic effects of climate
change are.
Unavoidable if we do not act
this means our forests will burn
this means our rivers will dry
up they'll get drier sooner
State drier longer it's affects
communities all across the state
every single person in the state
on the other side as we seek to
confront these challenges Mr
chair and committee we're
actually growing our economy
we're positioning New Mexico to
be the leader when it comes to
clean technology innovation
attracting investment not only
in New Mexico not only across
the United States but worldwide
investment in New Mexico that's
going to help all New Mexicans
first and foremost as we
safeguard our environment and
our heritage so Mr chair in
committee I would turn it over
to
our technical asked experts to
offer additional comment I'm
again very pleased and excited
to be here today so that this
committee is again part of
showing the leadership that we
need as an entire state and
protecting our environment
growing our economy and doing it
in a science based way thank you
very much Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative small
Representative small who then
your experts you need licenses
for two thank you Mr chairman I
would go first to our
secretaries secretary Probst and
secretary Kenny
then perhaps brief comments from
additional members of their team
before we proceed thank you
Secretary approached.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee you're the governor's
supported us we have strategies
to advance our climate change
work in this legislative session
and that includes creating new
climate euros at our department
the land of enchantment geo Bond
efforts to provide funding for
conservation resilience
incentives for clean hydrogen
which will be important to
reaching that zero in at twenty
fifty House Bill sex is
important because it puts us all
the scaffolding into law it
builds on the governor's twenty
nineteen executive order on
climate change as you heard from
Representative small and put our
targets are very clearly in
statute and as well as our cross
government organizational
structure creates clear
deadlines every year by which
state agencies need to
coordinate and collaborate on
our our climate change efforts
our progress to date and what
additional progress we need to
make to stay on track with the
science driven goals we already
are doing quite a bit of
of organizations so this is not
a whole lot of new activity for
state agencies we are already
meeting quarterly we are already
having climate action teams that
are focused on each type of I am
emissions whether its
transportation or natural
working lands or industrial at
cetera so we're we're doing
great work and this bill helps
codify that make it clear in
perpetuity what we need to do
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Secretary approached
the sector tenant.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee thank you for
allowing us to be here today
So H. B. six amend their quality
control act to limit statewide
direct greenhouse gas emissions
no more than fifty percent by
twenty thirty to at least net
zero by twenty fifty and that's
from the two thousand and five
level baseline so really what
we're doing is laying out a
destination and to destination
in which we already started the
journey is my colleges mention
and that is first resale
policies that we've enacted ETA
at Baird
or ETA and then EMNRD's oil and
gas rules and NMED's oil and gas
rules plus our proposed clean
car rules are predicted to
reduce emissions about thirty
eight
metric tons of CO two.
But there's a hard truth here
to that's only getting worse to
the two thousand five baseline
level which means we have to get
about fifty seven fifty percent
below that baseline as we enact
different market based policies
and regulatory policies.
So we need to do more we need to
continue to destination have
stopped we can't have a fall
summit and the way we're doing
that is to implement additional
innovative meaningful emission
reduction strategies
to what you're going through it
the session yes those are
legislature this thirty day
session one is the clean fuel
standard act which is over in
the Senate dealing with
transportation fuels and as we
discussed in this committee
the no and low carbon hydrogen
fuels is also essential in order
for us to move forward so Mister
chair and members of the
committee thank you for your
time thank you for listening to
us today and center in the from
the environment department will
serve as our expert for the the
residents hearing along with
large cats thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you Secretary Kenny
Senator you.
Chairman members of the
committee of no additional
comments thank you.
Okay.
There's a small anyone else.
Chair respecting the committee's
time I think we are we wanted to
do a short opening presentation
we're prepared to stand for
questions and excited for this
discussion Mr chairman.
Thank you for that reserve small
so
We do have about two hundred
members of the public in
attendance and once again I just
want to say.
That's something that's not
possible with the committee so
please the with the strength of
this.
zoom platform before we go to
the public we will do all of
which allows members of the
public to
express their opinion
obviously not scientific.
The boys interest well I think
you put the pull up for twenty
seconds.
Okay so it's sixty forty exactly
sixty percent in favor forty
percent oppose and that's eighty
five members of the public
in favor and fifty six members
of the public.
This so we're going to do a half
hour we're gonna do and our
public comment half hour
The opposition and then we will
do half our support we will
start with opposition.
Okay so if you support this bill
please put your hands.
Is there any opposition person
the last bill we had a number of
members of the public to.
We call on the during a long
time so.
We're gonna do opposition first.
In our first member of the
public speaker will be Michael
Miller.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee first of all I'd
like to thank the sponsor my
name is Mike Miller and with
that Permian basin drilling
Association my god thank the
sponsor and others for working
with industry to try to come to
some agreement on this bill
however there are still many
problems first of all using the
two five two thousand five is
baseline here continues to be an
issue for implementation of this
bill because we don't have the
two thousand five emission data
so it's impossible to know where
we are headed if we don't have
an accurate measure of the
starting point the first
credible data is from the two
thousand eighteen we continue to
urge using two thousand eighteen
nineteen is the baseline here
since the data is available from
EMNRD and the CSU emission State
also many of the definitions
remain problematic and confusing
notably the definitions of
direct emission reduction excess
emissions reduction credit net
zero emissions and costs that
are problematic for many reasons
particularly how are they used
in section three of the bill
under the directives to meet the
two thousand thirty and two
thousand fifty greenhouse gas
emissions there are many other
problems and thank you for their
time Mr chair.
Thank you for that next step we
have okay.
The hope is that so please
potential US imports.
It's all wrong.
I'm hoping I made to Navajo
tribal member and community
organizer.
And I am opposed to the V. six
clean futures act bill because
it creates a market for carbon
trading which will allow
corporate polluters extractive
industries and crackers to
continue polluting and profiting
from from that which is against
international law against the
sovereignty and self
determination of public people's
and native people across New
Mexico in twenty twenty one New
Mexico has the highest number of
missing and murdered women girls
and two spirit cases with
extractive industry comes in
then camps that contribute to
MMIWG to ask G. plus we are
tired of not being heard update
solutions continued
contamination and pollution in
our homelands that settler
governments have no real
mitigation plan for I've been on
the front lines against the line
three pipeline for eight months
as a water protector we're open
nine hundred of us were arrested
by the extractive industries
this is a big solution
extraction is it is in any
capacity not sustainable you
can't drink oil keep in the soil
and so we must protect Mother
Earth by any means.
One timer thank you for that
next up we have the repair.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee again Amy bear be
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico oil and gas association
many nomo that companies have
publicly shared net zero
aspirations however the bill
presented today does not cheat
achieve its net zero intent this
is an absolute zero bill a bill
that would increase basic energy
costs for all New Mexicans
eliminate jobs across all
sectors have serious financial
repercussions for state budget
in public schools the top down
command and control approach of
this bill would cycle The
innovation necessary to keep our
state really reducing emissions
Moga has shared these concerns
directly with the Sanchez and we
appreciate their willingness to
collaborate possible
enhancements the belts we're
hopeful that by working together
we may achieve our mutual goals
for a cleaner future however as
currently written memo that
strongly opposes house bill six
thank you.
Thank you we have more in
Paterson.
Thank you chairman McLean
members the committee or
Patterson on behalf New Mexico
cattle growers association
currently we respectively stand
in opposition to house bill six
it is currently unclear on how
the levels of greenhouse gas
reduction will affect
agriculture endeavors in the
state it is also unclear on how
the greenhouse emission offsets
will work it seems to be a
carrot or cane system meaning
well the incentives are taste of
the care and offset the
increased input costs are the
came across the route for our
producers.
New Mexico cattle growers also
has grave concerns that the
conditions and rules of non
compliance are vague and could
very from district is district
possibly even bearing within the
same ranch or farm we also have
concerns that it would stand in
contradiction to the protections
established in the two thousand
six right to farm act meaning it
might not be feasible.
Timer next I'll hundred clients.
Thank you chair members of the
committee so I'm coming to you
as the environmental justice
organizer of the forty two year
old social justice organization
southwest organizing project I
was also in Glasco for the cop
twenty six where a lot of these
carpet markets and that there
were being proposed so we're
asking you all to vote no this
is a market mechanism it will
not people out to real zero and
that will increase populations
to bear the brunt of this
pollution so basically to us we
can create more rigid rules we
can create a better time line
that is based on traditional
land base knowledge we
understand that we live in the
belly of the beast and that we
need these jobs but this is only
going to allow people to create
a market for pollution.
And so that eight billion
dollars of folks have been
talking about that comes from
chevron and all these huge
lobbyist that do not want to
stop pollution so thank you all
for this time and please
consider opposition to this
bill.
Thank you next up we have to
need repair.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment again my
name is to me Rivera registered
lobbyist for New Mexico
formalized doctor wrote although
we appreciate the work
Representative small and his
accompanying state agencies have
done on this piece of
legislation we do still standing
respectful opposition if there
is an easy way to significantly
reduce emissions that would be
clearly spelled out in this
legislation and unfortunately
it's not we currently do not
have the technology or the
capacity to meet the M. vicious
goals outlined in the bill for
example the bill requires each
state agency to submit data on
qualitative and quantitative
impacts of climate change on
their programs while also
reporting the current and
projected future direct
emissions of greenhouse gases
from sources are sectors within
their regulatory jurisdiction
the department of act for
example alone administers more
than thirty five statutes and
collecting this data would be a
monumental task additionally the
bill grants the environmental
improvement board a massive
amount of regulatory power which
we propose thank you for the
opportunity to comment.
Thank you Mr we have delivered
all.
Thank you Mr chair on the
committee I am hello.
Can you hear me yes okay thank
you so much I'm here on behalf
of public action alliance and we
have stood firm against what we
in the global indigenous
struggle call false solutions we
must ask ourselves where do we
indigenous people fit into the
the settlers market system that
could modifies air land water
and all that is sacred to us H.
B. six allows for market based
mechanisms like net zero carbon
trading offsetting and now
hydrogen which somehow got
included it goes against our
values as possible indigenous
people that believe that
that is against you know solving
climate crisis we oppose H. B.
six because we don't stand the
same side of the stories of the
earth but because this bill
would allow for the creation of
a system to put price on carbon
which come modifies our father
sky allows the produce of
polluters to trade carbon on a
global market we need real
solutions like wind and solar
and also that center are
respected Pueblo and tribal
leadership who are included in
the crafting of this bill thank
you.
Thank you next up we have in
support units.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee on Vince
Martinez at tri state generation
and transmission association we
rise in respectful concerned
with HB six concerns we provided
during the COVID period the bill
seeks to regulate imported
emissions we believe the state
of New Mexico lacks jurisdiction
provided regulated missions
associated with electricity
generation located in other
states the bill gives the E. I.
B. unbowed authority to adopt
regulations for all sectors of
society to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions just three years ago
and the DA we agreed to a twenty
fifty target for net zero.
Provided that the energy we
produce was reliable affordable
and technologically feasible we
are concerned that our existing
lack of appetite for new clean
technologies such as hydrogen
which will hinder our ability to
get net zero thank you.
Thank you we address the bore.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee we are here on behalf
of public action lines we have
stood firm against what we in
the global digestible call false
solutions we have been
researching carbon market
mechanisms educating our
communities on how they make the
negatively impact our ancestral
lands and now it's time to come
to this moment where we have to
ask ourselves if it's about
money are doing what's morally
right as a mother educator and
community organizer creative
solutions for climate mitigation
must sector perspectives of
indigenous peoples and their
concept of stewardship we can't
possibly believe that these
proposed solutions to mitigate
kind making climate change can
assault in the state market
system that because the climate
crisis in the first place H. B.
six hasn't been crafted
equitably because public haven't
been consulted and it is our
concern especially.
If there is the potential to
subject our special lands to the
market we encourage leaders to
take bold action to look toward
solution outside of the fossil
fuel economy and keep the on the
ground thank you.
Thank you thank you know except
with having grown all.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Kevin role CEO
The New Mexico Alectra
cooperative association we have
to stand in respect for
opposition to this bill
we have three four concerns
I think as miss Martinez spoke
yeah we had targets what we well
one long with energy transition
act twenty nineteen but knowing
full well that we needed
new and emerging technologies to
ever get to net zero.
As we saw at the last committee
meeting when there was an
emerging and re technology but
for them it was rejected
we cannot get there with wind
and solar we need some that's
reliable affordable
dispatchable.
The concern is also reserve your
respective tracking in state or
out of state imports for
instance one of our suppliers is
in the southwest power pool
there's no way to project what
goals in what goes out from that
where so thank you.
Thank you we have Jennifer
Weber.
Good afternoon chairman cleaning
committee members again my name
is Jennifer Weber and I'm here
on behalf of the New Mexico
chamber of commerce as I shared
in my earlier statement on each
year to the chamber has
supported efforts to address the
climate crisis including the
passage of the Energy
transitioned Act and many other
measures we understand and
appreciate the intent of this
legislation but it is what this
history commitment of money that
we oppose house bill six the
chamber is concerned that the
claim to track will have severe
multi generational impacts on
New Mexico's economy greatly
reducing our state's ability to
diversify its economy away from
our reliance on oil and gas a
bill that has multi generational
economic impacts to the state
should not be considered without
the benefit of interim committee
deliberation and then a thirty
day session where access to
legislators it's extremely
limited due to the health
concerns from COVID we think a
more appropriate process of this
important legislation with so
much consequence is to go
through a more deliberative
process that includes interim
committees and a chance for all
stakeholders to provide
appropriate and to.
The timer the next step we have
source for the call so.
Actually we I'm sorry.
We got that wrong with the club
Sahlins
we'll go next to service what.
Good morning can you hear me yes
thank you Mr chairman and the
committee for giving this time
to speak.
my name is Nick McClellan I'm in
strong opposition to this bill
I'm arousal native and work in
the extractive industries down
here well I I noticed that have
an enormous impact on my.
My business it will also affect
all sectors of the economy and I
also read a recent McKinsey
report said it would cost nine
point two trillion dollars a
year globally ten access.
So well I think this is a
horrible idea.
I think it's also going to be
extremely expensive for New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you now we will go to
source for the also.
Hello good morning are
wheelchair or afternoon
honorable chair committee
members my name is searched
wanted callsign the mother of
three children from us no one.
The mobile propaganda about this
bill calls it the No future act
and sadly I have to agree with
them while the bill has good
goals the plan it proposes to
reach those goals is grossly
inadequate we cannot wait until
twenty twenty five to begin
creating rules and expect to
achieve any meaningful
reductions by twenty thirty the
bill must be amended to start
rulemaking now.
The proposed carbon credit
trading scheme must also be
eliminated such schemes are
proven unverifiable an
ineffective and harmful to
indigenous communities.
Actual emissions reductions are
the only barometer that counts.
The bill as it stands now is
dangerous it gives the people
the illusion that something is
being done about the most
existential threat they will
ever face when in fact nothing
is being done if it cannot be
amended that it should be
tabled.
Thank you the except with more
L. the nasty.
Good afternoon.
Chair and committee members my
name is Merriam the nasty and
the executive director of new
energy economy carbon trading
and offset projects are hollow
schemes to address climate the
overwhelming majority of
projects have failed to reduce
carbon emissions some are hoaxes
resulting in the increase of
emissions eligible successful
programs demand strict
accounting roles with robust
frameworks and mitigation
mechanisms that require
certification of emission
reductions there is none of that
evidence in this bill all of
this is dependent on actual
enforcement the oil and
conservation division which is
supposed to supervise control
manage and if and enforced
against oil and gas hi fail to
do so at this rate since
Michelle Lujan Grisham
administration has taken over
since January first twenty
nineteen we're seeing more.
More than four toxic and
hazardous waste discharges by
the oil and gas in minutes at
companies per day.
Sorry about the timer the step
we need people to.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce.
New Mexico is currently on a
steady course to strengthen
diversify and modernize its
energy portfolio for example
this legislature recently passed
the energy transition act which
the chamber strongly supported
and there's another bill this
session dealing with cleaner
fuel standards that's also
supported by the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
and companies are rapidly
deploying new technology on a
voluntary basis to reduce
emissions house bill six
represents a big contrast to our
current approach and strategy
this bill gives enormous power
to an unelected board of
environmental regulators who may
or may not create the proper
balance between environmental
protection and the purpose of
ation of key employment industry
therefore the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
respectfully opposes house bill
six.
Thank you except as senator
Johnson.
Morning chairman members of the
committee my name is senator
Johnson I'm here is the official
spokesperson for yucca used in
economic crisis action we
propose Eightysix as currently
written in order to support this
bill will calling for
significant changes one move up
the time line the bill must be
amended to put emissions
reductions standards in place
now in order to make it possible
to exceed the stated fifty
percent emissions reductions
goals by twenty thirty to make
Mr Starr as soon as the bills
passed into law and is rules
take two years to promulgate
right now the timeline in the
bill has rulemaking initiated in
twenty twenty five which could
mean rules on to place for
emissions reductions between
twenty seven and we can't
realistically cut emissions by
fifty percent in three years the
current timeline doesn't comport
with the stated goals and is
disingenuous to require real
zero emissions not net zero
carbon capture and sequestration
covenants and offsets in current
markets are all all stations in
need to be removed three you
cannot continue to propose kind
of solutions about us without us
we do then you need full
participation consultation and
benefits to impacted communities
we also sponsors will work to
rectify these issues and that
will be able to pass a bill that
actively reduces our emissions
Senators needs leadership from
my communities and puts forth
real climate solutions thank
you.
Thank you accept sterling
program.
There we are okay good afternoon
no chair and committee members
my name is sterling Grogan I
speak today only representing
myself I oppose house bill six
as originally introduced was not
aware of the committee
substitute when the governor was
first elected she recognized in
her executive order addressing
climate change that we had
twelve years to take decisive
action to reduce climate
altering carbon emissions this
bill looks good but really does
nothing we don't need goals we
need action there as others have
said there is no required time
deadline in this bill for the
environmental improvement board
to act on the petition which
could itself take years affected
industries are likely to appeal
the rules and those bills are
likely to delay the
effectiveness of the rules for
even more years as a practical
matter the chances are extremely
remote that this distant and
like the process can possibly
even be completed by twenty
thirty much less result in the
state meeting the goal of
bringing statewide direct
emissions of greenhouse gases
down to the fifty.
Or just for the timer lame to me
that.
Good afternoon chair and
committee representatives H. B.
six is designed to fail because
it relies on carbon trading and
offset system mechanism to
supposedly lower carbon
emissions tech carbon trading
offset markets give energy
giants power over monitoring
managing and controlling the
economics the bill is gaming the
system the European Union
California were found to have
significant risk of carbon
leakage through shuffling
schemes this bill doesn't come
close to the needed rigs carbon
markets are in badly needed of
reform why would New Mexico be
any less susceptible to industry
scamming what about stopping new
oil gas permits we need serious
action on climate crisis no more
carbon bubbles if not amended
vote this bill down thank you.
Thank you we have.
Jonathan were as once.
Thank you Mr chair members of
this committee as a member of
tribal communities that were not
consulted and as a young leader
of yucca whose future will be
jeopardized by insufficient
action I stand firmly in
opposition to house bill six the
claim futures act as it is
currently written although I can
see where the sincere good
intentions of the Sanchez with
brought this bill forward are
coming from I have major
concerns with several aspects of
the bill that prevent us from
supporting it until critical
amend amendments are made.
Not only does this bill do far
too little far too late but
despite receiving a multitude of
feedback from frontline
indigenous communities and
grassroots organizations like
yucca we have not seen any of
the incorporated into the final
draft that we have before us
here today Mr chair we're well
aware of the conversations
taking place behind the scenes
and the ways in which I Popp
frontline and grassroots groups
continue to be excluded and we
wish to remind you all of the
principles of free prior
informed consent the heinous
principles and the crime equity
principles of the Christian
administration and this
legislature allege that they
support yeah we do not see that
support reflected in the lead up
to the session or this bill
please vote please vote no
unless amended thank you.
Thank you for that next step we
have no what some US.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Noah Thomas Paris on New
Mexicans on college line only
made me want to echo the
concerns that the members of
yucca had particularly around
the language of carbon offsets
because it does not the idea
carbon offices not to drive down
emissions but to offset
emissions ins with other
projects be that with solar
panels or planting trees or.
Carbon capture facilities and
the history around carbon offset
programs have been quite a
disaster to famous programs the
clean development mechanism and
the joint implementation program
one found that eighty five
percent loss as had a low
likelihood of creating real
impacts another found that
seventy five percent of the
credits were unlikely to
represent real reductions and as
far as carbon capture goes there
is a reason story around the
shell carbon capture facility
emitting more carbon than it
through down and I am very can.
Well yes for the timer
we have Bronson court.
Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee I
appreciate you taking time to
listen to me my name is Bronson
corn Representative I mean the
New Mexico will growers.
I would like to talk about house
bill six.
We are in standing in opposition
respectfully have the house bill
six would negatively affect all
sectors of agriculture
regardless the size of their
operations.
It will but unfair taxes on that
community it is also unclear how
the greenhouse gas emission
offset credit system is going to
be implemented twelve and
transferred this system of
credit offsets will be available
for producers well this I'm
sorry well this system of
credits.
Offset credits be available for
producers of all size large and
small scale operations.
Does it it establishes extreme
greenhouse gas reduction
mandates it creates new
burdensome air quality control
act requirements and the swift
implementation implementation of
this act would create burdensome
input costs for agriculture
producers to upgrade
infrastructure and compliant
quit.
However next up is
part of a.
Who can everyone hear me yes
okay good afternoon when I start
days everyone attending
committee members and chairman
I'm not sure Cordova the account
number and concerned community
members and.
From that the MEP Chris and okay
when the pueblos animal such
content I stand opposition of H.
B. six the claim teachers act
the reason why I'm in opposition
is not because the intentions
are for a cleaner future but I'm
in opposition because the most
impacted communities are still
in danger public tribal
communities have not been
consulted which is inexcusable
by talking frontline communities
are being hit with every single
affect that the bills are being
passed.
Our our people are dying and
it's clear to see they're
already resources created in
eighteen help amending H. B. six
like free prior and informed
consent to how misprints pools
and inclement Task Force climate
principles.
Coming from someone who will
feel the effects of HB six.
I don't want to see my future
generations suffer because of
our actions today I don't want
to my future my people suffer
and I don't want to see the
future generations suffer I want
to see maybe because it's run
around in our homelands with
fresh air and clean water thank
you.
Thank you Charlie markets.
Much Mr Chairman can you hear
me.
Yes.
Again Charlie market is with the
New Mexico business coalition.
The focus of NBC is to make New
Mexico a better place to live
and work.
An NBC respectfully stands in
opposition to HB six Waller
member support a claim vibrant
environment they want balance
and how that's accomplished
while still allowing economic
development and job creation
this bill in our opinion does
not do that this this
legislation proposes a more
stringent requirements in the
nation even exceed requirements
of the Paris agreement that many
countries including the U. S.
have signed on to HB six
significantly expands the EIB's
Authority making it the
exclusive authority over
greenhouse gas emissions with
the decision makers appointed by
the governor and the legislative
oversight we are again creating
a situation where New Mexico
will not benefit the balance of
powers we do not believe believe
H. B. six is in the best
interest of our state Senate
opposition thank you for that.
So thank you I'll start.
In opposition.
Thank you next up is time
Shelly.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
I'm an active member of the New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
and the Grant County and New
Mexico cattle growers.
My comments are.
very simple we're our families
and our businesses are currently
experiencing higher call energy
costs and higher food costs and
that affects everything the
energy cost effects our food
that is Hey for my cattle and
horses everything.
Right I'm in in addition to all
that inflation is extraordinary
right now swear under tremendous
pressures.
And from what I can see in the
bill it has.
The potential increase energy
costs going forward and we
really need solutions that do
not do that they keep energy
costs low and abundant energy
and reliable energy and I'm
concerned about the potential
new forms of taxes and so forth
that involved with this so.
Thank you for that all the time
we will take one more speaker in
opposition that's John
Alexander.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee for taking my
comments today stand opposed
opposition to the house bill six
it is a top down command driven
piece of legislature that does
absolutely nothing to help our
oil and gas companies or other
energy extractive companies deal
with the issues of call of
climate change we're we're
concerned about that
significant.
This is been right in those
already and we need to allow the
people.
Technical people involved with
it to to to to to do their job
so we appreciate that do stand
in opposition and our hopefully
you will vote no thank you for
your time.
Thank you so that will and our
public comment in opposition so
if you have your hand raised in
opposition I would ask you to
wear your hand although.
Maybe you're wanting a lowered
that works but if you would like
to speak in support
please raise your.
before we get to the public.
Speaker you also would you like
to as a sponsor this bill makes
comments.
Mr chairman thank you sorry to
be a touch late I'm happy to
have the public comment continue
and I'll wait for a I need to
make a few comments represent a
small after we hear from those
in support okay thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker so once
again we're doing comments in
support.
We'll do thirty minutes our
first speaker is Barbara cables.
Good afternoon chairman queen
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Calif I'm speaking
for the league of women voters
of New Mexico eight supports
this bill we endorsed the goal
of reducing greenhouse gas
emissions to fifty percent of
the two thousand five level by
twenty thirty and to net zero by
twenty fifty but we help these
goals can be achieved earlier we
have a few concerns instead of
requiring the environment
department no later than June
twenty fifth two thousand twenty
five to petition the E. R. I'd
be to promulgate rules to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions we ask
you to set a deadline and twenty
twenty three for the E. I. B. to
adopt unnecessary rules.
Using carbon capture
sequestration as a possible
approach to emissions reductions
also troubling will be vital to
require proof that such an
approach is and indeed
quantifiable permanent and
verifiable as the bill says
before it is approved finally
the bill does not specify any
penalties for failure to achieve
the twenty thirty and twenty
fifty goals thank you.
Thank you next up we have and.
You know that you get your tier
self.
In your muted on your at.
Okay we'll move on to the next
step we have Houston chiller.
Hi my name's even show where
live in Albuquerque thanks so
much for hearing me speak I just
want to say I'm so glad and
grateful this this bill is being
considered because it creates a
new market for carbon trading
which will allow me to keep
polluting forever and I won't
have to change anything so
thanks so much for that that's
really awesome.
You're in support of the bill
next step is Camilla I went.
Thank you Mr chair Mr speaker
and members of the committee I'm
the director of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club
representing thirty five
thousand parents grandparents
and concerned members of the
public I think of my five year
old and instead of imagining
college and his career his
partner has children I think of
what the climate emergency might
be like for him given how bad it
is now cyclone bombs hurricanes
more forceful than ever force
fires that incinerate instead of
regenerate December's that feel
like early fall snow that
evaporates before it ever makes
it to our rivers fifty percent
reduction by twenty thirty from
each polluting industries is
what we need ninety percent
director reductions from
polluters by twenty fifty is
what we need prioritizing
impacted communities and
reporting rulemaking and
indirect benefits is what we
need are great lab modeling
shows the bulk of remaining
emissions in twenty fifty will
be from natural and working
lands which would also be aware
carbon sinks maybe develop
through healthy soils
reforestation or other measures
drive our economy drive
innovation protect our kids
thank you.
Thank you we have roads rushing.
Hi everyone hear me yes.
Yes it thank you good afternoon
my name is rose rushing and I'm
speaking today to support the
claim future act on behalf of
the western environmental law
center the act requires direct
emissions reductions of fifty
percent by twenty thirty no
offsets allowed additionally
this is not create carbon
capture market instead it
creates a legally enforceable
mandate to eliminate emissions.
We stand with our frontline
community partners today and
want to let their concerns about
the act.
Community consultation and
consent must be an integral part
of the implementation of this
bill.
But the science is crystal clear
we don't have any time to spare
and only a goal this ambitious
can put us on track to reduce
our missions in time to save us
from the worst impacts of the
climate crisis we need to open
the door to date to renewable
energy future we hope the New
Mexico can take a necessary step
today and in that process become
a national climate leader and
build a legacy that our
grandchildren's grandchildren
will be grateful for we urge you
to pass this act today thank
you.
Thank you the next step we have.
Yes the.
Hi good afternoon my name is you
state I want to support this
bill because I like how it talks
about tracking what happens to
disproportionately impacted
communities without actually
following the lead of you.
So we are in support of the
bill.
This is Alex thank Golia.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee my name's Alex to
Golia I'm grateful to be here
today on behalf of the
environmental defense fund and
are more than thirty thousand
members call Mexico home.
So EDS strongly supports the
computer act and the ambition
and promise it offers for a
stable climate future and robust
clean energy economy yes works
across dozens of states and
countries and our work has
consistently shown that the
first most important step in
climate leadership is also
straightforward one putting firm
limits on greenhouse gas
pollution the governor is
committed to the limits proposed
in the bill because they're
what's necessary according to
climate science but also because
they're cheap all we strongly
support a framework as proposed
in the bill that is necessarily
ambitious equitable and flexible
well the bill marks only the
start of the work I needed to
meet its promise it's a critical
step well worth taking a look
for to continue the work with
the committee the rest of the
legislature throughout the
process to ensure the final bill
puts New Mexico in a position of
leadership
to pass on to our children and
grandchildren.
Thank you next up we have first
UCC Albuquerque if you could err
answer self.
Yes Mr chairman committee
members my name is Ruth struggle
and I'm co chair of the board of
New Mexico interfaith power and
light.
Climate change is evident to us
now on a daily basis drought
fires deadly heat superstorms
and species extinctions are
happening much more frequently.
We humans created this problem
and it's up to us to stop it and
protect god's creation.
In a my peel sees the clean
futures act as a strong
mechanism to bring down
greenhouse gas emissions while
involving overburdened
communities and creating good
jobs the energy transition act
regulates electric utilities but
we must lower emissions in many
other sectors of the economy and
that is addressed in this bill
we are running out of time to
prevent runaway heating of the
planet we need the ambitious
target set forth in H. B. six to
protect our world our fellow New
Mexicans and the beautiful land
we call home thank you.
Thank you that said that Nancy
says CEO so stay the.
Thank you very much good morning
sorry good afternoon chair
members of the committee my name
is Nancy subset of climate
justice organizer here outlay we
stand in favor of H. B. six of
you as a racial justice issue
climate change
disproportionately affects by
about communities and they
should be at the table when
decisions are being made for
them this legislation does many
things including requiring
consultation with overburdened
communities in order to develop
Clemente policies that address
disproportionate impacts in
improve our understanding of how
climate change affects these
communities we urged committee
members to vote in favor of
house bill six thank you.
Thank you miss Thompson all.
Thank you chairman the queen of
my name is Tom Solomon with
three fifty New Mexico and that
we stand strong support of this
bill as we see the climate
crisis worsening every year I'm
in mind of this warning winning
slowly is the same as losing I
agree with the comments from
Jonathan Alonzo and others from
the frontline communities acting
for amendments to make this bill
stronger and implemented faster
and I urge those changes to be
made but we have no time to wait
let's grab the opportunity to
make from the dramatic cuts
employment emissions represented
by this bill and get started now
let's passed H. B. six through
this committee and make it
better as it goes forward three
fifty New Mexico stands in
strong support and we urge a yes
vote thank you very much.
Thank you next up is Jamie
Phillips.
Good afternoon chairman
committee the board appreciate
you giving us our equipment to
share here I'm really excited
for the claim teachers act
presents an incredible
opportunity.
Urban markets are creative
innovation solution to the
challenge of posturing is acting
on climate change while still
sinking our teeth and all the
vast resources our state is yet
to extract as important as
reducing emissions may be it is
of the utmost importance that we
shield the fossil fuel industry
from any curtailment reels.
You're on support of the bill
next up is the loss.
Okay can you hear me yes thank
you Mr chairman and committee
I'm Beth Beloff coalition of
sustainable communities
representing our members Santa
Fe Albuquerque Los crucis and
Santa Fe and Los Alamos counties
in support of this bill I had
the privilege of leading our
coalition's delegation to cop
twenty six where world leaders
stressed this is the decade of
delivery if we are to reach net
zero goals by twenty fifty as
our governor said at cop twenty
six states and local governments
are leading the way to address
climate change it's much more
powerful than by executive order
to codify brought greenhouse gas
reduction goals into law that
can survive a change in
administration and protect our
future this bill is that
leadership effort and will
provide real aggressive and
equitable greenhouse gas
emissions reduction targets and
a process to develop the roadmap
to achieve them we would agree
though that rulemaking should
start and be adopted well before
twenty twenty five as Tom said
as time matters thank you for
your time please consider
supporting this bill with
timeline change.
Okay next the the I'd like to
hear from Sydney.
Your.
The thank you Mr.
I'm in sixth grade and I'm on
the left but I know that each
each I know how many gases are
released into the air.
I know that that trash I see one
driving school is going away
anytime soon.
I know that I am on millions of
kids do not have a future.
Which is why appointments to
help it is one of the big steps
we can take to ensure that I am
all of those and it features you
all in your hands the option of
the future there's no penalty
thank you.
Thank you very much next up is
Joseph Hernandez.
Yes yes yes Mr can you hear me
yes.
Thank you.
Yeah Mr chairman and members of
this to committee I am
representing NM native vote I
live in Shiprock New Mexico and
for the record my family and I
hold a lot more it's eleven
miles east of Chaco canyon all
humans have two things in common
we walk on two legs and we all
have of five fingers we were all
given to this as a gift from the
creator to work together and
respect each other and all
living things here on Mother
Earth I stand in support of H.
P. six.
Because this will make a
generational impact and that
will bring forward legally
enforceable mandates to
eliminate missions Mr chairman
and members of this committee I
showed it please vote yes.
Thank you is different on the.
Mr chairman thank you for the
time for us to be able to
comment on this bill Deborah
Condit would W. R. A. at
communities across New Mexico
are ready experiencing the
impacts of climate crisis
including prolonged drought
devastating forest fires
unprecedented he's he waves and
their pollution Mexico does not
have time to waste we must act
now to cut carbon emissions and
fight climate change house bill
six would ensure New Mexico's
clean energy transition and help
track help track tackle climate
change in the state it require
the state to achieve fifty
percent reduction of carbon
emissions by twenty thirty and
net zero emissions by twenty
fifty please support house bill
six to protect the climate and
health of communities across the
state diversified economy
raising raise new revenue and
create jobs in growing
industries thank you.
Thank you next up is Christopher
then.
This for your muted on your at.
Next up is been Chilton.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
Mr chairman
this bill amends bench are on
the political and policy
director for conservation voters
New Mexico.
this bill represents the
opportunity to take the largest
step forward on climate action
of what you're legislature has
had the opportunity to consider
since about two thousand
nineteen we know that New
Mexicans overwhelmingly support
action to address the climate
crisis it's changing the way we
manage our water and our forest
is reshaping our economy and
communities even to speak today.
There will be more details and
planning the months and years to
come as we continue to approve
our climate change approaches
the state I want to clarify this
bill is not intended to be a
self contained solution but
everything that we do going
forward must flow from this
first step from this first vital
commitments.
Built a binding statement of
intent the state of New Mexico
will me our responsibility
future generations it's a
message that New Mexico will
pick up our obligation to
address the challenge of our
lives I appreciate the offer of
unlimited time testified that's
all about you today please vote
yes.
Yes the the tire did start on
that but thank you for being
great next up is Luke McMath.
Hello.
We can hear you thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is the big
mac I'm an educational assistant
working for APS top some of New
Mexicos most vulnerable children
I'm here today to be the voice
for those who cannot speak for
themselves and you'll be the
most profoundly affected by the
worsening climate crisis if you
tractors and perfect
imperfection cannot be an excuse
for lack of action in dire
situations and this is a dire
situation working one of the
poorest neighborhoods in
Albuquerque I have a first hand
perspective on how this crisis
is affecting our students how
they feel disenfranchised
ignored and abandoned by those
who have been charged with
ensuring the future one student
recently asked me in reference
to a score why does this matter
your is destined to be covered
in pollution anyways why should
I try with this piece of
legislation of a chance to send
a message not just to him not
just to impoverished students
but every child staring down the
barrel of the worst crisis in
our history your duty to show
them that their futures are
cared for and that what is best
for the people of this state is
what their leaders stand for
thank you for your time.
Thank you that's the it is don
Schreiber.
Thank you Mr chairman committee.
With a hundred twenty two gas
wells on our northern New Mexico
ranch clean futures act
represents a unique opportunity
to bring environmental and
health protections under law for
all of those of us living daily
with the many impact of oil and
gas production I'm proud to join
Joseph Fernandez and the rest of
my I figured brothers in support
of HB six.
Thank you.
Thank you next up is Kathleen
mostly.
To clean and members of the
committee my name is Kathy
mostly on retired community
health nurse with a master's in
preventive medicine and a member
of the New Mexico Public Health
Association which stands in
support as I do personally
thirty years ago in my master's
program CO two levels were three
hundred sixteen parts per
million and we already were
worried about leisure melts
thirty years later it's four
hundred twelve and I'm picking
up my granddaughter to take her
to the hospital and record
setting temperatures packing her
an ice and protecting her per
raining ash.
I am concerned about the
discussion of including
indigenous people who will
address that in I encourage you
to begin this because we are
already late and the please vote
yes for H. P. six include you to
respect thank you.
Thank you next up is no along.
Thank you Mr chairman members.
On the but not.
Out on top.
Thank.
Hard to hear you.
That's a little better.
I'll try to both my.
Can you hear me.
Now I don't know what I was my
can hear me now yes there you
have okay I apologize for that
Mr chairman members the
committee my name is no longer
about the naturist as defense
counsel are thousands of members
in New Mexico I urge you to vote
yes on today's HB six the bill
is ambitious achievable
necessary and happening it's
ambitious because after decades
of exploding pollution levels in
here in New Mexico this bill
would put us in line to meet the
IPCC and bided ministration
targets necessary to maintain a
stable and healthy climate in
New Mexico it's achievable
because we have the technology
the rule makings are already
under way and we know how to cut
these emissions it's necessary
because we have no time to act
wait imperfections not
withstanding with any action on
climate we must take steps
starting today it's happening
because the string at the clean
energy transition is already
under way the technologies are
available and governor Lujan
Grisham has already started the
necessary action over three
years ago with our first
executive order I urge you to
vote yes and thank you for your
time today.
Thank you next Gen McKenzie.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
committee members and the
concerned public my name Mr
mackenzie I'm co coordinator of
three fifty New Mexico and I
stand in support of H. B. six on
behalf of our seven thousand
members in New Mexico H. P. six
let's New Mexico on a ladder to
climb out of the climate
emergency make no mistake New
Mexico's greenhouse gas gas
emissions are significant on a
national and a world.
Stage.
Passage of HB six and the needed
increases in state department
budgets for enforcement of HB
six will begin meaningful
controls agrees house gas
emissions with all the blah blah
blah but government leaders
about climate change our
greenhouse gas emissions are
still increasing thank you.
Thank you is Paul Gibson.
Yes thank you sure chairman my
queen and Committee members and
thank thank you bill Sanchez
retake our democracy believes
that you get what you measure so
we applaud this bills are point
to measure our green are
stashing gas emissions.
Fortunately we also call for
some amendments we want to
comment the need to remove the
rulemaking forward to twenty
twenty three twenty twenty five
is much too right but far more
important we call for a man Gen
genuine amendments to the carbon
capture and offsets part of the
bill the word processed has now
been removed I see the committee
substitute and the term excess
emissions reduction credit has
been inserted but the definition
of that term is exactly the same
as
as
As what was in there before for
offsets so the check no no
changes substantially happened
we need to be genuine about this
process and make real progress
we need to eliminate the offsets
for the.
Sorry about the timer next up is
Ramon Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I Representative doubt consumer.
See the NM I'm gonna take a
different tact and
And then there.
Climb the tightest mountains
here in New Mexico we've this
clean air.
And I've seen the Rio Grande
flows with water.
From bank to bank.
I've experienced some of the
greatest.
New Mexico skies in my eighty
years.
I want this bill to pass for the
sake of my great grandchildren.
I hope we'll get a chance to
experience what I've experienced
in my life.
More.
A good vision for we can see.
Of conservation voters stand
strongly behind this.
Act I strong stand strong.
I doubt that I will ever get to
see
twenty fifty my grandchildren
great grandchildren certainly
will thank you to the sponsors
of this bill and the governor
Lujan Grisham thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you the study wise for.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
steep widespread with the D. P.
N. M. rural caucus and three
fifty New Mexico real at that
you see here to support our
support for H. B. six Colorado
instituted a similar mission law
last year and so I wonder if
that's why tri state co op is
building all of its renewable
power plants in Colorado instead
of New Mexico after it withdrew
from Escalante power plant given
the concerns of the indigenous
community expressed earlier I
hope the bill can be amended to
make it more effective and fair
but the bottom line is that New
Mexico is in for a lot of pain
due to climate change and the
remedy is to bring emissions
down now H. B. six maybe in
perfect but we have waited too
long to act already so please
support H. P. six now thank you.
Thank you next up is a boss
thank you.
The.
Hello.
You're very faint boss okay I'm
I have a very V. connection by
the road side.
The state I've been very strong
support of the bill I will be
able to speak with a long but I
do support also speeding up the
timeline if the committee can
agree to it I think that's a
very valid concern we don't have
time to waste it's of any
measurable and quantifiable the
framework for reducing our
greenhouse gas emissions and I'm
stressed as to stand strongly in
support of fate and I definitely
want to see if the committee can
exited the timeline and amend
this bill as we move forward
thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members.
Thank you next step is to work
what's.
Can you hear me now yes okay.
Good afternoon members of the
Mr chairman and members of the
members of the committee my name
is Stewart Watson a long term
resident of
New Mexico Santa Fe and
Albuquerque predominately
somewhat house I just encourage
you to try to work with yes on
the house bill number six and I
don't think we have to look any
further than out the window what
I'm doing right now I realize
that the middle of January
at the end of January and
there's no snow on the mountain
that's a crisis we're in the
midst of a crisis now we just
can't wait anymore I encourage
you to vote yes on the bill I
encourage you to accept
amendments thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you next is June persons.
Honorable chairman and committee
members my name is Jim Parsons
are you able to hear me.
Yes I am speaking in support of
H. B. six clean future at this
bill provides New Mexico with
the once in A. generation
opportunity to diversify our
economy raise new revenue and
create good clean jobs in
growing clean energy industry H.
B. six is not perfect and carbon
offsets are not a long term
solution to our energy needs and
human caused climate crisis
however our drought our health
and our economy.
You need to open our doors to a
clean energy future for every
New Mexican a community and the
health of every New Mexicans the
clean future act is an ambitious
and needed requirement for a
fifty percent reduction of COVID
pollution in New Mexico by
twenty thirty it's a good start
because without New Mexico
making the bold step of HB six
in truly extracting ourselves
from extracting and burning
fossil fuels instead of New
Mexico continues to be the
world's largest single emitter
of climate.
Timer next Tuesday here need.
You're you're muted I'm here at.
Okay I'll move on that set the
stage night.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is patient
with Mexico braces for Children
to speak in strong support of
house bill six our children
deserve a healthy future clean
air and water and they deserve
action on crime and now so for
all the reasons that we've
listed in that you've heard
today from from kids and from
use across the state I we
strongly urge your support for
this legislation thank you.
Thank you in our final member of
the public will be billed
midcap.
Bill your muted on here and
there you go.
Are you there.
Okay we can't hear you so let's
take one more can't we.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Ali and
I can DO a deputy director with
capital crime advocate both of
the need to we stand in front of
the board of education the claim
to track when it Senators one of
the center of protecting those
most impacted by allowing us
pollution and the climate crisis
that is causing here in our
state can open new doors for New
Mexico to cleaner air a state
requirement and more robust and
resilient communities the
science is clear we need to
reduce our greenhouse gas
emissions and we need to do so
as quickly as possible we urged
support of this bill and it and
we also urged support for
amendments that
create action sooner rather than
later and we also encourage the
committee as well as the sponsor
to incorporate those have spoken
who who the effect their
indigenous communities your
should be involved in creating
the kind of policy thank you for
the time to speak to.
Thank you.
Well Kate okay bill moves cap is
back with try this again.
To hear me now chairman yes.
Okay sorry about the confusion
that's on my part thank you
chairman agreed to committee I'm
the only captain I'm
representing Rocky Mount farmers
you.
America's farms and ranches are
being challenged with severe
drought and devastating storms
are destroying our crops not to
mention disruptions in
transportation it challenging
workforce and price increases
increases meeting the world's
changing just like our climate
making food security a national
issue as well as our State issue
this time to quit talking about
it and we we need to act thank
you very much.
Thank you okay and that closer
the public hearing portion.
We'll go back the the sponsor
Representative small
Would you care to make any
comments or act actually we also
speaker Egolf that you want to
make comments at the start.
Mr chairman thank you I believe
Representative small has got
some information in the bill
that deals directly with the
opportunities in the legislation
for tribal consultation this is
been setting that is I really
think been one of the hallmarks
of my tenure speaker is having
meaningful consultation and with
tribal governments and the
revitalization of the government
to government relationship
between the legislature and
tribal governments all over the
state
it is incredibly important to me
consultation is taking place
already Representative small
we'll get more into that.
If you allow him to speak
briefly after me and then also
Mr chairman I think we've got an
opportunity to make a huge
amount of progress with this
legislation several of the
comments made a point I think
it's correct that this isn't the
perfect solution and it isn't
probably the last time we will
take action in this area.
But we have to each session I
make as much progress as we can
if we want to have legislation
that would completely eliminate
emissions in the course of a two
or three year period that's
simply not gonna pass the
legislature and it likely would
not be possible the current city
technology so we stab was goals
and then as technology improves
we come back to the legislation
we would go back to
environmental improvement board
and make the.
Deadlines and goals in this
process more ambitious each year
and I think this legislation
provides the flexibility that we
need to take into account future
improvements in technology we
all share the same goal the
questions how we get there and I
think this legislation is a good
opportunity to see how far we
can push the issue.
Reducing emissions
that within that within that
context of the available
technology that we have before
us and Mr Chairman Mr
Representative small would like
to.
At the tribal consultation fees
to I'm gonna be very glad that
think chairman.
Mr Chairman thank you Mr speaker
thank you Mr speaker as you said
and with this body was able to
show most recently in the
redistricting session.
The consultation government to
government relationship and on
going.
Consultation and engagement are
hallmarks that guide our work Mr
speaker Mr chairman I want to
say that as we continue to move
forward the same principles of
and I want to thank secretary
Trujillo from the Indian Affairs
Department
for her engagement and I and we
are very.
Proud and grateful to have
continually sent out legislative
drafts in as we're in the
session now and as we're moving
forward to continue whether
that's remotely or in person is
folks are comfortable to engage
through this legislative process
but
said sharing the the draft
legislation sharing the.
The committee substitute
engaging in the kind of dialogue
Mr chair that you have here
before you today and engaging in
that dialogue directly on a
government to government basis
with sovereign tribal nations
and their members is that is
incredibly important to me we'll
continue to be part of this
effort deeply appreciate the
many different comments that
have referenced that and
continuing work that began last
session with integrating into
what we see before us today with
disproportionately impacted
communities and the requirements
Mr chairman and committee
members for engagement at each
step of the process including on
front ends of rulemaking
processes with
disproportionately impacted
communities including but not of
course not limited to sovereign
tribal nations which.
More where we engage on a
government to government
relationship.
And I would just add Mr chair
not only is that a hallmark of
this house under the leadership
of speaker egolf but it's also a
hallmark of governor Lujan
Grisham as I already referenced
that has begun it will continue
and it will be written into this
law as a way forward for our
state as we confront the climate
crisis.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative small
Representative small speaker you
go through anything like that
before we go to the committee.
I don't think so well the one
other thought Mr chairman and
that is.
I think any solution to climb it
has got to include some aspect
of.
Removal of CO two from the
atmosphere that is already in
place during cop twenty six I
was watching some of this panels
that were there and and one of
the experts was describing the
earth's atmosphere in making an
analogy to a bath tub.
In cinemagic you got the bats of
filling up with water filling up
with water and bath W. it's
you're full of the top you turn
off the water he said imagine
water is a CO two emissions.
If you stop the emissions you
stop the water you still have
the challenge you still have the
climate problem of.
To much CO to the atmosphere
continuing the warming affecting
continuing the climate
disruption so even if you stop
emissions even if you slowed
down dramatically.
We still have some solution
Weatherby director captured
sequestration some solution
through CO two sinks some
biological solution there have
to be ways that we not only stop
emissions but reverse the
accumulated impacts over decades
of excess CO two emissions and
this bill provides the start of
a framework for how we approach
that as well now to make sure
that we're not just reducing
emissions were reversing the
damage done by getting that CO
two out of the atmosphere and
doing our part here in New
Mexico to contribute to the
global solution and that's
really important part to keep in
mind when I hear comments the
state you know we will for some
folks don't want to do anything
that would relate to getting see
if you have the atmosphere I I
think that that view is somewhat
misguided it is it yeah I think
he's missing half the half the
solution to the crisis that we
face thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker the reason
small I think reading is that to
the committee I agree Mr
chairman thank you.
First up we have Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Chairman.
A couple of points I know it's.
Radically important to
To the proponents have a robust
conversation and so I'm going to
try to.
Make sure that he has that
opportunity.
Of.
You know it's at.
That's kind of traveling out to
FK Mr chairman because.
in order to have an incredibly
robust conversation you have to
allow the public to be involved.
Yes
Committee substitute.
Comes out on Friday afternoon.
And
None of the public has has the
ability to see it because it's
on the shared drive.
And then you.
Have a.
Committee hearing on Saturday
morning.
And quite frankly it comes out
as a plan bam thank you ma'am
instead of an incredibly robust
conversation.
That is not what I think the
public expects.
I have had a number of comments.
From industry folks that say
industry regulators and others.
Are nearly at the end of a three
year process where tens of
millions of dollars.
Have been.
Is to develop a methane rule.
And this bill.
If you're bringing forth today.
Allows all of that to be
seconded.
That's not an incredibly robust
conversation.
Secondly the ambitious nature of
this bill exceeds even the
parameters laid out in a
proposed federal clean futures
bill which is currently in limbo
in Congress.
If this bill gets enacted in New
Mexico we essentially subject
our New Mexican citizens to the
economic pain and human
suffering this bill will cost
ahead of the rest of the
country.
I think it is an effort to shoot
ourselves right now in the foot.
And.
I think it's it's not in the
best interest of New Mexico.
Let me ask you
are.
Representative in the interest
of.
A robust conversation.
What will your bill have on
global climate warming.
And when will that affect occur.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you later Townsend Mr
Chairman later Townsend as is a
knowledge in New Mexico many
other states in our country in
the world we need to get to net
zero emissions by twenty fifty
and we need to reduce our
emissions significantly by half
here in New Mexico.
In order to work avoid the worst
effects of climate change it
also Mr chairman later Townsend
and thank our bill puts us.
In the front row.
At the same table as countries
all across the world as states
all across our union in taking
up this commitment and Mr chair
Representative Townsend this
legislation clearly puts us on a
path to avoid the worst effects
of climate change here in New
Mexico Mr chair leader Townsend
that means reducing the risk of
catastrophic forest fires
reducing the risk of
catastrophic drought Mr chair
leader Townsend and many of the
other associated with our
impacts of the climate crisis
well Representative and Mr
chair.
What does your modeling show.
Certainly have some modeling
that will back up this proposed
rule what effect will it have
year to year.
thank you very much Mr chair
thank you leader Townsend.
As there is additional comment
that's needed from our experts
of course you know I would
encourage them to offer that Mr
chair leader Townsend the
modeling that I'm aware of shows
that the actions taken by the
Lujan Grisham administration
have already begun to set the
stage for dramatic carbon
reductions.
well that's interesting Mr chair
and.
In the Representative Townsend
you need to allow him to finish
his answer for you to ask
another question I'm just trying
to have a robust conversations
well let's let's have a robust
conversation in the manner that
we do.
Representative small I believe
you're answering the question.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
leader Townsend
yes so at the the
Work that is being done with the
experts in our state agencies is
setting the table and laying the
groundwork for emissions
reductions for economic growth
as we've heard from both of our
cabinet secretaries and
positioning New Mexico to lead
in both areas.
Thank you for that
Representative Jan Mr chair.
Do you think there are any any
reductions in CO two in recent
years.
CO two emissions in recent
years.
Mr chair leader Townsend and are
a where are you asking about.
In New Mexico are.
Bye bye.
You know I mean has there been
reductions or increases.
That Mr chair leader Townsend
and again I would invite.
The our experts to to feel free
to weigh in Mr chair Senator
Townsend there are
on going innovative efforts to
reduce emissions to reduce
emissions intensity there is an
incredible amount of work
that New Mexico Mr chair leader
Townsend through the innovative
at times bipartisan work that
we've undertaken at times not
that's helping put New Mexico at
the forefront of decarbonising
our economy while
Which meets the the biggest
challenges of climate change
while also becoming a more and
more attractive place for
investment in creating jobs for
New Mexicans.
Mr chair Senator Townsend if I
may please my name is Sandra Ely
on the environmental protection
division director at the New
Mexico environment department
and I consented Senator plea
that a number of the recent
policies adopted for this
administration are leading to
significant emissions greenhouse
gas emission reductions in
energy our generation in the oil
and gas industry and and in
transportation those emission
reductions given this
actually about to the two
thousand five baseline of
seventy five million metric
tons.
Thank you for that the is the
late and.
Share
but we don't know what the two
thousand and five levels were.
The last I have what I'm told is
the last reliable data we have
this two thousand and eighteen.
So how did how do you how do we
go.
What two thousand five data.
Los.
Chairman if I may Representative
Smalley and members of the
committee we have a couple of
inventories we've been
collecting emissions inventory
since about two thousand and
seven and so we do have
estimates of the two thousand
five emissions the latest report
was conducted in twenty twenty
as one of the participants
acknowledged that it was
conducted by the Colorado State
University and has pretty good
emissions data in that
Commission stated that's really
useful to us and tracking trends
and understanding where our
missions in New Mexico are
coming from and how they're
increasing or decreasing so that
data is pretty good it could be
refined and we'll need to be
refined approve any use in the
regulatory process but we do
have a pretty good understanding
of where we were in two thousand
five.
Chairman miss easily I
appreciate that but they're just
too much you don't have any data
from two thousand and five that
was collected that you know is
accurate you just have estimated
that is that correct.
Members of the committee the
data and the Colorado State
University are estimates the
pretty good estimates based on
production and the type of
equipment that were in the field
in the end it's helpful for two
thousand five baseline but again
to actually establish emission
limits on to determine what the
sources emission reduction
should be we will need time to
go back and look at that and
refinement and to do a better
job we do have some actual data
and those are for the largest
polluters those that and that
more than a hundred thousand
pounds a year of certain
pollutants that they're required
we're we're required to submit
greenhouse gas emissions data on
an annual basis so for a number
of sources we do have exact data
for those smaller sources
especially in the oil and gas
industry we're going to have to
go back and do some refinement
and work with our industry
partners to get a better sense
of what those missions were in
two thousand five.
Really thanks again I appreciate
your knowledge and that the two
thousand that we do not have any
two thousand and five data we
only have us.
Second of all.
I had asked
Representative small.
What modeling agency and place
to show the effects of this
legislation on global warming.
As the director of the
environmental department do you
have that of do you have that
information so it and Mr chair
I'm that leader Townsend I I'm
absolutely Environment Sealy to
to help answer the question Mr
chair leader Townsend it's so
vitally important for us to keep
in mind as this legislation does
that global climate change the
catastrophic global climate
change is a global issue with
all of us is participants and so
Mister chair leader in New
Mexico's role is to not be ahead
especially not behind the behind
of where we scientifically need
to be to avoid the worst effects
of climate change well
Representative small let me ask
you a question.
The cliff dwellers left their
cliff dwellings at about
thirteen hundred was it CO two
emissions of the lack of methane
rule that cost them to leave.
Thank you Mr chair leaders
sounds and.
I'm focused on this legislation
if you want to detail
additionally if if there's a
specific question as it pertains
to HB six well I tried requests
for that my my my point
so I would be happy to stop
interrupting if you go through
the chair.
Well there are with both be
happy with that too so I'll be
happy to.
Representative small Mr chair.
The point of my comment laws.
And your lack of energy the
question.
Is that we.
I just don't have any modeling.
That you believe will
adequately predict.
A benefit to global warming.
The benefit New Mexicans.
The budget to.
The increased cost to the
homeowner.
This piece of legislation.
I'm just asking certainly I
would hope that you have some
modeling to assess.
This is what this piece of
legislation is going to the.
This is what it's going to
increase the cost of the
homeowner.
This is what it's going to help.
with the with the global warming
and and I mean Mr chair and
representative.
We can say we're leading the
nation and.
And where we're gonna take steps
that no one else has there may
be a reason why nobody else is
gone here in it may be that it
doesn't make a lot of sense.
Have you have have we I mean do
we have any modeling and do we
know what it's going to affect
the global warming.
So Mr chair later Townsend thank
you for clarifying the question
Mr chair leader Townsend you
bring up important points as to
the effects on New Mexicans of
global climate change Mr chair
leader Townsend what will
climate change right now is
causing drought in our state
helping exacerbates that doubt
Mr chair later Townsend the
increasing global temperatures
the fact that there is.
More Easter is falling at
different times snow is staying
for shorter periods of time is
absolutely leading to
catastrophic risks and in fact
entire communities Mr chair
leader Townsend and.
Going up in smoke and Mr chair
later Townsend thanks to the
help you helping refine the
question the fact that
communities in for us across New
Mexico whether it's Mr chair
later Townsend Andrea does so
whether that's in northern New
Mexico whether it's in western
New Mexico southwest was over
city.
The potential for fires to not
only destroy forest habitat but
to engulf entire towns as we've
seen happen Mr chair leader
towns and across the west it is
an existential risk to New
Mexicans to New Mexicans way of
life.
So that that is just one area Mr
chair leader Townsend and the
effects of drought.
And the catastrophic effects of
drought that frankly Mr chair
later Townsend we're seeing this
in real time.
R. another a fact that threaten
not only the livelihoods but in
some cases the lives of New
Mexicans all across our state in
so Mister chair later Townsend
and.
Those are both part of modeling
as climate and as temperatures
go up as climate change in the
climate crisis increases and
becomes more out of control
those effects are both modeled
in seen in real time harming New
Mexicans and harming people
across the United States Mr
chair later Townsend the way
that we avoid those effects or
at least the worst of those
effects is staying in line with
keeping temperatures below the
rise at in the twenty thirty and
the twenty fifty timeline at
that one point five degrees
Celsius and Mr chair leader
Townsend the way that we do
that.
As is we've talked about as
speaker Egolf explained is
reducing significantly the
carbon dioxide and greenhouse
gas emissions into the
atmosphere in working to drive
down emissions that have already
been released into the
atmosphere Missy Lee do you want
to add.
Is there anything to add to
that.
Mr chair Missy we.
Chairman members of the
committee now very nice job we
we have predictions on the
impacts of climate change on New
Mexico including many of the
affects you just addressed
Representative small coming
mostly from the university of
New Mexico the Los Alamos
national lab.
So
Representative small is that
decide that you don't have any
modeling that can you can point
to and say what this piece of
legislation what effect it's
money to have on global warming.
Mr chair and I know the chair
advised us to go through the
chair Mr chair leader Townsend
and the modeling that we have
which this legislation is
exactly in line with which Mr
chair leader Townsend and that
are executive orders are based
off of our to reduce emissions
by fifty percent by twenty
thirty and to reach net zero by
twenty fifty and so Mister chair
leader Townsend this puts us in
the very center not ahead of nor
behind the scientific monitor
modeling that tells us how we
help combat the worst effects of
the climate crisis in safeguard.
New Mexicans.
So Mister chair and
Representative small.
If you have modeling.
That predicts that this piece of
legislation is going to be
effective you still have not
answered my question on its
effect on global warming.
You have not answered my
question on what the cost will
be to New Mexicans.
You have not answered my cost
you have not answered my
question on at what point will
this occur I mean if we look
back.
My friends tell me that there's
been a twenty two percent
reduction in CO two emissions in
the last several years.
That document.
Do you know what yes meanwhile
will be the impacts do you
believe
to the cost of electricity.
To the cost of gasoline.
What will be the standard of
living that will deteriorate in
many families across New Mexico
you know Representative small Mr
chairman I we all want clean.
Water we want clean air we want
clean.
Fuels we what we want all of
that.
But to have a piece of
legislation like this.
That does not quantify the
effects to civilization.
And we continue to hear
committee we're gonna lead the
nation we're going to do this
and we're going to do that.
What is it gonna did in New
Mexico.
What's it gonna do to us.
And what I think is it going to
have on global warming I would
venture to say Representative
it's not gonna do squat.
The global warming.
Not not a thank you.
We're going to penalize too many
people.
We're gonna lose too many jobs.
For the sake of saying we were
first out on the plate that was
that that had no place to go.
So Representative I I don't
believe.
The executive orders have been
beneficial to the state.
I don't think jobs have been
created.
I don't date I know many
storefronts of closed I know the
cost of living has gone up and
the standard of living is gone
down.
I know you have a piece of
legislation that comes.
It appears that it comes from
derived from a Washington piece
of legislation.
Nobody in New Mexico needs any
more Washington legislation that
drives up costs that empties the
shelves in the grocery store and
cause this devastation across
many families we have wiped out
fortunes and equity remaining
New Mexicans so Mr chair and
representative.
This piece of legislation is not
good for New Mexico.
You don't have modeling that
says it's going to be a world.
And it's not in the best
interests.
On top of that we do it on a
Saturday was no public input and
we say we are transparent and
we're ethical and I take
exception to that Mr chair and
representative that just isn't
true.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr chairman later
Townsend.
The
small do we move on to the next
committee members let's
absolutely thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Townsend next up is
Representative Ortez.
Thank you Mr chair Mr speaker
Representative small I want to
get us back to that two thousand
five baseline can you tell me a
little bit about how we
establish that two thousand five
baseline
Does NMED is the EPA have data
to help us understand but that
is.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair representative works as we
have the.
held at both the federal and the
state level Mr chair
Representative Ortez we have
additional work that has been in
reference using that data
gathering new data that Missy
the reference with Colorado
State University Missy the is
there anything that you would
like to add to that and I know
also we have folks from energy
minerals on as well.
Yes chairman members of the
committee the twenty twenty
report conducted by Colorado
State University use the number
of data sources to develop the
two thousand five in twenty
eighteen emissions inventories
they included the.
Energy and environmental
protection agency as well as the
energy information agency and
for the oil and gas sector they
relied heavily on a recent
report from western States more
resources council or west are
specific to oil and gas which at
the time was one the most
detailed analyses of oil and gas
emissions in the state thank you
it is an estimate though because
this was using eight of twenty
fourteen and twenty sixteen data
and so they looked at production
numbers to assess the twenty two
thousand five data data level so
it is something that we will
have to spend more time on but
we're feeling pretty good about
this inventory but it's an
inventory and it was not
developed for regulatory
purposes that's a much different
process than in much more detail
that analysis to get to that
point.
I thank you Mr chair
representative small miss easily
what one more quick question can
you tell me just a little bit
about the targets that are in
this bill and how they compare
to other states targets or the
federal targets.
Thank you very much Mr chair
representative worked as Mr
chair representative Martez
these targets compare very
closely to targets of other
states including Colorado Mr
chair representative works as
and as we would know Mr chair
Representative Ortez.
We're actually seeing more
investment more building of new
clean energy
very increasing standards of
living and reinvestments Mr
chair representative words as
specifically in Colorado into
the natural and working lands
that help Coloradans just Mr
chair Representative Ortez is we
want to help New Mexicans not
only avoid the worst impacts of
climate change it's but to enjoy
the incredible natural resource
bounties of our state so Mr
chair of some words as that's
one area where our targets
really compare quite closely to
targets of other states is there
a tackle this challenge as well.
Thank you Mr chair
representative small I'm.
Thank you Representative Ortez
next up is Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you.
Small and the only house bill
six in I'm trying to.
Understand.
Thanks for doing I I know they
have a Colorado has some really
great save a renewable portfolio
standards as we did but I don't
think any of our neighboring
station in our northern Mexico
has anything quite like this and
we need to put this in
perspective Mr chairman and
Representative small I mean.
Our neighbors a total around
fifty million people in and we
total two point one million
people and and we've got some
aggressive goals to reduce or or
Carmen.
The emissions and now we're
trying to get technology to help
us do that Mr chairman a no our
area in Representative small
we've got several of so we're.
Addiction works in other case
had delays because of COVID.
material labor material on the
issue states just it's been
tough on all industries of it
but so we're in our in.
It's just been really affected
and we need we need time to get
work out these
you know bottlenecks if you will
in in New Mexico is still suffer
from high unemployment.
Mr speaker and and
Representative small in we're
trying to get our economy in
recovery we had the fifth
highest yet like I said we had
the fifth highest unemployment
rate and inflation is is
affected all of us should in a
negative way so there's going to
be tremendous costs
in this energy transition and
and I know in Colorado excuse me
California.
They've been kind of a leader in
renewable energy and they come
to the conclusion that natural
gas is is a a great energy
because you have to have natural
gas to support and and
supplement wind and solar in the
great state of California and I
have family members that live
there in their utility costs Mr
Mr chairman and Revenue small or
three times what we put so there
there's a real big cost here and
and maybe that's acceptable but
we take to the rank and file New
Mexican but we're just trying to
make ends meet right now.
house bill six.
Is is super ambitious you know
fifty percent reduction we don't
even know what the two thousand
five baseline is you know we've
got a an estimate and next and I
understand estimate you gotta
have estimates
And
We need to have some sort of
baseline but we it this is a
really ambitious girl and I just
don't want New Mexicans that hi
three times more for their
energy costs we know gasoline
costs are high the costs are
high and then you know that that
that affects the supply chain
Weatherby food or manufacturing
or construction and I can just
tell you the construction
industry is booming up here in
San Juan but the cost to have a
really.
Escalated with the cost of labor
material and I just couldn't you
know just get cut is the
inflation is definitely alive
and well up here when it comes
to a cost per square foot so I
have real concerns about this I
think we need to give ourselves
you know the new technologies
that the the hygiene hobbies is
one carbon captures another we
we've got a lot to a lot on our
plate and I.
I think this is a bridge too far
I think we do let the current
programs work its course of
business and industry are doing
everything they can Mr chairman
and Representative small to
reduce our emissions but we're
just such as we're just such a
small piece of the puzzle.
Representative small maybe fifty
million neighbors and they're
not they're not going this route
so I agree with Representative
Townsend you know we we don't
know the nail that much and in a
Representative Scott is the
numbers then and
I'm sure he'll share with us
those numbers but to one of the
thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I'm sorry.
Mr speaker is out there
somewhere but Mr chairman and
and Representative small and I I
just I just have real real
trouble trouble with house bill
six thank you.
Thank Representative Strickler
next will be representative of
Scott.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative small up.
And no one.
The starting point is.
To know whether we have.
You start to do so sixty percent
of.
Seventy five percent reduction I
looked.
The CO two emissions from New
Mexico and it does in fact have.
Six it go all the way back to
two thousand five they said
that in two thousand and five.
That we were meeting state.
Shinn's along.
We're order which.
Fifty three million metric tons.
And are hurt.
I miss a lot of state.
Seventy five million metric tons
the latest status as T. R.
right.
On the website was a little less
reflect truly reduced our CO two
emissions over that time period
of five to twenty one and that
was forty seven million metric
tons so if you would.
Let me postulate that we're
we're starting.
Yes well.
Somewhere between fifty and
seventy five could we call it
sixty million.
Metric tons a year as a
reasonable starting assumption.
The thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative Scott always
good to see you Mr chair
representative got
I I would say that
citing EIA data which which I
appreciate very much is very
good I think for purposes of of
I look forward to to the line of
questioning I don't necessarily
Mr chair and and Representative
Scott I would have to defer to
Missy Lee and the work that
they've done that sets a that
that seventy five million metric
tons roughly but I appreciate
looking so so that's Mr chair
representative Scott that's
where I would set the number
that that that I heard from
Missy Lee but I appreciate you.
Kinda landing a little bit
towards the low end but still a
little bit in the middle to see
where your questions go into
kind of engage in that for sure
okay.
Mr chair on madam chair rather.
And not.
Representative small you'll
agree with me.
Sixty million metric tons within
the ballpark so.
A fifty percent reduction will
amount to thirty million metric
tons a year how to percent
reduction sixty million metric
tons a year that's.
The simple math so let's which
store from.
Now before we go any farther
this.
Representative one hundred
percent.
Emissions from transportation
motor fuels.
And one hundred percent of the
emissions from elect.
Our generation in the state
according to the latest data.
The as published would you
concur with.
Mr chair representative got
and certainly defer to Missy lie
going back to the starting point
of sixty I just want to make
very clear Mr chair
representative got that that
this is the number then Missy
lie is noted for the state
estimate in two thousand five is
that seventy five million metric
tons
So I'm just want to be really
clear Mr chair representative
got that we're going through
with your number of sixty just
as a as a.
An exercise in arithmetic as a
work which you very ably guide
us in and I always appreciate
So just again go back to that Mr
chair representative I think
your question to Missy Lee is
that referencing specifically
the EIA.
Data for right now when is that
referencing specifically.
What is the latest data they
have which.
Believe was two thousand.
Either eighteen or nineteen.
That's with respect to.
Electricity generation and.
Transportation motor fuels or
does work yes and everything at
this point right so from an
engineering standpoint it's
better to start with reasonable
guesses and move forward from
there.
Courses we can.
Implementation of this
legislation will certainly be
fund in the state but let's
let's start with what we think
are the best guest numbers a
recent.
And then move forward from there
Mr chair.
Small businesses would you agree
just that simple reasonable
hello message to proceed forward
with this discussion.
Chairman.
Members of the committee would
not though that our consultants
didn't think the E. I. a data on
its by itself was.
Accurate enough for the state
and relied also on the EPA tool
specifically for electricity and
transportation but you know the
I. a date is a is a place to
start for conversation purposes.
Mr chairman Mr.
Representative small thank you
for that that's all I was trying
to do.
Now.
The next question let's say for
example that we've got a reduced
missions in the next eight years
plus thirty million metric
tonnes which.
Which is substantial reduction I
guess from a from an engineering
standpoint from a technical
standpoint how will that be
cheeks.
Chairman members of the
committee that.
We have a lot of work to do to
get to our to twenty thirty
targets as noted the bucket of
aggressive policies that we have
in place now the ETA the ozone
precursor rules The OCD oil and
gas rules clean cars really only
gets us to our two thousand five
baseline which is why this
legislation is so important to
go beyond our we need to be
working with our stakeholders to
develop new policies to meet
that target including things
like the clean fuel standards
and hydrogen incentives we need
to be and all that we need to be
working together in order to get
those policies in place this
bill does not determine how that
is done it sets the targets and
asked us to go out to work with
our stakeholders in to an
interagency process to develop
those policies with us prior
meant to apartment for its
portion of the act to look at
emission reductions that would
go and be considered in front of
the E. I. B. E. which is another
collaborative stakeholder
process that will take some time
so we haven't determined how
we're going to get there
that we have determine where the
target is and will be looking
for collaboration from our state
R. industry stakeholders and our
public stakeholders as well
thank you.
Mr chair representative honestly
current to postulate.
The technology.
Very simply is not available to
day to chief these goals.
We we pass this legislation
we're going to.
Something develops while this.
Goal to be achieved.
With which brings me to the
methodology employed.
In this.
Legislation.
Which is forget the exact
terminology I'm going to use the
term renewable energy correct.
Which is.
The sequestration.
Okay metric tons of CO two or
its equivalent.
Now.
Do we know.
What a renewable energy credit.
Will cost.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative the.
This legislation
is is not specifically to the
electric generation secretary Mr
chair and representative
some of the examples I I like to
go briefly back to a point you
just maybe Mr chair
representative which is that it
kind of the state of technology
where we are today Mr chair
representative our legislation
does not Roose include renewable
energy credits so that's not
part of HB six before us today
Mr chair representative
the bill does in setting that
twenty thirty eight fifty
percent reduction target
role I have fully on existing
technology in so Mister chair
representative as been mentioned
these are
electric vehicle.
Yes energy efficiency of what's
for larger and larger state
federal and private sector
investments he calms
renewable energy these are all
things Mr chair representative
the modeling I've seen with red
lab and others really says does
allow us to reach our twenty
thirty goals and in fact Mr
chair representative we're
seeing deployed all across our
state we heard earlier Mr chair
representative about emissions
reductions that have happened
and.
There is no corner of our state
where there has not been an
increase of sorry in the
deployment of renewable energy
Mr chair representative I know
on the place where I come from
we're seeing more and more
lectures vehicle Chargers that
are coming in
we're seeing the increased
investments in energy efficiency
support for things like heat
pumps and other things so.
Mr chair representative the.
You know.
The all of the above approach to
combating climate change
yeah we're seeing that and we're
seeing actually pick up steam
and Mr chair representative.
As we're in this conversation I
think one of the core things
that really we have to grapple
with is that
really much of a you know we're
starting from the recognition
that higher temperatures longer
periods of drought intermittent
moisture are causing the
catastrophic effects we see not
around us not on TV but in our
New Mexico communities and so
that's one of the foundational
things that that really makes us
have to look at ways that we
innovate using new technology to
address that and if we don't Mr
chair representative of a of the
quiet after this if we don't
think that higher temperatures
longer droughts more forest
fires intermittent rainfall if
we don't think those are
problems than H. B. six is much
less necessary if so just to put
that out there thank you Mr the
representative.
Chair representative small this
bill does in fact contain the
equivalent of renewable energy
credits first program H. eight.
Are requests Hey don't page on
if they don't call they aren't
called that for the purposes of
this discussion we got a call
and.
So what's called of all if you
will or excess emissions
reduction credit these or
renewable energy credits now I'm
postulating that the technology
to truly reduce issues.
Actually bring down emissions
will not be able to meet these
goals so these offset credits
these renewable energy credits
will be thank or.
Artificial commodity created the
state.
To call.
The system works.
So if we can.
Klay.
Right now all of these additions
to these targets we got
approaches this commodities is
state created the call in office
or renewable energy credit to
synthesize the actual reduction
now let me repeat my question.
Mr Chairman.
Representative small do you have
any projection as to what these
renewable energy credits will
sell for what will be their
value.
That thank you very much Mr
chair thank you Representative.
Noting again Mr chairman.
That offsets are not part of the
twenty thirty fifty percent
reduction
where where is that and that's
what Sen that's one thing Mr
chair representative to.
The ex miss madam reductions
refers to Mr Chairman
representative not in the future
but on going really innovative
work that in some cases have is
happening much more quickly that
is saying that the development
and the deployment of technology
it actually Mr chair
representative is attracting
more investment while.
The.
let the heavier more intensive
less innovative higher carbon
emitting
approaches to doing business are
attracting less investment
But also Mr chair representative
that the Energy improvement the
that that the IP the
environmental improvement board
is required as they should be to
take cost into consideration and
So as we look forward to
reaching the targets Mr Chairman
representative in twenty thirty
and twenty fifty their normal
consistent rulemaking process
will ensure that the cost of
reaching these goals is is taken
into account
and and minimized and Mr chair
representative just to make it
say it again what we're actually
seeing is that business
practices and investments that
are more carbon conscious that
focus on lower carbon intensity
are attracting more investment
higher carbon intensity
investment practice or business
practices are seeing uh
investment in capital become
much more difficult to adapt.
Mr Chairman representative small
are completely agree which.
Significant capital will be
expanded to to develop.
Offs or what I'm calling permits
to emit so that the rest of us.
Can go about our business.
Now these investments in this
technology require.
Right of return.
And just write a return has to
be generated by.
The office.
Credit so you.
Let me ask you can't is there
any projection has there been
any modeling.
As a consequence of this
legislation and.
The technology will not allow.
The actual reduction of CO two
emissions is time for.
What can we do.
The price these cars also said
today do we have estimate of
that cost to.
Mr chair representative thank
you for your patience thank you
for your questions Mr chair
representative the modeling in
the information that I see says
that current technology and the
work that's going on deployed
perhaps that at faster rates but
that gets us Mr Chairman
representative to R. twenty
thirty target to this fifty
percent reduction in so Mr
Chairman representative the
that again and it may just be
you know different data that
we're we're looking at different
modeling but Mr chair
representative current
technology the deployment in the
investment in that technology
and new and innovative
approaches that are happening
that are on the drawing board
somewhere that are happening
both here in our state and in
other places get us to that
twenty thirty target and that's
why Mr chair and representative
again looking at the twenty
thirty time frame why the the
great lab modeling that I've
seen suggests seven thousand new
jobs that are created literally
two trillion dollars Mr Chairman
representative of investment in
the.
Development and conveyance of
renewable energy not to mention
other investment in other
sectors that will flow into our
state so.
From that twenty thirty time
frame because assets are not a
conversation before twenty
thirty Mr Chairman
representative
The current that current
technology again what I'm told
what I've seen is sufficient to
get us to this two thousand and
five.
Target of of being fifty percent
below the two thousand five but
once.
And it actually Mr go ahead
sorry I interrupted you.
Mr Chairman representative small
can you describe the
technologies that you are aware.
That will result in
a decrease of thirty million
metric tons per year soon to
shift.
Subscribe any portion of that
technology that you believe will
get us close to that.
Absolutely thank you Mr chair
representative again I would
invite additional feedback but
you know some of the most that
they they claim the clear simple
things Mr chair representative
is having carbon free
electricity which we we actually
see our investor owned New
Mexico up utilities reaching
more and more quickly so that's
clean electricity carbon free
very low carbon electricity Mr
chair representative the
electrification of cars and
vehicles as well as the adoption
of clean fuels and low carbon
fuels for those areas that are
very hard to to make a lecture
again as we've heard Mr chair
representative something that
this legislature is working on
reducing Mr Chairman
representative emissions in the
upstream and midstream process
these of oil and gas and then Mr
chair representative of course
energy efficiency those are all
for active areas of deployment
where technology is not on the
drawing board it's actually out
in the field at scale and
attracting more and more
investment.
Every single year.
Mr chair Representative small
everything you described got you
about halfway there.
The electric utilities are
already struggling to keep the
lights.
With the energy transition act
out what.
Was there it least in the near
term is not a whole lot of room
for improvement electric
vehicles have about a I don't
know three maybe five percent
penetration rate in the total
market in states like New Mexico
with very long distances and
limited infrastructure again.
Those are not likely.
To provide much of the solution
thank.
Let me direct you if I could.
Mr Chairman representative
small.
Credit.
Or.
The standard or renewable energy
credits or in fact priced in a
number of places in the nation
mostly on the west coast you
know what those credits are
valued at.
Mr chair representative again
the the the offsets I don't have
that information in front of me
Mr chair representative
market based mechanisms are
allowed not required in this
bill Mr chair and representative
and the.
There are the legislation there
are no offset Mr chair
representative prior to twenty
thirty.
We're sorry just if I could Mr
chair representative I think it
does bear noting especially when
we look at the penetration of
electric vehicles that we're
seeing new charging
infrastructure and.
Vastly significant very
significant new investments in
charging infrastructure those
investments are being carried
out on the private sector
through the recently passed
bipartisan infrastructure law
and with our of course our
investor owned and and coop
utilities couple that Mr chair
and representative with the Big
Five auto makers and yes those
commitments to in some cases
actually discontinue the
building of non electric
vehicles I think we will see at
and New Mexicans Mr chair
representative will not be
surprised to see charging
stations in every corner of our
state
with investments that have
already been made and electric
vehicles some that look you know
some yes those a whole lot of
Ford F. one fifty linings and a
lot in between so that we we see
that rapidly rapidly increasing
and in fact.
The market supply has made those
commitments the market demand is
you're saying those vehicles pre
sold.
Just to briefly touch on.
Thank you Mr chair
representative.
Mr Chairman representative Paul
sent you did not answer my
question and I do know the
answer I'm going to share with
you.
Renewable energy credits on the
west coast.
R. two hundred dollars.
Metric.
See you.
Let's.
To allow me.
Missions in New Mexico.
Our transportation issue.
About fourteen million metric
tons annually.
So.
Fourteen gallons of gasoline.
generates.
Total of CO two.
So.
The math would indicate.
Is two hundred dollars per
metric ton.
Is
that we are going to be faced
with which is reality on the
west coast.
Amounts to.
Without.
Any administrative costs amounts
to a minimum of a dollar and
eighty cents per gallon with a
hundred percent reduction so
let's take let's take your
target of fifty percent
reduction by twenty thirty.
What we're looking at there.
And it is nothing but mass what
we are looking at their yes
eighty cents per gallon and.
Yes Sir.
Process.
I will think through.
Rest of our economy.
Every thing that utilizes Energy
everything that requires energy
will have to one day.
An account for and thank you and
is there input costs.
The.
Renewable energy credits.
That will be the state program.
CO two.
So.
I would.
Ninety cents a gallon for
gasoline production going to
apply to a loaf of bread a
toaster so for a car and
everything else.
That we buy in New Mexico we are
going to inflict significant
Hey.
On the consumers of the state
with this policy now.
All set.
I'm going to.
I'm going to shift to climate
change because Representative
Townsend from Aston number of
time.
Maybe what I'm looking at here
is a cost.
Analysis.
So the call.
Unequivocally will be
significant so what are the
benefits of this policy all want
to answer I won't answer and how
many degrees Celsius.
Difference will this policy
right to the planet's
atmosphere.
I I Mr chairman.
Appreciate your question that
I'm sure Regis small answer.
Maybe you could just.
Coming down the stretch.
Sure about that Mr chairman I do
apologize this is a separate
fires me up.
Thank you thank you
Representative Scott there is a
small.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
thank you Representative Scott
and I I sometimes a young it's
always great to see back B. C.
you and colleagues at House
Energy Mr chair representative
Scott first of all
What we've seen empirically it
is that the adoption of things
like electric vehicles the cost
of wind and solar energy other
energy inputs if you will the
levelized cost has crashed it's
actually Mr Chairman
representative the reason we see
adoption of more renewable
energy and low carbon energy not
only in New Mexico but in
states to our Representative hi
sue are left to our east or west
north and south that's because
that energy is cheaper Mr
Chairman representative that
energy is more cost effective
the N. G. is driven by scale and
technologies that are being
adopted in New Mexico across the
country across the world and so
I well I greatly respect the
pointy I have to disagree Mr
Chairman representative that the
caught it because what we see
are the costs for lower carbon
energy calling the energy costs
down that higher carbon
intensity just like Mr chair
representative overall with coal
and some of the other
energy sources have actually
gone significantly up and driven
those energy sources out of
markets in New Mexico and out of
markets in the United States and
out of markets in the world Mr
Chairman representative so.
Respectfully I I'm I'm think we
need to put that out there Mr
chair representative.
Very happy doing by Missy Lee
and others to comment on the
temperatures.
But as I will engage it earlier
Mr Chairman representative.
As the global climate avoiding
the one point staying within
that one point five Celsius
degrees and warming is the state
for threshold for our
climate here in New Mexico
And across the world Mr chair
representative these are the
targets that are accepted to
keep us within that threshold
and so while we don't control
the world and and worldwide
emissions are just that.
By being.
At the level that we need to Mr
Chairman representative we avoid
going over that one point five
Celsius threshold and this again
I think Mr chair representative
is a very important place for us
to think about what it means as
we're talking about to stay
under that threshold and then
what it means to go over that
threshold because Mr Chairman
representative based upon the
observations of anyone in New
Mexico the evidence produced
University of New Mexico New
Mexico Tate tech and I miss you
and others including our labs
there are real effects if an as
we exceed that one point five
Celsius warming those it affects
Mr Chairman representative R. if
I may and look outside the
window here.
The disappearance of Conniff for
us for us and the mountains
outside of Santa Fe Mr Chairman
representative because they've
all burned up.
Representative those effects are
stretches of the Rio Grande not
just below elephant Butte but
then above drive for extended
periods of time depriving
farmers of water for their crops
depriving livestock depriving
everything of the most one of
the most essential resources so.
This legislation Mr chair and
representative keeps us at or
below that one point five
Celsius degree warming because
it keeps us at that fifty
percent reduction by two
thousand five and net zero by
twenty fifty with a ninety
percent reduction which is in
keeping with keeping us below
that one point five Celsius if
we exceed that Mr Chairman
representative The New Mexico we
know and love it won't exist.
Thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee
In regards to New Mexico's
impact on addressing climate
change I must point out that New
Mexico is one of twenty six
states that are part of the US
climate alliance working
together to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions across the country
half of those states for nearly
half of those states have net
zero targets themselves in near
term targets in twenty thirty so
as a group our emission
reductions our ability to
achieve emission reductions that
power is much greater than just
New Mexico along and in addition
to that the federal government
is stepping in to do it develop
policies so we are one of the
team that are working very hard
to get these emission reductions
to avoid the impacts just
described I Representative small
now is far as getting to the
twenty thirty target our climate
change task force has developed
a list of policies that may help
us get there we need to work on
those policies that I'm with the
public a little bit more with
include things like early
retirement of some coal fired
power plants which we know is in
front of us more renewables a
clean fuel standard which by
itself will bring us fourteen
point five million metric tons
annually and fewer greenhouse
gases hydrogen project as well
as
building efficiencies so we're
looking at a number of
strategies but we don't need to
go out to the public to further
develop these and move towards
rulemaking I must also just note
that market mechanisms have been
proven to be some of the
cheapest way to get emission
reductions when it comes to air
the air quality rule yes to
training program brought you
introductions at much lower
price than anybody could ever
predict and so what we're not
going to do that for twenty
thirty twenty thirty is all
about direct emission reductions
in the future will.
Have that option if we need it.
Mr Chairman.
Representative small.
I'm going to presume that the
answer to my question in spite
of that.
Restricted editorial I'm going
to pursue this the answer to my
question degrees Celsius was he
wrote.
Or.
Measurable.
And with that.
Mr Chairman.
Hi.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you Scott representative
Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative small for
bringing this bill you and your
group
most my questions have been
asked and answered greatly and I
appreciate that so.
Product that up a little bit
about the environmental
improvement board that the
promulgate the rules of the
greenhouse gas emission rules
who makes up that board can you
tell me.
thank you very much
Representative Mr Chairman
representative at Indiana the
members of the environmental
improvement board Missy like
Missy Lee can also address that
are appointed by the executive
from the state Mr Chairman
representative one of the things
I think were we've noted in.
The clean futures act is that we
set some clear guidelines Mr
Chairman representative for how
the environmental improvement
board engages in they're very
important rulemakings and their
very important work and one of
those ways Mr Chairman
representative
is the requirement to have to
hold these meetings with
frontline communities prior to
an ad.
The rules and and the.
Ation is developed so we we
ensure that they go out they
engage with frontline
communities as they engage in
this important work Missy they
do you want to add any
additional information about the
the environmental improvement.
Chairman just to know it is a
seven member board appointed by
the governor of the majority
okay which the state for no more
than four can be of one party
current board has a lot of
technical expertise including
folks from New Mexico tech and
consultants who worked a lot on
environmental cleanup some
immigrant for.
Great.
Thank you Representative and Mr
chairman thank you and thank you
miss easy for your answers
appreciate it.
Thank you Representative
Sarinana next up we have
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative small you you
made a statement earlier.
Not being able to control other
other nations and what and what
their policies are.
so real quick can we discuss
just briefly
which.
Countries outside of of America
let's just let's just start
there which countries are the
greatest polluters.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
thank you Representative
I don't have that list in front
of me Mr chair representative
what I would note though is
that.
A very important.
Although we don't control is as
we talked about the emissions of
other of other states certainly
other nations Mr chair
representative one of the things
that we can encourage and should
encourage our are the
investments the creation of jobs
the support for lower and lower
carbon intensity forms of energy
and so that's something
Yeah I would just say that.
So Mr chairman and
representative of small.
Many of my colleagues on my side
of the aisle if it tried to
engage in a conversation and I'm
I'm.
I mean I I know it's going late
and for the sake of time I don't
know that I would love to have a
conversation where I ask you
questions and you give me
answers to the questions I ask.
but if you're not going to do
that you're gonna find I'm not
going to be asking questions go
down my list of things that I
want answers to and knowing the
answers upright just provide
them I don't think that's what
you want I know that's not what
the what the chairman wants but
in reality we're trying to vet
the legislation.
And in trying to that the
legislation means run ask
questions all of them are going
to be hard.
Maybe inconvenient.
But.
I really do want answers to the
questions so
I'm gonna chair of the
information thank you that's
just fine Representative on so
if you have information you
don't need to.
In the affirmative question
answer you can just shared with
us okay that's great so thank
you Mr chairman and
Representative small the the the
largest polluters.
Are the emerging.
Third world countries.
From India and China and still
Russia still one of the big
polluters and and most of these
countries are not.
Agreeing to work.
With us.
And I I know you through the
The goal.
Trying to make sure that we
don't increase.
the temperature doesn't
increased by more than.
One point five percent Celsius
is this achievable is this
achievable first because I think
your answer earlier and I'm not
going to presume that was
actually answer it sounded like
earlier you were saying we can
achieve it keeping it one point
five percent of New Mexico just
at this I don't I don't believe
that's what you actually meant
where you answer the question to
representative Scott it sounded
as if you were inferring that if
New Mexico does this.
We will reach a we will keep us
keep the world from from going
up in temperature by one point
five degrees Celsius over the
period of time that were talking
about I don't believe that was
what you meant but it is when
you stated it that's how much
that's what it said I believe Mr
chairman.
And Representative small what
you're saying is this is the
goal we need to reach and if
everybody does their part.
This is achievable is that an
accurate statement of what you
are trying to is that the claim
you're trying to make.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Montoya so that
the three countries you
mentioned along with the
European Union the United States
and Japan are in that top six of
carbon emitter emitters Mr chair
representative and it is
absolutely as countries commit
and as we all work to do our
part that we will reach the goal
of avoiding the one point five
Celsius degree
not going over that increase in
temperature but Mr chair
representative it is very
important that I share that
reaching that goal helps it in
encouraging investment because
Mr chair representative it is
absolutely true and unavoidable
that the rate of increase for
investment in to lower carbon
energy sources is increasing
year over year.
Frankly month over month many
times supply chain disruptions
that have been noted across the
globe Mr Chairman representative
and so that
that the I think the the three
countries you mentioned along
with the E. U. in the US and
Japan is the top six matters the
rate of increase in investment
in lower carbon intensity energy
sources.
Is the it is increasing
incredibly fast and so that's
how we not only do our share is
you know Mr Chairman
representative in avoiding that
rise over the one point five
Celsius temperature but actually
how we bring more than our share
of investment jobs in support to
New Mexico.
So thank you for that answer
Representative Mr chairman
The key though is that I would
like to focus in on and not not
just.
As a representative Scott said
the the editorial the the Q. and
I'm trying to focus in on is.
We can't reach this on our own
and especially New Mexico.
And what we're finding is.
The three biggest polluters are
not are not participating in we
can't overcome their non
participation.
As a matter fact within the
state.
the Navajo Nation.
Navajo Nation of big portion of
their economy.
It's still based on.
On fossil fuel production and
fossil fuel
Transmission and.
And so I'm looking at that and
they are a sovereign nation.
And I'm wondering is it
necessary to reach this goal in
New Mexico.
That the Navajo Nation must shut
down to share power plant.
Shut down their coal mine shut
down the Navajo Nation oil and
gas company.
Over this time frame.
And I submit to you before
trying to get to zero in New
Mexico the answer is yes they
have to shut down.
If that's what we're trying to
get to in New Mexico.
And so I submit to you Mr
chairman and representative that
we are essentially.
Going to try and encourage.
Force control a sovereign nation
within our New Mexico borders to
do what we think they should do.
That's really an inconvenient
truth.
That is.
What will we to some degree I'm
already hearing what we're
trying to force other investors
who are invested in the.
Into into the.
Arizona public service power
plant that is located in outside
of current.
And so we're already trying to
discourage that so we're trying
to influence the way as we hear
over and over that sovereign
nation.
What they have to do but really
they have economic concerns.
And I would submit to you that's
why India.
China.
Russia are not participating.
Because.
They're looking they're weighing
economic concerns.
Versus.
climate concerns and they've
made the determination.
People die a lot faster if they
can eat.
People die a lot faster if they
don't have sheet.
If they don't have water if they
and and right now on the Navajo
Nation.
Mr chairman and Representative
small.
the numbers climb a little bit
but it just recently fifty
percent of the people who live
on the Navajo Nation didn't have
running water or electricity.
What we've seen.
In your opinion which has rushed
out ahead of us they're further
ahead of us and we and then we
are here in trying to reach.
Right carbon emissions as as it
has California.
And the price is not come down
we've made a couple of
statements about it being less
expensive that is not the case
in California and that is not
the case in Europe as a matter
of fact the numbers that I was
looking at just as I was
googling the price in of of of
electricity in Europe has gone
up two hundred and thirty
percent last ten years that's.
I don't know it's it's it's a
good it's a it was just a quick
Google I don't know if it's
accurate.
But I think that's why Mr
chairman and Representative
small that the questions by
leader Townsend and the
questions by Representative
Scott or about the modeling.
What what is the cost benefit
analysis and I would submit to
you.
And correct me if I'm wrong
right we I don't believe there's
been an actual cost benefit
analysis.
The cost benefit analysis to
what degree it's been is it
doesn't matter what the cost is
the benefit is we have to shut
these down.
Because.
The goal is a certain mission.
The reduction fifty percent by
twenty thirty which by the way
has to be changed within this
legislation in a five year
period from twenty twenty five
to twenty thirty.
That is a very high bar in a
short period of time and when
that's been done everywhere else
the price of energy has
skyrocketed.
So.
I don't believe in actual cost
benefit analysis has been made.
And I just think with as many
poor people as we have we're not
we are not India and we're not
China.
but we have a lot of poor people
in New Mexico.
And I and I believe it's a
dereliction of duty for us to do
anything that doesn't do a cost
benefit analysis what is it
going to cost people.
And as I'm looking at this site
you mentioned.
Of the electric vehicles.
I just purchased once again.
I can afford this so I I
purchased a the power boost pick
up that's not the echo those
that's the one has a generator
on I bought it because I believe
with what we've been passed in
the last several years we're
gonna have rolling blackouts or
brownouts it is essentially told
some of our members that we are
in because of what we've done we
are going to be facing rolling
brownouts so I want a generator
I can I just I I want to pick up
to pick up has a generator I
heard the stories in Texas that
when they have their brownouts.
For able to hook up to their
pick up and run it and it was
able to keep your refrigerator
running the heater which needed
electricity to be able to kick
on and off.
so.
But the average person the
average New Mexican.
Can't afford that and I make a
good income and I can barely
afford that and I'm looking at
this I'm looking at you saying.
Is there any consideration.
Any consideration at all.
To the other costs.
This legislation.
And so I'm I mean I I I do have
a question here Mr chair and the
question is.
Has there been.
There hasn't been but has there
been a cost benefit analysis as
to the cost.
To the daily lives of New
Mexicans of what is going to be
increases in the prices of.
Of.
Utilities and fuel for vehicles
because of poor once again if
everybody else can afford to buy
that that electric vehicle the
poor not going to be able to
they'll still have that old
vehicle and we're I think we're
I don't think we're planning on
taking away from them.
Maybe I'm wrong maybe that's
that goal in the end is to take
away their vehicles but what is
the actual cost benefit analysis
Mr chair and representative and
if there has not been one is
there even any intention to do a
cost benefit analysis in the
lead up to implementation of
this in twenty twenty five.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair thank you Representative
Montoya the adoption of more
clean energy has not led to
higher costs in New Mexico Mr
chair Representative Montoya
from the place that I come from
down and in southern New Mexico.
Where we have the
El Paso electric they've adopted
more low carbon energy and
actually gave credits back to
customers Mr chair
representative Montoya although
recently are.
Commission disapproved and did
not approve of the merger with
between PNM and having read
that far from cost increases it
affects Mr chair representative
more renewable energy look more
low carbon energy was projected
to give a credit back to
customers as part of that merger
which again was not approved but
I think that that is something
that's New Mexico specific
Mr chair representative as we've
noted the environmental
improvement board absolutely
does take cost into account.
During its rule makings and Mr
chair representative
Although it may seem
inconvenient the fact that
energy costs for low carbon
energy have declined whether
you're talking about energy from
the sun from the wind.
Other sources
those are the that's what we've
seen in the levelized cost of
energy and so Mister chair
representative that's why we see
costs going down more investment
flowing to those low carbon
energy sources and support in
New Mexico in states that are
more that are different from us
politically different sorts of
ways including in Texas with a
very significant increase
investment in renewable energy
as just one source of of
powering a more low carbon
future so that the costs that we
see in New Mexico Mr Chairman
representative associated with
lower carbon energy sources are
very competitive we I just noted
a couple examples on the utility
side where more carbon free or
low carbon energy result in
lower bills early support put in
the proposed lower bills for for
Public Service Company territory
and that is
what we expect to see that there
is a drive towards lower carbon
energy sources because it makes
economic sense because it
creates jobs as you've noted
more folks moving into your
corner of the world more folks
moving into many different parts
of New Mexico especially during
the last couple of years during
the pandemic New Mexico is an
attractive place for folks to
come.
I confess I was surprised that
the ability to invest in the
four corners area on low carbon
energy that we recently heard
You know I was surprised that
that was rejected but
M. that is what it is.
So hopefully that answers that
the cost is absolutely a factor
this legislation
Doesn't deposit it follows the
example here in New Mexico that
there is more investment in low
carbon energy sources low carbon
energy sources are the best way
to control costs for consumers
to support New Mexicans I just
expand briefly on that Mr
Chairman representative the less
efficient vehicle is under
standard the less efficient
vehicle as the higher the
maintenance costs the higher the
current fuel input costs the
harder it is for New Mexican The
New Mexicans are paying more for
their share of that
transportation.
Going to a low carbon energy
source and investing supporting
the rules with an H. B. six that
set that standard for New Mexico
are going to be in less
maintenance costs for New
Mexicans higher energy for their
vehicles for their homes and
although it's not the subject of
the hearing today we're gonna
see a budget that invests in
those lower income New Mexicans
supporting them and getting more
energy efficiency which we
talked about as one of the four
key economic ace to reach fifty
percent reductions below two
thousand five levels that's what
this legislature is poised to
deliver and are all of the above
approach.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative.
First off.
The there the.
Proposed we were told was going
to happen with PTA with the
investment back in San Juan
County.
and those projects showing up
here they they've not shown up
there's not even look trying to
locate them here so but and as
far as the I think you're
referring to the hydrocarbon
bill.
Just looking into that I'm not
so sure there's any jobs at the
end of that rainbow and San Juan
county either now that I've that
now that we've been finding out
more about maybe a state a multi
state.
conglomerate doing this I'm not
sure that we even end up with a
hundred and how parents our
county but that's a that's
another bill and I better get
off of the floor chairman claim
telling us talk about that.
And stick to the subject so Mr
chair and representative
that has not been the case for
others have gone out there other
states and other countries have
gone out there and put in
greater requirements the cost
has gone up.
Back when I was a we're debating
the closure of the San Juan
generating station.
I'm just looking into that we
were able to verify the sources
of California of the utilities
are rising.
Cost went up.
And so
I'm really just got myself and I
have faith in my religion as
well but the proof hasn't been
there for that's the proof has
just not been there every time
that that this continues to go
that we increase
the.
We increase the requirement for
going short term more lower
carbon or.
Renewable energy's if the cost
has has gone up not down in part
because they're still not a real
a reliable not down this road a
dispatchable resource for
energy.
And there's not acceptable it's
very reliable but it's it's not
acceptable as well so our our
our back of sources are being
eliminated.
So I'm I'm looking at that and
I'm looking once again.
We are.
Population in New Mexico.
We are very poor state almost
fifty percent on Medicaid.
That's a that's a big number
that's a lot of folks who are
living at a certain level.
Already.
And they cannot afford what
happened in California going
into in a ten year period of
time from the cost of a.
Kilowatt of power going from
eight cents to twenty eight
cents.
In a ten year period of time.
We can't afford that are I can
afford it others can afford it
but the poor folks cannot afford
that.
And so we're either gonna have
to switch that burden to other
people.
But once again there's fewer of
those people to share that
burden with about fifty percent
of the population we would have
to shift that burden to.
The other thing is reliability.
The reliability that members of
the from talking to some members
of my caucus have talked about
to them that there is real
concern that we don't have the
replacement energy in New Mexico
yet.
And so we are either going to be
facing the prospect of brownouts
this is coming from people who
represent PNM there's a prospect
of brownouts coming to our
state.
Or the other option which is
where California falls into
we're gonna have to purchase
electricity off of the grid
somewhere else likely
dispatchable likely not a
renewable source.
And in the meantime we're gonna
shut down our renewable source
here in San Juan County.
Well we're gonna have to go
outside purchase a much much
more expensive source to
supplement.
The the grid so that we don't
have to have.
Brownouts and that will reap
will cause there to be an
increase.
To people's utility bills.
One of the ways that you thank
you and telling those and I see
if anybody can go back and look
at utility bills over time those
utility bills have changed
instead of things that used to
be included in the right.
They have been changed to this
fear that fee in the past they
used to be all inclusive but to
artificially make the right
local.
That is been a gimmick that is
taking place but the reality is
the cost should be whatever that
cost is with those fees.
Once again you know that's a
personal issue to me so I'm not
gonna get off that once again
before the before the chairs
Chuy's miss to this particular
bill.
Representative Montoya I I
appreciate appreciate your
narrative I I would ask you to
be conscious of.
Mr speaker I don't believe we
have a four separate Mr Chairman
with a four session today and
I'm gonna tell you that's
correct we are coming up on our
our of this committee okay just
in the interests of humanity.
Okay Mr Chairman I I do want to
say though.
I look at world history and this
is going to be a statement not a
question I look back on world
history we've had the dust bowl
previously.
We have the ice age.
We've had the extension
extinction of the dinosaurs.
And none of it.
Is.
All related.
Maybe we can say the dust bowl
because it was Senator it was in
the last sixty years seventy
years maybe maybe somehow we
could claim the dust bowl but.
The effects on the climate have
and did not have to deal with
what we are claiming it has to
do with state which is what
which is much more production
of.
Also feels.
I don't believe we can blame
the.
Who knows maybe the dinosaur
farts were much worse than the
cow farts.
But.
I believe the biggest thing
which is the solar activity
which has been documented to be
very active over the last
several years I believe that has
and we can't discount that we
can't control that at all.
But there is going to be.
At some point.
The misery index.
For the people of New Mexico
especially the poor especially
the marginalized especially the
disenfranchised specially
people of color.
Are going to have a hard time
accepting.
They're Representative their
representatives and senators.
Pushing through bills without
any concern whatsoever.
What it does to their
pocketbooks to their bottom
line.
And so
I look at this and I and I'm I'm
gonna vote against it.
And I just know at some point.
They're gonna have.
It's gonna be too expensive for
them.
To have certain sources people
who are in in in in the
northwest or northern New
Mexico.
Who.
In two thousand ten or two
thousand eleven we have the
elect electric grid that went
down would not have been for
natural gas that would not have
been for that and propane.
These folks these folks would
have had.
What is it would in life and
death for them not just the
inconvenience and expense of
repeat replacing the food in the
refrigerator but that was life
and death.
And I I would suggest.
That.
Mr chair that at some point.
A cost a real cost benefit
analysis not platitudes not we
see investment not.
Conjecture but actual actual
cost benefit analysis needs to
be done.
Because I believe that is the
minimum that we owe to the
citizens of New Mexico and the
people who send us to Santa Fe
to represent them so.
Conason of time Mr chair that
concludes my discussion.
Thank you.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair sh I am I had
a long list of questions I think
a number of them have been
answered.
And so I think what I'll do is
simply.
Find some comments so thank you
Mr chair
I think that this is a.
Very valuable step that our
state needs to take and I
appreciate the bill being
brought forward for this
discussion I thank you as
evidenced by the lengthy debate
and discussion on this issue
From many different people
industry I'm different community
is R. as well is that.
There are still there are just a
lot of factors that really are
at play in this debate
one of the things that I have
been interested in Mr chairman.
Is how Colorado and California
proceeded when they have us read
taken these steps and looked at
different legislation and so a
few things that I.
Would prefer to see.
I'm so thank you Mr chairman and
Representative I would really
like to see a stakeholder road
map a pathway where sectors are
part of the discussion with the
department of transportation is
in is included in this and
You know other departments it
agriculture
so I would really appreciate a
fleshed out thorough.
Wrote.
and I think that other states
have done that because I think
that there are a lot of policies
and incentives that we need to
be discussing as well I don't
think I personally I do not
think that this bill is
sufficient with what we're
trying to do but I.
I agree with the value and.
Our mission our goal
So with that and with that I'd
like to you know just conclude
by saying that I'd like it if we
could continue working on this
bill as it makes its way through
the process I think there are
some inconsistencies that need
to be addressed as well as
further discussions with
stakeholders and so I would
really appreciate that
if if that can happen
Mr chairman
If it are you know is
appropriate at when we're done
with questions I would be
interested in making a motion
but I have no additional
questions or comments at this
time thank you.
Thank you I will come back to
you I do have some questions
myself.
Are there any further questions
from the committee before us my
questions.
So
it's been a very long day I
apologize for that I will try to
be quick Representative small I
think we have for the most part
Been very sort of thirty
thousand foot level on the
effects of this bill I would
like to ask some questions about
some of the language in the
bill.
small on the first page of the
bill in section two there Senate
Phoenicians in there is a a
similar so definitions and I
think it's section six
but they're also there are some
variations in the definitions is
that intentional is that because
the definitions are going into
different areas of law.
Thank you Mr chair
I would ask if we could have
deland from energy and minerals
how to answer that specifically.
Mr.
You.
Yes Mr chair of section six of
the of the H. B. six amends the
air quality control act in the
air quality control act has a
certain existing definitions so
when we were developing them we
worked to crosswalk the
definition so they were similar
but we made that the areas where
you see differences are because
of we were working in into the
existing structure their quality
control act.
And at Mr.
Mr chairman and I apologize for
it as Representative Dixon
talked about earlier we want to
continue to work through this
process going that we're
bringing together both different
sections of law as well as
really encouraging the cross
departmental and cross sector
collaboration that
Representative Dixon pointed to
and so for me as the bill
sponsor although not an attorney
I appreciate your highlighting
this area in us continuing to
work to see the best ways to
synthesize and have definitions
be the same thank you.
Thank you for that each three at
the top of page three
There's a list of.
Yes yes so the greenhouse gas
definition begins at the bottom
of page two the list of
greenhouse gases begin to top of
page three if I was.
Rafting this contract I might be
tempted to say including but not
limited to.
And I wonder if the current
structure with its very specific
list of greenhouse gases and one
exclusion.
If you for closed adding other
types of greenhouse gases.
Mr Mr chair of the including but
not limited to is not a
preferred structure in the New
Mexico statutes it's
As an LCS it's sort of direction
it's implied and so typically
the including the but not
limited to park it struck out.
In terms of how we structure it.
Mr Chairman thank you for that.
In the will further down on that
page under the definition
offset.
there is there technological and
biological means thank you I
believe the technological would
be the.
extraction of the carbon from
existing carbon in the
atmosphere is that correct and
is that I think the speaker
touched on this earlier the idea
of taking water out about the it
is that that.
He's hold our views on the
future.
Mr chair you yes that is what
one of that one of the things we
are referring to you know with
technological but as all things
with both sort of existing
technology
you know in areas.
CO two capture and there are
there are facilities to you know
in inject them but it's but
technological also is intended
to capture things that maybe
develop in the future.
Mr huge what is a biological
need.
That plane trees are is that.
Algae farming with this
biological mother Mr chairman
again trying trying to be open
ended here but investments in
forest restoration and forest
health import investments in
rangeland health and healthy
soils all have well established
opportunities to store and
capture more carbon and and
certainly all of those avenues
would fit under the under the
biologic means.
Thank you for that.
Nine the the I can be on page
nine.
It says the no later than July
thirtieth twenty twenty five
Department help Titian part on
crude import promulgate rules
there is a lot of concern
expressed about.
That being a couple years away
is there any reason that they
can't be moved up since is just
the beginning of the making
process.
Mr chair and that these are very
complex rulemaking efforts I
know from and it for many from
EMNRD's perspective and
certainly I can share this on
behalf of my colleagues and NMED
and I would invite Missy you we
did also offer comments these
take a lot of time there's going
to be a lot of stakeholder
outreach there's going to need
to be a lot of modeling analysis
sort of discussions and so I
think trying to move something
that's that that ambitious up
risk sort of undercutting the
quality of that process which is
why and I think you can see this
if you would go to section
Do you have that same section
and I'm looking at page.
Bear with me just one second I'm
looking at page eleven lines
fourteen to twenty one you know
recognizing if this were to pass
this year and we we don't want
to have folks wait there are
provisions included for the
board when they're in their rule
making to consider voluntary
actions you know taken by
sources sort of post effective
date and prior to because we're
looking to reward sort of an
issue given that have already
been announced and are under way
by companies like oxy and and
EOG that are looking at you know
taking near term steps to reduce
their you you know to do produce
there near there near term
emissions and so I think that's
how we endeavor to mirror at two
to line the two up and and to
not delay actions.
So Mister huge the.
The work that goes into
preparing for the rulemaking can
I presume that that work will
begin immediately.
Mr chair I'm going to ask to
defer to my colleagues over NMED
who are on the phone to answer
that question you Mr chair at I
think it's certainly important I
I look for you here in the the
HSD answer as well Mr chair I
think the answer is this simply
yes Mr chair with this work as
well as as the legislature's
work in other areas
There's a very strong
recognition that the stakeholder
engagement needs to continue and
expand and that the work is you
just asked Mr chairman needs it
is ongoing has to begin
specifically focus on H. B. six
immediately and and needs the
support to do the missing the
please answer from from your
perspective.
Members of the committee it's
our intention to get started as
quickly as possible to develop
robust role with extensive
stakeholder input and the
technology assessment emission
reductions testament that.
We'll create a role that will
withstand any legal challenges I
do have to say that resources
need to be obtained in order to
do this work and we are hopeful
that the executive budget that
will allow us to create the
climate change bureau or will be
approved at three point two
million will be essential to
getting this work done as well
as other climate change work.
Thank you for that moving on
page twelve the it in talking
about.
Considerations the code offsets
one situations that you're
you're traffic location of any
offsets.
R. the US Census.
Emission reductions that occur
in New Mexico or could they
occur.
Elsewhere.
Mr chair I think the H. eighty
six as drafted allows for
Offsets or or reductions to to
occur elsewhere but it's but it
directs the the I. B. when
setting its protocols about what
counts and what doesn't two
factor geography into it and you
might reach different
conclusions about the.
Appropriateness of trading for
example methane reductions which
we yield other benefits aside
from climate reductions in New
Mexico for state reductions of
CO two and other and other
things like that.
Okay there is a small Mr future
further down that on page twelve
under yes.
It was suggested to me that
said the word reasonable
modifying fees reasonable fees a
better word might be appropriate
fees.
I'm and then also in that same
paragraph we were charging.
The is to cover the reasonable
cost of the department to
administer the rules is it is
there any funding to enforce the
rules is that it says separate.
Issue P. D. on administering the
rules.
Again Mister chair I would that
turn this over to my colleagues
at NMED if you are there are
representatives are comfortable
and and and they can speak to
this particular provision.
Mr chair members of the
committee and Lara cats I and as
assistant general counsel with
the New Mexico environment
department at this point it does
fees included the reasonable
fees increase our for
administering the the
Representative rules that are
propagated State do not
necessarily directly include
enforcement in those that
typically is something that we
have as part of
are there are in a budget so we
that we deal with so that's not
specifically called out and
included in that as.
Thank you for that just you know
with disabilities toward it
something to consider
small most cats on the following
page it says that the fees
collected will be deposited into
the general fund.
Sometimes we allow agencies
collect fees to cover costs
mysteries remain in HSD is there
a reason these fees would be
deposited in the general fund.
Thank you Mr chair
briefly an answer to this Mr
chair the
I think the the sense is that
it's it's most appropriate for
the legislature to
retain its ability to
appropriate funds and Mr chair
Allowing the funds to go into
the general fund and you're
seeing the.
The emphasis on support that the
general that that the body is
providing through the budget
I think should help early
support that approach and that's
Mr chair just kind of been
practice including on and pass
legislation
Last year dealing with other
subject areas although there are
additional costs associated with
that the fees going to the
general fund and then the
legislature's taken painstaking
work to make sure that their
support from the general fund
for those.
Thank you Representative small
Is is perfect for Representative
small.
If you can handle it.
If you would like to ask the
question because it's I think
it's important
I would also like a brief
answers that's you know doable
can you briefly just touch on
how the claim future act relates
to and works with the energy
transition act.
Sure
thank you chairman the.
The clean future act addresses
additional parts of.
Of
the landscape in New Mexico
others sectors not only the
electric generation secretary Mr
chair and works with those other
sectors I think kind of in.
Con currently with the energy
transition act Mr chair
representative sorry Mr chair
than a long day for everybody
It.
With and not to the exclusion
of.
Okay sense also the.
There compliment complimentary.
Mr chair I think they're very
they are they they are
complementary they need to work
together and
I always appreciate.
You know feedback up in that
area but some.
Complimentary and we want to
make sure Mr chairman that.
Emissions reductions that are
part of the Energy transitioned
act absolutely count towards in
our part of the claim future
act.
Thank you Representative small
Mr future to the use of the ones
that.
The yes Mr chair I would just
point you to in the in the the
I. B. section of the and there's
actually an affirmative
requirement that in setting
limits the E. I'd be.
Consider the requirements other
applicables in Los so that links
the achievement of the limits
here in consideration of you
know things like the ETA OCD's
rules NMED's pools other things
like that.
Thank you for that my final
question is if.
The clean future act passes
signed into law.
In at some point in the future
we have.
In the ministration that's
that's not interested in forcing
the creature Act or the rules
made pursuant to it is there any
Forsman mechanism is is this
something that will bind
The future administration.
Thank you Mr chairman that Mr
fusion and Pressman's cats can
speak and or the secretaries in
more detail but we have roughly
on very much a compliance based
system in many of these
different areas
And so it will it will drive you
know enforce compliance I don't
know if there's any additional
pieces that Mr fuser miss cats
want to just.
Without the addition of a
specific
Specific counties for instance
Mr chairman associated with not
reaching some of the the
standards that might be in here
I'm believe that to be a
necessary but I defer to the
actual attorneys were part of
the acts.
Mr chair.
Members of the committee at at
this point there is no
There's no specific additional
enforcement mechanism that's
provided for us so it would be
at whatever would be available
to the agencies percent to
whatever rules were
were promulgated I and any legal
remedies at current movies that
were available and.
If there the rules are
promulgated are under the air
quality control act so those
could by the board so those
would be subject to enforcement
provisions of their quality
control act
however that's not the rest of
the
D. as.
The bills that are subject to
those that are part of air
quality control act would have
to enforcement mechanisms that
are available in that act.
And of course we would need at
the budget to conduct that is
were spent.
Secretary props.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to call attention to the fact
that the the statute the
proposed bill would
cover and report on and track
progress under a number of
different laws and statutes
across state government in
progress so everything from
building codes to the OCD rules
have been mentioned so there's a
lot here that has enforcement
our climate work in addition to
the specific yeah I'd be
provision of the NFL.
Thank you for that.
Thank you thank you all for
Thank you along the numbers
malls or anything like that
before I entertain a motion.
No thank you very much Mr
chairman today thank you for
that adding anything Mr small
however sensible.
Sen you said you want to make a
motion.
I yes thank you Mr chair I would
like to move it do not pass on
house bill six and a passed
without recommendation on the
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill six.
I'm a substitute motion to
table.
Okay we have a substitute motion
to table which takes precedence.
Motion fails so yes to table of
people in motion fails will
return to Representative Dixon.
Augustine can you take the vote
on tabling motion.
Quickly right beads are made the
motion I think I can check with
I'm sorry I guess in your little
muffled I can't quite hear that.
can I please get the name of the
representative Representative
Strickler thank you.
Representative Strickler is all
set to motion to table.
Yes.
Representative.
No to table.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Herndon.
No to table.
Representative one point.
Yes table.
Representative.
No to table.
Representative Scott.
Yes
Strickler yes.
Representative Townsend yes the
table.
Representative Garcia.
Vice chair our annual.
No to table.
No to table.
Five to four.
The motion fails no to table yes
there sorry.
So going back to Representative
Dixon your motion had not yet
been seconded review like to
restate your motion.
Certainly Mr chair I would move
that do not pass on house bill
six in the past without
recommendation on the House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill six.
Is there a second to that
motion.
A second Representative Ortez
seconds.
Well I think you take the the on
the do not pass on house bill
six do.
With that recommendation on the
committee serve for house bill
six.
Yes.
Representative the.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative earned.
Yes.
Representative.
No.
Representative.
That.
Yes.
Representative.
There were no.
Representative.
No.
Representative Garcia.
Shares.
Yes.
Yes.
I yes and for for now.
The motion passes the bill moves
forward without recommendation
of a like to once again thank
everyone they're still a hundred
members of the public with us
it's been a long day thank you
for sticking with us we are
urgent thank you Mr chairman and
committee.
Recording stopped.
