Mr speaker it not being eleven
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve oh one PM no
objections order Mr speaker I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended and that the
journal show all those present
in this morning session are
present in this afternoon
session no objections so ordered
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the judge has been
read in full of the pool subject
to revision and approval of the
rules and out of business
committee no objection it is so
ordered.
Members were gonna do a couple
committee reports and then do
house the one on third reading
we had an agreement with the for
leaders that rule eleven dash
twenty dash one or twenty four
hour rule will be suspended for
the duration of the special
session user objection to the
waiver of that rule or
suspension that rule hearing
none it is so ordered.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee reports hearing
objections ordered Cllr to read.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee team is
Missouri for House Bill one has
had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it to pass respectfully
submitted Patricia Lundstrom
chair.
Pass.
We are an induction favorable
committee report on house bill
one all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
I.
This is.
The committee report is not.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee to limits been
referred house bill two has had.
Important thing with
recommendation that it do passed
as amended and then it's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
this Martinez chair this.
Your introduction of a favorable
commute for House Bill two is
amended all those in favor
please signify by saying hi I'm.
Eight well this was named.
The committee report is about
to.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
This is speech move that we go
to the next order of business
third reading of legislation no
objections ordered.
In the summer calendars been
passed out first of that house
bill one.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo are
you ready on that I.
Could you please get me to that
point the record reflect all
action necessary for placing
House Bill one on final passage
has been taken the gentle lady
to explain it all.
Mr speaker and members of the
house I didn't before you house
bill one.
In the house bill one Mr speaker
in section one this bill would
appropriate two hundred forty
three thousand four hundred
dollars from provided cash
balances for the legislative
expenses of the first special
session that amount includes the
following ninety five thousand
seven hundred dollars for the
house of representatives eighty
seven thousand one hundred
dollars for the Senate and sixty
thousand six hundred dollars for
the Legislative Council Service
section tool makes general fund
appropriation to the executive
and judicial branches of the
pandemic bus related.
Legislation as follows one
million seven hundred thousand
dollars.
The regulation and licensing
to administer cannabis
regulation at.
Seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars to the department of
public safety for law
enforcement certification and
for roadside impairment tests
related to cannabis impairment.
For.
To the
state department for the
implementation of the pandemic
bus stops Act.
Five hundred thousand to the
administrative office of the
courts to us at.
Expungement of arrest.
And so the bus related offenses
Mr speaker I now stand for
questions.
Right the gentleman from Diana
Representative small thank you
very much Mr speaker Mr speaker
with the gentle lady from
Bernalillo you Mr speaker I
yield to the gentleman from sole
nana.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
thank you very much gentle lady
Mr speaker gentle lady
this this legislation for the
special session your legislation
Mr speaker gentle lady it
includes additional items in
addition to Mr speaker gentle
lady the items for simply for
running the the capital during
the special session correct Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Dona Ana yes.
Speaker thank you gentle lady
and Mr speaker gentle lady I've.
In in the short relatively short
time that I've been here been
through several special sessions
Mr speaker gentle lady of course
you you've seen a few more Mr
speaker gentle lady I would
choose that it's unusual to have
more than just more than one
item in the feet bill especially
during the special session.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Dona Ana yes thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
the it and actually as we look
at it we see Mr speaker gentle
lady that it's not that unusual
Mr speaker gentle lady
As we hear Mr speaker gentle
lady it seems like there's been
a few instances and I know
there's at least.
three during the time that I've
been here Mister speaker gentle
lady where additional amounts
have been included in the
special session so Mister
speaker gentle lady I wanted to
go through them briefly if
that's okay and see if
if you agree with the with my
characterization of these first
Mr speaker gentle lady in the
two thousand and seventeen
session and it in addition to
the session expressed expenses.
We restored funding for higher
education and and some other
entities Mr speaker gentle lady
do you recall that.
Mr speaker would use repeat that
again please sorry Mr speaker
delay as going on too long in
the two thousand seventeen first
special session we raced in the
fit in the feet bill we released
in addition to funding the
activities of the legislature we
restored of funding for a higher
education the Legislative grants
and some other entities that
it's saying there funding veto
is that correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman from Dona Ana yes I
definitely we call it because it
was related to education and if
I'm not mistaken it was about
eight hundred thousand dollars
so.
Yes about eight hundred thousand
dollars was be told from the
battle and then it was placed
into the special session.
House bill one Mr speaker gentle
lady that that was my
recollection as well and for
higher education you know we
were talking and and really in
the hundreds of millions of
dollars Mr speaker gentle lady
so and that far outweighs Mr
speaker gentle lady what we're
looking at today is that correct
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
from Dona Ana thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
and while
I wasn't here during this time
in the two thousand and fifteen
first special session Mr speaker
gentle lady it's my
understanding that four million
dollars was appropriated to the
department of health and Mr
speaker gentle lady three
hundred thousand dollars was
appropriated to the
administrative office of the
courts to address projected
shortfalls does that sound
accurate Mr speaker and gentle
lady Mr speaker and gentleman
from Donahue after if that's
correct thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady I know
that's kind of in the
neighborhood of what you're
bringing before this body this
evening Mr speaker and gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady also
in the twenty twenty in the
first special session as well
all recall we included funding
for census operations which of
course was a very important
effort that needed additional
work during that year Mr speaker
gentle lady different issue but
the same principle I put it
seems to me that you're bringing
before us here today Mr speaker
gentle lady
So Mister speaker gentle lady
we've gone through a few of
these examples.
It under Mr speaker gentle lady
would you agree that this was
under governors from both
parties
Mr speaker gentle lady this was
under
speakers from both parties that
sort of thing both seems like Mr
speaker gentle lady both parties
have utilized this tool when
that tool was necessary here in
the recent past would you agree
Mr speaker and gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman from don't
have that I've been in this
helpful for twenty seven years
and Mr speaker and gentleman and
members of this house both.
Republican and democratic
governance have utilized this
concept thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady it's
certainly one of the what the
evidence shows Mr speaker gentle
lady for different sorts of
issues utilizing the fee bill
what you're bringing to us this
evening house bill one to
address important priorities Mr
speaker gentle lady seems like
the the numbers you're bringing
to us this evening fall right in
line with what is been commonly
brought Mr speaker gentle lady
in the one extraordinary
circumstance that is in twenty
seventeen when the van executive
had vetoed the entire higher
education budget in addition to
the legislative branch.
It was a far higher number many
many many times what you're
bringing before this before us
this evening finally Mr speaker
gentle lady.
For the items that are in your
bill you're bringing to us this
evening.
the my understanding is that
these are contingent that is the
songs outside of the two hundred
forty three thousand for the
special session they are
contingent upon passage of
of other legislation house bill
in the Senate bill to be
specific is that your
understanding Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker and gentleman
from the only have yes it is
they are contingent upon the
legislation passed in it's just
a simple way in terms of we have
been funding in the budgetary
budget and then we have the
legislation moving on its own
and if that legislation don't
pass and we have a situation
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady that was my
understanding as well so all
right Mr speaker gentle lady as
I trying to summarize what I
understand.
The approach you're bringing to
us this evening Mr speaker
gentle lady has in fact been
used multiple times I think
looking at four times since two
thousand and fifteen in the
exact same situation we are in
tonight Mr speaker gentle lady
we're in a special session with
the house bill one that is the
feed mill and Mr speaker gentle
lady in order to make the
process sufficient clear and
transparent there is the
inclusion of of multiple
priorities within this bill Mr
speaker gentle lady
that has been done under when
this house has been under both
parties Mr speaker gentle lady
with governors from both parties
so we can really say in our most
recent.
History much of which members of
been in a here in this body
tonight that the tool in the
approach you're bringing to us
this evening falls right in line
with that tool and that approach
that's been use multiple times
before that I just want to make
sure that my understanding is
correct Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Dona ana all below what you have
expressed and have outline is
exactly items and things that we
have done over the years as
provided in the house of
representatives in reference to
house bill one and in reference
to special sessions that's
correct thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady make sense
to me it means the most
efficient clearer and quick
process Mr speaker gentle lady
drawing the pop process out will
spend more tax dollars lead to
more time in special session and
Mr speaker gentle lady does not
seem to be the way to go Mr
speaker order gentle lady your
approach seems to be the clear
way utilized by both parties in
the recent past to move forward
during a special session and so
I'm happy to support it this
evening thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady.
Thank you John is for the debate
the gentle lady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from Chavis.
Mr speaker gentle lady hi to
pull that bills for there were
other appropriations that were
made fun of we were getting the
bill passed and one of them had
to do with an impeachment
investigation which happened in
the two thousand eleven for
special session.
In the end in two thousand five
fifteen that was pointed out by
the Representative next to me
the appropriation was made.
For the department of health.
And also for the administrative
offices of the court.
There we go all the way over to
two thousand twenty.
The first special session.
That also had to do with the
census we were sending them we
were trying to back field as far
as education goes then in the
two thousand and twenty six
seconds special session.
We were dealing with the Corona
virus because it seems like all
the businesses in New Mexico
were shut down Mr speaker gentle
lady is that correct.
That's correct.
Okay I'm glad that we're on the
same page right there.
Mr speaker what are.
I'm one to pull up numbers to
run the numbers to find out what
it's actually costing.
And of whenever I ran the
numbers on this.
Special session the feed bills
which is supposed to be called.
Of.
Ninety five thousand seven
hundred dollars.
Goes to the house of
representatives with.
Eighty seven thousand one
hundred dollars.
For the Senate and for the
expense of the Legislative
Council is sixty thousand six
hundred dollars and that total
Mr speaker and gentle lady in
the people that are listening
out there comes to a total of
two hundred and forty three
thousand four hundred dollars.
Mister speaker whenever you go
on down and read to see bill
under section two.
We are appropriating.
One million seven hundred
thousand to regulation and
licensing is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady could you repeat that.
Yes ma'am I can Mr speaker
gentle lady regulation and
licensing.
We will be if this bill passes
we will be appropriating one
million seven hundred thousand
is that correct.
And to the department of public
safety seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollars is that correct
that is correct Mr speaker
gentle lady from Chavis Mr
speaker gentle lady to taxed Rav
four million dollars.
That is correct gentle lady.
Mr speaker to the ministry of
offices of the court five
hundred thousand dollars Mr
speaker gentle lady yes.
So Mister speaker whenever you
at those four totals together.
It comes to hold onto your
britches ladies and gentleman.
Six million nine hundred and
fifty thousand dollars six
million nine hundred fifty
thousand dollars.
Mr speaker less than ten days
ago whenever we gaveled down
taxed ribs thought that two
million was going to be
sufficient what happened in this
ten day period for that number
doubles Mr speaker gentle lady
can you explain that to me
please Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm going to try and hold onto
my britches while I tell you
okay I hope you do Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Okay so Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
The bill okay then in the last
session realize then pass.
Staff.
And secretary look at what all
was involved as the bill was
going through and the analysis
was being made and realized that
they had actually ask in the
last session for five million
dollars.
We.
House pool was only placed two
million dollars.
That.
All this language of what was
needed.
Which was five million dollars
request is now down by one
million dollars and the
appropriation pay me now four
million dollars and within that
four million dollars as you know
in running a business and even.
Should on HSD as you partake in
way to make something become a
reality you will see that as you
analyze what is needed.
More
items more structure structure.
So in house bill one thanks for.
One.
You have.
Compliance in.
That must take place you have.
All the time do what's that's
going to be put for.
You have also.
Technology so you have data
that.
That needs to be established you
have full time contract.
Business is.
Fees that's all.
Taxation and revenue.
I'm sure Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's not.
Given to you at this very moment
said so what is supposed to take
place as a result of this
legislation should pass.
The taxation and revenue
department.
Mr speaker gentle lady can you
tell me for the fiscal year for
this body is.
Which body the legislature
taxation and revenue taxation
and revenue the fiscal agency
start July first of each year.
So Mister speaker we have April
may and June three months left
in the fiscal year for the state
of New Mexico Mr speaker.
Whenever we're talking about the
amounts that are appropriated
from the general fund for
expenditure.
In fiscal years two thousand and
twenty one and two thousand
twenty two.
That's what this money is for so
we've got three months left on
this year and then the remainder
of it is going for twenty twenty
two Mister speaker whenever we
are also talking about all the
different.
Items that are listed in section
two every one of these has to
do.
With.
Recreational cannabis.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Whenever I'm reading is item
number two in section two of
this bill we if this passes.
Seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars to the department of
public safety for drug
recognition expert field
certification for law
enforcement officers in the
state and to develop or purchase
roadside impairment test that
are validated for testing
cannabis impairment Mr speaker
gentle lady can you tell me.
Thank you.
Will be in charge of the
department of public safety
doing that.
The department of public safety
Mr speaker gentle lady is that
the state police.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
department of public safety has
there is a New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy.
That will be doing the training.
Mr speaker gentle lady does this
include.
This sheriff's departments
located throughout our beautiful
state Mr speaker and gentle lady
both urban and rural offices
will receive training.
And then they will have the use
of train the trainer model so
that one member of the office is
whether their rule and will be
trained and they in turn would
spread that training statewide.
And Mr speaker gentle lady does
this include.
Municipal police as well.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes.
And Mister speaker how will they
be trained.
Who will do the training.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
training will be done at the New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy.
And so Mister speaker gentle
lady nine seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars is going to
train all of our law enforcement
officers throughout the state is
that what you're saying Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentle lady I was told that
the seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollars is sufficient
for both the training for the
products that is needed for the
training so Mister speaker
gentle lady.
I don't know who told you that
the I am very very concerned
because to me it seems like
that's going to be another one
of this legislative bodies
unfunded mandates that we are
putting on the backs of our
counties and of our
municipalities and of our small
towns that are located
throughout our great state and I
have great concerns there Mr
speaker so we are going to
develop or purchase roadside
impairment tests that are
validated for testing care
cannabis impairment.
That is an unfunded mandate Mr
speaker gentle lady whenever we
are talking about the five
hundred thousand dollars
appropriated from the general
fund to the administrative
office of the courts.
To address expungement of arrest
and conviction records for
certain cannabis related
offenses Mr speaker gentle lady
how far back is this going to
be.
Hello how many years in the past
are these records going to be
expunged as far as any sort of
clearing up anybody's record
generating if we can keep debate
to the matter at hand that Mr
speaker it is matter at hand
because this is five hundred
thousand dollars yes that is
going to be taken out of the out
of internet general fund at that
the taxpayers have paid into
gentlelady please don't
interrupt me I don't interrupt
you gently you did gentlelady
from Chavis would you please
keep the debate to the topic at
hand questions about the
specific scope and reach of an
expensive bill could be debated
with that built before the body
is not relevant to the hospital.
Mr speaker you through.
Yes challenges receiving.
Mr speaker I want to no no no
that the taxpayers of the state
of New Mexico want to know.
How far back we're going.
That is their money that is
being spent and there's concerns
out there because of the number
of phone calls and emails I have
gotten regarding this.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
The record show.
Five hundred thousand dollars to
the administrative office of the
courts to address expungement of
arrest and conviction records
for certain cannabis related
offenses this is not the bill
that talks about expungement so
we.
Well
when the analysis is done.
That's a question for the.
But yes Mr speaker and gentle
lady I could not tell you how
far back they're going to go.
If we gave five hundred thousand
dollars and it's not sufficient.
Perhaps.
Come back based on what has
outlined in the strategy that
has been developed regarding the
office of the courts.
Mr speaker gentle lady whenever
we are talking about this
particular bill and I guess I've
been called down so I have to
stay with what we are discussing
here just for the money is gonna
be going and how much it is all
of.
Six million nine hundred and
fifty thousand dollars in the
second part of the feet bill and
I'm looking back at.
What other feed bills have
addressed.
In any way shape or form I
cannot see where.
In acting recreational cannabis
by going ahead and getting them
everything all set up prior to
us even discussing this
particular piece of legislation.
It in no way in my mind Mr
speaker and gentle lady to the
past.
The bills that do have other
appropriations tied to a.
Does not fit with what we're
looking at here today Mr speaker
this is nothing more than a
Trojan horse and ladies and
gentleman.
I am very concerned about Fleer
we are spending this money and
how it is going to be utilized.
Mr speaker.
With that I have no further
comment.
Thank you gentlelady Mexico John
for San Juan Representative
lane.
Thank you Mr speaker religion
lady from Bernalillo kindly
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentleman from someone.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
as a as a new member of the spot
as a freshman Mr speaker
generated from Bernalillo I'm
hoping maybe that the gentle
lady can fill in some gaps for
me.
Would you kindly help me to
understand what the purpose of
the bill is.
The those that need feeding.
The man from San Juan.
It within the structure of the
New Mexico legislature.
We have a seat belt that last
the appropriations of various
policies and procedures that we.
As the Legislature intends to
put for.
And with.
The bill the funding.
That structure that goes with
that structure takes place.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo
so it seems to me and I I might
need some help there it seems to
me that the purpose of the bill
is to pay for of the Legislature
being in session is that
correct.
That seems deems necessary
within the structure of our
process in of legislation.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so for example of it
I think it's pretty common that
in a few bill
This this body will include
funding for the executive branch
and funding also for the
judicial branch is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that also involves the judicial
and the executive.
And Mr speaker gentle lady
and so I I do understand the
response that that we can add
other things in the bill but I'm
just trying to understand at a
high level.
The purpose of the bill it seems
to me why we even call it a feed
bill instead of an
appropriations bill I do think
that that that informal name.
Is important and it seems to me
that the purpose of why we call
it a feed bill is because.
as simple of we're simply trying
to.
Of find the funding to to pay
for the legislative session is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan you off correct and in
addition to that Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan it's
also.
The way says relating to general
appropriations.
And you mentioned the executive.
And so these agencies that
intends for these funds to flow
through.
To.
What is necessary in terms of
funding is all part.
Of the executive.
In the executive in charge of
all of these agencies so yes you
mentioned about the executive
being part of the state here you
go.
Mr speaker gentle from
Bernalillo so I am curious why
this dialogue so
I've noticed this bill went
through the committee I sit on
which is appropriations and
we've had some some level debate
already on this bill Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo has
there been any debate about the
expense of the house of
representatives as shown in
paragraph of section eighty one.
Mr speaker let me clarify are
you asking me if in the
appropriation committee if there
has been any discussion in
regards to the ninety five
thousand seven hundred dollars
for the house of representatives
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo essentially so either
in probation or on the house
floor of has there been any
questions around why why would
we find for expenses the house
that seems like an unusual
expenditure of is there been any
lining where along those lines.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo is there been any
line in query wondering why in
the world we find for the
expenses of the Senate.
No because I believe everyone
knows what it is you get your
per diem and mileage for coming
to Santa Fe to do the people's
work and you all know that so
you're not going to ask me that
question and Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo has there
been any enquiries around why we
would provide for funding for
the Legislative Council Service.
I do not recall.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I think that that
undermines in it it's my point
is the fact that there's been so
much debate.
Around wire these other
appropriations in section two
and there have been zero
questions about section one.
R. to me that seems to cut
across the argument that Hey
this is typical spending in a
feed bill.
It seems like typical spending
to me an appropriations bill or
in their in the body of a
substantive bill but if we're
talking about a feed bill.
The fact that there has been so
much dialogue on everything
contained in section two seems
to me to cut across the argument
that this is typical spending in
a few bill.
Do you disagree with that.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
from San Juan and the reason I
do is because the house bill
one.
In the in the title of the bill
it says making appropriation for
the for the executive and
judicial branches.
Also expenses for the special
session exactly what it's
supposed to do.
What you just mentioned to me
that the bill is supposed to do
executive judicial and the
legislative branch all right is.
In the title of this bill that
shows that is exactly what we're
doing.
Mr speaker gentle lady I would
not dispute that the rules allow
for this I would dispute that
this is a legal way to do this I
I'm not even arguing that I
think that this also is within
its its purview to do this I'm
talking more about the wisdom of
of doing feed bills like this
rather than either having a
separate bill for the probation.
For the underlying substantive
cannabis bill or including the
appropriations in the
substantive Canada spill Mr
speaker generated from
Bernalillo and and I would
appreciate
Understanding what the gentle
lady from Bernalillo as opinions
on this do you think this is a
best practice for this body
would you encourage us to do
this in future years when it
comes to crafting a feed bill
that we include substantive
appropriations for substantive
bills.
This.
If it deems necessary.
Mr speaker generally what what
do you mean by if it deems
necessary.
It is necessary that as we look
at the today show and we look at
the executive and legislative
and all.
The application
is pool the bill then so be it
it's.
Does.
Initial statements in regards to
the three branches of government
and.
What we have to do with that it
does.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo so it sounds like you
think this is a wise way to
handle if you bill.
Mr speaker.
And gentleman.
As I mentioned.
It deems necessary that just as
the gentleman from Dona Ana
mentioned earlier.
And he mentioned that at
different times different he is.
Do they just have.
We.
From the executive branch.
Also this judicial branch that
items be placed into the.
What is necessary in a special
session and so as you.
It is necessary to have it.
I'm.
In the twenty twenty one.
We did that.
We did.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo and I'll just be
completely Frank with you and I
realize I am a new remember but
the idea that because we've
already we've always done it or
we have done.
Such a thing in the past
therefore justifies doing it in
the future I have a difficult
time getting behind that
rationale and it seems like to
me what this body is doing it is
not a difficult thing to
introduce a separate bill for
appropriation is not a difficult
thing to include these
preparations are in section two
within the underlying
substantive bill so we're not
talking about doing something
that is that is it possible or
on reasonable but when this body
craft legislation that we call a
feed bill.
And within that C. bill we
include appropriations for
substantive bills that are
unrelated for too our ability to
fund the special session in my
opinion what we're doing as a
body is we are watering down the
purpose of a few bill we might
as well not even bother with the
feed bill anymore we might as
well just stick those probation
and some other substantive bill
that we come here to do the
legislative work in my mind a
few bill is a specific kind of
built a unique kind of bill in
order to be limited to simply
funding the legislature to do
its work while we're in session
and I believe the public
deserves to have a separate
discussion about the
appropriation for an underlying
substantive bills when you
combine these into one one feed
bill I believe were robbing the
public of that ability the other
thing that this does that I'm
troubled by Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo is this is
forcing the seventy members of
this body to choose.
I must choose tonight do I want
to choose the fund.
This legislative session.
And also vote on probation that
maybe I disagree with those that
are found in section two and so
when you couple those two things
together that are very important
concepts they're not related
section two has nothing to do
with our ability to fund this
legislative session so when you
couple those two things together
in my opinion you're putting
members in a compromising
position I do not believe that's
fair now with regard to section
two I do have a state couple
specific questions about the
four million dollars is going to
taxed Representative department
so that's on page three
subsection B. as in Bravo Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo are you are you at
that paragraph.
Section three of the bill Mr
speaker gentle formerly known
start page three section two and
it's paragraph B. as in Bravo.
I am Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo thanks for that so as
the body knows there this is
making appropriations for four
million dollars.
From the general fund to the
taxation and revenue department
is that correct yes Mr speaker
gentle lady can you help me just
understand why we're the number
four million come from why that
specific number.
Ms.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman from San Juan it is
the estimate given to us by tax
and ram and as I mentioned
before to the gentle lady from
Chavis that taxed who have
actually doing the regular
session did ask for five million
dollars based on the items that
The appropriation is needed for.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I'm aware of what the department
is requested I'm more concerned
as a representative of the
people and as we talk about
appropriated tax dollars about
what is actually needed to be
able to fill of the underlying
cannabis bill if it doesn't fact
pass.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo are you aware of how
many funded.
Vacant full time employee
positions the taxation and
revenue department had for
fiscal year twenty one.
Mr speaker and gentleman the.
Mr speaker gentle lady they have
forty nine.
Funded vacant positions for two
thousand twenty one Mr speaker
gentle lady do you know what
that equates to in dollars and
cents.
No could you please send me.
Mr speaker gentle lady so that
again there funded.
Full time employment vacancy
dollars that they had was three
point five million dollars.
For fiscal year twenty one and
so this body needs understand
that when this agency requests
for million dollars in order to
implement this program.
They already in two thousand
twenty one have three and a half
million.
In funded vacancies.
In terms of actual dollars that
they weren't able to actually
spend and yet they're requesting
another four million.
Mr speaker gentle lady can you
help me understand why there's
such a large vacancy in terms of
dollars yet they're they're
requesting additional four
million.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
someone could you repeat your
question please Mr speaker
gently from Bernalillo I'd be
happy to so they're they're
funded vacancy for two thousand
twenty one in in real dollars is
three point five million
dollars.
So that's money they were not
able to spend even though that
was budgeted to them even though
they have these full time
employee positions available and
yet on top of that they're
asking for another four million.
To be able to implement this
underlying legislation some
trying to reconcile these two
things they had three and a half
million the couldn't spend on
employment positions I'm
assuming that a lot of this four
million is going to go towards
hiring new employees and and
paying existing employees so if
they had a truck if they had
trouble spending the three and a
half million why are they now
asking for additional for.
Mr speaker.
And gentleman from San Juan.
Do you.
In our engines here.
They didn't spend that does not
necessarily mean that the
funding that they requested
currently fall.
This project this piece of
legislation that must pass it
needed to be implemented that
the four million dollars part of
it is going to go to what was
not done in the past.
Because you'll maybe you don't
know because you.
Yes okay money is allocated for
one subject matter and just
automatically put it to pay for
something else without.
I'm.
from the state.
Finance.
That.
Mr speaker gentle lady so when
it says implementation of the
campus act cannabis tax act and
that's that's language it's in
the feet bill.
so are you suggesting that the
expenditure to implement the
cannabis tax act is not going to
involved.
Payment for new employment
positions Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan that
that is nonrecurring dollars
full bill implementation not the
first salary
It's the implementation.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo Sir are you saying
that that that none of those
four million dollars are gonna
go towards any new employment
positions.
Mr speaker and gentleman the.
Actually and I mentioned five
million but.
It was six point eight that was
updated to streamline I'm
just so now we need four point
two million.
And that the state is offering
four million.
So.
That.
That was placed.
To save two million dollars.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo Sir are you saying
that the four million dollars in
a contained in this the street
bill are not going towards any
new additional employment
positions.
I'm.
In regards to
contract and project manager and
business in relation to the
implementation that's correct
not any full time employees
hired two tops and Revenue
because it is we.
Nonrecurring dollars.
Mr speaker gentle lady so.
Are you suggesting then that I
guess I'm confused are you
saying they're not going to have
to hire new employees in order
to implement the the cannabis
tax act.
I just mention that what I was
told that it was in reference to
because it's nonrecurring
dollars it was reference to
contractors being hired and you
talked about that funding that
did not get spend and if you
know anything about state
government they had a freeze
because of the pandemic.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
early I am aware of there being
a hiring freeze I'm not aware of
the hiring freeze.
Impacting agencies like it has
this one we have three point
five million dollars and funded
vacancy dollars such a hard time
believing that that three point
five million is due to the
hiring freeze but again I so.
And from so we we we can cut it
down that issue there will be no
new S. T. E. R. N. with these
funding.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo thanks for the
clarification I still do
struggle with the amount of
money that's going to the state
agency to implement this this on
a line with this legislation of
the cannabis tax act given the
amount
That that this agency already
has a hard time spending
and you know I I I will just
finish with just the idea I
think it's a bad practice it's
not best practice to of to
combine.
Into a few bill substantive.
Appropriations of substantive
bills I think that is deserving
of a discussion within the
context of the substantive bill
disappointed that's been
stripped out and that we are
trying to a taxes into the few
bill so with that Mr speaker
you'll back.
Through the Great gentlelady
from any.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
will the gentle lady from
Bernalillo please yield Mister
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Andy thank you so much
gentle lady Mr speaker so in
House Appropriations Committee
earlier today I asked the
question if there is precedent
for putting us something like
what we see in section two of
your bill into what is
traditionally called the feed
bill.
And I appreciated very much.
The chairwoman us Legislative
Council Service to provide us
with any examples of from the
from the past of where this is
been done.
And Mr speaker gentle lady we
were given a packet this thick
it's probably I'm guessing a
third of a ream of paper and
when I got it and I hello that I
thought oh my goodness there's a
lot here.
But in fact I I took time to
look it over and this is
actually a very thin record.
And it's not really on point.
Mr speaker gentle lady so we've
we've heard the chronology of
the years in which we had
special sessions and what might
have happened to the feed built
in some of those sessions in
just briefly review.
Mr speaker gentle lady in two
thousand eleven.
with the C. bill contained
an appropriation for the
expenses of an impeachment that
looked like it would occur
regarding a PRC public
regulation commission
commissioner.
Mr speaker gentle lady so that's
really not a good example
because this is a function of
the legislature to
to to do impeachments and so
this is really kind of in line
with with a few bill does is
provide for the expenses of the
legislature to do its job.
Going on the Mr speaker gentle
lady.
In two thousand and fifteen
another special session and this
is already been pointed out.
There were some shortfalls in
the budgets for the department
of health in the administrative
office of the courts.
And so the legislature used to
feed bill to provide some
supplemental appropriations so
those are existing agencies
doing existing programs.
And so the legislature moved to
help out a little bit.
We also have in the packet Mr
speaker gentle lady an example
from two thousand and sixteen it
was special session number two.
And actually it's a simple food
bills are traditional fee bill
that contains money to fund the
operations of the house the
Senate and the council service
for the special session so it
really doesn't doesn't provide
any justification.
For what we see here in in house
bill one the the instant bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
so they're not too.
Two thousand and seventeen.
And here we
The legislature addressed to
some vetoes that were done to
the general appropriations act.
And it was sort of an emergency
situation quite frankly I
believe the governor at the time
was making a political statement
of dissatisfaction with the
pirate Department and so the
vetoing of that budget meant
that the legislature came in and
basically restored that funding.
But that's not really
L. and apples to apples
comparison for today's house
bill one.
And then I'm going to look Mr
speaker gentle lady at the year
twenty twenty.
We had two special sessions just
in the recent past.
Special session number one was
really very atypical we actually
came in and reduced
appropriations.
We allowed for certain transfers
of funds to occur we reduced
operating budgets.
We extended the period over
which certain expenditures could
be made.
The fiscal train wreck about to
happen.
And then the second session in
twenty twenty Mr speaker gentle
lady it was really all related
to the pandemic the Corona virus
we had federal dollars flowing
in we had.
People in New Mexico needing
emergency assistance so that was
a true emergency.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
the the point of trying to get
at is this packet really does
not justify.
What is been attempted with
house bill one and its linkage
of potentially some data house
bill two.
So the point I made in
Appropriations today and I am by
the way I wish we have these
examples earlier they were given
to us we had our.
Appreciations meeting and that
we pause for a while this
information was provided and
when we met this just just got
your hands not time to really
review it in time for that
committee hearing I think we
could have talked about this at
the committee hearing.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady the the concern I have
here.
Is that by putting section two
into the feed bills section two
deals with the cannabis
expenditures.
is for one and I think this was
made a good point that the
public really wasn't on notice
effectively asked anybody if we
did a
Jay Leno used to do some kind of
pull thing on the streets people
walk by and we just anybody
what's the fee bill I I don't
think anybody would really know
the answer to that question in
the context of the legislature.
But people who follow politics
understand that that's simply
the bill that we use to fund the
staff.
Being here to fund the
legislators being here to keep
the lights on and but for
security and all those other
attended expenses.
So this is kind of a.
A deflection in our opinion Mr
speaker gentle lady and I don't
think the public.
really understands maybe they do
now maybe they've been listening
but.
We did a disservice to the
people of New Mexico.
In how this is been handled in
Mr speaker gentle lady also
believe we spent a whole lot
more time on this topic.
Than we ever would have if this
appropriation has simply been
placed in house bill to where it
really belongs.
But here we are.
The biggest concern I have
Mister speaker gentle lady is
that what.
This section to the feasibility
Ms to do.
Is not chair up.
A function of the Legislature to
Stephen be here to talk about
bills.
What this does is put money into
a whole new space or venture
enterprise governmental
functions whatever you want to
call it and that doesn't belong
in a futile the truly does not.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
I just want to point out to this
very hefty packet that we
received.
Of examples of feed bills being
used to fund other things yes.
Most of this put them thirty
nine pages forty pages and more
pages of just the budgets from
the special sessions they didn't
really need to be in here.
If we took those out we did in
fact have just a couple pages
and I could summarize it all and
have a page so I appreciate.
The time to express my concerns
I remain.
Extremely disappointed Mr
speaker that this is how we
transact business in the New
Mexico legislature.
This is not a good practice and.
I hope we never do it again
thank you.
For the debate the gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady.
From Bernalillo yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Thank you this.
Thank you.
One section to.
Yes in fact on appropriation.
Was.
More difficult if you will.
On to HB one in the interest.
Just.
John would you like to use a
Representative cleans microphone
there's preseason static in the
table.
So if the it's fine we have
unanimous consent for you to use
the microphone of your neighbor
on the floor you might hear you
better because it's it's for
static.
Mr speaker will try this one.
This is this.
To direct your attention to page
three.
One three.
With respect to seven hundred.
And fifty thousand dollars.
To the Department.
Public safety.
Why did you have.
Speaker and gentleman from Lee I
do.
This gentle lady.
Would you confirm for the bodies
at this is to try.
Law enforcement.
Purchase improvement test
equipment.
For.
This impairments is that.
The purpose.
This.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
formally.
So this
is just one question.
And that is this money.
Directed to.
Business.
So.
Researchers to perform the same
or a similar function Mr speaker
and gentleman from Lee that is
not part of this piece of
legislation this piece of
legislation said nothing about
where the money will go.
Except to public state
department of public safety that
would have the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy do the
training.
They will.
He is not part of this
legislation.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
you very quickly answered my
question.
Private business is going to be
left to their own devices and we
will have more of that
conversation during debate on
the bill thank you gentle lady
for your answer.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please yield the
floor Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Sandoval thank you very much
So again as a freshman I I am Mr
speaker I want to make sure that
I understand this.
So normally when we put these
things together.
Because it makes sense.
And the first part we're trying
to put money together to
basically Fe pay for our
overhead so to speak is that
correct.
This.
The lady from Santa and
Bonamego.
This.
Nation.
Is making appropriation
bills related to the term which
is a nickname for this general
appropriation bill is feedback.
The name.
Comes from the fact that we put
within the veil.
The staff.
The legislative part function in
part of the legislature.
In addition to that.
One I think it was lame
Representative Lane gentleman
from some one talked about the
fact that you have executive and
judiciary
we do in the feed them we have
all three branches of government
and today Mr speaker gentle
lady.
We have all three branches of
government that makes this piece
of legislation that is agenda
appropriation bill because.
It's actually appropriation
bill.
We just have the nickname the
bill because it pays the staff
and the podium and it pays the
mileage for legislators.
Thank you for that explanation
gentle lady Mr speaker so.
And then when we going to
section two.
What is the necessity.
Portion of this bill.
Thank.
The speaker and gentle lady.
Shows and demonstrates the
request that applies to the
judicial branch.
Executive branch.
Thank you gently you Mr speaker
so what it what is it and what
is the overall necessity like
why is cannabis and SSAT in this
bill.
The funding.
Piece of legislation related to
the bus is in the bill.
Legislation of cannabis is not
in this bill.
Funding related by the judicial.
Executive sure.
And patients
that
come about that's what the
purpose of it is full.
Thank you generally first thing
that Mr speaker so the necessity
is or why this is necessary.
Is because of this giant bill
that I have here my desk is that
correct we're declaring that
marijuana is a necessity it's
necessary we have this bill it's
urgent we're in a special
session therefore we are adding
this section into here to cover
the expenses for more one is
that correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady from Bernalillo and
Sandoval that is of you'll
opinion if you'll opinion things
that I have this giant bill on
my desk and then this is subsidy
for it is this then so is your
opinion.
Thank you appreciate that I like
my opinion because most of those
are Mr speaker and speak for a
lot of people in my district so
as we know let's just be really
volunteer pun intended
In this state what I have run
across from talking to the
people in my own district this
is a very heated.
Debate on marijuana there are a
big chunk of people that are for
and they're a big chunk of
people that are against it so
the people that are for the
marijuana would definitely see
this as a necessity I don't know
if that agree with that because
I don't know if they understand
that.
Their tax dollars are going to
be going out at six million nine
hundred fifty dollars so I don't
even know because I haven't
talked to them about this.
Because we just got this and
then there's another half of the
people who do not want marijuana
who would not see this as a
necessity at all.
So what I'm trying to make a
decision on this I have to agree
with.
My fellow people my caucus that
this would've been so simple if
we send align seventeen we just
what I've done and unanimous
vote we would have voted and we
would be done but the debate is
coming of whether this is a
necessity or not is this
necessary to be in here well it
comes down to the opinion.
Is this big bill necessary is
marijuana necessary.
I have to represent my people
and the matter what side of the
fence of the fallen pro or
against if they're forward
against it.
Should know and not at.
Eight o'clock at night.
That six million nine hundred
and fifty million dollars of
their tax dollars whether they
want marijuana feel it's
necessary not.
Is going out of the speed bill.
I think this would have been put
somewhere else I don't think
we'd be having this discussion
and like I said I think we will
edit and line seventeen we would
be finished with this bill and
this should be done but I'm a
really hard time especially the
first one because I'm here
because I really want to do the
right thing right I want to do
what's right for my people and
my people there are some people
that are for marijuana and there
some people against but now I
have no idea how they feel about
almost seven million dollars of
their tax dollars going for
something that they may even
feel is necessary to me like yes
I'm program want to think is
necessary but I don't want this.
And so now I'm here stuck.
Trying to listen everybody's
thoughtful discussions here on
marijuana and trying to decide.
Is this necessary sister
appropriate does this belong
here and it's a whole bunch of
opinions.
And it's frustrating because I
can't go to my people right now
and ask them I mean I want to
Facebook and I'm very happy with
this.
So I guess had we ended online
seventeen.
There would be no more debate it
just would have gone for we have
this whole other section of is
marijuana even necessary.
I don't know ask the people it's
very split and they're very
pending needed on it but I have
a really hard time and I will
definitely be voting no because
I will not put my name on
something were there seven
million dollars almost going out
the door that they're unaware so
thank you for answering my
questions I do appreciate but
will definitely voting a hard no
on this and thank you Mr
speaker.
Thanks for the debate the
gentleman from curry.
Thank you Mr speaker gentlelady
from Bernalillo plays you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from sorry thank you delighted.
generally I I don't have any
questions or make a quick
comment there's something that
is troubling me deeply.
And that's the fact that this
body eleven days ago.
Voted.
That two million dollars was an
adequate amount to stand up this
kind of this program the money
was set aside and house bill two
thirty was appropriated for
taxed Representative to access
those funds to stand up this
program.
Tonight the same body is
considering voting for six
million nine hundred and fifty
thousand four million nine
hundred fifty thousand more than
we said was adequate.
Eleven days ago.
If we have missed the mark by
two hundred and fifty percent
just on what it costs to stand
up this program.
I cannot imagine how far we've
missed the mark on what the FIR
is actually gonna look like.
When we adopt recreational
cannabis for the state of New
Mexico thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen.
Sure the debate the gentleman
Chaves Eddy and Otero.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from any.
Thank you ma'am
The point that Representative
He made was exactly what I stood
to make was that.
Less than two weeks ago.
We had an idea and voted on the
on the cost of this legislation.
And.
Today.
According to the bill being
proposed is gonna by a factor of
three.
But I I would be remiss
Mr speaker and gentle lady
And not reminding the body it
was about
Sixty days ago now.
We had a debate on the floor and
we talked about zero based
budgeting.
Whether it was good it was bad
and you know.
There was quite a debate on
that.
The people of New Mexico that
are watching tonight.
When they realize.
That.
We have a department.
That has forty nine.
That simple it's.
Funded so that they have the bar
capacity the budget
reconciliation capacity to move
three point nine million dollars
around as they see fit.
Within that salary category.
That's what yes.
Need great consternation as to
our budgeting process.
Now we have four million dollars
that we could have used for this
at this if that is the the value
that it takes but I'm really
worried that what we're doing
right now I'm your speaker and
gentle lady we're done so fast
we don't know what we're done
and we don't know how much it's
going to cost but we're gonna do
it anyway thank you.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Mr speaker.
Ladies and gentlemen of the
house and the public.
This piece of legislation.
Is the general appropriation
bill.
Is making appropriation.
Mr speaker and gentlemen and
ladies of the house.
It is always shown throughout my
discussion on this floor today.
That this bill.
Expresses the request.
Of the judicial system.
The executive and the
legislative.
All three branches.
C..
That.
Hello.
Mr speaker.
And ladies and gentlemen of the
house.
Is.
Given for this piece of
legislation.
However.
Mr speaker ladies and gentlemen
of this house.
We have.
Existing.
I am.
In this house today.
No.
That.
Doing that piece okay.
Thank you so much.
Research the fact.
And sent.
Thanks.
Use those precedents.
Within your case is what
happens.
As many of you mentioned has
been sacked although many.
I believe before I come to this
legislature in regards to the
fact.
That is.
And I'm not saying this is an
emergency we have established
and put into legislation.
That is required.
The full.
We.
Legislation.
School funding.
After this.
You today.
That this legislation would be.
We get.
The legislation.
This passes.
So.
Contingency.
When it comes to my previous
legislation and I'm looking for
money.
And I don't want to say
them the bill passes you.
What's going to happen but we
do.
That it passes we have to have
in place the administration and
what.
In terms of administrative
support the funding.
The
tension all the legislation the
one that is that this bill is
about.
Funding.
A piece of legislation passing.
Gentlemen.
Of this house.
You today.
Should.
Sure this past.
What the.
This.
Yes.
In the past we.
That.
We pass that piece of
legislation without funding.
The state of New Mexico I know
that you guys.
It is six point something
million dollars.
There is money.
What what is.
What is.
Well you know.
To make the justification of
Insurance that we as a state
we'll have implementation
procedures related to that piece
of legislation.
About the four million dollars.
As I mentioned.
The.
That show that we have session.
Hi.
The need was for six point eight
million dollars.
That.
Do.
Session full.
House.
No.
Exist because the bill did not
pass.
Two million
two million dollars so.
And today all you.
One four million.
In two million dollars that
would be lacked a lot of the six
point eight that is needed.
Ladies and gentlemen the members
of this house each one of us
with
all.
Know what we want and what we
want.
We
also know what constituents want
but
do you.
This legislation.
It's.
In the state of New Mexico Mr
speaker.
Will be one do not pass we are
on final passage of house bill
one the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Chatfield New.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes yes.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Those not close by vote of forty
two in the affirmative twenty
for the negative house bill one
has passed the house.
Gentlelady from.
I did vote.
Gently from Bernalillo.
Mr.
I also.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Mr speaker I move to the next
order of business introduction
of legislation no objections so
ordered clear to read.
House bill four introduced by
Representative Rehm an act
relating to driving under the
influence of intoxicating liquor
drugs or adult use recreational
cannabis addressing road safety
issues related to legalization
of adult use recreational
cannabis providing for testimony
by interactive video prohibiting
driving with certain amounts of
controlled substances or medical
lights in the blood amending the
requirements for testing the
blood of a person suspected of
operating motor vehicle while
under the influence of
intoxicating liquors or drugs
providing that certain medical
professionals are authorized to
withdraw blood the performance
of the chemical blood tests for
driving a motor vehicle or
operating a motor pool motor
boat under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs.
Clarifying that the chemical
blood tests may be used maybe
for drugs or alcohol providing
for implied consent to a
laboratory analysis appearance
by video.
Providing that the ignition
interlock requirement only
applies to the fenders with
alcohol concentration in their
blood or breath House Bill for.
House Bill for having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House joint resolution one
introduced by Representative
Townsend and Rod Montoya a joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to article four
section six of the constitution
of New Mexico to prohibit the
calling of a special session of
the legislature within ninety
days if each of the adjournment
of a regular session of the
legislature unless a public
health emergency natural
disaster or fiscal crisis has
been declared by the governor
house joint resolution one as
joint resolution one having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
I move that we go to.
This.
Hearing objections so ordered
are there any nonsense.
Journalist Bernalillo and
Sandoval Mr speaker your rules
committee will meet tomorrow
fifteen minutes following the
floor session.
Members take note.
I did get a couple of questions
about the ability to consider of
constitutional amendments during
our special session I myself
have been under the impression
that the constitution allows and
special sessions
that is not the case
unfortunately they can be done
during the thirty day session
but for special sessions even
resin drivers Lucians are only
allowed if they are on the
governor's proclamation.
are there any other
announcements.
Okay so is there an announcement
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
It is.
Okay there's a so you can be
sure the gentle lady can be
heard on live in other chamber
gentlelady are you announcing a
meeting of the Judiciary
Committee.
I.
Mr speaker.
And what time is that going.
This is.
And generally see fifteen
minutes.
Okay.
Fifteen.
Fifteen minutes after the after
the a gentleman for session so
let's let's call it a forty
five.
Eight.
You are there any other
nonsense.
Okay we will not be back on the
floor this evening so everyone
who's not a member of House
Judiciary you were done for the
day.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until nine AM to
more funding thank you members
thank you for your work today.
folks watching from home please
tune in to the house Judiciary
Committee and let's just dot
gov.
Just receiving stay safe for the
mask that houses a recess until
nine AM tomorrow.
