Morning everyone and happy pi
day it's three point one four
Representative Chandler.
Here.
Representative Dixon.
There.
Representative Ferrary.
Here thank you Representative
Montoya.
Here thank you Representative
Ortez here.
Representative Sarinana here.
Representative Scott there.
Representative Strickler your.
Representative Townsend Here.
Vice chair Stansbury air.
And chairman the queen.
Here thank you we have a quorum.
Thank you Shelly.
Are there any other questions or
comments from the committee
before we get started.
This is the days of the session
coming running short we do have
a scheduled meeting on Tuesday
we have to bill so far it's
possible if we get more
referrals we will add to that.
We one more scheduled meeting
after that that the Thursday.
and if need be we will schedule
emergency meetings if you will
we need to handle any other
bills.
And with that I think we're
ready to begin Senator McKenna
are you ready.
Good morning chairman yes I am
take it away thank you.
Okay.
Presentation that we're gonna do
the Paul that review the public
comments Senator McKenna.
Very good well thank you
chairman and thank you good
morning committee members
I'm pleased to join you to share
SB thirty two with you as
amended the wildlife
conservation and public safety
act.
I am a co sponsor with this
legislation with Senator
Gonzales.
And Representative Chandler
McQueen.
I have supported this
legislation for years
understand before I have the
have the honor to serve as our
as a state legislator I served
as a citizen lobbyist and offer
testimony.
Over the course of many years
why our state needs to outlaw
the use of leg hold traps snares
which are usually caught the
card around the neck and poisons
on our public lands.
A few years ago as that system
this I purchased a late call
trapped at a New Mexico retailer
for less than twenty dollars
that is the same price for the
trapping permit in our state.
I'm not a weekly but I cannot
open it without carefully using
my feet.
R. now imagine having to do that
and you are in a high stress
circumstance trying to free your
dog cat or yourself.
If something is caught by local
traps near or exposed to sodium
cyanide the pain is severe
injuries include broken bones
sever tendons deep cuts
dislocated joints broken teeth
permanent maiming and more often
than not death.
Many non target wildlife species
are maimed and succumb to their
injuries due to the late cold
snaps the snares and the sodium
cyanide which are the M. forty
fours with that are used by the
USDA wildlife services.
Those non target species
including dogs cats raccoons
Mexican gray wolves which are
supposed to be protected under
the Endangered Species Act
skunks deer elk and others.
A few years ago I did visit the
USDA wildlife services office in
Washington DC the director was
not there but the W. was and I
want to discuss with them why.
This country uses local traps
snares and forty four some
public lands.
And the W..
Since we talked maybe because
they work.
I knew at that time advocacy to
end the use of these these
barbaric devices would entail a
lot more time.
As a society we should not
condone these barbaric.
Devices.
And
As I said I'm very honored to be
with you this morning I do hope
the committee finds this
legislation favorable and
chairman and committee members I
do have a subject matter a
witness with us miss Jessica
Johnson she's available to
answer any questions you may
have thank you chairman.
Would you like miss Johnson to
make a statement or just be
available to answer questions.
Thank you chairman I welcome her
to offer statement if she
wishes.
Johnson.
Thank you as senator thank you
Mr chair and good morning
committee members my name is
Jessica Johnson I am the chief
government affairs officer for
animal protection voters
statewide and nonprofit
organization here in New Mexico
I just want to at first start by
I really explaining what this
bill does and what it does not
do.
So as Senate bill thirty two.
At prohibits all traps snares
and wildlife poisons on public
lands those tracks include at
leg hold traps the full body
gripping traps and cage traps.
This prohibition only applies to
public land which is a defined
term in the bill it does not
apply to sovereign Indian nation
tribe or pueblo land it also
does not apply to the interior
of structures that may be
lawfully sat on public land.
I'm.
The at the bill includes a
multitude of exceptions that
have been worked into the bill
as this legislation has been
worked on receiving feedback
from the state agency and and
stakeholders over about a decade
now the first exception is just
to clarify exception that the
prohibition does not apply of
course to any other type of
lawful hunting fishing archery
falconry equipment or any other
implements in hand.
the bill the prohibition also
just does not apply to birds
fish or any rodents that are
classified as for years so that
would be beavers scouts and
beavers muskrats and nutria us
when we're talking about mice
and rats this prohibition does
not apply to them.
I there's an exception for any
government entity to use any of
these devices to protect human
health and safety.
There is an exception for the
department of game and fish US
fish and Wildlife Service or
Conservancy districts to use any
device in the course of
ecosystem management which is a
defined term in the bill.
There is also an exception for
bona fide scientific research
another defined term in the
bill.
There's also an exception for
depredation trapping so
trapping with at the goal of
preventing or mitigating
I'm damage from wildlife to
livestock for example the
exception miles that allows the
department of game and fish or
its designated agent to use
nonlethal devices in the course
of responding to depredation so
those devices would include let
cold traps and foot and snares
it would not include the legal
body gripping traps or and next
nearest which killed by
strangling.
Further there is an exception
for cage traps in order to
protect property including
livestock or crops that are on
public land or to of course
recover your lost and died for
feral animals.
and the the bill sets out as
some at guideposts on on how
that would work and then finally
there is an exception for
trapping done by and and rolled
member of a federally recognized
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
when that trapping is done for
religious for ceremonial
purposes
before concluding my comments I
just want to
But we know that you know this
has been an issue over many many
years the department of game and
fish did undertake some
rulemaking for the first time in
a long time several years ago I
had these rule changes made a
very minor changes
including at new requirement
that anyone purchasing a
trapping license in New Mexico
must have at some point in their
lives taken a mandatory trapper
education course these rules
including that requirement
requirement went into effect
April first of last year so it's
been almost a year ago that
these rules have been and in
fact therefore you know every
trapper that is trapping in New
Mexico right now should have
taken that course.
However despite this I do want
to point out that the number of
negative trapping incidents that
have been reported publicly has
actually increased this trapping
season compared to recent years
we have not been informed that
any of the traps that caught and
nine dogs this year were
illegally sat in violation of
the new rules so in other words
the new rules did not prevent
the increased incidence that
took place the strapping season
and so with that I'll conclude
I'm happy to answer any
questions the committee members
have and I truly appreciate the
opportunity to come before you
this morning thank you.
Thank you Mr.
They were gonna put up a poll on
the screen we have quite a few
attendees today.
The poll will go up for about
thirty seconds and you can
indicate your support or
opposition to Senate bill thirty
two.
About ten seconds.
Okay so our support.
It is sixty two percent or a
hundred and ninety one
individuals and hundred nineteen
in opposition or thirty eight
percent.
Thank you for participating in
our poll we are going to do.
Madam we're gonna do thirty
minutes in opposition and then
thirty minutes in support.
Each speaker will have ninety
seconds to speak.
If you are.
Brief in your comments then more
the the people who agree with
you will have an opportunity to
speak so that's an incentive we
do not attack.
members of the committee either
for against the bills.
please be polite please not be
repetitive in there with there
will be a timer up on the screen
which you should be able to see.
and you will be needed at the
end of ninety seconds.
One final thing if you're on the
phone and would like to speak.
I think you press star nine and
that has the effect of raising
your hand on the zoom program
but and like I said we will do
opposition first so if your in
support of this bill please put
your hand down now and will come
back to you in about a half
hour.
so our first speaker in
opposition to this bill is Joe
Culbertson.
You read me Mr chairman yes.
Chairman McQueen members of the
committee my name is Joe Culbert
ranchers Harding County.
Hi and opposition to Senate bill
thirty two first of all the
target wildlife volunteer
danger.
Second native Americans are not
the only ones who need their
custom and culture recognized
and protected.
Religious and ceremonial
purposes are only part of the
custom and culture.
Many other people have been
hunting and trapping for
generations their custom and
culture is important to them
also.
This custom of trapping goes
back before these public lands
were made public.
Think carefully thought out
amendments could be crafted to
address this issue I hope that
someone on this committee will
propose such amendments thank
you.
Thank you for that we have the
chance but for.
Can you hear me yes.
This bill is not just a trapping
brown this bill is an assault on
rural New Mexico by California
style legislators.
Okay we're not talking people
next up we have Carolyn Nelson.
Caroline you're needed on your
end.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you now okay thank you.
I have a question worry are
concerned about the definition
of public land.
It is so broad it says public
land means and I jumped down to
the comments in a since state
parks in any county or
municipality.
Is that are we going back to
eighteen eighty five when it was
public land it doesn't say
County or miss this apology
lands it says any county is now
public land in the definition.
So does that mean my deeded land
is now public lands it's just a
very vague right there.
So we're not really in a queue
in a kind of period.
Will not your concern and
perhaps the Sanchez can address
that when we go back to how
about that that's very good
that's a big concern okay thank
you for that right.
Next up we have Kerry ****
Romero.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee Kerry
Clarke for more on behalf of the
New Mexico council about theirs
and guides we stand in
opposition to this bill because
a blanket trapping ban across
the entire state is overly broad
and unnecessary in two thousand
and nineteen the state game
commission at the request of the
legislature amended the trapping
rule after a lengthy public and
stakeholder input process those
changes went into effect in
twenty twenty and included a
complete elimination of trapping
and high use urban recreational
public lands such as the
Sandia's the organs and the
Santa Fe and Taos ski basin the
changes additionally included
increasing the setback distance
from trailheads for up to a half
a mile which essentially closes
down trapping to any hi use
hiking path in the state.
These changes addressed the bulk
of the concerns that have been
expressed by the urban public
over the years a sweeping ban
across very very rural public
lands that never see a hiker and
are extremely hard for the
general public to access is not
necessary and would remove an
essential management tool from
the New Mexico department of
game and fish.
Similar to how the department
utilizes hunters to manage game
populations the department also
utilizes recreational trappers
to help manage for bear
populations it is especially
important to realize that a
trapping ban does not mean that
all trapping stops trapping is a
management tool utilized by
every management agency in the
country all this bill does is
shift the cost burden thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have tried this Chilson.
My name is Travis yield one
sailor in New Mexico this bill
has quite a few problems the
legal aspect of it how can you a
you know basically discriminate
against one user group but not
the other based on religion or
race.
Also a large for now the.
The advocates that are distant
for use experts so are they well
up to that wall of biology
degree they all like managers
why isn't the department of game
fish called for the expert
witnesses they have for bear
biologist as well wired.
This is a fair you know problem
then why not ask all the
stakeholders one I just advocacy
groups that make millions of
dollars off of people's
donations.
I think it's.
Iraqi that you guys don't
console with biologists and
wildlife managers on this you
just basically go straight
Wallwork advocates are really
wish that you're if you're gonna
pass wildlife management start
laws.
And you need to console while
apologists thank you.
Next we have won the state amber
of.
Money you're needed on your and.
One you're still muted.
Okay Lonnie we're gonna have to
move on if you can't at yourself
and muted.
Okay next up we have fill
Martinez.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes.
All right well I'm in opposition
to this bill because yes
politicians are being are the
drivers of this and not the
professionals and scientists who
we entrust to make wildlife
decisions.
I do not know why we are not
using data to drive decisions
and allowing the professionals
who have dedicated their lives
to knowing animal animal
populations.
To make those decisions I would
argue that some of the people
a legislature legislators on
this meeting no far less than
the professionals who dedicate
their lives to that career
additionally I do not support
any legislation who doesn't seek
to provide some kind of middle
ground and honor each
stakeholders.
You so the last so I believe
trappers have done that for non
chapters in the most recent
modifications to the rules.
However I do not see any effort
to accommodate our way of life
our values our culture my
family's been trapping in New
Mexico since the seventeen
hundreds.
And this is my cultures in my
way of life that I'm passing on
to my kids.
I don't see that being
accommodated even though
trappers are accommodating.
Hi recreation user is.
Please let the professionals
while I professionals make the
decisions and Dr policy not
politicians.
Thank you.
Thank you for that before our
next speaker I want to note that
I have Representative is
Pettigrew and is still in the
queue and Representative has if
you would like to speak during
public comment you're welcome to
do so I would know that if this
bill passes to the house floor
you'll also have an opportunity
to speak then and you might want
to consider letting members of
the public speak now but I'll
leave that up to you.
Our next speaker is Colleen
paying.
Good morning can you hear me.
Yes.
Good morning my name is Colleen
pain The New Mexico regional
director for the mule deer
foundation I'm here to ask you
to oppose Senate bill thirty two
passing this bill would take
away important conservation
wildlife management practices
mule deer are facing a steep
decline in populations across
the west with predators being a
major factor of that without
trapping more predators will be
on the landscape which means a
severe impact to deer and more
which can cause negative
snowball effect to the entire
ecosystem I ask what would you
do to support the wildlife and
habitat needs of an increased
predator population the cruelest
thing that we can do to all like
this feel to manage them this
bill defy Senator tenants of the
north American model of
conservation including number
six sciences the proper tool for
discharge of wildlife policy
this bill would punish the law
abiding licensed and ethical
trappers of the state the legal
activities a lot on public land
should be made available to the
entire public not select
demographic groups calling
further divide on public land
users I ask you to consider how
the enforcement of this bill
would take place if it were to
be signed if the bill allows
permitted tribal members to prop
on public lands what happens if
the trap an animal not approved
by the permit I ask you to
consider the economic impacts of
trapping and how it supports the
department small businesses and
endangered species I please
opposed Senate bill thirty two
thank you.
Thanks thank you next up we have
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you chairman thank you
committee members as committed
to my constituents side I speak
out against this legislation and
I do look forward to the
continued debate and my
willingness just to put out
there my willingness to carry
members for anybody that would
like thank you.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very Mr
chairman thank you very much I
would rather hear from the
people out there that are
speaking in opposition and if
there is time left at the end of
this I would like to make some
comments thank you very much.
Thank you Representative as.
Next up we have Joel gate.
Thank you for the opportunity to
to speak this morning on toll
gate representing the New Mexico
chapter of backcountry hunters
and anglers we believe wildlife
management decisions in New
Mexico should be left the state
game commission and professional
biologist at the department of
game and fish last year after a
nine month public outreach
program to gain Commission
adopted a range of new
restrictions to reduce conflicts
between trappers of the public.
These regulations just wanted to
affect late last year.
We believe that all out ban on
public trap public land trapping
is premature and unnecessary and
we urge the committee to let the
new regulations have a chance to
work before adopting this
overbroad trapping ban.
Shopping is important as a tool
that is compatible with the
north American model of wildlife
conservation and this rooted
science based fish and wildlife
management wildlife management
policies and decisions should be
should not be dictated by state
or federal legislation or voter
referendums and ballot
initiatives unless requested by
wildlife managers we're
obligating as an organization
committed to hunters and anglers
to advance sound stewardship
policies are guided by science
over politics in motion and
projection therefore we remain
supportive of the existing legal
trapping policies that take.
Authorize managed by game and
fish please vote down just the
thirty two thank you.
Yeah we had to be Hughes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Debbie Hughes
executive director with the New
Mexico association of
conservation districts and we
oppose the bill we have called a
policy supporting depredation
control by landowners basically
this bill saying that the nine
dogs that may have been hurt
more important thousands of
sheep and cows and deer that are
killed each year by these
predators this is basically
going to be a state taking of
private property rights and
we're gonna read ranchers off
the land there already suffering
economically if you really care
about locally grown food as so
many people talk about now you
need about no there are also
nine million acres that are not
public land that our state trust
lands that needs to be shown and
the other thing is if we care
about equity why are we only
lady tribal folks.
Trump on their land yet none of
the ranchers that are out there
trying to grow locally grown
food we need to let that New
Mexico game and fish do the work
that they are doing with the new
rules and let them work adult
cultures already only one
percent of the population and
this is going to really hurt
agriculture so we just ask that
you vote no on this bill thank
you very much Mr chairman
members.
Thank you next up we have Stacy
Curtis.
Good morning Mr Chairman can you
hear me yes.
I am in opposition of this bill
I'm a fifth generation trapper.
And out of the line dogs caught
how many of them were on page
there are response in the state.
And also why is it only one
certain part of the public is
allowed to use public lands why
are you cutting out.
Certain demographics just so
others can have.
It's not fair.
We're part of the public also.
We have given given given in the
last year there's so many new
regulations that we have to
follow.
Given the chance let's try to
make it work before making all
out ban.
We.
Thank you.
Thank you next up we have she
asked the younger.
Mr chairman.
When he was K.
younger younger generation.
Sure sure from this point system
Mexico.
I propose.
Is Senate bill thirty two thank
you.
I have seen as seen above.
Backyard.
J. Knox chickens.
That we use is that we used to
it thanks to late for class.
We will need you know on Senate
bill and Senate bill thirty.
You know.
Young.
I'm again generation rancher
this.
Thank sure eight Mexico the last
this is.
Mexico and I have seen.
Thank you.
K. not checking Senator cuties
and activities in our backyard
in our backyard please vote no.
Please no no Senate Bill.
The two eighteen thank you.
Thank you thank you thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have Gary the state go.
Good to hear committee hear me
yes.
Thank you my name is turning
your last go I'm here
representing the national
trappers association for takers
of America which have members in
New Mexico and also the New
Mexico trappers Association
modern trapping is largely
understood by much of the
public.
Just do you said that that term
foot hold trap rather they it
was used as a label track modern
traps are much different than
what people imagine trapping is
one of the most highly regulated
activities that is allowed in
the outdoors it should be
allowed is highly valuable for
the reasons testified here today
wild life control domestic
animal protection state set up a
lot trapping have.
It significant higher cost of
wildlife control on wildlife
species and mystics species
number I did find a letter to
the committee on violations
which have been touched on here
today specifically section for
each of the proposed bill which
would allow only enrolled
members of federally recognized
Indian tribes nations and Pueblo
to track but no one else I did
find case law that this violates
which has been recognized but
the tenth circuit the religious
freedom restoration act nineteen
ninety three specifically the
sections outline in my letter.
The case in Utah very similar we
would oppose this bill.
Thank you except with Karen
Kaplan.
Schering your muted on your and.
You were I needed for a second
and then you got muted again.
Now.
There.
It we can hear you all not very
well but we can't hear you okay
I'm sorry my name is Karen Allen
I'm a member of the New Mexico
federal land council the Grant
County paragard American now
we stand against this bill this
bill is terrible for wildlife in
New Mexico.
In some of our elders will
suffer as they lose their babies
every year Carlos and other
creditors thank you for your
time.
Thank you we heard some of that.
we John current job.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning committee I'm John
Crenshaw president of the New
Mexico wildlife federation on
behalf of the federation I'm
asking you to table this bill
and allow the state game
commission to do its job the
game commission is the proper
body and it's flexible
rulemaking system remains the
proper tool to address complex
and contentious wildlife
management issues including
traffic.
The very competent Commission we
have now is utilize that
rulemaking tool just as the
Legislature has intended it to
doing mandated to do and
developed a deeply vetted and
they're widely debated trapping
role.
The outcome is the most
restrictive such role in the
nation it has been an actual use
for parity for months deserves a
chance to work but evaluated and
amended if needed in keeping
with the legislature's mandate
to the commission to create
quote an adequate and flexible
system for wildlife management
in New Mexico B. thirty two is
neither adequate nor fair
resolution what is much more
contentious social rather than
biological issue again we are
too lax Commission system
workers design and tribal this
bill thank you very much.
Thank you next up we have
elderly Ellery Tucker Williams.
Your muted I'm here at.
So we've we've authorize you to
speak on our system there you
go.
You need can you hear me yes.
Thank you thank you chairman
queen and members of the
committee my name is Ellery and
I'm the Rocky Mount state senior
coordinator for the
congressional sportsmen's
foundation testified in
opposition of Senate bill thirty
two over seventy thousand people
have signed an online petition
against Senate bill thirty two
and each of you however have
receded coalition letter signed
by twenty six reputable
organizations apples the state
and national level opposing this
bill highlighting just how
detrimental it will be to
science based wildlife
management if this bill were to
pass the department came into
his ability to utilize trapping
as a necessary and critical tool
in wildlife management would be
severely limited and would no
longer be able to rely on
trappers for their assistance
with population control data
collection depredation
mitigation our human wildlife
conflict resolution it is
submitted by trappers provides
information on overall
population numbers sex ratio age
structure disease prevalence and
numerous other factors that
influence the health and
sustainability of all wildlife
populations without attracting
community the department would
be forced to take person and
funding away from existing on
the ground conservation
priorities to continue these
basic yet essential data
collection efforts that the
trapping community is currently
paying the state to do while
I've management decisions such
as this must be left up to the
Department the body best
equipped to make informed
science based decisions thank
you very much.
Thank you next up we have Nick
thank.
Make your muted on your at.
Nick are you with us.
We cannot hear you.
Thank you.
What.
Hello.
Your.
I'm sorry.
I'm interested in supporting the
bill so my in the.
You are so we'll provide you can
go to support.
Next up we have national
trappers.
Can you hear me yes could you
please this Jon Daniel president
of the national trappers
association.
Chairman committee members thank
you for this opportunity.
Watch start off by saying at I
think it's a very commendable
that this bill does consider the
rights of the native Americans
and and there.
Need to per to practice their
religious activities that
they've established down through
the generations but also like to
point out that our first
amendment right.
Allows other people also
practice their religious rights
throughout the nation as well
and while some of those
practices more than originally
established by native Americans
is not limited to native
Americans and this bill
eliminates anyone is not Raul is
a tribal member order from
practicing their same beliefs
within the public finance in New
Mexico.
if we're gonna we're gonna use
it for half of this laminated
for all of them make it
available thank you.
Thank you except we have
Michelle frost Maynard.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Shoppach
Maynard making a big gap in New
Mexico what lowers we have built
thirty Q..
What it would cost in an illegal
track again and their legal
track betting trapping on
publicly at the Olympics
trappers that follow the rules
this will not stop illegal track
that by law non law abiding act.
The New Mexico department of
game and fish recently
implemented rolled on happen in
that creek regulations that came
alive we need to have time to
allow would be able to work my
family right in mile from our
nearest neighbor having been in
place yes another tool that we
have to protect our livelihood
on eight track player.
Two years ago with the crowd
calling project now I've been in
traffic what will be next.
If trapping so barbaric why are
we allowing one culture to
continue trapping why we
penalize another again walk with
caught by a criminal you that
and a legal track.
Thirty two will not stop act it
only hurt our families who are
trying to protect our livelihood
thank you.
Thank you we have to me Rivera.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning took me Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
Senate bill thirty two prohibits
the use of traps snares poisons
on public land these wildlife
management tools are extremely
essential to protect livestock
maintain healthy and vibrant
wildlife populations and protect
human and health and safety
these tools are not only
important to our rural
communities where our farmers
and ranchers often reside but
are also imported into our urban
communities there is inboxes are
real problem in the state and
often we have owners in fear
when allowing their dogs and
cats outside.
Because they're fearful that
they may get taken it is
important to know that the
remaining options like cage
traps are really successful for
control of coyotes and other
predators many research studies
have shown that have utilized
global traps and have shown that
they are safely available to
using capture animals without
causing damage.
That our culture community
relies heavily on trapping
efforts in rural areas to ensure
the safety and welfare of our
livestock just as it is
important to protect your
domestic animals it is equally
as important to protect our
livestock last year the reigning
mesa ranch lost half of its cap
prop to predation that's a
hundred and sixty baby calves
not coming home ever to their
Mamas please vote in opposition
to Senate bill thirty two thank
you.
Thanks thank you for your
patience without.
So that you there you go good
morning chairman queen thank you
and members of the committee I
am representing wildlife
protection of New Mexico.
I would be I am opposed to the
bill only because.
Currently though your expert
witness kindly stated that the
exception for cage traps is for
protecting doxing capturing our
feral animals there's a specific
allowance for their use as
deputation and seventeen eleven
four G. it says the use of cage
traps to abate damages caused by
any animal to property crops or
livestock.
Currently.
Representative McQueen current
statutes and administrative cold
I could tell you the numbers of
And may see nineteen thirty two
point six two point seven two
point eight and
NMSA seventeen two dash seven
dash point to.
Just as full of a host of
requirements for.
Reporting and controlling
numbers taken by deprivations so
so I would support additional if
it was amended to take away that
exception R. or and controls the
use of cage traps to abate
damages caused by.
To make damages you know.
Right.
Thank you we'll do one more
Lauren I think it was Patterson.
Good morning chairman McQueen
members of the committee lord
Patterson on behalf of New
Mexico cattle growers
association our membership
strongly opposes at the party to
the recreation community
conservationists sportsmen in
agriculture along with the New
Mexico department of game and
fish came together to create a
compromise set of rules two
years ago please allow those
rules to work New Mexico
agriculture operates on a
patchwork of private state trust
in federally administered lands
this legislation ties the hands
of current and future state land
commissioners for managing state
trust land for the best interest
of the trustees as a rancher
myself I own my grazing
allotments but I have to manage
for a split is state multi use
doctor this legislation but it's
the rights of one group of users
over another please consider the
rights of all users a federally
administered lands when voting
against SB thirty two the
newlyestablished game commission
rules yet thank you.
Okay thank you for that and that
brings us to the end of our
public just moving in opposition
to the bill so if you're in
opposition and you have your
hand raised please put your hand
out.
We had over three hundred people
watching the zoom.
and we had thirty people still
waiting to speak in opposition
but it's simply not feasible to
let every person speak.
so we're gonna switch over to
the thirty minutes worth of
people in support.
So once again if you're in
opposition please put your hand
down if you're in support you
may raise your hand now.
And we will start with support
in our first speaker in support.
Is Trenton small.
Here are needed on your end.
I'm in opposition of the bill I
just in lower my okay thank you
we have Charles W..
Charles you are also muted on
here at.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members.
If you support science you
propose just the so thank you
Charles server on to support of
the bill.
Okay.
He's got.
Okay
So we have zoom user.
So again we're we're on to
support
in the Mr resume user could you
please introduce yourself.
And zoom users come on.
next up we have moto.
G. Stallis.
Okay let's move on except we
have but Berkman.
Support.
We can hear you are you in
support of the bill yes I am
please go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman
commissioners I'm not in charge
of any professional organization
I'm just a regular citizen.
What are you and so many others
moved to the state many of us
moved here because of something
New Mexico really has going for
its beauty our public lands and
most importantly the wildlife
which roams our public lands.
Rapping skills are wildlife
indiscriminately bears foxes
coyotes bobcats jackrabbits
eagles owls all are getting
trapped mutilated and killed.
Depleting our state of this
amazing heritage all of us
because wildlife in reaches us
it reaches us economically these
animals are worth much more to
the state alive than dead.
Wildlife attracts towards to New
Mexico and attracts people like
me who decide to make it their
home this translates into
helping our economy and
therefore we all budget.
Wildlife also reaches us
hysterically and recreationally
culturally and spiritually we
kill our wildlife we diminish
our state and impoverished our
children thank you.
Thank you for that we have a
phone number ending in one zero
nine five.
Needed a need yourself on your
end and you could introduce
yourself that would be good.
Yes committee thank you can you
hear me yes.
Wonderful good morning my name
is Mary Catherine right I live
in a very rural area the court
county and volunteer with Sierra
Club and strap in New Mexico
when people reported dog being
traps to trap for you dot org
their email comes to me the
panic the dog screams the
difficulty opening the trap and
the loss of peace of mind and
reluctance to return to the
place that happened are all
common features of these reports
I also had to rescue my own dog
from a trap might leashed dogs
from a legal trap on National
Forest lands near our home new
regulations adopted last year by
an in game and fish would have
changed nothing about what
happened to us she and I were
both injured now I don't return
to that place in winter it might
as well say keep out because I
never wanna hear my dog scream
like that again some people have
had worse outcomes including
incurring veterinary and medical
expenses our experiences belie
the claim the traps are
selective and humane they are
neither please support SB thirty
two thank you.
Thank you next up we have Kerr
credit Clausen.
Good morning Mr chairman members
the committee here back faster
than Mexico wild.
As a boy I ran a trap when with
my Big Brother so I know a thing
or two about trapping I live in
a rural J. area adjacent to the
cars to National Forest did not
subscribe to the idea that this
is an urban rural divide issue I
see more more recreation right
recreations all over the back
country in every corner of the
state.
Trapping flies in the face of
the north American conservation
model for two reasons one of its
primary tenets opposes the
commercialization while I fell
to the public trust model also
opposes the one waste wildlife
trapping breaks both of these
rules I also think the trapping
doesn't fit into the parameters
the fair chase at which is why
widely respected within the
sportsmen women community.
To me this issue is all about
respect and reverence for all
the animals we pursue as
sportsmen women trapping is
nasty business anybody's walked
up on a wild eyed animals and
the label trapped for twenty
four hours knows what I'm
talking about all wildlife
deserve our respect and trapping
certainly doesn't give it to all
as an avid public lance hunter
and conservationist trapping has
too much of a risk to give a
black eye to sportsmen women's
reputations I want the court of
public opinion to view us as
ethical humane and respectful
previous support Senate bill
thirty two.
Thank you we have Gary the stico
I think we've already called on
Gary.
And I think he was in
opposition.
Hearing.
Then again I that is correct I
was in opposition I did lower my
hand so I don't know why happy
but yeah it it does weird things
so thank you for that next up we
have Brian.
Right if you could err teacher
self.
My name is Bryan monkey from
meddling in New Mexico my dogs
have been caught will a cold
traps and the I've seen many
labeled traps that are not
attended properly or placed in
public right aways or near
picnic grounds by irresponsible
trappers
please support this bill.
Thank you next up we have long
the stammer of.
Money you're muted out here at.
In here.
We heard you for a second.
Yes I was in opposition of the
bill.
Sorry my hand was still up okay
thank you on the next up we have
Michelle Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members I am the national
carnivore conservation manager
for project community and the
former wildlife biologist for
nine million acres of New Mexico
state trust land.
By the way recreation
encouraging prostrate state
trust land in New Mexico I also
come from three generations of
farmers at the PhD scientist I
state competently science
doesn't support legal trapping
as wildlife management modern
conservation understands the
biodiversity and ecosystem
health and function is best
managed by protecting natural
process season cycles trapping
is management is akin to
bloodletting as medicine
biologists might have once
thought trapping accomplish
something but we now know trying
to manage wildlife like cash
crops is harmful the ecosystems
the best available science
points to nonlethal methods for
was prevent livestock wildlife
conflict there affected targeted
and address the root causes of
complex unlike traps and poisons
nonlethal methods are safe and
thus do not require constant law
enforcement as a scientist who
is also studied human
perceptions related to wildlife
I can state confidently trapping
is not supported by the vast
majority of Americans New Mexico
New Mexicans oppose the archaic
practice by an almost three to
one ratio finally we don't need
science to tell us trapping is
wrong the unending instances
where the public encounter
straps is evidence enough please
support Roxy's law to ban public
lands trapping thank you.
Thank you next up we have John
Gluck.
Chairman yes.
My name is John block a retired
teacher from the university of
New Mexico and an avid hiker.
I wanted to wanted to tell you
that the first time I ever heard
the term collateral damage I was
in basic training in the army I
never expected to see an example
of that while hiking in a
shallow canyon on palm on public
land in New Mexico.
The sound I heard was a rustling
and hissing.
I look behind a fallen tree and
there was a young Turkey vulture
about two feet tall trying
desperately to for to fly and
break loose from a like cold
trap that tore at its ankle.
I rejected the fantasy that the
trapper would soon release the
emotion or and so I tried to
contact with my voice and a
gentle hand.
Eventually the bird did allow me
to release the the the trap and
it flew away unfortunately the
the the the cut was deep and
survival was likely very
unlikely but at least she had a
chance to escape the collateral
damage of a dangerous weapon not
that for her.
Thank you John.
Next up we have any Estrada.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of this committee for
taking my public testimony my
name is a D. Estrada and I'm a
resident of Dona Ana County and
I work as a field representative
for the endangered species
coalition.
A lot of my work is centered
around bringing awareness around
the Mexican gray wolf and
protecting this endangered
species.
Is one of the most imperilled
rules in the country and with
only eighty seven wolves in the
wild here in New Mexico they are
facing many challenges and traps
are a huge obstacle for recovery
efforts.
I'd like to present some data
since this was in are your
concern here in New Mexico forty
six Mexican gray wolves have
been caught in traps over the
last two decades eighteen of
those were injured for required
amputations and seven resulted
in death to put this issue into
context in our neighboring state
of Arizona we're trapping is
already banned on public lands
only for endangered whales have
been injured and tracks the
difference is this forty six
persons for the detrimental
impacts that tracks have on
public lands it's clear so I
humbly ask the members of this
committee to support SB thirty
two and help endangered species
and protect wildlife across New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you we have an make kero.
Thank you Mr chairman and
commissioners my name is Edward
kero I own a small farm in
northern New Mexico I'm also a
PhD scientist in the study
wildlife in both public and
private lands in both New Mexico
Colorado.
For my farm coyotes bobcats
foxes and other predators help
me out by controlling past in
particular there are vital in
controlling pocket gophers.
Gopher tunnels divertir geisha
Water you go first feed on roots
killing our fruit trees.
We've observed bobcats and
coyotes efficiently capture
gophers at rates of up to four
go first for our.
When we have a predator problem
we selectively remove it by
shooting at.
In my thirty years here I've
only had to shoot one problem
coyote.
With predators helping us we
waste water or should say
without critters helping us we
waste water money time and have
to rely and poisons to manage
gophers.
Trapping in my area has resulted
in a noticeable decline in
predators in a subsequent
increase increasing gophers.
I support.
Senate bill thirty two and I
urge you to also please support
thank you.
Thank you next up we have Eugene
stone Romero.
Can you hear me yes yes R. thank
you for allowing me to find my
comments first a trapping is
extremely cruel so there's no
need for any scientific studies
to show that's true it's simply
a matter of just six second just
because trapping is customary
for some people in the state
doesn't mean the trapping
practices should continue
slavery was once common views
acceptable however today is no
longer seeing that way third.
There is almost a limitless
number of ways that people can
pursue
it is far as earning income
trapping is not necessary for
anyone's livelihood endorsed the
bill deals with public lands
many people have commented on
this as though they're talking
about their own lands there's
nothing that prohibits trapping
on private lands so I strongly
encourage you to support Senate
bill thirty two thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Derrick Toledo.
Them all the insurance a the
impact that the chairman members
of the committee good morning my
name is Derek to little known
entire stable a best friend a
friend who live to love and love
to live like that when we were
wild and free.
She was a husky who meant
everything to me with the gather
every day like the native Calvin
and Hobbes until one day we
couldn't.
She went missing my family and I
search for her for days and days
because of reckless trapping she
was caught and that the case for
at least.
Three or four days and three
phone there she was more dead
than alive.
With small future waste name is
robin if she was here today
should make sure spoke of for
her to make sure no animals
through what she went through
thank you offer creating space
and opportunity for this because
robin and I support Senate bill
thirty two thank you.
Thank you next up we have David
Parsons.
Thank you Mr chairman and fellow
commissioners my name is David
Parsons I've lived in
Albuquerque for over thirty
years I have a master of science
degree in wildlife biology and a
twenty four year career with the
US fish and Wildlife Service.
I was a trapper myself in my
younger years on the family farm
but through my professional
education and my experience I've
learned that no scientifically
valid evidence exists that
recreational commercial trapping
Services legitimate wildlife
management objective or purpose
not for protecting big game
populations not for protecting
domestic livestock.
The best science shows that non
lethal methods to prevent
livestock wildlife conflicts are
much more effective.
species caught by trappers in
New Mexico are carnivores
which haven't evolved internet
capacity to self regulate their
own populations in harmony with
their prey species.
Some species like coyotes would
likely be less abundant if we
stopped trapping and shooting
them.
You just heard the statistics on
how many Mexican walls have been
killed or injured by traps I
just want to add that there's
actually no way of knowing how
many more Mexican walls have
been trapped by incidents that
go unreported with the evidence
concealed.
High time we stop this
unscientific and unethical
practice on our public lands
like support additional thank
you.
Thank.
We have Sallee ever.
Sell your muted on here at.
Okay we're gonna go on next up
with tearing necks.
Good morning chairman members my
name is Terry necks and the
deputy commissioner of public
affairs at the State Land Office
hunting and trapping access to
R. nine million acres of state
trust land is made possible
through an easement negotiate
with game and fish we recently
entered into a four year
agreement and are continuing to
work with game and fish to make
our public lands more accessible
for hunting community with that
said commissioner Garcia Richard
understands the majority of
injuries the state because of
dropping to about life and
family pets have been on public
land in fact the first dog
injured this season was on state
trust land well the trap was
placed illegally under the newly
enacted rules because it was too
close to no hi you didn't see
area the tribe itself was set by
a licensed trapper.
We believe all New Mexicans and
while I deserve safe access to
and while occupied public lands
in support the passage of Senate
bill thirty two ultimately we do
feel the decision whether to ban
trapping on public lands is the
decision of the legislature and
not closed door negotiations
between the State Land Office in
giving fish regardless of the
decision today we will continue
to work with game and fish to
try to ensure mandated signage
near live traps in better
management of trapping on state
trust land thank you.
Thank you.
We have Chris Smith.
Good morning Sir can you hear me
yes.
Chairman queen members of the
committee thank you for hearing
this critical legislation my
name is Chris Smith I'm here on
behalf of WildEarth guardians
and are thousands of members and
supporters across New Mexico I
participated fully in the
aforementioned stakeholder
process leading up to the new
rules that were put in place by
the game commission last year
and I came to the conclusion to
that process that a public lands
trapping ban with the
incorporated common sense
exemptions is the best solution
to the merry problems caused by
trapping in New Mexico.
it helps to mitigate the cruelty
the public safety issue the
equity issue where in a small
small subset of the population
makes public lands in accessible
and frightening for the rest of
the population and it also helps
mitigate the conservation
concerns caused by mass
trapping.
Thousands of native wildlife are
killed every year for private
profit on public lands these are
native species that engineer
ecosystems and make New Mexico
livable and enjoyable for
everyone and this is occurring
during the globes six mass
extinction event New Mexico
department of game fish does not
have a good handle on how many
of these species populations are
faring this paradigm needs to
fundamentally change please
support Senate bill thirty two
thank you.
Thank you next up we have to
Linda in Brighton.
I got our order my apologies I
think current on G. New Mexico
at.
Yes.
Warning chairman of queen a
committee members
I hope to have a good connection
because I live in a very rural
area my name's Gen Colin on the
wildlife and public lands chair
sos indivisible New Mexico we
strongly support the passage of
SB thirty two but I am speaking
to you today as an educator
let's talk throughout New Mexico
forty five years every year I've
told my students to appreciate
the wealth of our public lands
and public wildlife through the
study of conservation science we
explore other this for our roles
as responsible stewards of our
one of the parents I also
encourage them to and join our
great outdoors but at the end of
my unit of study I want my
students of the dangers that
they may encounter from traps
set on our public lands I can
still see the confusion
disbelief and horror on their
faces when they learn of tripe
traps on public lands so when
can I tell my students that it
is finally safe for them and
their families to enjoy our
beautiful public lands please
vote yes for SB thirty two thank
you for this opportunity to
speak.
Thank you next up we have Kevin
Bixby.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee members of.
My name is Kevin Bixby and
executive director of the
southwest environmental center
in Los crucis and I have spent
my entire career of more than
three decades in the field of
wildlife conservation in New
Mexico.
Start out by saying we support
we strongly support SB thirty
two
you traps are indiscriminate
there and I like to stay there
like land mines they catch
anything that steps on them you
never know and not only are wild
animals caught and suffer as
unintended targets but the
possible presence of traps.
The TIRS.
People from using public lands
for and taking their you know
enjoying those public lands so
the.
Basically making them off
limits.
But even if traps worked of
indiscriminate trapping should
be ended for ethical reasons our
ethics are evolving at one time
it was acceptable to inflict
cruelty on other people and
deprive them of their liberty
and lives for economic profit we
rejected that idea when applied
to our own species and we should
do the same for other species
wild animals should not be
subject subjected to cruel
practices a beach private of
their liberty and life because
it's someone's idea of
recreation or way to make some
money.
Thank you us as we strongly urge
you to pass SB thirty two.
Thank you I have a phone number
ending in six nine one eight.
You could find yourself in there
do for self.
Okay you are muted on your end.
And I I didn't know the code a
need that.
Okay.
Are you there.
You're on mute you're good.
Okay unfortunately moving on
next up we have Linda van
Brighton.
Hello hello yes Mr chairman and
members of this committee I
thank you for hearing me today
my name is Dylan Defense
breaking I am the current
president and canine unit leader
of tiles search and rescue I
have been involved in search and
rescue as a dog handler for
nineteen years of search and
rescue volunteers required to
search off road and off trail
areas both on private land and
public lands.
Those handling search dogs spend
fifty two plus days a year on
public lands training their dogs
so that when the call comes our
dogs ready to save lives to have
to risk the lives and health of
our highly trained dogs is
unacceptable to us due to traps
it makes us very nervous to have
to train our dogs in areas where
traps can be located and we
never know where those areas are
we are trumping through that
area and our dogs are working
through that area.
So we strongly support Roxy's
law and we encourage you to
complete to take that into
consideration
and please support Roxy's law.
Thank you thank you next that we
have Luciano we see on the Nino.
Good morning
Good morning Representative
McQueen and members of the
committee my name is close and
ending on and I'm a roll of
resident of New Mexico of New
Mexico at the end of county and
organiser with WildEarth
guardians I am here in support
of Senate bill thirty two I have
seen the damage of what tracking
and cruelty has done you're my
home this winter a pile of skin
coyotes were discovered by a man
taking and taking a warming a
morning stroll near the desert
of sign about that just now
about forty cables were left to
right in the desert on public
land signs of like what traps
were on each coyote showing that
there was no respect for
wildlife this horrific scene was
the breaking point for me
although dumping those coyotes
is a crime trapping and killing
and skiing scanning them for
private property private profit
is not traps why isn't and
snares are the most vulnerable
on public lands where they
should be protected our state's
reputation suffers because of
this the sound of that just the
incident is a warning sign to
New Mexicans and tourists alike
I am glad the other states other
seven states like Colorado and
Arizona then peyote contest but
is it is also time to
benchmarking on public lands and
is in it is also time for New
Mexico to join other states to
do the same I just thank you and
members of the committee support
Senate bill thirty two thank
you.
Okay I'm going to skip ahead a
little to go to David Clark.
Mr Clark your there you go okay
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Dave
Clark I'm retired colleges for
the state of New Mexico energy
minerals natural resources
department I live in Espanola.
My dog Roxy was killed in
November twenty eighteen by
strangulation in a wire snare
trap set by a licensed trapper.
In the BLM Santa Cruz lake
recreation area.
What I have to say is pretty
simple you've heard it before
here again indiscriminate
killing should be condoned in a
modern society.
People seem to understand this
intuitively when thinking about
fishing with dynamite.
Not so much when it comes to
setting legal devices on lands
that are open for public use
this boggles my mind please vote
yes on Senate bill thirty two
Roxy's Law and help make New
Mexico's public land safer for
everyone thank you.
Thank you for that we have time
for one or two more next up with
Jason Thompson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Jason
Thompson I'm here representing
the New Mexico veterinary
medical association and the this
is the time for the apps more
the people speak we stand in
strong support of the bill
and thank sponsors for bringing
it forward.
Mr.
Thank you Matt Mexico is Charles
fox.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Charles fox sentiment added
public lands hiker thank you for
this hearing and the opportunity
to comment.
Traps placed on public lands
create an intense source of
conflict.
Where none need exist.
Rapping is simply not practical
for public lands and it's not
compatible with cultivating a
Bible outdoor recreation
industry.
Arizona and Colorado band traps
in the mid nineteen nineties and
it has protected their public
lands for people and wildlife.
And it has benefited their
economies of we know that
removing traps from public lands
works after a series of
troubling incidents over the
past few years the Sandia ranger
district of the Civil Air
National Forest was closed to
traffic and this closure has
eliminated track a lady
conflicts in that area.
New Mexico would benefit from
the same common sense
protections statewide.
Thank you.
Okay and that brings us to the
end of our public comment.
For all of you who commented
thank you.
And for all of you who want to
comment and were unable to
either for or against I
apologize but just in the
interest of time we need to move
on.
we're gonna go back to our
sponsor and our expert if they
would like to add anything
before we go to the committee.
We lose our Senator.
So I don't see R. of Senator.
Okay
Chairman I she's rejoining right
now it's the panelists okay.
I think chairman can you see me
yes your back yes
a little bit of a technical
hiccup there.
Senator Woods you're you're just
for like to making comments
before we go to the committee.
I'm.
I I really value hearing all the
the expressions this morning I I
would like to defer to Mr
Johnson to talk about.
The use of of public lands
and I do want to.
Echo what a.
Another test of fire said about
the north American wildlife
conservation model and and
emphasize that unlike hunted
game species for bear species
targeted by traps snares and
poisons can be taken and
unlimited numbers.
so emphasizing on limited and
sold in commercial markets so
that's why.
The present use of trapping on
public lands is in
is converse and does not support
the the model.
I'm and so in the interest of
time chairman and committee
members I would like to defer to
Mr Johnson she can talk more
about public lands and I think
there's a couple of other
questions that she wanted to
address thank you chairman.
This Johnson.
Thank you senator and and thank
you Mr chair committee members
I'll just make maybe mention a
few things one just to clarify
there was some and talk about
the definition of public land in
the bill
so I just want to clarify that
what that definition says is but
it includes lands administered
by it various entities including
county or municipality so.
That does not mean that this
bill applies to private land
within that the county lines are
the confines of the municipality
were still just talking about
public land.
Owned by an administered by at
least by the listed entities in
the bill.
I will also.
Just briefly mentioned there was
some discussion about day and
indigenous religious rights
exception so I'll just point out
that and there is a tenth
circuit
K. that speaks to this U. S. the
oil gas and two thousand and
eleven and the court in that
case did hold that the federal
eagle protection act and
migratory bird treaty act do not
violate the religious freedom
restoration act with respect to
only allowing eagle feathers to
be used in religious ceremonies
of federally recognized tribes
so and that is the law that we
have here in the tenth circuit
there was a similar ruling in
the ninth circuit as well.
And I'll just you know again
clarify we're talking about
religious practices I have this
exception is not related to
culture it is relaxing its
related to protected religious
rights
finally
there was some discussion about
rock scene we did hear from
rusty's owner so I it is true
that the next more that was a
sense that kids Roxy what was
found in violation of and
Senator technical violations and
rules set and game commission
however I will note that
the trapper identified has yet
to receive any consequences of
from of that at the the judge
ended up dismissing the case
after ruling that and the game
and fish had illegally or
improperly seized and handled
evidence in that case.
and then Furthermore you know
the next more think kids Roxy on
even while it might have been
placed someone incorrectly I've
worked exactly the way next
years are supposed to and they
catch whatever comes through it
and they strangled the animal to
death and these devices are very
legal on most public lands and
so that is why proponents of the
bill are is really concerned
about and I'll leave it there
for now thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you
miss Johnson and senator McKenna
I think we're ready to go to the
committee and first up we have
vice chair stands for.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to everyone in the public
who came to testify today I want
to first say that I have
tremendous respect for all of
New Mexicos land based cultures
and traditions and that people
who make their living on the
working lands of New Mexico and
the first time that I heard this
bill was in two thousand
nineteen we had a hearing on a
Saturday morning and literally
hundreds of people showed up to
testify and I remember being
extremely moved by the testimony
both in support and opposition
because people came from every
community across the state and I
personally take these kinds of
pieces of legislation very
seriously and it's really
important to me that we look
carefully at the words on the
page and not just you know
ideas concepts you know rhetoric
that's been out in the public
sphere and really look at what
are the words on the page what
does the bill that we're
discussing actually say and how
will it affect you know affect
their communities and so Mister
chairman I wanted to you know I
asked some questions to really
clarify I'm looking at the bill
it looks like it's been
streamlined significantly from
the last time that we heard this
bill and I want to kind of take
some time this morning I know
the Sunday morning people are
tired propose you get through
this but I think it's important
especially for the public to
really see what's in the bill to
discuss the words on the page
and to really discuss some of
the potential implications we
heard a lot of testimony this
morning you know from different
perspectives ethics livelihoods
culture science personal
experience but I'd like to go to
the bill itself so I'm gonna I'm
gonna open up the bill I have a
here in front of me and the
first thing that I want to note
Mr chairman is that the vast.
Jordy of this bill is actually
exceptions to abandon we heard
some testimony this morning and
I have personally received
hundreds of phone calls and
emails asserting that this bill
is an outright ban on all
trapping and will affect every
kind of trapping in the state of
New Mexico but when I look at
the words on the page here in
this bill I see a huge number of
exceptions and so Mr Chairman
I'd like to kind of go through
some of these so
the exceptions in this bill
start on page four section four
and
you know the first as the
exception that we see here is
under section four eight which
it looks to me like an exception
for hunting and so it's the
taking of wildlife with firearms
fishing equipment archery and
falconry etcetera Mr chairman
and Senator McKenna and Mr
Johnson does this bill infringe
on the rights of hunters and
fishermen.
Senator McKenna and would you
like me to answer or I'm sorry
there you go ahead Mr Johnson
yeah I I have the bill in front
of me too and
As far as I know this bill does
not infringe and fishermen or
hunters but go ahead and add
more detail if you like miss
Johnson thank you sure thank you
and Mister chair and and
Representative Stansbury thank
you for that question so now the
bill does not infringe on
hunting and fishing rights and
while we did here a lot of
testimony about how there is so
much science to support the
efficacy of nonlethal management
the truth this this bill does
not in any way limit lethal
management
you know the most common way to
at to kill wildlife to take
wildlife is with a firearm and
that is completely
out of the scope of this bill
this is just focused on trap
snares and poisons.
So Mr chairman and miss Johnson.
It is well I guess we can get
into this and some of the other
exceptions you know one of the
you know arguments but I've
heard both and comments that
were made directly to me and
this morning is that this would
essentially make it you know
impossible for us to do any kind
of wildlife control I'm but this
bill does specifically exempt
hunting and fishing as well as a
whole slew of other wildlife
control methods is that correct.
I thank you chairman and
representative yeah in in in
particular Representative and
chairman the of.
Folks have been working on this
bill do collaborate with the New
Mexico game and fish
I think one of the last
committee was in twenty nineteen
and in fact
there is an exception for New
Mexico game and fish to use
I think it's section page five
section F.
so some trapping can be done by
the department if there is a
situation that requires trapping
so you know in for in fact if
there is a.
New Mexicans who has been trying
to deal with predation and other
means are not
Satisfactory they can contact
the New Mexico game and fish and
they can go out and trap so yeah
there are a number of sections
and really proud of the
collaboration that we've had
with New Mexico game and fish Mr
Johnson would you like to add
any detail to that thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative Stansbury so at
yes you know and speaking
specifically to the department
of game and fish there are
several exemptions in this bill
that and given the department
widely way to conduct or
facilitate activity related to
wildlife management including
some uses of traps.
Thank you Mr chairman so you
know going back looking at the
bill here I see under this
section or as you guys are
alluding to multiple sectors
subsections here that are
referring to so subsection C. it
says a government entity acting
in the course of its official
duties essentially can is
exempted from this band to
prevent or mitigate threats to
human health and safety do you
state that you go system
management conducted by the
department the US fish and
wildlife Conservancy district an
employee agent or representative
acting in the course of its
official duties is exempted from
this act and section.
Specifically calls out
deprivations trapping conducted
by the department for a
designated agents right so that
the department could use.
I'm I'm assuming a designated
agent could be a contractor or
or another department or another
partner so when I look at these
sections I think it's really
important to talk about this
because I'm I'm concerned that
that there is a broad public
narrative around this bill that
this bill bans all practices
under all conditions and one
does not follow follow the
science does not allow for
ecological management that it is
banning hunting and other legal
means our wildlife management
when I read the words on the
page I do not see that in this
bill and so I think it's really
important that we pull that up
is part of this public hearing
this morning.
the other set of comments that
You know I think raises
significant concerns and and a
number of members to raise this
at in the context of the
agricultural management and of
course strapping is used by many
of our ranchers and folks who
are associated with that with
the agricultural livestock
industry to protect animals but
I see here in this bill under
section half an exemption for
wildlife art sorry four years
for livestock management is that
correct sorry section G.
subsection G..
I thank you chairman and
Representative yet so those who
are
looking at what page where a
we're on page six
Representative is as reading
section G. the use of cage traps
to recover or to provide
veterinary care or husbandry to
a domestic animal or fair on
what is authorized by law or to
be damages caused by any animal
to property crops or livestock.
Yet so yes Representative been
chairman yeah once again there
are a lot of
exceptions so that those
folks who are ranchers and
farmers or even city dwellers
and they're dealing with a
nuisance animal they have the
means to contact New Mexico game
and fish and
and and remedy the issue Mr
Johnson would you like to add
anything to Representative
Representative Stansbury is
question.
I'm and thank you Mr chair and
representative Stansbury so yes
that that's right so in addition
to the bill the bill providing
an option for a ranchers for
example to work with the
department of game and fish
to implement trapping to protect
their livestock that day and any
individual can also use at cage
traps
to capture and remove and or
deal with animals that that are
causing damage to their property
including their livestock.
Thank you Mr chairman so you
know I I I don't know because I
am not a working rancher kind of
the full extent of how that will
change the operations of how
it's currently practiced but at
least the words on the page that
I see here in this bill is that
there is an explicit exemption
in this bill that allows for the
abatement of damages caused by
any animal to property crops or
livestock provided that the
damage that once the damage has
been abated the use of the cage
traps that shuttle seats so
my read of the actual words on
the pages that this is language
to enable our agriculturalist to
continue to carry out practices
to protect their livestock and
their livelihoods I understand
that there is widespread
opposition and our livestock in
ranching community and and I
hear that and I but I do want to
acknowledge that I do see that
there is an exemption in this
bill and that way.
The final piece I want to come
to is section H. we've heard
some testimony I've received a
number of emails at about the
exemptions in this bill and I'm
gonna read the language here
because I think it's really
important so this is subsection
age there is an exemption for an
enrolled member of a federally
recognized Indian tribe nation
tribe or pueblo when quote
trapping is conducted solely for
religious or ceremonial purposes
and Mr chairman and senator and
miss Johnson I did hear in your
closing comments a reference to
the tenth circuit but I think
that it's really important that
we may identify and discuss this
morning that federal law
protects American Indian
religious freedom.
It is federal law it is a
responsibility of our country
and our state to recognize honor
and protect the religious
freedom and the ability of a
federally recognized tribes and
their members to practice their
religious practices and so Mr
Chairman this exemption puts
this law and compliance with
federal law and the protection
of American Indian religious
freedom so I think that's really
important this is not about.
Protecting a you know one group
of peoples
cultural practices ideas this is
about compliance with federal
law and protecting the religious
rights and freedoms of.
American Indian tribes and
communities so I think it's
really important to highlight
that in this bill I'm finally Mr
Chairman thank you for taking
letting me take some time to
kind of go through the bill I
think this is an incredibly
difficult issue and for me I
don't take it from any other
stance than the words on the
page thinking seriously about
the implications for all of our
communities and I will vote in
favor of this bill this morning
because I do see that in this
bill there has been a good faith
effort to ensure that their
accommodations for serious
science based ecological
wildlife management to
accommodate our ranching and
farming community to follow
federal law to protect the
religious rights of tribes and
to ensure that we're striking
the right balance and our
management of our public lands
so I really appreciate the
opportunity and thank you for
the time.
Thank you by your Stansbury next
up we have Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator.
A couple of questions.
Before I get started is director
Sloan.
By chance in the
In in this room that I could.
ask question to with the support
of the sponsor.
Representative can you remind me
of what direct response first
name is.
Mr to media.
I don't I don't know but is
first name is laptop yet.
Michael Michael Michael that's
it.
Director Sloan if you're
available you could raise your
hand I feel to provide you.
It.
Okay so we do have time
available.
Senator McKenna.
The do you think objection to
including the arctic
infrastructure Michael Sloan in
the conversation how absolutely
chairman.
I know Mr Sloan I've been to
many meetings thank you very
much thank you for being with
us.
So Shelby has promoted him to
the panelists.
Representative Townsend at I
appreciate getting input from
our state agencies I don't want
to go off and unlike the Q. and
a with the director but question
too I think would be fine.
Thank you Mr chair landed on a
pile
Director some and Mr Chairman.
Senator.
Does the department have any
legal concerns about how to
manage your the provisions in
this bill.
Mr Chairman representative as
was pointed out in our FY are we
do have some confusion I think
over exactly how.
Section H. related to enrolled
members of the Indian nations
tribes or pueblos would be both
administered and enforced.
Thank you for that director
Also does do you or or the
department of management have
any legal concerns about have
your field personnel will be
able to enforce this bill.
Mr Chairman representative again
I would relate that specifically
to the we're.
Federal rules members of tribes
and our ability to enforce
that particular provision and
and check on that those
individuals in the field that
and whether how.
Whether that becomes profiling
those sorts of things there are
also some concerns related to
How that exemption interacts
with current statute in
seventeen one I mean excuse me
seventeen five one to seventeen
five nine which are trapping
statutes currently.
It's a little bit unclear I
think exactly how those relate
to in order the exemption exempt
them from all of that for
questions that none of that.
Thank you correct thank you very
much for that
Mr chairman and senator.
Many.
Federally recognized.
tribal chiefs.
Are there that would be.
the bill and on page six
H. is rules members a bait
federally recognized Indian
nation tribe or pueblo.
How many are there in the United
States.
Chairman and Representative we
have in excess of five hundred
nationally I'm part of a
federally recognized tribes.
So.
Madam.
Mr chairman and senator would
any and all of those be able.
And be legal to exercise their
trapping writes in New Mexico.
Chairman and representative if
they are federally recognized I
believe they would be and I will
defer for to miss Johnson if she
would like to add any other
detail to that.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative towns and yes
that's correct they would they
would be and just for some quick
context there are given year to
year anywhere from may need
seventeen hundred nineteen
hundred licensed trappers in New
Mexico I've heard reports that
this trapping season it's down
to something like fourteen
hundred and in the past about
thirty individuals have come in
from out of state.
But you're with the but you're
but the language in the bill
would not prohibit out of state
people from coming into New
Mexico is that correct.
Yes.
Representative thank you go
ahead.
Thank you well.
Senator.
There was a little bit of talk
about.
That depredation trapping would
be continued to be allowed.
In and and your bill it talks
about.
A live traps not let cold traps
is being used.
Do you have any science behind
the affected less of those two
different types of traps.
Chairman representative I can
offer a anecdotal experience and
then I welcome Mr Johnson so I'm
I'm from non building get and.
we have a lot of great wildlife
where I live
Near my parents.
And
one one of the triggers it like
to visit because my mom has a
lot of bird feeders and the like
are squirrels.
So sometimes we get too many and
so my dad will use a a humane
trap
and
And after it the score was
caught hello usually takes it up
to the waterfalls were it's
great there because there's
canopy of trees and the stream
is there
so that's my experience chairman
and representative of using a a
live trap and then Mr Johnson
would you like to add any other
details.
Sure thank you and Mister
chairman and Representative
Townsend you know I can I can
mention of the New Mexico
department of game and fish over
recent years has undertaken
great efforts
to really bolster their program
to relocate beavers for example
in order to enhance our wild
areas and and deal with are
nuisance complaints and so of
course they're using a live cage
traps there
when we go to the store it you
know anywhere from tractor
supply to home depot
you can find cage traps of
really commonly known brand is
have a hard you go to their
website they have cages that are
listed as for sale for you
depending on what species you're
going after everything from
bobcats to nutria and of course
at unit you know I could I could
shows photos New Mexico trappers
who are posing with their
coyotes and bobcats and and
caught in cage traps but you
know that contracts will not be
the only option for ranchers
again they can work with the
department to
to that conductor facilitate use
of like cold traps or foot
snares and then of course
there's always the old fashioned
firearm when we look at USDA
wildlife services when they are
I'm conducting their work in New
Mexico to kill wildlife take
coyotes for example their number
one weapon of choice is not to
like cold trap it's not even and
twenty fours it's firearms.
Well.
Mr chairman Mr John Senator.
My question really was do you
have any science between the
different effectiveness of the
two tracks are they able.
Equally able.
And and equitably supported by.
people in the business.
I'm chairman and representative
The question about the two
different types of traps is that
the.
And the and the leg hold trap
yes ma'am.
Are they equally effective
can can a person
to is and a depredation mode for
his or her.
I heard she'd for cattle are
being.
victimized by some of these
predators as as as they have
been for centuries well those
two types of traps.
can they be used.
Equally jam a person using a
live trap expect to be able to
catch a predator as fast at the
in in the same manner to stop
the degradation on is for.
Our.
Do you know then that's just my
question do you know.
Well I'm so because I'm not a.
chairman and Representative
because I am not a trapper with
the trappers Lysons in New
Mexico I can't tell you I'm out
about the amount of time
miss Johnson do you have
recollection about the the
amount of time it would take to
capture an animal in a leg hold
trap verses a humane trap.
Mr Chairman representative towns
and I I am not aware of the
studies that have looked at cage
traps verses like cold traps I'm
sure that they are out there we
can also look to data in
Colorado for example which has
banned traps snares and poisons
statewide since the mid nineties
however cage traps are are still
able to be used at to protect
livestock and they do so very
successfully Colorado's and then
last I checked a tent in the
country and beef production
so you know the restrictions on
it that trap devices and not
state have not shown any
meaningful detriment and to the
livestock industry in Colorado.
Well I was I was wondering and I
had a couple of thoughts on that
Mr chairman and senator Mr
Johnson is I have read now that
the
Some proponents and Colorado are
trying to and even the live cage
traps and in my thought really
was.
So.
Eight farms and ranchers all
across New Mexico which I am a
product of raised between Parma
ranch.
if we as the state.
Are going to start a process.
That.
Bye bye science definition.
Will increase.
There are losses of heard
whether it be.
you know whether it's a land
proper cross.
Do you believe that's a taking
under the law and shouldn't New
Mexico be responsible for the
increased cost because these
people are paying for the exact
same amount for this lease on
these lands they lease the land
under the understanding that
these methods that have been
used in New Mexico more
generations and that you
continue to allow on the or by
your bill on
On some lands.
Is taking in your in your mind
is that just something that the
state should.
Be responsible for.
Townsend on that point yes
please Mr Chairman
Representative Townsend my legal
point of view it's nowhere close
to take.
I appreciate that.
The.
Senator do you agree.
Chairman and Representative.
Are using the word taking T. A.
K. I. Angie I'm.
My point is Senator yes the
state ends instead to a rural.
That causes a person to be
harmed financially should the
state pay for that increased
harm to that.
Culture that that finding in
ranching culture.
I thought.
Chairman and representative so I
I can relate a bit to that
because my grandfather was a
sheep herder.
And as my mother said.
He didn't use traps he had
horses and dogs when he was
hurting the sheet from Colorado
to New Mexico.
And he also accepted the.
The risk of of predation.
so I think.
All of those all of us to have a
vocation of farming and ranching
we have to accept the risk of
predation.
Well there's I I I understand
that I coming from a long care
to job farmers and ranchers.
Sounds like very similar you I
would bet your granddad took
care of the problem when it
occurred and because his job in
his livelihood was tied to that
that herd of sheep and so you
have to protect them that's
that's all these people are
asking today is as they have the
same rights as your grandfather
had in that in that process.
I have a number of other
Question so I'll try to be brief
Senator how much interaction did
you have.
with the agricultural community
that is expressed so much dismay
and concern over this bill have
you tried to bring them to the
table just weren't able to get
there or how did that work out.
Chairman and Representative so
I.
I was took my oath of office in
January.
after the election in November.
I've been working with this
legislation as a citizen
lobbyists since probably twenty
thirteen.
And during that time all those
years back I did attend a number
of New Mexico game and fish
commission meetings
I always welcome the opportunity
to have the conversation with
others in in the meetings.
Does that answer your question
Chairman representative yes
ma'am I I appreciate that I will
I will tell you all this kind of
wrap it up here is now being
raised one of farm and ranch
You know predators have a
significant impact on their
livelihood I don't know if
you've ever had the opportunity
to see you now are a small group
of child's tried one Halford
that strand the cavern first
time and you know she's got that
she's already under distress and
those those predators are
nipping at our heels they're
pulling at that the this common
as it's as it's coming out of
the calf and they're literally
eating that cap before it's born
I mean they're they're they're
called on at it you know because
she can't she's had to a mess
that means she can't run you
can't protect your cell and the
sky Anthony EM if someone is not
there she.
To intervene they will not only
Ruiloba.
That can.
If that happens so often.
Yep you very quickly but if they
run that Halford that cal long
enough.
They'll get her down and they'll
hamstring her and the kids are
as well and and that is a
significant loss Mr chairman and
and.
Senator to those I mean that is
I mean in today's prices.
Eight to fifteen hundred dollars
that cap that they have.
Range has same kind of that you
and so it it's really hard on
and
There are.
Chairman I was I was hopeful
last year the year before last
when we first heard this bill.
I thought we kind of came to the
middle on many efforts and we
closed areas from trapping and
we we restricted traps in areas
and I just don't think we have
given in that time.
To work I don't think with given
the department time for some new
rules and to train the trappers
and hunters around New Mexico.
And I.
I'm worried that so.
There is a significant culture
and a significant industry in
New Mexico that has not been
listened to in this process and
will be harmed greatly.
Mr chairman and senator we
haven't met yet I look forward
shaking your hand
but I I am I'm gonna put your
bill because I don't think it's
good for New Mexico and and I
think we have rules and
regulations in place that so
given the chance to work can
work and I would encourage you
to do that thank you for your
time and for your patience with
me thanks.
Thank you Representative
Townsend except we have
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator for bringing this
forward
I
attended the game into this
hearing last year and they
didn't seem to listen to those
of us who oppose the trapping as
is evident in the rules that
they adopted they didn't go far
enough
but that's one reason why we
need Senate bill thirty two and
also trapping is so
indiscriminate
it you know to who or what it
injures or kills and I lost to
our setters which I'm sure I've
mentioned in other hearings to
trapping on land nearby my home
south of Albuquerque and that
early seventies and we also
have.
People that we need to protect
hedges search and rescue dogs
that was mentioned as well as
hikers with their dogs they're
in danger and also what's
happened we've stopped higher we
can't mask tired killing but
they're still as was mentioned
by one of our supporters of this
bill their public comment was
about the Taiyo these that were
tracked in Santa Theresa area in
the the pictures were just for
FY.
So one of
our interim committees a few
years ago we had a meeting where
I believe it was inTaos and we
heard from a cattle expert who
talked about the different
protections that cattle
cattlemen can adopt to protect
from natural predators and some
of those were like using cal
bells of breeding cattle that
are used to being out in the
open and not just buying cattle
from areas that didn't have that
kind of experience within
generations because they can
pass that on.
And so
they are more protective of
their.
Your links and can be better you
know from predators.
This also using cattle dogs like
they do sheet of sheep dogs for
protection and
also to
Make sure that they can bring
their cattle into areas that are
more protected during calving
times so like in the spring they
would be able to I'm not just
leave them out in the open and
you know once you.
So my question after mentioning
all of these things is that we
also with this bill you are
accommodating New Mexico
department of game and fish and
they're having to up have these
accommodate their rule making
and their regulation by making
it so that this doesn't start
until January first of twenty
twenty two and can you explain
why that would accommodation was
made.
Chairman and representative
thank you for the question let's
see so.
Mr Johnson the effective date I
have for the bill is April one
twenty twenty two.
So I'm a little confused at the
other date that Representative
Ferrary that you're looking at.
Yes.
Okay so I have April one twenty
twenty two and what what date
did you use.
I thought I said April first
okay thank you.
The reason why you're making it
that so far out.
Okay.
let's see I'm I'm going to defer
to Mr Johnson and Mr ari and
chairman about that date.
Sure thank you Mr chair and
representative Ferrari thank you
for that question so New Mexico
department of game and fish is
regulations on that for a bear
and trapping and fur bearer and
killing it runs on April first
through March thirty first cycle
so by delaying the effective
date of this bill until then
they would not have to alter
their current rules that they're
working under
They won't have to alter the
rules that would take place
April first starting April first
of this year if the effective
date of this bill was and in
July of twenty twenty one sorry
if that's not a particularly
articulate explanation but
there's just.
So Mr chair and senator and miss
Johnson it sounds like you know
we're considering the things
that need to be done in a timely
way and not to rush or make it a
hardship on the department of
game and fish so I appreciate
that
and
Is this bill impact of land
grants and
How how those work.
Representative and chairman so
this is public lands of forest
lands
we you know we do have the.
private lands are exempted
I think chairman and
Representative you're asking
about trust lands in particular.
You Mr speaker Matt and
Representative Senator yes.
Okay so
So that lands held in trust with
Indian nations and tribes.
Mr Johnson.
So I I know it's this is our
public lands forest lands I'm do
you want to add anything else to
Representative Ferrary single
inquiry.
At Mr chair and senator
Representative Ferrary if the
question is about whether that
the bill's prohibitions apply to
state trust lands the answer is
yes.
Okay okay thank you Mr chair and
senator that's all I have
questions about.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
except we have Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you senator
thank you for.
I've got a few.
Your question to.
workable bill is in Colorado but
allow put traps to catch.
So that they have exceptions in
Colorado I don't see that and
your bill and that's important
hope.
K. friends do not work for
coyotes.
Your audio is poor because it
comes in and out a little.
Let me let me let me try
something real quick okay.
In front.
Then.
You can you pass me by I just
for a second and I'm I'm having
trouble untangling my headphones
sure we'll come back to
Representative Strickler next
wave Representative Scott.
Now.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
and Mr Johnson.
I understand that there was a.
Multi month effort.
Twenty game and fish and the
folks that would be supportive
of this legislation.
To reach a compromise is a
consequence.
Of those efforts number of.
Areas you were urban and rural.
Come together.
These activities I have now been
banned and my question would be
on.
For sure.
Did result in some policy
changes there's they're just now
coming.
to fruition why do you believe
those were unsuccessful and that
we now need this pre salicylates
and to go forward.
Chairman and representative
Scott thank you have as we've
talked about already
There been a number of trapping
incidents
I have a list here of eleven
trapping infants.
That it happened during the
twenty twenty one trapping
season.
inviting you one was once
started November fourteenth
we're Siberian husky.
was trapped near lake Farmington
seven hundred fifty dollars and
that caught and that costs
another one November twentieth
that's the one that's been
mentioned where the scan coyote
carcasses were found on your
transferred to trek trapper
dumpsite.
There was another event on
November twenty one.
Hikers found a dog languishing
in the lake Mexico trap in the
northern Santa Fe County.
there was another event of
November twenty six search and
rescue dog Jesse.
was a Dutch shepherd was tracked
on a hike.
December two there was a.
A German shorthair pointer but
German shorthair pointer that
was trapped during a hunt
sustained minor injuries
December twenty seven Santa Fe
National Forest a healer named
cruiser was trapped.
December thirty a dog named
Nellie was trapped while
Her human was collecting would.
January six in Rio Rancho.
the citizens reported a coyote
limping while attached to while
his it's what was attached to a
trap.
On January eleven Cloudcroft.
Tooley was trapped while hiking
on a forest road.
On January twenty three hiker
came upon some skin bobcats.
That were dumped by eight area
trapper.
And then number eleven is the
German shepherd.
That was left outside and then
found the following morning
choking in New and the next more
so it's it's these events are
chairman and representative that
That leads us to believe that
the current regulations are not
working well.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator for that answer can you
tell me how many of these areas
would now be off limits to the
activities of as a consequence
of the new rex.
I Chairman representative of
thank you very much so.
So the areas
that this would apply to.
R. as as Mr Johnson said of the
state our own land the trust
lands to be US force lands.
I'm US fish Wildlife Service
land.
Bureau of land management the
National Park Service the US
department of defense state
parks and any country our county
municipality very important
we've got the exception for
private lands.
and so we are we're not it's
it's not a cure bill we're not.
The outline trapping all
together you're still allowed to
do it on private lands it does
not apply to sovereign nations I
hope that answers your question
thank you chairman and
representative.
Mr chairman and senator I'm not
quite of the eleven
circumstances you madam November
to January health many of these
areas would now be off limits as
a consequence of the the recent
negotiations and and compromise.
I would have to take a look
little Matt this these are these
areas on a map but perhaps
Mister Johnson has more
information about these events
and I can answer your question
with more detail Mr Johnson.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
representative
I am looking at the list I
would.
We want to look at a map just to
be sure but my understanding is
that none of these
incidents took place in one of
the new area closures
established by the department
that answers your question.
Mr Chairman Mr Johnson it does
although I would certainly like
to see.
Maybe if more definitive answer
there.
Let me move on we're.
We're talking about.
Taken was widely hoods.
For seventeen hundred people.
Those are currently operating
and complete.
Accordance with with our laws.
And that's not to mention the.
cattlemen and ranchers that
appear to be universally
opposed.
Because of the.
Ineffectiveness associated with
these humane trapping system.
And.
Game and fish too small herself.
The resources to address these
depredations.
Situations without significant
additional resources if you ask
anyone
over game and fish how many
additional folks they might be
needing to.
This legislation.
passes.
Chairman and representative
Scott I so I haven't personally
not asked Mr Sloan about this
but again that's what I like
about the the date now that I'm
of twenty twenty two it gives us
plenty of time to to work out
these these details I'm and I do
have another response our
chairman and representative
about the
The source the the income amount
for the average trapper so here
I I have here the for market has
been declining for years.
the average New Mexico trapper
who attempted to sell every
harvest from the twenty eighteen
to twenty nineteen season
grossed only about two hundred
sixty five dollars to about four
hundred and forty one dollars so
obviously because the trapping
season is not year round.
there is no way that someone can
sustain on their household with
that amount of income.
miss Johnson do you want to add
anything that I may have
oversight it.
I'm.
Thank you at Mr chair and
representative Scott perhaps I
will just also tack on a
response regarding the
department resources so you know
I I think it's I wish the
department at at minutes it is
unclear exactly how this is
going to affect but trapping
On the department and because
this bill only refer applies to
public land and the department
does not know how much trapping
happens on public land versus
private land we know we have
nationwide stats that a lot of
trapping happens on private land
that's often where a lot of you
know the nuisance complaints
come from there could still be
and plenty of trapping happening
on private land in addition to
you know through the exceptions
on public land I'll also note
you know when you look at that
the five most traps species in
New Mexico.
I'm not seeing a lot of impact
that the the top traps and
species is the coyote the
department does not manage at
higher lease so they are not
required to respond to that to
depredation with their own
officers however they still
regulate the the use of of
Of the traps that and capture
coyotes and they they still
require licenses for out of
state trappers that would not
want to take higher lease so
there is some level of
management I imagine that the
department kind of work on a
regulations perhaps with a
special use permit like they
currently have for a nuisance
for bear and taking on the other
species skunks not really a
problem with livestock on public
land you know less I come public
land that we're primarily
talking about cattle and sheep
so skunks most of that is on the
those conflicts are going to be
on private land where the bill
does not apply the third most
trap species is the gray fox
eight pound animals I'm not a
huge threat to livestock on
public lands
and the fourth is bobcats they
are not typically going to be
predating on at cattle and sheep
State you know according to data
they they will occasionally take
a lamb or calf but it's it's
very uncommon and then the fifth
is the raccoon again not a
threat to livestock on public
land we're we're primarily
talking about nuisance
complaints on private land with
the bills not apply so these
five species represent about
ninety three percent of all wild
trapped animals in New Mexico
so you know just looking at that
I'm I'm not perceiving that
there's going to be a dramatic
increase in
at resource use by the
department.
Mister chairman Senator Mr
Johnson.
But then I'll if this
legislation passes is not
correct.
The game and fish would be
responsible for the production
problems particularly with
coyotes were they really don't
have much responsibility now is
that accurate.
Chairman and representative
Scott so when I mean repeat the
question make sure I'm
understanding so if this
legislation passes I'm your
question is will.
New Mexico game and fish.
Be able to.
Address the predation.
Reports from.
From those having conflicts is
that it.
Well I guess the question would
be whether game and fish would
be responsible for these of
predation compliance in the
event that was felt necessary to
use some form of lethal trapping
mechanism.
So if it's on thank you for the
clarification of Chairman
representative so if it is on
public lands then this
legislation is asking those in
need of to address a recurrent
predation to contact New Mexico
game and fish if it's on their
private property they can
address it on their own.
in my M. Mr Johnson would you
like to add anything else.
Thank you Mr chair I will just
add that of course on public
land they can also just use cage
traps on their own and you know
when we look at Colorado and
Arizona are neighboring states
that have banned these devices
on their lands but we're cage
trapping is is still allowed for
depredation purposes and they're
depredation rates are actually
lower than New Mexico's.
Mister chairman Senator and Mr
Johnson thank you for the
answers that's all my questions.
Thank you representative cut
we're gonna go back to
Representative Strickler and see
if you got his audio.
Thank you can you hear me now.
We can I print my volume okay
I've got my the media outlet
makes the mistake in my how
about that that's that's good
okay.
I apologize for having technical
difficulties
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you senator
I've got a couple of questions
the
The case traps unfortunately
they don't work for coyotes or
wolves and the will file edges
they use they use foot traps.
to capture the wheels and
perform medical examination and
and apply radio collars I mean
that's the only effective tool
that they have and so they do
that safely and the the wildlife
biologist and the of the
American veterinarian
Association they they do support
you know these foot traps of
the.
It is a best mains of a
controlling a predatory
animals such as coyotes I have
just it just a real quick report
I have family and and friends
that live in in California and I
have a real problem with coyotes
and they they do more harm on
dogs and cats.
then you can imagine and they're
getting pretty aggressive in
California especially in rural
areas or the suburban areas
where there have a lot of open
lands
and their their their hungry
the
have to have to survive and so
they they turn over trash cans
and and and scavenge for food
and and caught and and dogs and
cats are safe with so do you
have any statistics on how many
dogs and cats we lose primarily
from counties they they really
are there really are problems in
the suburban areas residential
areas center do you have any
comments on that.
Chairman and Representative
Strickler thank you for the
question
yes I'm sensitive to this
because I'm pretty much in a
semi rural area I have three
cats they are not allowed to go
out because I have at least two
packs of coyotes in the area.
But I assure you if I lost one
of my cats to do.
predation by one of the coyotes
I would blame myself and not the
coyote everything gets hungry
I realize that.
Where the new ones on the block
and part of you know the the
coyotes incredible animal right
it is virtually on.
This so.
This whole country they've done
very well and why have their
numbers exploded well.
I haven't had a conversation
with
Dave Parsons sometime ago he
offered testimony earlier and.
Part of the problem is that we
have done a really good job at.
Reducing the number of wolves.
On on this continent
and so hence why we have to
protect the Mexican gray wolf I
have not heard make me miss
Johnson house of wildlife
biologists using a lead foot
foot hold trap to put a collar
on the endangered wolf I really
have not heard that happening I
thought they were tranquilizing
them or using another humane
type trapping technique
Mr Parsons.
Was instrumental in the Mexican
gray wolf recovery efforts in
this area and so I don't know if
you still available he could
comment but Mr Johnson I don't
have any statistics on cats and
dogs that have been
Killed by coyotes I.
Do you.
Thank you.
yes thank you
Senator and Mr chairman and and
Representative Strickler I I am
aware of recent studies that
have come out saying that
anthropogenic food sources
including domestic animals and
cats are very low component in
coyote diets in general so we do
have evidence of that I would
also like to note that at you
know for an endangered species
management for some species like
wolves despite the risks the leg
hold trap is a preferred one of
the preferred tools by wildlife
biologists and this bill allows
them to do that at both and you
know in management and agencies
duties and also for scientific
research and then perhaps I'll
just echo you know this the
Senator it is a spot on about
personal responsibility you know
I I have dogs in my backyard but
is up against in a royal so I
know that we have wildlife
coming through including coyotes
I also have chickens and I take
the responsibility to make sure
that I have you know a a
carnivore proof
at a set up for them to protect
them from coyotes and raccoons
and my own dogs so I I would
echo the senator on that point
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator and and an
expert.
Well I I just just want to kind
of tie back into
the farming and ranching
community of land ownership is
pretty diverse in our state we
have all we have a lot of
federal lands make stand with
with private lands and those
those cattle ranchers for
example they have grant leases
on those federal lands but
mainly bureau of land
management.
Lance enforce lance and it's
really hard.
to manage these predators
When you have such a mix of of
property ownership same thing
with State Land G. of nine
million acres of state lands I
know in San Juan County we have
for us sections of state lands
forever township and the rest is
primarily of federal land so
those ranchers farmers ranchers
up there
or any you know in a in a unique
position where they have more
federal lands in state lands
then then in South in the
eastern part of the state
where's where's Lara private
lands and so these trappers
They on a typical season they
they up the put out about to
hundred fifty thousand to two
thousand
traps per night for typical
season and that's a that's a lot
of coverage and the game and
fish and game wardens we only
have sixty to eighty game
wardens and they simply don't
have the resources to take care
these depredation problem so I'm
mainly concerned about the cavs
they have seen him in action
I've I've done some hunting with
the some friends that have to be
trappers and we've saying.
Codd's the.
The in this particular case
three cutouts together in a pack
chasing down a large L. calf and
we did you know that L. L. did
make it and there's nothing we
could do because we weren't
allowed
to shoot the couch that we would
normally on private lands in so.
You this bill is it really goes
pretty far.
In Colorado you mentioned
Colorado the state of the state
of Colorado does allow for
traffic for farmers and ranchers
they have to apply for there are
some exceptions your bill has no
exceptions
this one size fits all is really
difficult for the farming
ranching community and we
mentioned that recent rules were
enacted April of last year
to restrict the use of foot
traps and and and metropolitan
areas we mentioned the sandy is
Oregon organ mountains Santa Fe
and Taos ski areas were
were laminated and also setbacks
were increased so.
That's why that's where life
should be in a regulatory world
with private industry COVID
really really hard all of us
including the farming and
ranching
it's been a very difficult year
two thousand twenty these rules
came into place they haven't
been given enough time to work
its course
and I think
Because because of the wide
range of ownership land
ownership I mean what is a land
owner it was a could a cattle
rancher going to do.
One half is land is private.
Hafeez ranches.
Or you know half is ranchers is
federal and then we'll throw in
a small percentage of state
lands me how she got house that
ranger cattle rancher gonna be
able to to manage the predators
Bailey couch they're they're the
problem
with the such a checkerboard
effect of the the land ownership
Representative bandy up in my
country is twelve hundred acres
of private land and he has ten
thousand acres of federal and
state lands on his on his cattle
ranch and the it's just that's
just why the land is made up of
the country
and I think the the the
rulemaking process the the
hearing process Mr chairman and
and Senator is I came up with
some pretty restrictive rules to
help alleviate you know some
problems and I'm more concerned
about Kyle's taken out dogs and
cats
than anything else and I you
know we've all have friends if
if experience that even if
you're responsible pet owner
sometimes dogs and cats are
going to get out and you don't
want them to be taken out by by
these aggressive cod said that
are not regulating themselves
so.
We don't have a question just
just a bunch of thoughts and
comments
that the rules and rags the
state to be.
Working well or leases a step in
the right direction we need to
give it a little more than six
months to to operate.
And I'm really concerned about
farmers and ranchers because
every every calf that they lose
is about a thousand dollars.
the on average if they sell sell
the cash for feeders we have a
one point three million Catholic
had a cattle in the in New
Mexico a large large industries
we have ninety thousand head of
sheep.
In our state and so that's a big
industry and we certainly want
to give them the tools to
protect from predators
The last thing I was going to
say is
we we need to work together this
bill is pretty restrictive
doesn't have the
the exceptions that they have in
Colorado I don't know batters on
a but I think it but in Colorado
they do allow for transfer
cattle ranchers they have to
apply for and and they they are
they are granted those to those
exceptions which helps them
manage their their investment
but the the case it was
mentioned earlier were a hundred
sixty calves were destroyed by
predators that's a hundred sixty
thousand dollars at that the
cattle ranchers going to have to
somehow recover from and that's
a that's a pretty that's a
pretty tough hill to climb
especially with the with the
COVID for last year so thank you
Mr chairman and thank you
senator just yes but the I look
forward to mania and
and all you much time.
Thank you Representative
Strickler Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator nice to to see you here
I have a couple of questions and
I'm hoping to sort of
focus on things that we haven't
sort of talked about too much
the first question that I'd like
to get some clarification on is
how this legislation applies to
land grants.
and specifically what impact are
it would have on land grant
lands.
Thank you chairman and
Representative Dixon yes so
So SB thirty two applies to
public land only.
and public land means state
owned land including land grant.
So it also includes the Forest
Service land of fish and
Wildlife Service land BLM land.
National Park Service land.
department of defense land state
parks.
Counties and municipalities.
Thank you I'm.
Could we also talk about
Some of the farmers and
I thank you as and conserve
water conservation districts in
terms of how under SB thirty two
they will be able to manage
muskrats and beavers that maybe
compromising the structural
integrity of their ditches.
What exceptions are allowed
For those circumstances.
Chairman and Representative
Dixon.
So let's see I reside in
Kerala's I'm trying to get a
full.
full appreciation of your
question I residing paralysis
and so your question is say I
have.
A new sense situation with.
What what were the animals that
you listed did you say muskrats.
Yes so
Beavers and muskrats for
instance you know specifically
if they're compromising the
integrity of a ditch.
So.
If I.
Came across the beaver dam I
would be really in celebration
of it because of what they're
what they're.
What their dams do for.
the local ecosystem
So I don't I don't know I I
guess I'm I think I'm the wrong
person to ask given to think of
a bureau as adding any conflict
because actually they help.
the environment that surrounds
let's see you said muskrats.
Okay so muskrats
I guess they might be qualified
under the rodents and so it
wouldn't there would be an
exception for that.
The center if I may on on that
point and all the Google those
points.
So on the muskrat muskrats for
for years.
So they are residents but
they're covered under the for
bear lake regulation.
So so.
They are covered by despite
being relates.
On the land grant lands the
common lands held by the land
grants were treated as if
they're private lands because
they are owned by the land
grants I don't think this bill
applies to.
Okay thank you for that that
clarification
thank thank you senator.
Did it thank you Mr chairman and
Senator does your expert
Mysterons and want to weigh in
on.
The.
Issue of the.
The beavers and the muskrats
are.
Mr Johnson yeah and I I misspoke
the different it does the
definition does not include land
grants mystics and chairman.
And thank you Mr chair and
representative decks and so you
know just to specifically answer
your question about you know
what exceptions in the bill kind
of point to solutions first for
a denture miss ya
that you know if there is a
decision that they want to
remove that animal like a like a
beaver or muskrat there's a few
different exceptions that could
come into play one is that you
know if if it's a serious enough
issue where it's going to
black as the movement of water
such that it would be determined
to be a threat to human health
and safety any government entity
including you know that the
county the city asylum Water
Conservancy at conservation
district etcetera
can use these devices there are
also exceptions for again
working with the department of
the depredation trapping would
would
apply to that and then of course
you can always use cage traps
and cage traps are used
successfully for beavers and
muskrats.
Great thank you I just wanted to
clarify that something that had
come up in concerns from some
constituents specifically and I
wanted to make sure that that I
understood that
also
we did talk a little bit about
public lands in in terms of
sorry here's a specific question
what about a situation when you
have a house barn or other
structure on public lands
and a person sits a dog proof
traps to catch for raccoons for
instance would
Would they be.
A criminal under those
circumstances.
That was another question that I
specifically received so I
appreciate you answering that.
I'm chairman and Representative
so again this is these are
structures on public land.
Correct correct yes so the the
question is is it that it is it
a structure on public land
And I was wondering if there are
particular
exemptions that might apply
there.
And me and I don't know if maybe
miss Johnson.
yes the specifically Mister
Johnson do you know an exception
that would apply to this.
At yes and and Mr chairman and
Representative Dixon so it comes
down to the definition of public
lands
and at which which specifically
excludes the interior of
physical structures so even if
those structures are on public
land if that the trap is set up
on the interior of the structure
then it is not that the
prohibitions of the bill do not
apply.
Okay thank you and then just the
the final thing that I did want
to mention and I believe that
Representative Stansbury had
brought this up
earlier was sort of the
appreciation
for using data and research in
making some of these very
complicated decisions and so I
just wanted to highlight to that
we have you know there is in my
own research about this issue
trying to study up on it
A fairly robust body of evidence
and research
one of our professors at UNM in
the biology department I was
able to read a report by Dr
Robert Harrison
on use of traps and so I just
wanted to flag that for other
folks on that there is you know
I think you sites about twenty
five different publications and
peer reviewed articles on this
subject and so I found that very
helpful I don't have any other
questions right now I think that
most of my lingering questions
have been answered and so I
appreciate that thank you very
much.
Thank you Representative Dixon
except Representative Montoya.
But it thank you
Thank you Mr chairman and
and senator so I'm actually in a
parking garage at the capitol
pulled up and I I'm gonna have
time to get inside to my
computer and I and and
Representative Dixon was causing
offer argument sunset here in
the parking garage
so of.
Senator did I hear you say you
give a long list of.
Of of incidents that took place
just last year of different
animals that have been trapped.
You saw the carcasses that did
this against and others that
were domesticated animals that
you know a path that got
trapped.
I have the volume down a little
bit at that time that I hear you
say none of those had placed on
public lands.
Chairman representative no I
didn't say that I I listed the
various places
as I look at this.
The first one I mentioned was in
lake lake Farmington.
another one was on the payments
national recreation area.
Another was Santa Fe National
Forest.
Okay so.
three of these took place on on.
The plans and and and the
Farmington like is is owned by
the city that.
you know generally not where I
mean that's not we're.
Cattlemen are apt so
if SO three that we're talking
about three incidents.
Place on on the on these public.
Of locations Chairman
representative I'm I'm pulling
out so I would I'm listing these
like Farmington Santa Theresa.
Northern Santa Fe County Hey
miss national recreation area
Bernardo Santa Fe National
Forest Rowe mesa Rio Rancho
Cloudcroft the higher del Rio
plateau and Dixon.
So maybe it wasn't you who had
who I think might have been your
expert you mind if I ask your
expert how many of these infants
specifically this legislation
would have kept from happening.
I'm Mr chairman and
Representative Montoya at so you
know and I I also have perhaps
an even more updated list so I
have fourteen incidents that
have happened
in the twenty twenty twenty
twenty one trapping season all
of which took place on public
land and so this includes dogs
being trapped in includes two
endangered walls being trapped
it includes
at multiple instances of finding
stand wild animals on public
land and then also a coyote
limping at with a leg hold trap
attached to his foot on public
land.
So the.
The.
List of public land that was
mentioned earlier and nationally
I heard that land grants but
then.
Maybe some dispute that land
grants are not included in this
legislation could could could
that be made clear it is is this
going to apply specifically to
or it is.
Our land grants consisted
considered.
To be public land.
I'm Representative pardon me
chairman and and Representative
yeah the definition does not
include land grants.
I but I'm but I'm wondering
under the general term of public
lands.
Our our land grants included I'm
not I don't believe that I saw
that land grants were listed but
our land grants considered
public lands.
Because I I believe that they
are very similar to
near BLM land
there's what's called a lot she
land.
which is
It's all near BLM land but
native Americans have in my neck
of the woods have what's called
a lot P. land.
And
I'm I'm believing that those
folks would be caught up in this
language as well.
Chairman and representative I'm
not familiar with a lot of TV
lands lands with the exception
of those on DNA or Navajo Nation
is that what you're referring
to.
I am but it it is a lot he lands
are a little different than BLM
lands.
Thanks B. okay I think we need
to look into that going forward
that they also run cattle and
sheep and there are there herbs
are a lot smaller I mean and
and.
their methods of protecting
their animals very similar to
what farmers and ranchers across
the rest of the state.
do which has been traditionally
it's been either trapping or
when
the population of coyotes get
get out of control they would.
Do a invite families over and
call priorities in New
they what that something that
that I believe we've made
illegal throughout the rest of
the state that's something that
they have done traditionally to
two in advance of.
losing their animals as the
coyote population grows they
in the coyote population.
I'm sorry no go ahead.
On that point can by senator
answering make a comment.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
and Representative Montoya on
that point so am tribal a lot T.
lands are considered under
federal trusteeship and so this
bill only applies to state land
so it would not apply to I'm
tribal what T. loans.
Going back to that then Mr chair
and senator I I believe that
would capture land grants and in
just so I'm I I'm not comforted
by I don't think it applies to
them I I I think that.
That very well could apply to
the folks on land grants and I
think the only way that folks on
the land grants are going to be
able to if this is possible way
it is to defend themselves gonna
have to be going and spending
their money in court to defend
themselves.
Please thank you applied to
later the bill drafting is clear
it does not apply to land grants
so the bill drafting
specifically excludes land
grants I didn't think this not
include land grants as a couple
as a public land in lands owned
by land grants.
Are you the strange it's not a
straight up public ownership
even though we now treat land
grants as political subdivisions
the land owned by land grants is
still considered to be private
lands so it's there are really
two different to different
levels it does not apply to land
grants.
Okay well I'm I'm hope that that
is exactly correct
Mr chairman and senator.
Throughout this discussion one
of the things that I've noticed
is that.
The hat.
For service animals.
Have been.
As far as I'm concerned as far
as.
An animal that is owned by an
individual has been elevated in
this discussion over that of.
Cattle owners.
We
We know what the value of.
That is the cap for cal we know
or or sheep we we have an idea
of the value on that but it does
appear is.
Through this what we're doing is
we're we're elevating.
To a position superior to that
of of the cattle owners and I I
just.
When we talk about the.
About coyotes and you're talking
to somebody who is a rancher
farmer.
A cattle owner she.
Rancher.
That is that really is a
livelihood that is something
they're doing on purpose to make
a living the way of life.
and.
Initially I think credit a very
beginning of the
The description of this bill.
Colorado was deemed to be a
success story.
but.
There is an exception in in
Colorado to allow.
The same type of trapping that
they've done even on public
lands.
wherever they forever they the
their cattle rat or sheep or at.
I'm just wondering.
if if what we're trying to do is
follow Colorado are we not
making that same and exemption.
for for people who make their
living on livestock.
Chairman and Representative
Montoya I thank you for the
question and I would like to
defer that question about
Colorado to ms Johnson thank
you.
Thank you senator and Mr
Chairman representative Montoya
and thank you for the
opportunity to address the so I
would like to clarify this for
the committee.
Colorado has banned traps snares
and poisons statewide not just
on public land that statewide
they do have an exception that
they worked on through
regulation to allow landowners
to apply for a permit to use
devices like like cold traps for
a limited period of time on
private land this exception does
not apply to public land so on
public land they still have the
options that this bill in New
Mexico provides but on top of
that in New Mexico we have the
exception of letter S. that
allows on public land for
depredation to help depredation
trapping to happen
conducted by a facilitated by
the department of game and fish
so if we were to following
Colorado's footsteps we this
bill would apply to private land
as well but it does not I'm here
in New Mexico this legislation
is focused on public land and
there are multiple allowances
for ranchers to be able to use
cage traps as well as leg hold
traps and foot snares to protect
their livestock and it's worth
repeating that the number one
weapon of choice by USDA
wildlife services when they're
responding to deprivation and
trying to kill coyotes they used
firearms that's the number one
tool that they use thank you.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chair and Senator.
With the cattle ranching is you
can't have someone there every
moment.
You're not there every moment
otherwise the that is the number
one of weight ranchers also do
this and we've kind of
eliminated their ability to do
that in advance
by by hosting a an event.
To call in the the coyotes for
for a killing so I'm.
It appears to me that the number
one reason that we're doing this
is.
In part and because of the that
even the title of this rock sees
law is because of Pat.
I'm just wondering if why we are
valuing.
Individual pets above.
The ownership of animals bye bye
cattlemen.
And chairman and representative
that clearly is not the
intention of chairman and
representative they are all
setting and beings if anything.
What we're trying to do is.
Coexist coexist with all the
other sentence beings around us
Mr Johnson do you have anything
else to add.
I'm Mr chair and
Representative Montoya what this
bill this bill is is certainly
not intending to elevate one
species animal over and other
this bill looks to ensure that
New Mexico is balancing the
interests in the shared use of
public lands and make sure that
our public
has access to those public lands
that are able to do so safely
without other individuals
placing devices that can be
harmful and dangerous
there is.
There is certainly a public
safety aspects
of course there there are also
wildlife conservation aspects
and so it can't be ignored that
there is a body of scientific
evidence and also data looking
at our neighboring states that
shows that you know there's good
reason to look toward nonlethal
carnivore management as much as
possible because those are more
successful in protecting
livestock and and we certainly
don't want you know R. does that
for very species held in trust
by the state for the public to
be continued to
be exploited for private profit
by a few individuals as as
little as that profit might be
for those trappers so
you know again that this bill is
is looking to balance the
interests and I and I think
Representative Stansbury stands
right you know really pointed
that out that through these the
list of exceptions in this bill
there is.
And overwhelming accommodation
of of many different interests
including the ranching community
but it also ensures that there
will be somewhat of a reduction
of the devices on public lands
in order to conserve wildlife
and protect the public.
So what thank you
Senator and chairman but I once
again the bills called Rockies
law and all of the.
Comments that I've received.
Have been surrounded.
Around the idea of pet.
This committee is supposed to
deal with
natural resource.
Environment management and it
this appears to be something
that we're dealing with pets
over the concerns of people who
are
Once again making their living
and I'm not limiting that as to
I think the last discussion to
just trappers.
and and.
The idea that I think was
presented earlier that as they
had owner it's a responsibility
to make sure and take care of
them and there might be higher
lease around I can keep them
fenced and that's not so easy
with a herd of livestock.
trying to bring them in during
calving season is not that.
You're moving around because
that you're moving in from
grazing to grazing areas from
one grazing area to another so
if you're gonna bring them all
into a local area and where you
can more protect them during
calving season then that's gonna
be very expensive because now
you're gonna have to bring in
food and water to them it
becomes very.
Cost prohibitive.
I think that
The answer that we are that to
the problem that we're trying
to.
Six need to take into account
more the avalanches
I think that.
this is is is far sweeping
far too sweeping I'm not taking
them into account and not
looking at their concerns that
New Mexico has a high percentage
of federal state.
And native lands.
that other states don't have not
to the degree that we do so are
ranchers a lot of them have
really not that much choice but
to also make sure that they have
leases on federal and state
lands to to graze so I don't
believe this goes far enough to
protect the rights of of
ranchers
I'm.
I very beginning one of the
things I notice that as far as
trapping and poisoning goes at
we don't do it.
Specifically for
we we didn't we made an
exception for rodents in the
household you know we can still
do all of that for for mice rat
infestation we can we can do
whatever we need to in our house
and that's right because we are
protecting ourselves from in New
Mexico hanta virus the plague
there's all kinds of things
we're protecting ourselves from
with.
Up a Rhode.
But.
We are not to the same degree
Texting Catalonia's from the
same type of.
The same type of and more so
than the past something that's
going to cost them
Very large dollars
and it it doesn't seem the same
type of compassion towards pets
doesn't seem to be going towards
what Representative Townsend
described
eight eight eight.
Calf being born being
unprotected and being attacked
by a pack of.
Haley's
to some degree we are elevating
one species over another in that
instance so it's not really a
question
it just it it appears to me one
of our main industry in the
state it is cattle ranching
and we are not going far enough
to protect that industry thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Montoya Representative
Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair and first I
want to thank our co sponsors
Senator McKenna and senator guy
a goes for carrying the bill
through the Senate and and I'm
very impressed with the progress
that the bill has made and all
the work that's been done to
improve it is it a perfect bill
now it's not I personally would
prefer fewer exemptions
but this is a product of
stakeholder input interactions
with fishing game management as
well as the some commissioners
we've had this bill has been
vetted over a number of sessions
and a lot of public input has
been taken to try to craft a
bill that accommodates and
addresses a number of competing
concerns in the state and that's
why I'm supporting it and that's
why I am pleased to be a co
sponsor with my Kali chairman
the queen.
There's been very little talk
today.
Out are blooming and
recreational
Economy that I know this
governor and previous governors
have worked very hard to expand
upon and develop we've created a
Department outdoor Department
intended to attract tourism eco
tourism
Any number of things and
frankly trip trapping on on
public lands allowing trapping
on widespread trapping on public
lands I believe runs counter to
that very important goal that we
have been working very hard to
promote our economy upon and
I've heard very little for many
people to talk about the need
for economic development on this
committee say anything about the
fact that this this bill will
help us when we try to attract
hikers campers any number of
people that we've been trying to
bring to the state and I think
that point needs to be
emphasized the civically.
This bill is called the wildlife
conservation and public safety
act and
it underscores what I think many
of us recognize it is not safe
to have traps placed in areas
where there are people there are
children and yes there are paths
that are part of that equation
and it is very important to
protect them.
The last point I want to make an
and explain why I'm supporting
this bill and and to me it's
money most important reason
beyond the safety be on the
economic development reasons and
that is ethical reasons
Allowing an animal to stay in a
trap.
In language.
And allow that animal to be so
desperate to get away from the
trap and from the pain they
might to their foot off and
attempt to get out
is just not an acceptable way to
kill animals and I don't care
that we're calling it land
wildlife management or predator
management it is not okay in our
society any longer to allow that
kind of in in humane treatment
and animal and that's what traps
do and I frankly would like to
see it go farther but that's
what they do.
I believe miss Representative
Montoya is unmuted no.
I think for that reason I I that
is really the reason why I'm
supporting this legislation and
I encourage everyone on this
committee to support it as well
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Chandler
Any further discussion from the
committee.
Senator and miss Johnson
in closing closing thoughts
before.
We take a look.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee and I really
appreciate this rigorous debate
You know there's there's
something that I really believe
and that's wherever there is
humans there's gonna be conflict
it's all about how we solve our
conflict and I think just be
thirty two the wildlife
conservation and public safety
act is a real example of how New
Mexicans have done this because
we didn't get the pure bill that
we ideally wanted years ago it's
taken many meetings.
both the during session off
session when I was a citizen
lobbyist meeting with New Mexico
game and fish going to their
meetings and then of course
working with
Talking with tribes
and fellow native Americans here
in the state so it's not ideal
for everyone but it is of the
means going forward it is a very
good.
Example of how as of
Representative Chandler said we
can be very proud to welcome
new.
New tourists to our state and
state please enjoy our vote last
because our public lands do not
have any traps snares or M.
forty force on them
so with that I I thank you for
this discussion I really value
to it I've learned a lot from
everyone and with that right I
defer to Mr Johnson if she has
any closing remarks chairman and
and members of the committee.
Thank you senator and and thank
you Mr chairman and committee
members again for giving me an
opportunity to spend at this
morning and the first part of
the afternoon with you all
talking about this issue
perhaps I'll just.
Echo what Representative
Chandler said you know I I we
have all seen that as New Mexico
is is going to be moving out of
the grips of the effects of the
pandemic we will be relying a
lot on our outdoor recreation
and tourism industry to really
bolster our state and when folks
are looking at getting out and
enjoying the outdoors in the
southwest right now they know
that they can do so safely
on public lands in Arizona and
Colorado and you know there's
just a lot of movement and
support behind New Mexico taking
that step as well so that
you know people can enjoy
outdoor recreation we have
healthy wildlife populations and
and everyone can can be safe on
our public lands thank you so
much.
Thank you senator and this
Johnson was will the committee.
I really do passed on Senate
bill of eighty four right to.
I'm sorry I'm on the run bill as
it and I'm not sure if it's been
amended has been has been
estimated by us.
So we have a motion and a second
Shelby can you take a look
please.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Syriana.
Yes but I would like to explain
my vote.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Townsend.
No.
Vice chair Stansbury yes and I'd
also like to explain my both
please and chairman the queen.
Yes.
The motion passes with a vote of
seven to four.
you have to pass Representative
Sarinana to explain your vote
thank you Mr chairman I I would
like to thank all the people who
called me I I answer my phone on
specially built like this and my
grandfather was a rancher so I
understand what you're saying
But I do believe I do I was
elected by city people you know
I'm from Albuquerque so I I had
to vote based on on their wishes
but I did hear you and I and I
did get educated on this and I
do believe
I'm and actually that's I would
say thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Stansbury.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator and miss Johnson and
others who came and testified
today a few things that I think
are really important just to
lift up here at the end is that
there were serious concerns
raised by the ranching and
farming community about the
impacts of this bill and if this
bill passes which it is likely
to pass
I'm I would ask our state
agencies to engage seriously and
conversations with ranching and
farming community to make sure
that this can be implemented in
a way that makes sense any other
issues that were raised this
morning about how to implement
and the religious freedom at
provisions in this bill of
course our state does have to do
tribal consultation in its work
but I would ask that our state
agencies takes seriously its
tribal trust responsibilities
and partnerships and find a way
to implement this bill in a way
that protects the religious
freedoms and cultures of our
tribes so am thank you and and
that's all I have to say.
Thank you and thank you everyone
and all that many members of the
public to watch our the
committee
that's it for today we will meet
Tuesday morning at eight AM now
see you all then if not before
we return.
