Representative.
Here
Harper.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Representative group.
Here.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Here.
Representative Cruz.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Here and and Molly real quick
let's give Representative a lot
through some moment
Representative are you there
we're doing roll call.
Madam chair it appears he still
needed you may be speaking and
and the needs to you yes I I I
nudged him with asking him to on
mute so
we'll see if he.
Yes madam chair you should as
well as the.
The person controlling the soon
be able to you know.
Yeah I've asked him to you
himself.
He has to do it on his end after
I know Jim.
It's just.
It's just.
I'm texting him right now you
also give me just a few seconds.
Okay he's saying he has no audio
so let me see if I can help them
find I get that's right away
give me one second.
Can you get the audio on a cell
phone.
Yeah I'm asking him to do that
give me give me a second.
Recording stopped.
Okay he's gonna try calling in
you also thank you for your
patience.
I forgot to mention that there's
also not a dull moment in this
committee so I appreciate you
all.
Okay.
Okay welcome Representative can
you hear us.
And you're just on me right now.
I think.
Yes we can hear you now we can
hear you now thank you so we'll
we'll go ahead and get started
welcome again Representative
we will you roll call Molly if
you can if you can finish that
off.
Representative did a cruise
here.
We have a quorum.
Great thank you all I appreciate
your patience and all of this I
know that we that's it's pretty
typical to run into some
technical difficulties so thank
you
thank you all for for your
patience Representative that
most welcome we were going to
give you some time to maybe
share a little bit about
yourself and and maybe one
expectation you have for the
rest of what is it twelve eleven
days that we have left in the
legislature when it comes to
this committee so if you don't
mind sharing just for a few
minutes thank you chairman of
first of all it's a pleasure I
apologize for my technical
difficulties my wife was the
tech in the houses in Chicago so
I was on line with the trials on
the phone with her as well as
and that this isn't working so I
apologize for that it's a
pleasure to be with all of you
this morning and a little bit
about myself again Art De La
Cruz I'm a lifelong resident of
the San Valley in Albuquerque I
was literally born at the house
on been here awhile.
Click service all my life I now
work in government up to become
the director of of the county
parks and recreation department
I also talked to C. N. M. R. as
an adjunct instructor teaching
business classes I enjoy serving
people in all capacities
including helping neighbors so
it's been might my lifelong
passion and having been
appointed by the county
commission to this position
isn't this a great honor and and
and I'm most appreciative to all
be able to help folks again so
again pleasure to be with you
all in transportation madam
chair.
Representative than welcome so
we're gonna go ahead and get
started but before we get to do
that Representative up like this
chair Garcia he is having to
present a bill in another
committee so he cannot be here
with us this morning he said he
might be try to be able to as
soon as he gets done so I'm
going to hand over the Cherry
role to Representative on this
role metal if there's no
opposition to that we'll we'll
go ahead and get started
Representative if you wanna go
ahead and get started all right
thank you madam chair it's like
being in house education with my
committee assistant Molly good
morning everybody so madam chair
house bill one forty four when
you're ready please.
Great thank you Representative
so good morning everyone again
Mr chair and committee members
we're bringing house bill forty
four to you all today it is
legislation that looks to bring
New Mexico into compliance with
federal law as New Mexico laws
currently written we risk the
federal government reducing
funding opportunities for our
state in addition to issues with
the certification of individuals
participating in the commercial
commercial driver's license
requirements program I do have
here is my experts secretary of
tax and revenue Stephanie
Schardin Clarke and Jareth less
out those whose with the who is
the deputy director for NMED's
of central operations and so
I'll hand it over to them so
that they can provide further
details and then also answer any
questions you all may have on
this legislation there is an
amendment Mr chair the two oh
two number is two two two four
five zero point one and
essentially it's a very small.
Madam chair may have a motion
for discussion of the amendment
please.
I move discussion of the
amendment.
All right thank you all second
that madam chair please few
discuss human great thank you so
on page fifteen between lines
eleven and twelve what what
we're in what we're doing is
inserting just any section
section eight and it's the
effective date of the provision
morning in progress.
Which is what's the effective
date of the provisions of this
act which is January first of
twenty twenty three.
All right thank you so we're on
discussion of the amendment so
section eight The effective date
Sir any discussion on the
amendment.
Representative Crowder please.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I noticed in in the
Language I think it's identify
our analysis that I have says
that states have until September
twenty third of twenty two to
comply in your amendment.
Does it seem to reach compliance
until January one of twenty
three what we're gonna do in the
interim gap.
Thank you Mr chair I can hand it
over to the secretaries
secretary.
Please madam secretary.
She might have froze hello it
looks like I'm I can hand it
over to Jerry to Jerry I don't
know if you if you can chime
into that.
Mr chair representative review
of madam secretary
we and and Representative
Crowder we have to have the bill
in the legislation as long as
the federal government sees that
the legislation has been set and
that we're working for it they
will give us that extension for
that three those three months
four months that we will have
three to January one will take
some time for us to be able to
implement this B. R. I. T.
infrastructure and so will it
will take some time but the
federal government understands
and we have been in
communication with them letting
them know that if this bill
passes we do need tell January
first and they they will be okay
with that.
I appreciate that I just
rigorous flight the
implementation date wasn't July
first if the bill is passed and
becomes a valid this is the
governor signs it
it would it would seem more
appropriate to me that the start
date would be July first so I I
just was very curious all
continue to listen thank you
madam chair Mr chair.
Thank you for the questions on
the amendment.
All right.
So they have a motion on the
amendment.
For the amendment parents who
move adoption of the amendment.
The second
all right thank you
Representative occurs is there
any opposition to the adoption
of the amendment.
Seeing none madam chair you have
an amended bill Representative
Crowder can you lower your hand
for me please.
And then.
Madam chair if you would
continue on with your
presentation of the bill that
you have has the one forty four
as amended.
Thank you all so I'll go ahead
and handed over to the secretary
I know we lost you briefly if
you want to to share a little
bit about what we're trying to
accomplish here with this with
this bill if and then we can
open it up to questions as well
to folks in the attendees.
Thank you madam.
to be here with you today and I
think madam chair already gave
an excellent overview of this
bill I just want to emphasize
that by becoming in conformance
with federal law around issuance
of commercial driver's licenses
the big thing that we're trying
to do here is prevent loss of
funding to the road fund and
DOT's operating budget thank you
so much.
State.
Thank you.
You all stand for questions yeah
I'm with that's their will stand
for questions all right thank
you so we'll go to the attendees
list is
like I say in education is that
we have students that may not be
following direction as I haven't
given any in the attendees list
but I'm assuming that support so
is there support all right so
we'll go to secretary Santa
please.
It's only if we can bring him
over to speak because I don't
have the controls.
It's.
All right secretary Santa
welcome you.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
chair secretary Mike Santa with
the department of transportation
just wanted to stand in support
of this bill as binge mentioned
before this is one of those
bills that we that we have
continue to have over the years
where the federal government
requires a certain law to be
passed in the state and they
threatened sanctioning D. O. T.
from the recording in progress
in this case it's about four
percent of our federal
apportionment which should be
somewhere in the area of sixteen
million dollars so certainly we
want to make sure that this bill
gets passed that are funds don't
get sanctioned so that we can
continue to do the good work of
building roads and highways in
our state so thank you for
consideration.
Right thank you Mr secretary.
So if we could bring in
Schardin.
Sean Powell.
It's.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members on Chantelle
preservation Mexico university
in Roswell I appreciate the bill
and the Sanchez bringing this
bill forward we offer CDL
program on our campus and I
think by bringing this in the
federal compliance that will aid
the state of New Mexico and also
possibly increase the number of
drivers in our state and region
so I stand in support of this
legislation thank you Sir.
All right thank you all right
any others in support on the
attendees side.
All right so good opposition is
our opposition to house bill one
forty four is amended.
Right seeing none will come to
committee Representative Crowder
previous questions.
Thank you Mr chairman I keep the
the presenters talk a little bit
about I I completely agree with
the proponent of of meeting the
federal requirements that
dollars are funding I think
that's absolutely essential I
I'm completely remove that part
when we get into the part were
amending
whether personal live in this
state or another state we issue
realized someone lives in a
different state could you speak
to that a little bit in and tell
me exactly how that works.
Thank you Representative Crowder
I I I'll go ahead and handed
over to the secretary or to
Jerry to to help you out with
that question.
Representative Rubio did did we
lose the secretary and yes.
She looks like maybe she's
having some trouble I don't know
if you want to go ahead during.
Sure
Mr chair Madam chairwoman and
Representative Crowder.
The part that you mentioned that
allows.
Out of state and non domiciled
individuals the federal
government allows individuals
who have an authorized work card
and offers it works work
authorization card to be able to
work and get ACBL or commercial
driver's license within the
United States New Mexico that
does not have that provision
right at the moment we're little
more strict then what the
federal government does and so
this would allow an individual
especially that is non domiciled
so that is not a citizen of the
United States but does have
authorization to work in the
United States to be able to
obtain a commercial driver's
license and to be able to
operate a commercial motor
vehicle in so this expand our
program allows us to be able to
provide this service to
individuals who are legally
within the United States who are
legally authorized to work
within the United States and
then we allow them to also have
a commercial motor vehicle
drivers license within the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair and you
Sir are are very much appreciate
it I I happen to reside about
six miles from the New Mexico
Texas state line and I find
myself being curious this Texas
and Oklahoma have.
The the same verbiage to allow
New Mexico
For people that live in New
Mexico to get a license in Texas
is a reciprocity on on between
Oklahoma Texas New Mexico can
you speak to them a little bit.
Thank you Representative and we
do have the secretary back it
looks like so secretary if you
wanted to chime in on that thank
you and and Mr chair and madam
chair sorry for all the
interruptions I'm on my phone
now which in this crazy world it
seems to be working better
it I agree with everything Jerry
just said and yes New Mexico is
one of the last states that
hasn't conformed with this area
of federal law so the way will
be treating non domiciled or non
resident foreign nationals will
be in line with federal law as
well as our neighboring states
after this bill is passed okay
so what I think I hear you madam
secretary is Texas got a little
ahead of us on get this
accomplished what we're doing
the the language pretty much
verbatim what Texas and Oklahoma
are doing is that correct madam
secretary Mr chair and
representative Katter that's
correct.
Thank you thank you madam chair
well I'm not sure I'd want for
the question what is the
federally authorized exactly how
does that authorization take
place I think I understand it
but that's normally when I get
in trouble so I'd rather know
that so.
Thank you Representative
secretary do you have a response
to that.
I'm
Representative Crowder is
question is I believe it is.
If you all would allow the go
through the chair for any sort
of discussion please I'm hearing
a lot of between people but
please keep the going through
the chair thank you Mr chair.
Let policies Mister chair I I
was Senator my screen it is the
presenter and and I still have
her in my mind is the chair so I
apologize sure.
Mr Chairman representative
Crowder I might need to clarify
your question and indicate defer
to as deputy director but I'm is
that a question of the federal
authorizing documentation that
the driver presents.
As I understand it the Mr
chairman madam secretary it's
the allows foreign nationals to
provided a federal work
authorization card in and I
don't fully understand what that
means and what federal agency
actually does that.
Thank you your.
Mr chair
What what we're doing here in
the big picture is is right now
New Mexico law is more
restrictive than federal law and
so in other states as allowed
under federal law someone who
has an authorization to work in
the United States is able to get
a commercial driver's license
through the date that they're
authorized to be here but our
federal our state law is more
restrictive in its not allowing
that federal authorization to
work in the United States to see
the basis for
and issuance of a CDL through
that date Jerry do you happen to
know more about how that federal
work authorization is provided
and federal agencies that that
issue that.
Mr chair.
Madam secretary Representative
Crowder the United States
government as let me back up to
the commercial driver's license
in the United States is
considered a real ID type of of
licensure in so it requires to
have a commercial driver's
commercial driver to have the
same credentials as you would
and same information that you
would be providing for a real ID
for the rest of us that are non
commercial drivers so through
the department of homeland
security an individual would be
able to get the work
authorization as a as a
resident as someone who is non
domiciled in the United States
so they come from another
country but are authorized
within the United States to be
able to work so that all brands
through the department of
homeland security at the federal
level then what would happen is
once that individual would get
that work authorization they
could then apply it to get a
commercial driver's license
within the state of New Mexico.
Thank you very much I appreciate
your explanations part of my
confusion I carry a concealed
carry permit issued by the state
of Florida.
And I live in New Mexico always
have my testing everything here
was accepted by the state of
Florida so they sent me a a
license and I was trying to
correlate are the similar and I
think they are but knowing that
the homeland security department
plays a role in this process it
is a good it helps me understand
the over overall picture so
thank you Mr chair that's all my
questions.
Thank you Representative Crowder
Representative Pettigrew.
We can hear here Representative.
Did you call me I did here
Representative thank you Mr
chair
Representative Crowder took care
of some of my questions and I
appreciate that.
My first question Mr chair in
presenters is.
As I understand it the piece of
the legislation that we need to
access to be compliant with
federal law.
Is the one with respect to human
trafficking is that correct Mr
chair.
Mr chair representative.
In handed over to secretary
Clarke for at for that.
Mr chair and representative
Pettigrew you're correct there's
that you then trafficking piece
that's incredibly important
there's also a piece having to
do with standardized training
that the the folks to administer
skills tests for commercial
driver's licenses have to
receive certain standardized
training and I think director W.
result just might be able to
help but I think there's also
something about hazardous
materials endorsement where
again our state law is more
restrictive than federal law at
a driver might have a certain
date of issuance and expiration
of their CDL and a different
date and expiration of a
hazardous materials endorsement
on their CDL and this will allow
those two dates to be
streamlined and and work
together.
Mr chair madam secretary
Representative Pettigrew that
secretary is correct we're
streamlining and all of all
three of those into the spill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
presenters for that so.
As I look at the title of this
thing we're trying to comply
with federal law.
And make sure that we get the a
portion that that
that the DOT and and the state
is due with respect to that so
as I take that.
Mr chair and presenters the rest
of the bill is.
Superfluous to the compliance
with federal law.
Would that be correct.
If I may Mister chair and and
Representative had a group there
is a repeal of a section
sections sixty six dash five
dash sixty five dot one that is
not required by federal law
there the repeal is to get rid
of an authorization for M. V. D.
to collect certain fees that we
have not collected since twenty
fifteen so there that's just
that's clean up to this general
section of code and then there's
also a change of
so right now our regular driver
a regular driver's license not a
commercial just a regular
driver's license a driver over
the age of seventy nine must
renew that annually but there's
a disconnect in state law
between federal are between our
regular driver's license and CDL
so here we're moving that age
from seventy five to seventy
nine the line CD else with
regular driver's license that
also is not related to
federalize just something we see
as clean up in the code.
Okay and thank you Mr chair
thank you Secretary for that
answer so.
I appreciated a bill this
separated the things that needed
to be done by federal to comply
with federal statute and
everything else on the cleanup
side.
There are parts and pieces of my
constituents are happy with.
But it's hard for me to want to
vote against the bill that that
lack.
The things that we need to do
from a federal standpoint.
As I understand it this bill is
already gone through one
committee and its next step
would be the house floor.
Is there any
Mr chair is there any and and
presenters is there anyway you
get you would be willing to
separate the pieces of this the
don't need that we don't have to
comply with federal law with.
And just deal with that.
Or
On making sure that we get.
All of this piece of legislation
through this year.
Mr chair representative role
this is I believe a very
important piece of legislation
that is going to help many of
the folks who not only was
mentioned by the secretary and
and folks like out in Rossel
it's I think it's necessary to
do both and so at this point
no.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you presenters I just read the
top of the bill it says an act
relating to commercial driver's
license aligning New Mexico
commercial driver's license
requirements of federal law.
I feel like that is a complete.
That is not.
Representative at your yes it
does we get us to comply with
federal law and puts us in a
line with federal law.
But it's not require that we do
some of the aspects in here and
I think the the the the actual
on page one from lines to
underline thirteen is little
misleading and I'm not.
I I am in in with.
Same thing else on that this.
Quicker Mr chair that the more
you get ready for this afternoon
Mr chair presenters as I
understand it if we have a CDL
state of New Mexico that CDL.
Is works in all of contiguous
states is that correct.
Mr Mr chair representative all
handed over to secretary
Schardin Clarke.
Mr chair and representative
pedigree you're correct there's
reciprocity agreements between
states.
So.
Thank you for that response so
Mister chair presenters
Whether we accept the non
domicile.
A piece of this legislation or
not doesn't really affect us
because other locations are
around us allow for that.
Would that be a correct
statement as well.
I'm Mr Chairman representative
Pettigrew I would push back on
that a bit one it could affect
our federal funding received by
D. R. T. in the road fund and
second in the the lives of the
individuals who are.
Currently residing in New Mexico
the if they wish to have a CDL
by failing to pass this law we
are imposing on them the
additional cost and
inconvenience of needing to go
to a different state to get that
CDL because it's currently not
available to them here.
Thank you.
Mr chair and madam secretary for
that response.
With diving into the response
just a little bit deeper.
I understand that this could
affect us.
The law that exists from the
federal standpoint as I
understand it it's existed for a
while it hasn't impacted us to
date while certain this is a big
big issue is our memo that came
down from the federal government
somewhere that said Hey you get
a lot of the the non domiciled
piece of this we're gonna start
making impact financial.
Thank you madam Mr chair
representative you might have
been out when Representative
Crowder asked this question but
we have until September to have
to do that how we have to
implement this the federal
government has already provided
a waiver to handle this is why
we we did the amendment for
January first because the
federal government will give us
the leeway between September and
December to put everything into.
To build that capacity to get
that going starting January
first.
Actually Mr chair and for the
and Representative Rubio I I
heard Representative Crowder
question and I heard the
response so that's the reason
for this the piece of this that
needs to align is there are the
three point that was the first
part of my question the non
domicile piece of this.
Non resident all of those pieces
are not something that was that
was laid out in the first three
items from the secretary all
what we have from the federal
law.
Less.
Act and I her role.
The page three.
Warning on on line three that
piece that we're adding is it
required to be combined with
federal.
Thank you Representative I do
believe there's a dog in your in
your home so it was hard to hear
that last piece well if you
could repeat the question.
So.
As I understand the response
from the secretary of state
stage three.
Starting with section F. line
three
One of the pieces and then the
new section starting on line
eighteen page three is it
something that's actually
required to be compliant with
the federal law and ensure that
we get our questions.
Did in my understanding that
Rowe.
Representative Mr chair repair
Mr chair representative I'll
allow secretary to speak on
that.
And and Mr chair representative
I I'd like to send that to the
deputy director who's more
familiar with the ins and outs
of this program.
Mr chairman and secretary
Representative Pettigrew
New Mexico does not have the
provision to be able to find a
non domiciled driver's license
right at the moment federal law
does require that a license
commercial driver's license to
someone who is not on domiciled
in the United States working
with the also work authorization
card have non domiciled put on
the driver's license so
something similar to like for
someone who is under twenty one
and we say under twenty one on
the license
and the law requires that the
license the only to the extent
as long as they're work
authorization card is usually
those are issued in one year
increments so the driver's
license needs to be able to
reflect that I'd New Mexico does
not have that provision right at
the moment or driver's licenses
are either four year or eight
year and so this would allow us
to be able to find a driver's
license to the limit of the work
authorization card and it would
also align New Mexico with the
federal requirement of having
non domiciled written on the
driver's licenses.
Thank you.
Mr chair and thank you for that
answer W. secretary I think
we're still dancing around
something.
One part of this piece of
legislation drills down specific
items that we need to take care
of to stay compliant with
federal law and make sure that
we receive our federal funding
the other pieces are things that
we would like to do to our
current let our current statutes
to either align ourselves with
federal law or or neighboring
Los.
But not necessary for federal
funding.
Would that be a correct
statement incorrect statement.
Mr chair representative.
I believe that it is what we are
trying to do both but
it's not necessarily the latter
that we're doing it for federal
funding we're also trying to
just get up to speed to what the
rest of the country is is moving
and there's there's no point in
us having to continue to operate
in the way that we are when it
comes to this legislation when
we can be.
Very much aligned with what
neighboring states are already
doing rather than having
constituents here within our
state.
Deal with costs and with all of
the necessary hurdles that are
required at this point in time.
Here we are staying in Mr chair
and presenters right here what
you're saying.
And this is this is tough for me
because I hear debates like your
legislation that we don't care
what our next door neighbors
doing.
And then we care what our next
door neighbors doing and it
depends on what we're on on how
we feel about it and so we
compare ourselves when it's in
your convenience and we don't
when it's not marketing it's
more social federal rules wanted
to enter convenience or don't
when it's not in in in and I'm
really stuck on the fact that
the first part of this thing
says we are in acting we are
lining New Mexico commercial
driver's license with federal
law.
I made.
This should be two pieces of two
different legislation pieces
very clearly this should be two
different things we should have
one piece of legislation that
says we got to get this done or
we lose our funding and we lose
a portion.
This is a clean up the second
piece of legislation is we need
to clean up our state could
state statutes of our state
rules.
In my opinion this should be two
pieces of legislation because of
that I cannot support thank you.
Thank you Representative thank
you Representative Garrett.
Mr chairman I would do passed
house bill one forty four is
amended.
All right so we have a due pass
motion by Representative Garrett
do have a second.
All right so we have a second by
Representative to the cruise
madam secretary if you call the
roll on a do pass motion for
house bill one forty four as
amended.
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
Representative dela Cruz yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thanks your Garcia.
Gentleman review.
Yes.
It is a past of five two zero.
All right so we have a due pass
on house bill one forty four as
amended.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
representatives and I appreciate
all of your convert the
discussion today and thank you
for for being here this morning
to to do that so I appreciate
it.
Thank you thank you members of
the committee.
Great madam chair.
Great thank you so much General
metal for recovering from this
morning for representatives and
folks and for folks in the
audience this is it for today we
will be back on Tuesday I do
believe that there is one piece
of legislation that's on the
agenda from Representative
mobile yeah him and I have
talked about it and and he's
really just looking forward to
some conversation and some
debate about it so will we'll do
that on Tuesday morning will
will come back at nine and and
and so that's it that's it for
today Representative that Bruce
again welcome and and we will
see you all on the floor this
afternoon at to see all of you
thank you madam chair thank you
all.
