These types of Albuquerque.
And this is our first weekend
meeting of the session so here
we go thank you madam.
Representative Pettigrew.
Good morning everyone my name is
Randall Pettigrew I am from
house district sixty one which
is.
Part of Lovington Hobbs unison
job New Mexico thank you right.
Representative Romero is in the
waiting room I believe.
And we elevator to analyst.
A technical issue ma'am I'm
working with her will be there
in a moment.
Thank you thank you.
I'm here.
Sorry.
I keep getting a link sent to my
spam for everything in this
legislative session and so even
though I I'm fighting with that
we were able to work it out but
I'm always able to attend in the
attendees however so it's very
confusing thank you for
welcome everybody I was able to
see and that everyone introduce
themselves if you don't mind
I'll go ahead is that alright
madam chair thank
Representative Andrea Romero
good morning everyone I'm from
the northern Santa Fe County
from the Espanola valley the
walking valley into the city of
Santa Fe thank you madam chair.
Thank you and have we heard from
there.
Do we have we heard from
Representative Representative
Lord.
Yes I'm also having technical
difficulties difficulties good
morning everyone good morning
madam chair Representative Lord
from district twenty two in east
arts.
Okay right
I thought a side but says Brad
Jones.
But I have to go in he sent me a
link because I can't I I'm
cannot get in for some reason
and so he said he has like so
let me log out of this log back
in so I'm not Brad.
Hey I didn't know if we should
take a chance of that working.
And madam chair rob the demon
Representative Ely is in the
attendees with his handout I
don't know if he's presenting
first or we should just go ahead
and try to get our first bill
Sanchez into the panelists
section.
Yes that's a great idea I mean
Madam chair on the and and rail
that everybody's having
technical problems that it's not
just an old guy problem you're
making me feel so much better
thank you so much all right.
I don't think age is a matter
the problem it is all of that.
Technicalities that come up.
Representative Ely while we're
waiting did you have any expert
witnesses you wish me to
promote.
Either
there may be somebody with the
sentencing commission are either
Linda Freeman or docharbor one
of those two maybe in the
waiting room
I'm happy to have the most
experts I don't think I'm going
to need to madam chair but I'm
happy to have them and they've
offered their services so be
great.
Madam chair promoted both of
those individuals thank you
thank you.
Right we should have just kept
Representative.
I hear what you had a chance.
Madam chair waddle waddle right
waiting I would love to be able
to give Representative Ely are
tapped for for offering up
twenty to twenty six additional
pages of information thirty
minutes beforehand you're so
concerts.
You're welcome
secretary has COVID so it was
it's been a real challenge a
my law office you do not have to
read that I I just want to make
sure that you had a because I'm
gonna be referencing it but I
can talk about it that's in a
later bill so I'm.
No no I I I just want to take
the opportunity to.
Honoring and that.
The trust me I read it.
I think we should have kept
Representative Lord.
Even as she's agency name.
Well I'm let's go ahead and take
roll call and we know she is
here
She does have the state will
come back.
Yes madam chair.
Representative Pettigrew.
Here.
Representative Thomson.
Senator.
By share more.
Hearing we're meeting with madam
chair.
That's true.
Range.
Yeah I'm president thank you.
And I'm continuing to try to
work with Representative Lord.
Okay great let's just go ahead
and we'll get her on board as
soon as possible
of the State our first bill this
morning is house bill eighty
four Representative Eli.
Ahead thank you madam chair
members the committee this does
not come with materials are very
happy to know Representative
Pettigrew madam chair.
So I'm I I I I just wanna give
you a this won't take long but I
do want particularly for the new
members to know what the
background is yes this was a
system that we set up with
bipartisan support
Representative night we're not
work together on what was.
I want to say it was two
thousand nineteen but I could be
wrong it was shot house bill two
sixty nine.
And the reason the parties came
together is because we have been
in the past giving money to
participants in the criminal
justice system having the
criminals but the courts to dust
the public defender's behavioral
health you name it we've been
kind of giving money out
without the and I don't
procreate counted Bill of.
I mean for example a few years
back you I million dollars to
the second judicial district
DA's office and with really no
performance goals and what the
bureaucrats call perform
performance just goals
performance measures and real
accountability so data in real
time to evaluate programs work.
If they are can we apply those
lessons to other areas of the
state and if they're not shut
down the program well there was
no real system believe it or not
to do that so we set up house
bill two sixty nine it is I'm
happy to go into lots of the
details but I don't honestly
think you need it there are
coordinating council set up
around the state that former
Chief Justice Judy drive more
actually set up and they bring
the participants together in the
local areas that are involved in
the criminal justice system and
they figure out what they need
and they apply for grants and
somebody has to evaluate number
one whether those requests make
sense prioritize those requests
and then insist on performance
measures goals and a real
accountability data sharing
data in real time so that they
can evaluate it and we can all
done publicly so there's a
transparency in the system so
you can see where both Democrats
and Republicans would get
together in a bill like this
because it's using taxpayer
dollars why is as opposed to
just sending money out the door
and hoping for the best and what
we discovered and Justice Chavez
was behind us you know I I am
I'm never made any secret of
this are close friends but but
just as childish maybe as a
smart guy and he's got a public
service as we have and she was
on a criminal justice task force
that led to a house bill two
sixty nine and what we realized
as we more money's coming in the
pipeline is that the requests
that the sentencing commission
is going to review it wasn't
broader to cover the other kinds
of requests that are gonna come
into the system so we've added
and this is the critical section
on page two we've added a number
of other areas where EDF these
criminal the if the sub
coordinating councils I.
Requests that then they're going
to be reviewed in the ways that
I talked about for these areas
right now we only have one two
and three and we've added for
through chat and it's it's hard
to try and capture all of the
money that's going to start
coming into the criminal justice
system so we can really get a
handle on is this money working
and I don't know I I have Linda
Freeman and Joe Carter with the
sentencing commission obviously
I said something wrong I would
sure like them to champion and
I'm encouraging them to do that
but if not if I understand
correctly I know the committee
it's a Saturday I want to take a
much here time I'm happy to turn
it back over you chair but let
me just ask Miss Freeman or
Mister car reflection correctly
at that's alright madam chair.
Representative Ely members of
the committee on I agree with
as Representative Eli his I.
characterization is entirely
accurate and the reasons that
divisional grant reasons that
are in the bills are indicated
above of areas that we have
gotten requests for people asked
about and also I believe that
Representative Eli did a lot of
outreach the criminal justice
coordinating councils like
talking to them about other
things that they would perhaps
want to pursue that they've been
limited by the initial three
purposes that were designated in
the statute with that.
And madam chair Representative
members of the committee Douglas
carver with the sentencing
commission it's good to see you
again
and I just want to let the
committee know that the
commission's legislative
committee discussed the spell at
its meeting last Tuesday and
supported it unanimously so this
bill does have the support of
the sentencing catch commission
madam chair.
With that madam chair will turn
back over you and and questions
or comments to the committee or
the audience right now thank you
madam chair okay thank you
representative will go to pull
the audience
If you could pull the at the
poll.
And
Go ahead those in the audience
if you'd like to weigh in.
Okay we have twenty seven of
people in favor and three
propose.
So we will go to
Public comment.
And those who are in opposition
please raise your hand only
those in opposition will here
first.
Marci then.
Can you hear me now.
Yes we can't okay I am against
this bill and while I know that
there's some language that makes
it positive some positive
movement
I I first of all I have had real
issues with this of the the
Democrat legislation I know what
you want to try to say it's not
partisan but it is with the way
that you guys have you you and
being able to see CEO for at the
roundhouse that's a violation of
second amendment but
restricting gun
of guns.
Possession for anybody who's
will a lawful of biting Services
citizen is
just really another little tiny
step that the are that people
who are socialist and communist
for using we see in Australia
and young just because you carry
gun doesn't mean that your
criminal it's meant to protect
you.
I'm sorry that person is on the
wrong bill it sounds like we are
on house bill eighty four crime
reduction requests purposes.
So go to the next person in
opposition.
Donna or drawn down.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Well first of all.
I would like to know why all
that money was given out with no
accountability rules.
And I would
I would want to know where the
money went how it was spent
specifically
And you know with receipts or
whatever accountability choose
to to use before you give out
more money so that's why I'm
opposed.
Next.
The final public comment in
opposition madam chair okay
great now if those will lower
their hands and those in support
raise your hands.
And we have one minute if you'll
watch the timer goes in support
of house bill eighty four.
RT.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee I hope you can hear
me.
My name is Arti pep and director
of the administrative office of
the courts we've been involved
in the grant process through the
National The New Mexico sensing
Commission the original bill by
Representative Eli was a great
idea it was the funding was put
to good purposes there is
accountability through the
process the sensory Commission
adopted this money has done
multiple levels of good compared
to the amount of investment in
new investment will be as
rewarding and I really urge the
committee to vote in favor of
house bill eighty four it will
do a lot a lot of good through
our criminal justice
coordinating council thank you.
Derek Scott.
Hello madam chair men women and
members of the committee.
I've been asked commented just
about this is yeah out more
capability is always better when
it comes to any of money on
requests so I appreciate
bipartisan agency on this bill
and the fact that we as look
into the secretary of
accountability for grant
programs I hope that we can do
this more and other programs
thank you.
Six.
Jason Weaks.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee Jason Weaks on
behalf of Bernalillo county
really County stands in strong
support of this legislation I
want to thank Representative Ely
for his efforts on this Act and
and and continued refinements
Bernalillo county has probably
the most well developed the CGC
see your criminal justice
coordinating council in the
state it's really a place for
stakeholders can break down
silos and this mechanism has
been an important tool to give
C. G. C. C.'s some teeth in
terms of pushing criminal
justice reform forward hello
County was a recipient through
the C. J. C. C. and all the
other criminal justice partners
in the county of one of the
requests that the original act
created we used it to create a
hip high frequency utilize our
list we can identify high for
conceal as is coming in and out
of jails using services it's
going to help us really respond
to those issues and create
programs that effectively
address those underlying issues
that cause crime and continue to
push for this criminal justice
reform thank you.
Jamie Frasier page.
Rules Morning madam chair
members of the committee.
I think did you keep performance
indicators in any endeavor are
essential you have to know what
you're doing works so that you
can tweak it if it isn't or
continue what it is and use that
to move forward in other areas
so while I don't agree with
everything that comes from
Representative Eli Eli and.
Frequently I'm in disagreement
with the decision to this
committee this is one thing I
can whole heartedly support
thank you for your time.
Rikki Lee shot a.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee reviewed the
Chavez legislative coordinator
for the New Mexico called
defense lawyers association the
standard strong support of house
lady for we appreciate the work
of the sponsors and the groups
that have put this together as
we always are looking and
supporting ways to affect
positive criminal legal reform
thank you for your time.
Judge Angie Schneider.
Good morning everyone madam
chair members of the committee I
am entry shiner I'm the chief
judge in the twelfth judicial
district that's Lincoln and
Otero counties and I chair the
Otero county criminal justice
coordinating council and I am
also here in support of this
bill for the reasons already RT
outline and I think
representative Ely force work on
this bill thank you everyone.
Melissa Martinez.
Hello my name is Melissa
Martinez I am speaking on behalf
of the system and also is a
member of the lake thank you to
our people and members for
listening to me I am speaking
for because I live in Bernalillo
county there are a lot of things
that need to be addressed which
need specialty Task Force maybe
more money into resources like
Bernalillo county Representative
had spoken before I am to live
in a high crime area my children
and I used it to escape from a
domestic violence area and it's
not as bad it's just as bad as
for a left so and in support of
you guys thank you all for also
supporting us the people at the
other end.
Madam chair that was the final
public comment.
Thank you very much thank you of
public for your comments
we'll go to the committee
Are there any questions.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative new life for
your legislation.
Representative.
We have to work on this because
people are gonna start talking
this is to bills and we we
Karia.
Well I'm I I am very.
Happen with this there's.
Right I'm gonna apologize up
ahead of time you're gonna have
to give me some history on a
couple things so I can wrap my
head around.
Where we go from here.
Their original hospitals was was
to seventeen are what people
looking up
legislation and and figuring out
the.
Remove fire marshal for fire
marshal from the PRC was was the
original bill for this so when
you said to sixty nine so it's
two sixty Senator two thousand
nineteen and and I and I went
through and I read some of that
stuff.
And.
What what I guess confusion for
me on is when what was funded in
two thousand nineteen I want to
our.
To the courts and to the AOC
into the sentencing commission
opportunities to to grant these
funds.
How much was actually made
available in the beginning.
So are Representative Pettigrew
before hand side question couple
things like now.
I I appreciate what you said
about
you know we're on the same side
of this this this has been a
avail from the beginning I and
and thank you for correcting me
on the number I I you know every
time I guess I'm wrong so I
appreciate that I
Really I think have worked hard
to try and figure out bills that
we can work on together I mean
I'm talking about Republicans
and Democrats in this was one of
the I got a committee of Quixtar
and I have a
along the gender but when a bill
to sixty seven went over to the
Senate Stuart Ingle who is a
friend of mine in the minority
leader
the board so my picture up there
instead you know I don't agree
with Representative you lie all
the time justice Chavis is here
and I agree with and so I'm
supporting this bill I do want
to do though just so everybody's
clear the chairs right this is
not a gun because I want to
address that No Way I I do got
bills and I do that probably and
you and I will disagree on those
bills this is not a second I
would tell you that was second
this bill
I'm sorry the other the other
points from the audience was
what I want to five million
dollars what I would tell that
member is stay tuned watch house
bill five when it comes up
Senate judiciary because I'll be
asking to do a that very
question what happened the five
million dollars so that question
is going to be asked as far as
the question of how much money
we have two people that I think
could address that I think well
Linda and Doug administrative
administrative carver from the
sentencing commission but you
also have if they can't A. O. C.
the directors here RT happened
and he could probably responded
that by the time it got through
the wash I thank you could I
would venture a guess as to how
much money started to go into
the system and how much can to
the sentencing commission
Valette mistreatment answer that
because I think she probably
most appropriate person answer
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Pettigrew I can
turn over the screen and I think
she can and.
Yes Representative the members
of the committee I apologize
earlier I did I realize I did
not fully introduce myself but
at any rate initially we
received just about three
hundred fifty thousand dollars
the recurring appropriation is
one hundred and seventy eight
thousand dollars and what
actually happened is some of the
monies for pre trial services
which are mentioned in the
original house bill two sixty
seven actually went directly to
the administrative office of the
courts that one point I knew
those dollar amounts however
many years have passed since
then like three years have
passed I can't remember off the
top of my head I would defer to
RT have been the director of the
LFC.
And madam chair she is in the
audience so I don't think you
can talk.
And can you say his name again
yeah it's right there I can see
on A. R. T. I. E. last name is
P. E. P. I. air.
Madam chair thank you.
Hello madam chair I don't know
if you can.
Yes we can't well great I
appreciate my promotion to a
panelists very nice thank you
we did receive funds I can tell
you the exact number right now
we did use funds under the
original grant funding at crime
reduction grant funding act we
AOC I'm the director of the
administrative office of the
courts both for pre trial
services and to work with the
sensor Commission on a project
of that exchange which was
Freeman is quite familiar with
that's a going on very
successfully to integrate data
sharing among of all kinds of
folks involved in the criminal
justice system from jails to
prosecutors defense attorneys
the courts of course and but it
was it was a significant impact
on pre trial services because
that was back when we were just
starting to work on pre trial
services and now we're sort of
in the middle of implemented pre
trial services statewide I know
there are expanded purposes for
the funding for the funds that
would be provided in the current
bill and that's a wonderful
thing
I would probably say we will not
try to access these funds for
pre trial services because the
legislature's generously been
supporting our efforts in that
regard to go statewide
but I know there are many
projects that the criminal
justice coordinating council
will undertake with these funds
that are you know it's the local
folks to determine what they
need the money for and that's a
really good way to spend your
public money to improve public
safety giving it to the folks in
the local communities working
across their jurisdictional
lines to improve public safety.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that those answers
madam chair my next question or
may go to everybody again.
The way I read the bill and the
way I read the analysis is there
is no funds are.
For there there is no funding
for this and we do not insure
and prisoners and this is
Representative.
Rest six different.
Programs within here and that
does concern me because.
One of the pieces on on page two
section or section seven.
section to item seven.
Right lines nineteen through
twenty one allows our
communities together to recruit
or retain law enforcement
officer prosecutors.
Public defenders correctional
officers and mental health
workers and it's just funding
sources are you know reoccurring
knows of only a hundred and
sixty eight thousand a year you
know what is I get you.
Two people the DA's office two
or three people in the public
defender's office that does
concern me Madam chairman
presenters and so
maybe a little bit discussion on
on.
We're spending some of the
capabilities of this which I
think is a great thing but how
do we how do we how do we know
that we're actually gonna have
the money for it is there is
there is there another piece in
the grant process that more
money can be drawn for if that
if if needed thank you madam
chair representative Pettigrew
you know what that is an
excellent question and I should
address to the beginning the
money piece of this is going to
be part of house bill two.
So so what will happen is yes
asked us so remember if we're
doing stuff statewide if the
governor says I want to put a
hundred million dollars in the
cops this bill is due today and
nothing to do with because that
that will go to different
apartments this is where house
bill two and we're all waiting
to see what that's gonna look
like this is where house bill
two says we want to send money
to local communities you give
them the operator or two
departments rather so that they
can become granting agency so
local communities can then apply
for the grants these public
monies to help support their
local communities so every local
there are I think and this
Freeman can correct me if I'm
wrong I think there's thirteen
according to council staff right
thirteen yeah so they're
starting around the state.
And the into what we're hoping
to do yes and this is also lacks
a bipartisan bill is create
integration not just at the
state level but now we really
encourage innovation at the
local level you know let's say I
mean I give the example years
ago you know Gallup might have a
problem we just jewelry you know
with with with native American
Jordan being strolling or
whatever would be or or or
fraudulently maybe that that's
something they want to address
in their community I mean I'm
I'm not saying that's true just
saying that could happen because
they're so close to the Navajo
Nation and then on the other
hand Albuquerque wants to
address crime and they want to
have saved more better data
sharing whatever would be this
allows local communities to kind
of control our own destiny and
so the money is not in this
piece this is simply to continue
the system so that there's some
kind of coordination between
the money going out and the
local entities asking for the
money so the only condition any
as will prioritize it
everybody's gonna look at it in
a transparent basis to descend
to commission and the commission
then as US goals let us know
when you know you're in in time
periods you know what do you
want to accomplish with this
money say in six months or a
year and that provide us with
real data so we can evaluate
whether you're meeting those
goals that's all discussed to
you right the money piece No Way
hundred sixty eight thousand
would be anything that's the
past what we're trying to do now
with this and fusion of dollars
in the house bill two to address
criminal justice is have some
way of getting local communities
engaged in a way that they're
working in these coordinating
councils by the way are
fantastic I mean when they're
working they're great and they
have you know dust courts public
defenders share some.
Officers generals whoever the
local entities want to get fall
and so that's why you're not
seeing dollars for this wait for
hospitals to.
So sorry for the long answer and
I apologize general try to keep
a much shorter but I want to
make sure that I addressed that
I would think is an excellent
question thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you very much and use me I
think
has witnessed Mr Carter would
like to respond quickly.
Yes thank you madam chair and
Representative group yes very
briefly I wanted to let you know
that part of the reason for this
bill was in the three years that
the sentencing commission has
been discussing these requests
there's been a request from the
community
to expand the purposes because a
certain programs communities
have had.
But we didn't have grant
purposes so we could in the
statutes we couldn't find those
innovative programs and ideas so
part of the purpose of this we
hope that there will be more
money for the program after this
legislative session but this is
responding to the local
communities who wanted more
purposes and for which we can
just press requests and let the
committee know we disperse
grants to almost every judicial
district in the state so this
isn't a I. twenty five corridor
program at all members divided
here judge Snyder on
yes it's it's great for you all
to know that we've been giving
money to everyone I think is one
district that has been applied
yet so I just want to add those
points thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and and I
do appreciate the long answer
are expected this to be a long
day so I'm okay with that
in in it is important to me to
to I.
One I intend is where your bills
to I want to be able to descend.
Why we're doing this and what's
happening through my DA's office
through the judges I've talked
to there's no opposition to the
US and but I still don't have it
just have to be able to wrap my
head around the what what was
done and we're eight two and and
Mister carver I appreciate your
agency analysis and it speaks
very specifically what you just
said and I think that.
Madam chair well
Representative Eli I think my.
I want to make a statement to
support is wrong I would like
for to be corrected because it
like I said I'll really trying
to wrap my head around this
right now the funds go to the
sentencing commission and the
AOC granted there are there
council's out there that look at
this and and and bring the
current requests through so
would it be fair to say that the
in house bill to the sentencing
commission and the AOC office so
they'll see as of requests
specific funds.
For for this on the expansion
side.
Hoping that this bill passes
that they get their expanded
piece.
I'm gonna turn it over to both
Mr Carter's Freeman and and Mr
happened but I do want to say
that this bill is not limited in
terms of the granting
authorities being the AOC
and sensor Commission are the
money to go to the for example
department public safety and so
they have if they have grant
money for local communities yeah
the same process work life so
it's not gonna be limited to
that but I'm assuming I see are
Mr Evans hand up and chair I
could turn it over to him I
think you can answer this
question.
All right hand which he sees an
old guy like me.
I'm not sure our company can
directed emotional supports.
I don't anticipate that AOC will
function as a grant providing
agency in this regard I think we
are going to discordant the
sensor Commission of of the
original bill makes us one of
the grant providing agencies and
that's because of the original
funding elsewhere in the
legislature in the two that in
the original of legislation
find us to are making thousand
five hundred in FY nineteen and
hundred twenty eight thousand
five hundred in FY twenty so I
found the amount of money we did
spend with just under forty
seven thousand for those pre
trial services
because as this process has
matured I think we've grown
confident in the sense the
commission's ability to manage
the funds I see the FIR
indicates the general
appropriations act is working
about two million dollars in
that would be fantastic and I I
hope that happens and we are
partner and a member of course
of the sensor Commission and I
think we work through that
process madam chair members of
the commission of the committee
rather as opposed to just see
independently acting as a grant
providing agency although we
could do so under the original
legislation but things are
working well to censor
Commission and I hope they get
the funding for the expanded
purposes in the bill you have
under consideration I answer any
other questions you have but I
do want to circle back to answer
the question I couldn't answer
earlier about how much money
spent there was three forty
seven.
And madam chair I see that this
Freeman has unit are chained up
as well you she can talk that
would be for yes please
Representative members of the
committee just briefly I believe
I did a good job of kind of
covering the main point I wanted
to discuss so
just given the way that the
monies were initially
distributed I think that it's
kind of like to the commission
kind of being the only
administrative agency who's
who's giving funding now we have
a hundred seventy eight thousand
dollars this allocated our
budget for those requests and we
actually have a subcommittee
that is comprised of all the
major agencies we have
Representative the
administrative office of the
courts who serves on that
subcommittee and moreover we do
off coordinate to make sure that
the types of programs that we
are considering are consistent
with the the standards that the
LCS put and we get lots of
requests for my treatment court
so we want to make sure that
we're signing of a treatment
court has the fidelity it's
going to go through all the the
steps on the E. O. C. process
also so there's great
coordination we have
Representative from the
department of public safety we
have representatives from the
district attorney's the public
defender's we try to keep a very
balanced
Grant Committee who actually
reviews those those grant
applications so that's kind of
our approach of how how we've
handled the situation.
Thank you.
Anything else Representative
pedicure.
Yes ma'am thank you madam chair
But somehow I managed to press
five different agency analysis
go through all that goes through
the bill and completely miss the
FIR so madam chair I will tell
you this quit asking things
about the budget because now I
have that now already have the
answers I can go back through my
notes.
I appreciate some of the
specifics in here with respect
to data collection I would like
to hear.
From
from the presenters
specifically the data driven
policy programs and I think.
Sure the part of that answer was
was.
Was already dealt with with
respect to the question on the
five million that representative
Ely talked about for House Bill
five on some specific questions
he plans to deal with on that.
The in in the fact that
You Mr.
made the statement the the the
system that they're doing some
data exchange now that allows
that that may be the answer to
the question I may just need to
be able to close the loop on
that.
Thank you.
madam chair on your treatment
wants to ensure that I will turn
it over.
Yes Representative the members
of the committee
basically the data sharing I
believe the data exchange and
the data integration projects
are key one of the tools that
were you definitely using for on
the accountability and the data
driven aspect of the programs
but it dition only each one of
the requests agrees to a data
sharing agreement by which they
share on information with the
with the sentencing commission
that would allow us to evaluate
the outcomes of the individuals
who are recipients who have
received funding
I received a benefit from the
funding of the grant so this is
really in earnest our first year
just given the timing of
everything in the special
purposes for the year one
funding where we're going to the
process and we will begin to
look at future criminal justice
contact for those individuals we
are also working with some of
the new programs to help them
establish baseline measures by
which they can use going forward
have internal accountability
about the on affected this of
those programs so I hope that
answers your question so I mean
it's kind of two fold the data
exchange will become a
repository of information that's
helpful for these types of the
valuations but additionally each
grant recipient does agree to do
to provide that information and
we will continue to follow up on
those on those individuals far
past the on the period of their
funding.
Thank you for that response in
yes it does answer my question
madam chair.
With the original bill in two
thousand nineteen and in the the
additions that we're adding on
here.
What do you all intend.
What is the intent for reporting
structure on how will this
process is gonna work working
moving forward.
And and the other question.
We can speed it up.
My last question if you're
wanting us from both together
do you see any potential
integration of house bill eighty
four with the house bill ninety
six the violin and the violence
intervention protection act and
you see these working
potentially together to
Working on the prevention that
side of it and then the
reduction side as well and with
that madam chair with those
answers all your the only time.
So madam chair I see Mr Kirk was
up so and both mistreatment Mr
Carter what are you guys going
to have to decide which one you
want to talk because they got a
lot of stuff so which one the
lower your hand up I'm gonna
make you choose okay as we got
Mr Garber your car if you can
answer those questions on that
one I I know there are other
panelists and questions but
they're also the bills so our
alter or Mr Carter thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Pettigrew on reporting it's not
and it's in the act it's not the
section that you have as part of
this bill the sentencing
commission reports to the CCJ
that promo the courts
corrections and justice
committee every I believe it's
November on the requests that
we've just first and what's been
done with the requests in a
given year so that's statute
it's just not in the section of
the crime reduction grant act
that is in this bill we also
report that to the LFC so we are
required to make those reports
every year we would do it anyway
of course but we're prior to
make those reports every year
and I'm sorry Representative the
second half your question was.
The second half of my question
was the other day we we we
listen to a bill that will
continue on.
Ninety six on the violence.
Prevention act.
Is there an integration somehow
with the inner with the
prevention side of this in the
reduction side and how do of the
Courts see that working
together.
Thank you representative madam
chair as you might recall from
that bill the sentencing
commission also reviews those
requests we don't have the same
those requests run through the
department of health but they
get reported up to us and the
structure of that bill was very
similar to the crime reduction
Brandt act we were involved with
the drafting of that bill but
you could tell that whoever
drafted it modeled it on the
crime reduction Brandt act and
we can see those two efforts
working together I'm your
conceivably violence
intervention programs that have
been another purpose added to
the proper direction grand Act
but yes that act this past and
it's funded separately we would
definitely.
Ornate plus to efforts part of
house bill two sixty seven
twenty nineteen a separate part
outside the crime reduction bran
Act was giving the sentencing
commission explicit authority to
coordinate data sharing across
the criminal justice system in
the state so part of our ongoing
duties that we do outside the
crime reduction grant act is
make sure the systems are
talking together and
coordinating all these various
efforts is one reason the
commission has twenty seven
members from across the criminal
justice system and members
appointed by both chambers and
both parties in the legislature
is to ensure that the silos are
broken down that was the big
driver behind two sixty seven so
I can see the crime reduction
grant.
Act requests working in
conjunction or being paired with
the violence intervention
program
program if that gets
gets launched a good examples of
this past year we funded a great
program for domestic violence or
inTaos we provided essentially
the seed money for that and then
that district got some
additional money to essentially
make the same hole and so our
money through the crime
reduction grant act and the
other money tell Scott was able
to launch this innovative
domestic violence court up there
inTaos and I can see this
this crime reduction requests
working hand in hand in a
similar way if some jurisdiction
wanted to essentially looking
into pots of money to make
something all we do ask as part
of our process whether this will
provide the whole
project or whether they'll be
looking for other monies for the
project we try to distribute the
money is that we have as widely
as we have rather than giving
the whole pot to one district
and maybe others out the cold so
I hope Representative madam
chair that that answers
questions.
I really appreciate your
patience with me and give me the
background and and kind of give
me the vision as well I look
forward to hearing about how
this continues to progress in
the years to come madam chair
thank you for your patience I
yield.
Thank you Representative Romero
I think you Representative next
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Ely for bringing
this forth at with
Representative Nibert I just
have a few comments and and one
question I'll just start with is
I know from the piece of
legislation that you're not
you're coordinating a lot of the
activities and services but not
the budget of these services and
one of the sort of gaps that we
have continuously that I find in
our legislative body is the
money doesn't match the need
sometimes when we have all these
incredible findings of where it
is that we can do the most to to
prevent crime to be able to
impact communities in a positive
way I'm just curious why that
was left out or if that was an
intentional or if that is the
intent as well with the findings
that will come from this bill.
So chair representative
the question is is yeah this is
not about the money
One of the ideas of this year's
is that innovation comes from
can come from anywhere including
the local level I'm a former
county commissioner so I really
believe that you programs start
work and dissension Division
says Hey this program really is
what we got to back it up and we
can show that provides you as
representatives because I would
be there with the ammunition to
be able to go back to the
appropriators and say you know
this is a really good program I
think Representative Pettigrew
mention violence intervention
program those are good programs
I mean LFC we have real data
behind it now because LFC is
looked at it as that data comes
in we can say this is work and
work in these areas that I think
will inform the budget makers to
be able to say we need to
finance this and so going
forward in four step process.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative that is hopeful
and I know that this is possibly
your last session and I don't
want to I don't want to put that
on because I hope you'll stay
with us but I just a shout out
to to Doug and of course so all
those that have been working on
this for so long Linda thank you
for for being here today and and
continuing this this effort and
as Representative Eli leaves I
hoped to pick up the baton on
these efforts to continue with
being able to build these
opportunities into the budget
and and just a comment you know
we have a lot of different crime
bills in this session that are
up for the taking and
I just this is not sexy four of
for the sort of sound bites and
the you know the bits that I
think a lot of folks run on for
office but this is the real work
as far as I'm concerned that
helps us really route upending
crime in our communities the the
in the ways that invests the
time effort energy and and hire
the right people to help with
that rather than respond to the
issues that we have at hand so I
just want to commend the effort
with this I fully supported and
hope that we continue to do this
type of crime fighting in the
ways that that really works so
thank you madam chair and and
and two I just wanted to add
that I many of these bodies are
so eager to help work together
and I appreciate that the way of
going about it as a council the
behavioral health councils have
been extremely
the prolific in their findings
and their ability to connect the
dots on what works in our local
area and I just hope that the
same thing happens for courts
where we've seen backlog that
etcetera so I really just want
to commend everyone here and
just a comment about crime
fighting thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative and
and all the presenters.
Thank you Representative
Representative Lord and if you'd
like to introduce yourself as we
know letting you get a chance to
do that.
Thank you mentioned this is
Representative Lord I'm from the
east mountains district twenty
two.
Good morning Representative Eli
so you ready for this I agree
with your bill.
There.
Representative roasted it's
right it's it's not for lack of
a better word it's not a sexy
bill there's not a big or about
it this is actually the nuts and
bolts of getting stuff done I do
also appreciate that it's not
guns Center it's crime centric
which is so important to me I
just want crime to be addressed
overall matter how that crime is
done I thank you Representative
Pettigrew you did a great job
you asked a whole bunch my
questions I did reach out for
some definitions
I wasn't sure what law
enforcement crisis training was
I did get that answer which is
training hold on one second.
It's good to have people on
speed this ask questions so
basically training our law
enforcement for mental health
and go ciation de escalate de
escalation that innocent people
know what that is the only
question we have is on page two
number seven recruit or train
law enforcement officers are
there any specific law
enforcement officers or is it
any would it be city police
state police sheriff's I just
didn't know what specification I
was with law enforcement so
madam chair and representative
law enforcement is actually
defined in the statute.
This is so law enforcement would
include
all all peace officers it also
weirdly includes I just happen
to know this because I was
looking at the other day the
supervisors of the correction
facilities
but not the correctional
officers I don't know what it
but says that's not included but
it is everybody that you with
Cinco that would be given the
authority to arrest you.
It's pretty broad I don't have
in front of me but law
enforcement's provided it
doesn't have to be to find your
because we don't want to have
definitional sections and one
that might be consistent with
somewhere else right.
Chair representative I just want
to make sure that it was
everyone you know we we want to
make sure that everyone's
included but this can sometimes
people narrow it down to just
one specific time.
Law enforcement agency.
The questions I have I will be
voting yes on this bill and
thank you for bring it forward
and I yield my time manager.
Thank you and there any other
questions.
Okay I just like to add that I
think this is a great idea I've
worked with the community D. W.
Y. programs throughout the state
where we had you know like a
list of different things that
they could
you know is projects or things
they came up with to implement
in their own communities and it
was very similar group of people
here law enforcement of all your
agencies your DA
at behavioral health of the
jails all the different aspects
of the criminal justice
coordinating council seems to
have also involved and it worked
really well to get funding this
first but we also had the
accountability of the data after
each project and for that to
come together at traffic safety
bureau so I'm very much in favor
of this bill to I think it's
great
so with that do you have
anything else you'd like to add
Madam chair you just you just a
few hours.
Yes that's right well let's take
about first what is the will of
the committee.
Madam chair I'm make a motion
for to pass in that madam chair.
All right we do that very often
committee.
Glad I could bring you together
yes
more uniting
So but we have moved too far to
pass in the second
would you take role we don't
would that be a unanimous
consent by the committee.
No in subjecting.
Okay you have a due pass with a
vote of count everybody one two
three four five five to nothing.
I'm here thank you.
And thank you to your experts we
appreciate you being here thank
you madam chair.
Thank you okay we'll go on to
our next committee.
I'm committee I'm sorry I heard
next bill it's a house bill
ninety nine crime of threatening
a judge and Sanchez are
Representative Lane.
Dayan Hochman be he'll be here
Martinez your client date and.
Representative Gail Chasey.
Madam chair you still have me
elevated to a panelist I will be
watching this bill and I'm very
interested there are many other
members of the courts that will
be I think panelists so you
probably want to drop me
although if you have anything
you need from the administrative
office on this bill I will
certainly be here but you
probably don't need me act as a
panelist but I'd be happy to
stay in the just want to make
sure I will say goodbye in a
minute we just have to get
people on.
Unless they ask for you.
Madam chair could we repeat
those who need to be elevated
the panelists I'm not seeing
several of them in the ambulance
okay Representative Lane do want
to let us know loss on your
sponsor list annexes thank you
madam chair Matteo page.
Chief Justice Vigil.
Judge Francis Mathew.
Judge Cindy leos.
And judge Andrew Schneider and
and maybe if those folks could
raise and that might be helpful
as well.
Good idea.
Leave that is everyone madam
chair Representative please feel
free to let me know if there's
someone else that you need me to
elevate and this thing.
Great thank you.
Okay Representative Lane if
you'd like to go ahead and
introduce your bill house bill
ninety nine.
Thank you madam chair a good
morning madam chair this
Saturday and members of the
committee so this this bill
house bill ninety nine and
socially there's two portions of
the bill as as you know the
first portion creates a four
degree felony and the second
portion creates a misdemeanor
with regard to the first portion
essentially it it what it would
do is make it unlawful to
threaten a charger her immediate
family member with great bodily
harm also to try to prevent them
from doing their duties as a
judge or to retaliate against
the judges as a result of any
action taken by the judge to the
court the second section makes
it unlawful to share the
personal information of a judge
in order to costs arm to the
judge or interrupt the judicial
proceedings and you know in my
mind there's a couple reasons
why I think we we need a bill
like this.
To address some some more
they're going on our state one
is and I don't think it's a hard
so it's vital that we keep our
judicial process neutral
objectives and free from any
kind of outside influence and so
that's that's the first goal is
we you know as a as a body of
legislators and lawmakers would
you make laws all day long but
when there's any disputes or any
violations of those laws if we
don't have a neutral injected
scored there are system really
would fall so that's that's part
of it is try to make sure there
are working judges are are a
insulated through the judicial
process.
But then the other the other
reason was my money and and this
one maybe just a little more new
wants but.
I I the reality is and I
understand this as a as a
practicing lawyer is there
there's a real challenge right
now with recruiting good and
high level talent judges to the
bench all right and right now
one of the things we're doing is
we're we're addressing the
compensation levels of our
judges and rightfully so so so
we'll be seeing that an H. B.
two but then there is the other
I think issue that people have
when it comes to should I leave
private practice surely public
sector working join the bench
which is you you tend to become
a member of this magnifying
glass.
RT where every decision you make
is now under the microscope and
and there's a there's a healthy
part to that but we also need to
make sure that our judges aren't
scared fearful of any reprisals
or anything taken against them
as a result of of any judgment
that they may enter so that's
the second reason as well you
know and it some may wonder is
there a need to create yet
another
criminal.
Action.
And I would note that we are
actually doing something similar
in statute with regard to
witnesses so there's an existing
law on the books that if you try
to threaten or intimidate a
witness it's actually a third
degree felony and then if you
actually retaliate against a
witness instead of being four
degree filling which is what
this would be it actually makes
it a second degree felony so
where do you where do you
recognized in parts of the
process through witnesses and
this would just extend that
recognition to judges themselves
madam chair I would like to give
of Chief Justice hello a couple
of minutes to share about the
importance of this bill as well
as judges Matthew Wilson
Schneider and then at the
appropriate time to do have an
appointment for the committee to
consider as well.
Yes go ahead please.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Michael B. L. I'm the chief
justice of New Mexico and I
thank the members of the
committee of for taking up this
matter on on Saturday morning
it's it's unusual but yes thank
you so much for taking your time
I also like to thank the all of
the sponsors of this very
important legislation the
governor for putting it on the
call and for much help page from
Dale C. for working hard on this
bill
to get it in its present shape
particularly I'd like to to
thank representative Lente for
taking the self regulate before
you here today.
there are no statistics.
Maintained by the national
center for state courts on the
numbers of threats made against
state judges are so we don't
have the out that kind of data
to give you we do have data from
the AOC New Mexico at ministry
of office of the courts however
and it shows that in at twenty
twenty AOC receive reports of
any threats against courthouses
and seven threats against
judges.
Twenty one just last year AOC
recent reports of I threats
against courthouses and tenth
right to get judges those are
the the no threats there are
judges but I'm aware of we
appreciate to service threats
that rather than exacerbate or
make more public the threat was
made against them keep it to
themselves or keep it very very
private we do know from the
federal marshals service twenty
twenty the US marshal service
received
reported up four thousand two
hundred sixty one threats of
inappropriate communications
affect against federal judges
and members of the federal
judiciary by contrast to that in
two thousand fifty there were
less than a thousand threats for
that represents a three hundred
percent increase
we never knew where we were
going to come to this party
member growing up.
Where are you the members of the
committee may remember as well
that in the new house they would
report that a judge made a
decision right judge did this
for this was before a court and
out of respect for the privacy
of the judge in our respect for
the job that the judge was
performing the judge was not it
identified by the that has
clearly changed in this day and
age and it's it's it's has
serious consequences all members
of the judiciary it's it's so
serious that we made it a
legislative priority in our
budget book which you have the
which you should have if you
don't I'll get it to you where
we we ended up a priority of the
judiciary this year to make it a
felony offense to threaten
judges and their families.
There are certain judges that
have asked me to convey their
experiences and tell you their
stories and with your permission
I'd like to do that they were
very uncomfortable I'm like the
judges before your today coming
in the public and and telling
their stories so with your
permission I would like to first
of all read you a story about
one judge.
He's about twelve years ago I
was threatened in court by a
defendant when he said he would
kill me and my family I was
notified by the jail that the
same individual was looking for
my daughter by utilizing the
jail phone and having friends
look for fortunately for me he
was looking at Colorado she was
not going to school there anyway
I did notify state police and
campus police were my daughter
was going to school a year later
while I was attending the
legislature I received a call
from my wife say the piece the
police were in my driveway which
you went out to tell them that I
was gone she said he was going
there to protect her the police
had received a phone call
telling them that this strain
individual was in town with
plans to kill me and my family I
had to get my wife to leave town
it to come to Santa Fe to the
police found here she was there
here with me one week I now have
a large pull requests that is
electrified and three hundred
pounds of dog no kidding I have
also installed an electric gate
that only I or my wife can open
all to keep people away from me
and my family.
I would also like to remind you
about.
Very public story that came out
in two thousand eighteen where
we were required to close the
house county courthouse.
It'll of the afternoon back in
two thousand eighteen after a
judge made a ruling.
There were three of the
courthouse was barraged with
telephone email and social media
there were threats against
threats of physical violence
against the deferred against the
district judge.
One caller said she wished
someone would come and smash the
judges at.
At least one caller threatened
violence against all staffers
and report out.
Others posted her picture
address and contact information
on social media this was so
dramatic to this particular
judge she took a leave of
absence for a period of time to
try and deal internally with the
problems this posture she was
not successful and ultimately we
lost a very very good judge from
the New Mexico judiciary as a
direct result of all of these
threats another judge had China
has reported my car has been
shot with a high powered pellet
gun it was an older car needed
paid and went into which you'll
anyway my family members have
been threatened and one grocery
store in town the life
threatening issues often arise
in the heat of the moment is
Senator or domestic cases.
Law enforcement treats them as
bottom priority unless law
enforcement understands the
problem I expect the DA and
police to assign the same
priority to these issues as they
assigned.
To criminal contempt as I was
reading that I was just
remembering that as a practicing
lawyer number the report holes
in the patch in Las Vegas in the
current courthouse in Las Vegas
New Mexico and also the
courthouse in Gallup New Mexico.
This this next story brick right
you just showing.
Last year which was just this
twenty twenty one in the Mr
presiding over a fairly
contentious matter my address
and other personal information
including the value of my home
was purpose for the broadcast is
part of a talk show hosted by an
individual who was very
dissatisfied with the ruling I
made their perpetrator of the
broadcast referred to referred
to it as me being doxxed D. O.
X. X. you do.
We look that up with that means
up to search for and published
private right into find
information about a particular
individual on the internet
typically with malicious intent.
My address was provided on the
air in the context of work very
inflammatory and derogatory
remark report about the both
personally and as a judge to be
clear I fully understand and
accept that public criticism is
to be expected and up my code of
judicial conduct specifically
instructed me not to allow it to
affect my judicial independence
however this is broadcast and
talk to work beyond criticism it
was an effort to stir up
animosity toward me and direct
listeners to my all in a
threatening manner because of
disapproval of my ruling.
This broadcast and Dr because
harmful results both to my
family and community upon
learning of the broadcast and
frankly worried that I might not
be totally objective about it
strong and purpose I learned a
courthouse security to it and
requested their opinion about
its nature yes the threat and
began conducting post patrols of
my home.
The issues both city and county
law enforcement resources they
also advised me that I could
expect some form of resulting
problems from the broadcast
approximately three or four
weeks later based on their
experience I sure the broadcast
with AOC security who also
agreed that it was a concerning
threat and provided similar
advice I agree to the security
and surveillance of my all of
the advice of law enforcement
and security.
Approximately a month after the
broadcast amazingly consistent
with the predictions of law
enforcement someone threw a rock
at my home and broke my dining
room window greatly over warming
my family.
I know that many people have
suffered such acts and I'm not
manages deserve more sympathy
than they do however
functionally it cannot be
accepted oral out for people to
attempt to worse for this way
judges for making rulings by
using such tactics.
I became a judge to serve my
community and New Mexico members
of my community and my state
have every right to criticize me
and I really I truly wish I
could make everyone satisfied
with everyone I make but I am
not aware of any needs to doing
my job and reaching that
aspiration.
Threats and vandalism can not be
accepted as coming with the job
if they are the integrity and
independence of the judiciary
will stop and I am not an
isolated example in most
respects other broadcaster
document part to be a bit unique
and alarming number of judges
have expressed solidarity and
support for me because they too
have experienced threats and
understand the problem first and
the fact that this informal
support group is so large shows
that this is a real problem and
that this must be addressed.
And I'd like to this is
something that's not been made
public before but I'd like to
members of the committee to know
all that just this past month on
Saturday January the fifty.
One of our maintenance workers
out the window in the star lady.
Dropping off a package outside
the front door of the use of the
New Mexico Supreme Court
underneath the the
superintendents window.
It looks suspicious to him that
she was walking the way he
called it sure and asked her
what she was doing she said she
left a very interesting package
there at the at the window.
And she took off.
very uncomfortable the
maintenance worker called the
police and they came out with
their dogs fortunately it turned
out to be a harmless up package
but it was made to look like a
piece of dynamite it was
wonderful and shape not all
kinds a wire sticking out of it
in this box a police reporter
that was made.
So that was
Just this past month I'd like to
find the the relate to you a
very short story about a
district judge in New Mexico who
received a threat to kill him
and would have had to have this
points to the need for this
legislation
is that this case ultimately to
the US federal court because the
there was little or no
consequence under the state
statutes.
In my district judge who what
was threatened there was
ultimately a guilty plea and to
the individual I believe was
sentenced to two years in
federal prison here is what here
noted to doing on July twenty
twenty twenty while I was in
terms on your Mexico I use my
tablet to contact the national
suicide prevention lifeline.
I use their online chat feature
and completed a pre chat
service.
In the survey I conceal my
identity later during an online
chat with cancer M. J. I
knowingly threatened to kill the
New Mexico state district judge
you see at six o'clock PM that
evening I said I had a gun judge
you see have signed warrants in
my case I learned later I later
learned that the national
suicide prevention lifeline
accounts for I was chatting with
was in Rochester New York I
admitted my threat to killing
judge easy with the
communication that crossed state
lines.
There is a very real need for
this times have changed
Representative certainly are
gaining and their frequency and
intensity and I heard I would
respectfully request that the
the committee are undertaking a
study of this I'm happy to
answer questions and I once
again thank Representative Lane
for bringing this to to you
today and I'd like to turn it
over to some other judges who
are willing to come and tell you
personally their stories thank
you madam chair.
Thank you you have another
speaker yes madam chair and and
now just a maybe point us to
they turned journal Mr ball
there's also like to offer some
comments while I go to the next
job can we have somebody pulled
out of the attendees list to
make panelists thank you madam
chair I I go next to judgment
thank you.
Thank you.
There is I'm not seeing them
listed.
Senator Ortiz dramatically
reducing judgment leos.
I do and I saw that judge
Snyder's been admitted.
Madam chair committee and
sponsored are there's someone
named Hector with their name
grades are on hand raised is
that possibly the.
That's Attorney General Hector
Balderas I believe.
Would you like him to go ahead
and speak what we find your
other sponsor our other expert I
thank you madam chair okay thank
you go ahead Mr turning general.
On.
Good morning madam chair.
Morning.
Well I'll be brief and I I do
appreciate Representative lane
and and our Chief Justice I'd
like to maybe offer my support
for a little bit of different
reasons but I do think it's a
not only a critical concern for
the judiciary but you as members
of as elected officials number
one it's important to note that
the federal Congress is begin
has begun to really invest in
resources going so much as far
as investing in the personal
security and home security of
their federal judiciary and
there's a couple reasons for
that as why I'm clearly the US
marshal has seen an increase in
these type of unconventional
threats and I'm making deployed
here today as you New Mexico
lags and so many other areas
that we at least keep up with
the intention of safeguarding
members of the judiciary because
of the increased threats not
only to the judiciary but we
have a risk assessment you to my
office and it's not uncommon
that elected officials of state
police contact us to do certain
risk assessments on threats
where we share infrastructure
and so I think this is a good
preventive measure because one
of the key drivers is just
having information that is out
there to be exploited we're not
trying to be on not we're not
trying to limit transparency you
should have full access to
judges and their decisions and
their accounting and every every
other piece of the public
information but personal
information I believe it is
worth a worthwhile
measure to at least reduce
friction and potential harm in
the future the secondary I
wanna.
Put my full support behind this
bill is we aloft oftentimes the
judges and the weakest link in
providing additional security
it's usually family members or
loved ones and of course the
recent federal up tab took the
life of the son of a judge it
wasn't the judge that ultimately
was harmed it was her son and
her husband and so as someone
who has had to build in risk
assessment functions to support
elected official safety and
support other law enforcement
I'm can really concerned that we
are years behind in terms of
investing in the proper
infrastructure and data and
Intel sharing of that clearly
Representative increase track
threats in threats across the
board and much like the trend of
school public school security
we don't want to be talking
about an attack on a judge in in
retrospect and hindsight twenty
twenty and so I want to commend
Representative lane that this is
a proactive preventative measure
to keep some of this information
that could be harmful both to
the judiciary but also to the
violator the the person that
goes too far we're trying to
offer intervention prevention so
I think this is a simple measure
all finally closed.
Well I'll leave it at that I
just wanted to to personally
convey the confirmation that we
have also conducted risk
assessments for sitting New
Mexico judges as a precaution
and work with law enforcement so
this is something that is
legitimately a concern and I
think the legislature would be
phenomenal in being proactive in
this measure so with that I'll
I'll stand down and I I want to
commend this could committee for
considering such an important
topic.
Thank you madam chair.
And thank you attorney general
manager if we could go next
judge Matthew.
Go ahead judge Matthew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee for
considering this bill
I sit here in Santa Fe in the
first two additional district
and I've been a civil judge
since twenty thirteen.
Since I have taken advantage I
have been threatened with
systems arrests for my decision
in a case I've been threatened
with lean on my property and in
fact had a lean and involuntary
lien placed on on property.
Because of the decision that I
had made the lien was a
substantial in of it it was
clearly a bogus claim but it did
slander the title to the to the
property when I spoke with the
former partner of mine who was
it at that time on the federal
judiciary he told me that they
did not have that that that type
of threat or activity to punish
judge because of the federal
statute that this house bill
ninety nine actually is modeled
after.
Within the past six months so R.
I have had the occasion of
walking out to a car that was in
it that my car in front of my
house.
And found a proxy five pound
piece of concrete looked like
curving concrete had been thrown
and left a dent in the side of
the car about the size of a
watermelon.
Currently we have a situation
back just this week where I was
advised as a
Security judge that one of the
judges in the courthouse in the
domestic relations area had
received a credible threat from
a person involved in a domestic
violence situation.
That was perceived to be
credible enough for the sheriff
to.
Offer
Drive by patrols and we now have
this person's photograph posted
throughout the courthouse and
instructions that if they do
come in the courthouse there to
be escorted.
Wherever they may go.
In anticipation of this
Hearing this morning I.
Bill will have my own name.
And as a result of that search.
I have found no less than three
sites that posted my name my
address and the names of my
children.
Which was somewhat unnerving
although knowing that that was
probably going to be the case.
And finally I had one other
incident where a party came to
my house and the Senate Saturday
morning and wanted to discuss
the case when I refused to.
Engage in conversation with them
they left disgruntled and I
excuse myself from the case but
that particular person about a
year later committed suicide and
that suicide was publicized in
the media.
At.
After that publication I came
into court and my court reporter
asked me if I knew a particular
person and I told her that the
name was for more because that
person had been involved in the
in the case that I.
Been required to get out of.
And as she said the reason she
ask is because she was reading
an online account of the.
Situation of the suicide and
the the decedent's partner
boyfriend had posted that I was
responsible for her death.
And should pay for that.
So the fortunately the
newspaper took that post down
but it was there.
So that I come here and ask you
to please
look at this bill favorably and
hopefully pass it up for the
purposes of protecting not only
myself that every member of the
judiciary their family as well
as the hearing officers that are
included in this they suffer the
same type of.
Of threat that the judges suffer
by reason of their
decisions that they may and with
that I will close not I will
also apologize because I have to
Leave the the hearing and
attend another appointment that
that I previously made.
Thank you Sir for joining us.
Thank you madam chair Matthew
thank you for taking time out on
a Saturday madam chair tweet
please go to judge of yours now.
Good morning everybody thank you
for the opportunity to speak
here today I find it to be a
really important
Thank you for all of you to hear
it the perspective of the judges
that are sitting here in the
state court in New Mexico.
Echo and I agreed with
everything that Representative
lane had to say in fact he took
a both of what I wanted to talk
about and my sort of opening
before I got to my personal
story but just to expand on that
just a little bit obviously as
you all know our judiciary has
to be independent.
We don't have an independent
judiciary we don't have a
functioning democracy.
When there are threats made
against judges and their
families we are impacting the
independence of the judiciary
and therefore impacting our
democracy.
Judges need to be able to make
rulings based on the law and the
facts as applied to the law when
judges are making decisions
based on fear for the
consequences of their decisions
we are routing the very fabric
of our democracy.
Additionally as Representative
Lane mentioned we do need to
recruit and retain highly
qualified lawyers to this
position it's a difficult
position my fear is that if
these threats are ongoing and
without any sort of consequences
for the people making the
threats and we will be losing
out on an untapped resource of
qualified attorneys in our
communities.
There does need to be a
deterrent to individuals who
threaten judges
and this bill in my opinion
would work to deter people from
making threats either as judge
Matthews talked about coming to
your home and actually acting on
these threats damaging property
or just attacking people on
social media.
So I would like to then turn to
my personal experience so just a
little background I've been on
the criminal banks here in
Albuquerque for about five
years.
In in those five years as most
of us in the criminal world have
experience you have to make some
very difficult decisions that
make people unhappy but the
decision has to be based on the
law and the facts and as a
result when people get unhappy
they tend to target the judge
that made that decision.
Still in these past five years I
received countless threats to my
physical safety I will receive
after particularly controversial
ruling calls to my office
threatening sexual violence on
me I have received threats
against my family including
attacking my children.
Physically attacking and hurting
me.
Most recently in the one I want
the issue I want to focus on
most today as I address you as
what happened to my family in
October of this past year twenty
twenty one.
When I made a ruling that made a
local realtor property manager
very and happy.
I used to rent a property from
him when I was in private
practice my husband who's a
local architect took took over
that property.
This local real at our property
manager it seems to have a
particular interest in the
things I do and the rulings I
make and continually
postings on his social media
about is pleasure or displeasure
with my rulings.
In October in this case that I I
I've made a ruling that he did
not agree with he began posting
things on his Facebook account
about me that garnered hundreds
of responses many of them were
violent.
Most notably a day after this
ruling my has been received an
email from this property manager
that he would be evicted
immediately from the property
would need to vacate by the end
of October.
Has been is a busy architect
he's a solo practitioner.
And he had to pack up his office
and find a new property in less
than approximately thirty days.
Local real litter property
manager continues to post things
on social media about me and my
rulings.
I get up people send me things
that he says about me including
taking credit for rulings that I
make that he agrees with he
encourages his followers to
quote keep the pressure on judge
lance.
This is a road in the confidence
in the judiciary.
This is impacting.
Judges job ability to do their
jobs well.
Your does need to be
consequences for these actions.
I am so appreciative for this
bill Representative lane I
wholeheartedly supported and I
think it's long overdue I'm
available and open to any
questions you may have thank
you.
Thank you judge Leo speciation
restored madam chair with
mission the last person to speak
the judgment
judgment entered I believe
you're muted.
I do that every day about fifty
times thank you Representative
Eli madam chair members of the
committee good morning I'm anti
Schneider I'm the chief judge of
the twelfth judicial district
that's Otero and Lincoln County
I I my primary posted duty as an
Alamogordo in Ontario county and
I'd also like judge lance I
preside over eighty criminal
adult criminal docket I also
preside over a juvenile
delinquency docket as well as an
abuse and neglect docket and I
just want to say that I echo
other chief justices
appreciation for Representative
lane and the other sponsors of
this legislation for bringing
this forward
I I I I won't and also want to
express my appreciation for the
committee hearing this today in
in on a Saturday taking the time
for all of us to be here and to
talk about this important bill I
don't want to repeat what judge
lance so L. eloquently
highlighted about the importance
of the independence of the
judiciary that's a big piece of
this
I also want what I want to focus
on on my own personal experience
as well with threats in a half
years since I've been on the
bench.
We make so many personal
sacrifices to do this work and I
am very close to many of my
colleagues across the state and
we all make those sacrifices
willingly we are so proud to do
this work and honor to do this
work and it should simply be
expected that part of the
sacrifices that we make are are
the threats that we get and I
really feel like it that's the
view of the public that this is
something that we signed on for
our and and and and and that's
why this bill is so important I
have had threats in the eight
and a half years I've done this
work I've had them in open court
I've had threats made out of my
presence in the courthouse I
have had threats on social media
both publicly and and messages
privately sent to me all of
those I've reported to the
sheriff's office I ate I ate one
of the ten.
Our threats that have been
reported to AOC that was
referenced by chief Vigil is is
one that was made against me
much like the story that are
judge lance just outlined I'm
being attacked repeatedly on
public social media sites by
this individual this
individual's private social
media site my child has been
named
It affects.
Your well being and affects your
your happiness and again it it
it should not simply be expected
as part of this work that that
we that we have to deal with
this this this bill is
incredibly important and I got a
message about judge lance was
speaking from another judge
whose on the listening today and
and he is in our judicial
district in wide made off
highlighting experience that he
recently had he's got an invoice
sitting on his desk for eighty
five million dollars for ruling
that he made and I know that
this same judge in in response
to a
a ruling that he made on a pre
trial detention matter his life
his family's life was threatened
also on on social media it
happens all the time and I I
also will stand for any
questions that you may have
appreciate you you allowing me
to speak today and share my and
my feelings on this legislation
thank you.
Madam chair I believe you're
muted.
Thank you I'm usually not needed
Representative thank you have
any other words that you'd like
to you before we go to public
comment madam chair I just think
maybe after out public comment I
can have the amendment
introduced for discussion but
that's all thank you yes please
thank you would you like to at
present your amendment.
Disclosure the chair yes please
thank you madam chair
and let me or let me reference
to to a two number surveyed
knows we're on the same page
here so.
into a two numbers point to two
two three zero four point one.
And really what this this
amendment does is just a find
some cleanup
so essentially we are we refined
the definition of a judge
where we're not defining it
based on the court but now we're
defining it.
As a justice judge mansion the
mystic violence special
commissioner hearing officer so
that takes an obsolete are
supported quarter according
built our district manager for
judges are probate judges
metropolitan municipal judges
but also administrative law
judges and other hearing
officers and then the other
thing that I thought was
important for me was to really
flesh out what what does this
mean to retaliate against the
judge
I I when we're when you have the
possibility being charged with a
felony part of what our system
requires that you define what
that offense is clearly and so
that was the average European
behind defining what it means to
retaliate.
And then the other change with
regard to section two it is I
just wanted to make sure it was
abundantly clear that it was the
sharing of personal information
so personal address personal
cell phone those kinds of things
so with that I stand for
questions on Madam.
Okay.
Any comment or questions about
the amendment.
What is the will of the
committee madam chair I move
the.
Number two two two three or four
point one he accepted.
And approved by the.
Thank thank you that's been
moved incitement to
except the amendment are there
any objections.
Okay we do have your still in
amendment taken care of
let's uh go to public comment
and we will have a poll.
For all those in the audience to
please participate.
The.
Hey will go to those here in
opposition please raise your
hand those who are in
opposition.
And as you would like to speak.
Do we have anyone.
Thank.
I had I thank you madam chair
members of the committee when my
mom was being fair and by her
neighbors with death threats
Bernalillo county sheriff I said
that there was nothing they
could do because her life wasn't
in immediate danger our policies
have made prison so insufferable
that people being sent to prison
are being traumatized and are
lashing out if we want less
judges threatened and the
numbers that were presented
today are completely minuscule
compared to the thousands of
people we incarcerate every year
that we need to work on prison
conditions rehabilitation and
services that keep people out of
prison and criminal activity
thank you very much.
Donna Orgeron.
Yes.
I have a question the question
was
am I in favor of pre trial
release of can can you just
repeat that because I can't see
the screen.
But I'm sorry thank you to the
screen can you repeat the
question we just voted on.
Are you in favor of pre trial
release of.
No ma'am this is house bill
ninety nine crime threatening
objects okay.
And the whole we just answered
the question was what if you're
in favor or oppose.
Never mind okay thank you can
raise your hand and then if
you'd like to speak okay next
person if there is.
That was the final person madam
chair I believe her question is
in reference it seems there was
an error in the whole text the
bill tax was for a different
bill though the House Bill
number was correct my apologies.
well thank you for clarifying
that and apologies to the person
who is on now we'll go to for
House Bill ninety nine those who
who are in favor please raise
your hand.
Derek Scott.
Madam chair members of the
committee claims their style
like I've told you before I'm
running for sheriff in
Burlington county I directly had
to deal with this on a personal
basis with judges I've had to
protect them myself.
Judge Michael to be specific he.
At threats because of his ruling
so I am deeply in support of
this the only thing I'm
concerned about and that I would
say you know that I'm resistant
to is that it does not far
enough it should protect jurors
it should protect ancillary
workers in the court system it
should because we have threats
against clerks and others and
that we had to deal with we have
a walking home and patrol their
area many times because of
threats against clerks we also
should I would hope that you
guys could maybe expand this to
being with officers I've got my
own personal threats I think
this and been doxxed and I've
been continually docks even to
this day so I hope that you guys
can maybe open this up to court
and two officers and deputies so
I hope that you guys can do that
thank you so much and I really
appreciate you guys doing this
bill.
Thank you next.
Jason Boeing.
Yes ma'am can you hear me.
Yes we can thank you sorry
cabinet secretary for the
department of public safety
madam chair I usually say you
guys have me at hello I mean
it's something that's easy to to
get behind the this is us late
legislation that we absolutely
support from the PS was very
sorry to hear on the examples
that was given that this was a
bottom partial law enforcement
action to the actually don't
believe in that at least from my
perspective or that it should be
I recall having a judge and see
if you're and show find someone
in his backyard engaged in a gun
battle and that's a very extreme
case we should never get to that
point I believe that this
legislation would ensure that
judges make decisions based only
on the law and I don't fear of
reprisal I think we need
confidence in the in the
judiciary Act DPS with strong
support this piece legislation
thank you for your mouth.
Thank you Mr secretary.
James Martin.
Madam chair members of the
committee Mister Chief Justice
so college my name is James
Martin district judge in Los
crucis the third judicial
district and I have a personal
experience several years ago I
received two written letters.
From an individual threatening
to kill me.
it involved a child custody
matter.
Well it turned out this
individual was currently serving
federal time in the federal
penitentiary in Arizona for drug
and weapons charge.
And.
He also threatened Darren white
who was the secretary of
homeland security.
So therefore the FBI
investigated and he was
ultimately convicted and Arizona
federal court for the crime.
At the time and I think
currently
that would not have been a crime
if he had been in New Mexico and
not use the mail to threaten me
or to threat threaten sure
flight so I fully support this
bill and I want to thank the
sponsor in all the legislators
for bringing this forward.
Thank you judge Martin.
Next.
Michael Doyle.
Good morning madam chairman
chairman members of the
committee judges experts all
right Is I am a trial lawyer and
I stand strongly in support of
school I'm actually surprised
if not already in place I have a
view from the other side of the
bench at in my career as a
lawyer I've Representative
parents in CYFD child custody
hearings and are seeing the
reactions when judges terminated
parental rights I'm actually
pleasantly surprised that no
judge has ever been harmed
because many of my clients have
at least given an impression
that someday they might to some
like I think this is really
important to send a message I
think it's a four step I do
think that you should be put in
place thank you.
Thank you.
Jane Jamie Frasier.
Yes you are we can hear you
thank you madam chair members of
the committee presenters and
others I speak in favor of this
bill as a previous person said I
can't believe it's already.
Are not already a law I think
everyone in the criminal justice
system service to people needs
to be protected from threats.
Program written or otherwise
against them for doing their
job.
So I am a hundred percent in
favor of this and urge you to
vote to pass thank you.
Thank you.
Next.
Donna Orgeron.
Yes another person thanks this
is
We passed to
And I have a question it is part
of the bill
this part of the bill say that
anyone who threatens with verbal
action but with our actions are
they a media Lee arrested and
put in jail.
With no avail
or is this just I'm taking as a.
You know just just a threat.
because.
We have so much evidence that
these people will follow through
with their threats
I feel that it needs to be
expanded if it's not there
expanded to say that
The person making any sort of
threat or anyone who's someone
who's making a threat needs to
report the threat.
That person who's making the
threat needs to be put in jail
about.
I whole heartedly.
Approve of this bill.
Thank you next.
Madam chair I believe that
concludes public comment.
Okay thank you
yes we'll go to the committee
are there any are.
And it changed you.
okay Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative land for
bringing this legislation
forward I.
Will be crystal well first thing
I
want to thank the presenters for
for their stories and bringing
bringing.
Bring real life issues
legislation I think is is always
important.
Also want to say that I I.
Don't think deadly threats are
acceptable in any form or
fashion.
The last several years we've
seen the staff and.
All across this country and I I
think it's completely
unacceptable we've lost the
decorum of debate and discussion
and and I I.
I think that we should all be
able to stand up and answer for
the reasons why we do something
we should also be able to
without without fear of
repercussions especially
violence in any form or fashion
so I support this legislation
I am interested in here is just
continues on
where.
Everybody stands with respect to
the third degree felony portion
of this.
I'm not an attorney and never
played one on TV and so I I'm
not sure if this is the right
place for based on some other
legislation obscene amount of
that I can debate that it's a
bad place for it I just don't
know if that's the right.
Thanks for so I look forward to
hearing that seeing where this
goes madam chair I guess the
last thing I have to say is I
really appreciate just a on the
internet generals in the
background hope we just get some
of the state.
Thank you very much.
Thank you representative
Representative Lord.
Madam chair thank here
Representative thank you for
bringing this bill forward since
the judges I'm.
It's also about by sharing their
story a lot of people right now
that I have had a Stockert and
it is very scary and he followed
me to a Starbucks and yelled
obscenities yelp yes
Representative Sappey thank god
out of his car and
I can assure you know what it
was going to do but he slash the
entire side of my car.
People get angry and you have
the right to say on a Lexus
Representative Lord she's done
she got it done and so we don't
have the right to stop me and
follow me and harassed me and
get other people to harass me or
anybody else is is uncalled for
and I can imagine thank you John
I would bet it's a million times
worse.
But I just know from my own
experience.
That is referred to the dockside
been docks I know it feels like
there's a group on I want to say
I'm not gonna give me credit
this group that has stopped me
there this person is incited
other people and he's actually
made death threats towards other
people who have run for office
before and here's the sad part.
You got a restraining order
those stop stick it doesn't
matter anyways he still gonna do
it and unfortunately he was
charged with harassment and
nobody ever full through the
charges.
He slept right through the
system it was charged and then
nothing nothing ever happens
nothing went forward it was just
completely just disappeared and
that's unfortunate so I
absolutely agree with this I
think this should also be should
be for everybody I mean anyone
who gets this kind of
threatening behaviour but I
understand why bring it judges
forward because I would just
imagine that they would get a
hundred times worse than we do
so I do support this bill I look
forward to us this is very
important to legislators and
police officers and everybody
else's and risky position where
we have people that are
threatening to kill us or
actually stalking us and
damaging property so thank you
for your time.
Thank you Representative are
there any other questions.
Okay I just like to add that yes
I think with all of the other
representatives to our on this
bill that if they thought it
would be a proper at this point
to add any others such as
legislators or any other public
figures that they would have
done that so I think we should
know a specially protect the
judges and I think some of the
comments about gate yes you
might have taking care of and
your management was that your
intent Representative Lane yes
madam chair that's exactly right
okay great
well with that what is the will
of the committee.
Jerry moved to pass I can't okay
you have first in a second do
passed is there any objection.
Okay and you have a five two
zero approval for your and then
for your amended bill house bill
ninety nine as amended thank you
madam chair thank you members
the committee.
Thank you and thank you for all
your
But witnesses and expert that
we're giving testimony thank you
all.
Okay we'll go now to house bill
one thirty two interest rates
for certain loans and that would
be Representative Herrera.
And quite a few others I'm not
sure who all is going to be on
this.
Madam chair.
Yes hi Representative Herrerra
yes other people you want
brought on as panelists yes
thank you so much I'd like to to
bring on
my expert witness Karen Myers
and there's Representative Jack
Garrett I see other members
joining
So they might want to add to
this so I think you very much
sure.
Okay I think we have everyone
that you requested on is that
right I think so thank you madam
chair.
Go ahead if you like to present
your bill one thirty two
interest rates for certain
loans.
Thank you so much madam chair
thank you members of the
committee I've been listening to
this site committee session all
morning and I am so grateful to
this committee for hearing the
second report built on a
Saturday
it's it's a remarkable of the
legislation that is being put
forth and approved by this
committee and I'd like to
commend everybody I'd I'd really
like to thank you for the
opportunity to place HB one
thirty two before this committee
it immense a small loan act in
the back installment loan act
nineteen fifty nine and it's all
reduces basically the percentage
rate on the small loans from
hundred seventy five percent
thirty six percent
it increases the loan amount.
Excuse me from five thousand to
ten thousand and did and it
really put some anti inflation
measures and so that so that
people can get around these
percentage right so that's
basically what the bill does
stand and I think most people
here know that idea many people
have tried to put this
legislation before this body for
many years I presented it of
bill in two thousand nineteen
and again in two thousand twenty
one I in two thousand nineteen
it got before two committees and
died before going to the large
in two thousand twenty one we
had an amendment we brought it
to the floor and it actually
passed in a bipartisan approach
by I think was.
Fifty two sixteen of the Senate
refuse to take the compromised
and therefore died before going
to.
And so meeting and so I'm back
here again I am sometimes I feel
like I think you assistance says
that act right without a
character who you know is
condemned for every to push your
rock up a hill only to have it
roll down again but third time
maybe the chart charm so I'm I'm
going with that this morning
madam chair.
So I just wanna go back and say
that was interesting in two
thousand nineteen when I was a
Brandon legislator I told that
we had at the class that years
spent twenty twenty of a
selected and I I told freshmen
legislators that I was I was
going to try and changes from
one seventy five to thirty six
and they all said why so why why
would you do it at thirty six
and not fifteen percent and I
told them that we I went with
thirty six percent ten many did
many supporters of this
legislation went with thirty six
percent because that's the
interest rate that the
department of defense to the
military lending act allows
small loan companies charge
young men and men and women who
are in the military when
military personnel get trapped
in these high interest loans
they can be deployed so is
really a response to military
readiness.
We had to keep we have to
protect these young people and
so they introduced an act that
was passed in Congress in two
thousand six as a with a to
prevent abuse of long range
interpret them young families in
our military.
I agree I think New Mexico
should do the same right now we
have about fifteen states that
have adopted rates that they're
at a thirty six percent yeah we
have two that are at thirty
seven and thirty eight I and
these this is our neighbors to
the west and to the north both
Colorado and Arizona and adopted
thirty six percent cap rates.
When I first began to think
about introducing this bill it
didn't really seem like it
happened in all I thought most
people would say yeah thirty six
why would we do that why would
we go along with military
Defense.
Why would we agree with that.
I then found out we have an
entire sub industry in this
state to counter these abusive
long range we have it was over
like thirty major counties
cities and cat colleges that
have set up a departments within
their financial departments so
that they can help people get
out of these crippling loan
range it's it's really.
Not a problem this is really a
financial at the Deming.
And.
In about two thousand probably
eighteen and I should have a
date but I'm sorry we did pass
legislation in this body and in
this house and Senate so that we
could really study the effects
of these of these long range and
the the superintendent of
insurance this chart should be
here with coming out with a
report from the financial
institutions division and to
really say what's happening you
know what's happening to people
how many people are taking out
these loans what is the range
what are they charge rates and I
would just I just like to state
when I looked at this year's
report it was very sober it's
very sobering and I would
encourage all of you to go to
their website all that down
Almost three hundred ninety
thousand loans are taken out.
Excuse.
And the amount was hundred
seventy nine million in loans
taken out when I was here late
one night and I was just started
doing the math on that I was
just curious about what
percentage of the population
that are really taking out these
loans you know and the longer I
did the math this Saturday I got
really
and I I did the math and then I
realized I I was doing it the
wrong way I was counting
everybody in the population I
then went back we went back and
we looked at populations
eighteen and over in every
county I did the math again and
I can tell you sixteen out of
thirty three counties in this
state have over twenty percent
of people making these loans
that's that's how many loans
people are taking out and if you
look at the percentages of the
adult population taking out
these loans my gosh and McKinley
County it's a hundred and thirty
six percent that means people
take up more than one.
In in
in one it's fifty one percent
I'm telling you this is an
epidemic and it's not that I
don't it's not that we want to
close down it's very we don't we
know people desperately need the
salon suite get that we just
wanna lower this interest rate
that thirty six percent like
other states and other
leadership.
This will say that these loan
installment companies are muted
small businesses and the certain
important.
Their local business about four
hundred fifty people answer
great me and I want to make this
clear I don't think along
companies if that and I do think
the server great me I I do know
that I have talked to people on
both the sides of the aisle on
on both the right and left I met
with people I've tried to do do
due diligence to give everybody
you know there certainly a fair
play.
Just let me go over these
something that happened here
there are five hundred and fifty
small loan companies in New
Mexico a Propst some of late
eighty nine percent are out of
state corporations okay that
means ten percent of these are
about our local local
installment companies seventy
seventy eight of these other
state corporate store fronts had
and force meant and supervisory
regulatory action against them
by something called the federal
consumer financial protection
bureau the CFPB and they
continue to operate New Mexico.
In June of two thousand eighteen
that C. F. P. B.
the the administered enforcement
action against these companies
for improper debt collection
violated federal law I just want
to read it at this so that you
understand kind of what what
what the worst companies can do
and I'm talking about the worst
companies I'm not talking about
all of them but it is it is.
It is really security finance
made improper collection efforts
to collect delinquent debts
including physically preventing
borrowers from leaving their
homes visiting and calling virus
place of work well knowing that
this contact could threaten
their their employment the
violated the fair credit
reporting act by regularly
providing inaccurate and
incomplete information about
borrowers to credit reporting
agencies this potentially
adversely impacting the credit
scores security finance was
ordered to cease illegal
collection practices incorrect
inaccurate information provided
to the consumer reporting
agencies security finance was
ordered to pay five million and
some of them hi Max was ordered
to pay nine million and several
of these ace cash express was
ordered to pay five million and
refund our reserves and five
million in civil.
Comments.
This will take this bill
business is a high risk business
and they need to hire its to.
costs.
They do charge higher rates but
I don't think we need to charge
a rate of a hundred and seventy
five percent and and just just.
Let me just turn.
That
is important.
We should.
Percent of loans.
I'm sorry I had this image.
Five percent of the installment
loans were at APR rates less
than or equal to.
Thirty six percent thirty five
percent all the installment
loans or less and the well two
hundred percent thirty four
percent.
The installment loans for made
by lenders who offer loans
between a hundred and fifty and
a hundred and seventy five
percent just taking advantage of
that highest rate that we have
state so I just want everybody
to understand this to compound
the situation level two literacy
rate New Mexico is forty six
percent.
So that means almost one half of
our population is unable to do
simple math that means most
people who signed the slums
don't even know what they're
signing it's a perfect storm
created by out of state
corporations and I also want to
point to just a recent study
that was completed in December
of twenty twenty one this was
done by the S. P. reserves they
work with voices for children
and the a lot of our some of the
simpler though we need to we
need us they worked they were
curious about what happened to
our Hispanic population during
the COVID you know really what
what impacted this hat for those
of you who don't know forty
eight percent of New Mexico's
population is Hispanic certainly
in the north we have a much
higher percentage so I look at
these I look at these numbers to
see how people are impacted.
And
twenty six.
Hispanics across the state less
than twenty thousand and twenty
twenty and this was done in this
study was completed December
twenty twenty one.
Sixty percent have a thousand
dollars or less in savings and
thirty five percent have less
than a hundred dollars in
savings.
Twenty five percent of the
Hispanic population lost and
lost a COVID lost a member to
COVID nineteen.
To interrupt you
but if you would like to see
some of that great information
for questions
Glad to ask you a lot of those
things.
And would you like
Representative Garrett to say a
few words well and I would like
my that let me just if I could
just close up a little bit.
I think it's important to
understand that I'm not trying
to close down these businesses
we're just trying to get them to
to lower their rates to thirty
six percent I don't know madam
chair I know this is been a long
hearing for you I would I would
love to have my expert witness
Karen Myers just make a few
statements about what others
have happened in other states
and then recognized here if
that's all right chair.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for inviting me to present this
morning I want to first thank
Representative Herrera speaker
eagle often Representative
Garrett and the other Sanchez
for moving this bill forward.
Introduce myself very briefly
I am a consumer lawyer in
Albuquerque I was the head of
the consumer protection division
at the Mexico Attorney General's
office for eight years under
Attorney General king I worked
at the CFPB that Representative
Ferrary just cited to for number
of years on related issues and I
most recently.
What with the City of
Albuquerque to set up the
consumer protection initiative
in Albuquerque.
In my work all around a Lente
I've interviewed borrowers and
heard their stories about the
impact of high cost loans on
their lines and I reviewed
numerous loan files to better
understand the practices of
wonders and it's because of the
borrowers with whom I've talked
that I strongly urge you to pass
house bill one thirty two
As many legislators or where
each year as Representative
Herrera noted F. I do does a
data report there's a number of
things that have been created
the presented to committees that
have now been substantiated by
that report and I'll just
addressed a few of those
The legislator legislature has
been told that loans in New
Mexico were made to borrowers
who are unable to pay the loan
on the terms of the loan when
maybe which leads to refinancing
or re borrowing with payments
you cannot be mapped this is
what leads to what people call
the debt trap.
F. I do data shows that only
fourteen percent.
Fourteen percent of loans.
Of all the storm paid in full
without refinancing or re
borrowing and only twenty three
percent of all installment or a
course were able to pay off
their loan without refinancing
or re borrowing in twenty
twenty.
We've previously presented of
testimony that the the borrowers
pay high fees and costs when the
annual interest rate is a
hundred and seventy five
percent.
As stated borrowers are being
close to a hundred and eighty
million dollars in interest
between installment fees and
interest and refund anticipation
loan interest.
And we talked about the adverse
impact on lowincome and fixed
income households F. I do that
is supports and substantiates
that because we see that
eighteen percent of all
installment borrowers are over
the age of sixty five in New
Mexico unfortunately has the
highest rate of poverty for
people living who are over sixty
five who are living in poverty
in New Mexico it's thirteen
point five percent whereas
nationwide it's nine point four.
We also know that fifty one
percent of all borrowers took
out a refund anticipation loan
also get the I. T. C. the earned
income tax credit so that shifts
the benefits of that income
lifting program to benefit the
lenders.
Outside of New Mexico we have
many lessons about other state.
That having have changed their
lending to up.
The thirty six percent rate
which makes loans affordable and
safe for.
For example.
In Nebraska the enacted thirty
six percent Illinois Montana
South Dakota just for a few
examples Illinois is the most
recent state which when we
talked briefly about what
they've seen they enacted it
about a year ago and then as of
most recently and I checked
their data
they still have five hundred
lenders listed on their licensee
list who are making these loans
and interestingly enough.
Sixty seven new lenders open
business in Illinois after the
law went into effect which
countered the argument that
everyone will leave the state
and they will be no loans
available.
Also in Illinois they have a
community development financial
institution CDFI that's all
seventy percent increase in loan
applications from new borrowers
in South Dakota they did the
study are they pass their lawn
twenty sixteen it is a study in
twenty twenty using focus groups
of borrowers to see how they
felt about the thirty six
percent rate discount strong
support for keeping the rate at
thirty six percent and for
keeping high cost lenders out of
the state and they found that
they were still.
Available credit.
Two south Dakotans including
upticks in the use of credit
unions this straits the farmers
will seek alternative lending
options and that alternative
lending options can exist in the
state which which has a thirty
six percent annual interest
rate.
I am more than willing to
Answer any questions about the
data about the bill itself
but I will close by just urging
you to vote a do pass on house
bill one thirty two.
Thank you and Representative
Garrett thank we are running
short on time so that if you
just like to say a few words
Madam chairwoman forty seconds
hi mate I started researching
this for my son as a twenty year
old out of two hundred loan that
turned into six hundred dollars
so that's probably everybody on
this panel knows someone or has
a relative to embarrassed to
share their experience I just
want to point out there's a
hundred eighty thousand dollars
appropriation that goes to PED
to prepare curriculum on
financial literacy and training
I thank you so much that's that.
Thank you I'm Representative
Herrerra do you want to explain
your do you have in your
amendment yes and.
I
I need to tell Jerry Garrett
this but I I have an amendment
to that really
takes the probation on on page
one it says strict online making
appropriation on page forty two
it strikes a lines one through
six and then it re numbers state
numbers accordingly and that is
my agency manager okay do we
have a motion on the amendment.
Chair I make motion to move the
amendment accepted.
All thank you okay there any
objections.
Okay so move to we will your
bill has been amended and just
to clarify its point two two two
three one two point one.
Okay I'm.
So let's go to the audience and
take a poll.
Those in favor and those
opposed.
Okay we have hi forty three in
favor and is at forty nine.
Twenty nine thank you and twenty
one in opposition
we are going to have to limit
okay let's go to the audience
and those in opposition who
would like to go ahead and speak
even though we know that you
we've registered through the
survey it twenty one in
opposition and forty nine in
favor but those of you who would
like to speak we're going to
have to limit it
two one minute and to
At half an hour each side so if
you can speak very briefly and
not repeat what someone else's
seven just voice that you're in
favor opposed briefly that will
help us get through at this
portion
so let's go ahead and do those
in opposition first you'll raise
your hand those in opposition.
House bill one thirty two.
Ricky.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
we can hear you I'll be quick
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Ricky
keys according to Bankrate dot
com sixty three percent of
Americans didn't have access to
five hundred dollars to address
the house will be merged this is
the equivalent of one point
three million Mexicans
unfortunately New Mexico already
has one of the highest poverty
rates in the country and the
inability to access mainstream
forms of credit will make an
already bad situation worse
while some believe that that is
a more significant issue I
believe that for hundreds of
years ordinary consumers have
used that to escape poverty my
story may use like me is one of
using debt to finance my
education purchase home address
short term emergencies and
perform of the central functions
unlike others accessing leading
rig needed resources to family
or friends it's not an option
for me and thousands of New
Mexico residents I've spent all
of my career working with
organizations like N. B. C. S.
L. M. eight CSL Nobel women
African American pastors local
branches of the NWC peace
amongst others to ensure
equitable access to needed
resources I'm sorry last next.
David M. R..
Good afternoon Madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is David Emery I'm the New
Mexico regional manager for QC
financial services now if I
could please share an example
with you we have a customer
named Andrew is a single father
who is recently divorced and two
thousand self in a position
where you purchased some
specialized medical equipment
for his daughter and replace the
hot water heater it is home and
you thought he had to do so the
whole you thought to be able to
borrow money easily but when he
was unsuccessful in his attempt
to borrow money from a supporter
who by the way is a major bank
and metro area Andrew turned to
us and we were successful in
helping Andrew now if Andrew is
an able to borrow money from the
bank being an employee of the
bank just imagine how difficult
it must be for our fellow New
Mexicans in these types of
situations we understand it's
important that New Mexico needs
to be cleaned up and reining in
rogue actors but it's important
that people like can't you have
a state efficient practical way
to have their needs met we QC
welcome the opportunity in
regards to having a conversation
about future regulations thank
you for your time today.
Thank you next.
Joseph Rubin.
Hey good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and
thank you Representative Herrera
my name is Joe Ruben I'm here on
behalf of opportunity financial.
There's clear evidence from
other states I'm like Mr Myers
statement that lenders to
promise to fill the gap left by
rate cap do not do so they don't
change their underwriting
criteria and they don't change
their lending standards to meet
the needs of credit challenged
consumers for example even here
in New Mexico over the last year
we've been talking about this
and credit unions have said they
would fill the gap we've seen no
evidence whatsoever that they
have stepped up that they have
increased their landing or that
they have reached out to
consumers that need help also in
California California adopted a
rate cap we saw the number of
installment loans dropped to
almost zero yet the the balance
was made up by predatory payday
loans and by tribal loans which
skyrocketed in California and
Illinois we see the same thing
in fact the Woodstock institute
is warning that there are now
illegal lenders that folks have
to worry about because
the.
Thank you.
Next.
Danielle how great our love.
Okay I think and we needed thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee and any help if we
are low senior vice president of
the American financial services
association **** been around for
over one hundred years our
members are both bank and non
bank in all areas of consumer
credit do not revert the
Representative Patty lenders
title lenders for credit unions
will borrowers in New Mexico in
New Mexico the lead will be able
to find other sources of credit
or for larger loans lower income
individuals will likely be left
in credit desert's it HB one
thirty two is to pass in a
letter to the Senate banking
committee this summer the two
national credit union
association said thirty six
percent on captain courageous
powers to take on more debt or
for many borrowers with lower
credit worthiness pushes them
out of the market for small
dollar credit altogether madam
chair everybody knows you cannot
break even on thirty six percent
below about twenty five hundred
dollars the US federal reserve
under the bomb the station said
the same thing this bill if
passed would be the most extreme
lot in the country thank you.
Tony Tanner.
You
madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon Tony
Tanner ultratech court finance
respaldo Mexico family owned
business offering refund
anticipation loans at Gallup for
me good since nineteen eighty
nine thirty plus years.
Appreciate the opportunity to
address the committee members
today we're optimistic that the
industry and consumer advocates
could work together with the
Legislature to fashion a
solution for all sharing access
to a stable regulated industry
with in New Mexico to assist
residents in difficult times
Madam chair representative
committee respectfully we can
all support house bill one
thirty two is present thank you.
setter.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee my name is
yours that are on behalf of the
online lenders alliance I want
to express my appreciation to
the sponsor for a dialogue on
this legislation we have to find
some common ground on how to
address the Sanchez concerns as
to provide access to credit for
those in need regretfully as
currently drafted the oil I
cannot support H. B. one thirty
two the legislation related
right many New Mexico residents
without access to credit at a
time of financial uncertainty in
a recent survey of oil I members
with on the more than thirty
percent of customers New Mexico
already had either a savings or
checking account equity in other
words credit unions already have
access to many consumers using
short term or small dollar loans
it is unclear how recap will
help credit unions provide
services to those denied access
under the belt when they do not
do so now Furthermore H. B. one
thirty to one Pete how banks
market the loan portfolios
federal law protects the
independence of both national
and state chartered banks we
hope to continue our discussions
with the sponsor to find a
solution that will produce a bad
actors and still provide access
to lending but those that really
need it thank you.
Raymond Sanchez.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
we can hear you I apologize
madam chair my name is Raymond
Sanchez.
Presenting seedlip.
Which is not affiliated with
that payday loans COS provided
New Mexicans tumors with safe
affordable imposed installment
loans of the New Mexico bank act
of fifty nine since nineteen
sixty six we comply with fair
credit reporting and federal
truth in lending act it's
already been stated about the
number of New Mexicans who are
in poverty we have committed and
we have tried to work with the
members who have proposed
legislation and with the sponsor
herself in an effort to try to.
Make this a reasons piece of
legislation I have personally
spoken to members of the house I
texted and email several members
many have responded some have
not all I would like to continue
this dialogue we are anxious to
put something together when work
with the sponsor of this bill we
thank her for her efforts in and
we actually thank her for having
taken time to visit with us
thank you madam chair members of
this committee and we're and
madam chair get it off thank you
next.
Deborah right.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Deborah
right yes I represent Curo
financial technologies
corporation we are licensed
regulated lender offering online
installment loans to New Mexico
consumers under the brand name
speedy cash I'm speaking in
opposition to house bill one
thirty two I'd like to share the
committee the following data
points relative to the speedy
cash New Mexico customers nearly
thirty percent of our New Mexico
customer bank seven New Mexico
credit union of that thirty
percent nearly one half bank at
one of the nineteen credit
unions that offer lower cost
alternative loans this begs the
question why are are speedy cash
customers coming to us for
credit rather than their own
credit union could it be that
they've been denied credit by
their credit union or perhaps
those lower rate loans are not
nearly as by the available as
advertised whatever the reason I
can say with certainty that
house bill one thirty two will
result in the immediately
withdrawal of our installment
loan product in New Mexico
market and result in in the
denial of credit to New Mexico
consumers thank you madam chair.
Thank you next.
Measure.
Madam chair can you hear me.
Yes you can thank you my name is
Dan and John I representative
Representative access financial
access respectfully opposes
house bill one thirty two but
this should not be interpreted
as defending the status quo we
recognize that change is
necessary we have spent the last
year meeting with consumer
advocates and government
officials to explain our
financial model Representative
Herrera graciously met with the
several times we did not stop
there though we also spent the
year implementing a model in
Illinois at the thirty six
percent right that would be
required by this bill our
experience was that we had an
eight hundred percent increase
in customers as other lenders
let the market and we occurred
enormous is staggering losses
are efforts to serve customers
with poor or low credit ratings
below six twenty Michael scores
failed this is a complex issue
and we continue to urge the
stakeholders to come together
and make a good faith effort to
find a religion resolution that
protects consumers without
denying access to credit thank
you.
That was the final public
comment in opposition madam
chair thank you now those those
in opposition will lower their
hands and and those who are in
support please be brief we have
a limited time and
Go ahead and raise your hands if
you're in support but we are
limiting it to
I'm going to have to change it
and make it to fifteen twenty
minutes.
First we have a comments from
people and physical attendance
and the committee.
Chairman Alexis Johnson was the
son I'm just here on my own
behalf I'm here mostly to
commend you and the work of the
committee in the Sanchez on this
bill removing something that
certainly is in order yes the
mentioned many long overdue I
use hearing here some
encouraging sounds from those
who are in opposition if they're
saying they're intended to work
really hard to find ways to make
numbers work I think the first
test in New Mexico is going to
take go to financial literacy
for its citizens again started
will roundhouse with legislators
and I think we can work part of
the numbers to I thank you and
good night I think I heard that
enough to say good faith efforts
will get some good faith
literacy from the public
education research which is the
legislature itself who saved our
New Mexico New Mexicans above
all else I would urge that that
happened that people work hard
there will be other remedies
potential later maybe other
hearings another years long
overdue for New Mexico as we can
here thank you.
Thank you next.
David how to me.
Yes good I guess afternoon good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee David how to me
registered lobbyists for the
City of Albuquerque I want to
thank Representative at this
Myers and the other sponsors of
this important legislation for
their multi year effort to get
New Mexico into a rational
our position with respect to its
citizens and its citizens access
to credit five states have no
cap only one other state has a
cap higher The New Mexico
despite the fact that New Mexico
continues to be among the
poorest states what that tells
us is that we have a a large
population who are victimized by
predatory lending and high
interest rates in this bill is a
positive step in getting New
Mexico in line with the vast
majority of states that have
taken action to protect their
consumers protect their citizens
and get access to credit for
those folks it's working please
move this bill forward thank
you.
Thank you next Karen what lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen what lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and for all the reasons
stated we stand in strong
support of this legislation
thank you.
Rennie ashen.
Gentleman is ready action on
with the league of women voters
of New Mexico in twenty
seventeen we did a study on this
issue not much has changed since
then I'm happy to tell the
sponsor and others who are
looking at this bill that it
meets all of our major criteria
that we found for a good bill in
this area more study and we also
support for the reasons the
other supporters of given has as
have the Sanchez and our experts
thank you very much.
Are your muted ma'am Bill
Jordan.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Bill Jordan
with New Mexico voices for
children and I also want to
thank the sponsors who I know it
worked very hard and very long
on this issue I know you're
aware The New Mexico is one of
the highest rates of poverty in
the nation we can save New
Mexico families more money by
passing this bill then the big
increases that you all may to
the working families tax credit
and low income comprehensive tax
rebate these last couple of
years and at no cost to the
state.
Because voices for children
championed both the working
families tax credit and elector
we're especially glad to see
that tax refund loans are
included in the bill in twenty
twenty New Mexicans paid over
two and a half million dollars
in fees and interest to tax
refund lenders most of those at
eight P. R. near a hundred and
seventy five percent that means
those lenders are taking
advantage of the absolute
highest rates thank you Mr
Jordan I'm sorry your time is
up.
Melissa Martinez.
Hello thank you everyone chair
especially Representative my
name is Melissa Martinez I speak
out is the system but also as a
former employee of these
predatory loans I am not a
doctor I am the person that
stood in the front lines to
listen to the stories of these
people in desperate need I feel
that is not necessary to raise
the interest rate on the
individual like myself a single
income household the mother
trying to just survive during
the pandemic where your child is
sick there is necessary items to
go over the test New Mexico
needs more effort include local
loaning local morning only has
the capacity to lend up to a
thousand dollars and most of the
extended finances of the income
of the household is more than
monthly is urging you to listen
to us I went to the top of the
total.
Representatives of the recall
and the will not lower the
interest we do thank you.
Thank you next.
Hello Committee this is Patty
Williams I'm the registered
lobbyists for the Navajo Nation
council office of the speaker
and I'm speaking in support of
house bill one thirty two as the
Navajo Nation is supported it's
Merian progeny for over a decade
and we've heard the same
arguments against each spell
each session for years and years
the Navajo citizens of New
Mexico often fall prey to these
lending practices and
interestingly we have never
heard a justification for long
range over thirty five percent
and it has not been put forth
today please give this bill a do
pass from your committee thank
you.
Rachel Biggs.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Rachel
Biggs with Albuquerque health
care for the homeless high
interest rate loans to often
have devastating consequences
for families in New Mexico we
see first hand how high interest
loans contributed to financial
distress resulting in infection
or for closure and then trapping
families in a cycle of debt
thank you some from exiting
homelessness financial that both
creates homelessness and pro
lines that it's well past time
to cap small interest loan rates
at thirty six percent and we
think the sponsors for their
tireless work and commitment to
addressing this critical issue
we urge your support H. B. one
thirty two thank you.
Thank you next.
One center.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is lance
on a policy director for the
center for civic policy we stand
in support of house bill one
thirty two and thank the
sponsors for this legislation I
won't go into the stats that
Representative headed and I
already spoke on however I do
want to talk to how the pandemic
has particularly hit communities
of color the hardest and they
should not have to turn to
triple digit interest rate loans
to meet basic needs Sarah loans
are available after implementing
interest rate caps and can be a
reality for New Mexico I urge
your support in passing house
bill one thirty two.
Thank you next.
I apologize.
We the name OCM are will meet
AARP New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is O. T.
on both on the advocacy director
for AARP New Mexico we advocate
for ensuring the quality of life
of our state's fifty plus
population and continued
independence for these New
Mexicans Major home repairs
extraordinary medical bills and
many other circumstances
exacerbated by the pandemic of
forced many to seek financial
systems resort to these high
interest loans A. R. P. believes
and strong consumer protections
that help prevent borrows from
being taken advantage of or they
may end up and debilitating
cycle so that we are to to
support house bill one thirty
two to help protect New Mexicans
and their financial security
thank you.
From training.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm rob trying and and
I may consumer protection lawyer
in Albuquerque I've been doing
that in New Mexico for twenty
years.
My experience is that there are
national lenders in this area
in depositions and in court
pleadings that comes out if they
have a business model.
To look across the nation and
target the places with the
highest rates and the most lax
enforcement and New Mexico falls
in that category and some of
those may leave the state if
this passes that's true but
there are alternatives access to
credit will exist for those that
needed the credit unions here
some of them are already doing
it there is extending loans at
thirty six percent or less
without pulling credit checks
and there that boy will be
filled by responsible lenders if
this bill passes.
Thank you next.
Die and send of all Griego.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and committee for your time
today I move the intent of all
Griego I'm with Guadalupe credit
union I'm the chief of financial
empowerment I worked in the
credit union industry for the
last sixteen years and we have
worked
in this bill for quite some time
and we offer loans and products
and services that address of low
income areas
we are asking that the right be
dropped of four of many reasons
however my main reason is that
we feel that it is an inherent
right for people to be able to
access credit and financial
services
to protect their own personal
property we've seen more a
negative reaction from this than
we care to share at this time
but this actually is a problem
that has been exasperated for
many years yes that are local
government stand in our people's
defense and remove systematic
barriers that keep our low
income populations and building
wealth.
thank you very much for your
time and thank you.
Richard Marty.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Richard moody and I am the CD
one vice chair of New Mexico
veterans and military families
caucus and a member of the New
Mexico a rural caucus as
Representative Herrera said
military lending act protects
active duty military I capping
interest rates at thirty six
percent H. B. one thirty two
would help military veterans
retirees in the New Mexico
population in general to avoid
predatory lending practices the
veterans caucus in the rural
caucus strongly support H. B.
one thirty two so the New Mexico
protects its military veterans
and all New Mexican citizens the
same is the US government
protects active duty military
thank you for your time.
Lara and mind what.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and
Laura Montoya former Sandoval
county treasurer member of the
New Mexico tax policy committee
house bill one thirty two is a
strong step in the right
direction against predatory
lending and in support of
working class families people of
color young people women single
mothers maintenance in New
Mexicans as a whole in New
Mexico there's one of the stores
for every six McDonald's eighty
five percent of these loan
sharks or from out of state and
prey on our people in their most
vulnerable moments alone at one
hundred and seventy five percent
is five times higher than the
national average that's not even
the worst part fees and interest
rates on top of interest are
even more harmful these type of
regressive loans only continue
the cycle of poverty and less
debt and ruin people's credit
this combined with New Mexico
being forty seventh and
financial literacy only deepens
the problem that so desperately
need our help it's our
responsibility to protect our
families I urge you to support
house bill one thirty two.
Thank you.
Read more.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I want to address
today the Republican members of
this committee directly my name
is Fred needs and I'm the
executive director of thinking
Mexico which is a bipartisan
think tank serving New Mexicans
are board members included
former Republican governor Gary
Caruthers former Chief Justice
Judith Nakamura and former
Republican state party chair and
was Lujan thank you Mexico and
its board strongly supports
house bill one thirty two
earlier this week we met with
the executive director of the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
and the government affairs
committee of the Hispanic
chamber of commerce and I'm
delighted to report that both.
Organizations endorsed house
bill one thirty two predatory
lending is reverse economic
development real economic
development brings new dollars
in to the state predatory
lending does the opposite about
eighty five percent of predatory
lenders operating in New Mexico
are based out of state so the
six hundred seventy million
dollars worth of loans the
desperate low income New
Mexicans pay these lenders each
year is drained out of the state
rather than being used to
support local businesses thank
you for your time.
Rob black New Mexico chamber.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is rob black I'm president and
CEO of the New Mexico chamber of
commerce France also my thunder
but I am here in this in support
of H. B. one thirty two.
Over the last year and a half
the New Mexico chamber did it
doesn't focus groups with in
partnership with the US chamber
around New Mexico we were in
Farmington Hobbs Rossell a
Clovis talking about the
business case for racial equity.
And one of the key findings of
that effort that research
project was the lack of access
to affordable capital and and
and credit for our low income
and particularly people of color
in the state and across the
country we believe this is an
important issue to to properly
involved in involves all aspects
and all people in New Mexico in
our economy going forward
allowing them to get out of very
dangerous cycles that we urge
your support thank you.
Thank you next
Gorman.
Good afternoon my name is
Leonard Gorman I'm the director
of the Navajo Nation Human
Rights Commission.
majority of these lenders are
situated near indigenous lands.
I spent about three hours with
the Navajo family last week so
grand mother and two of her boys
are mentally challenged well I'm
a tells the story that this is a
very hopeful.
Safe.
Mending opportunity that her her
family got engaged.
She lost a lot of money she lost
her property.
To put on.
Her jewelry.
She is almost naked with her
property and she can't pay off
the loan that's how bad this
thing is people say we're
helping this is not helpful this
is a very very powerful support
XP one thirty two thank you.
Thank you good timing.
Next person.
Austin we are animated.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Austin we often hear on behalf
of an image of both and we stand
today in strong support of H. B.
one thirty two because we
understand these loans are
targeting native people all you
have to do is take a drive
around Gallup grants Espanola
Farmington or the international
district to know that this is an
issue of equity we know these
lenders are targeting our
poorest communities we know that
the targeting communities of
color and we know that they're
targeting communities with the
least access to financial
literacy every year we hear over
and over that New Mexico is a
poor state and over and over
again the state legislature
allows out of state companies to
operate New Mexico charging
hundreds of millions of dollars
in interest alone from our
people we have an opportunity
here in New Mexico to do the
responsible thing and pass a
thirty six percent right because
both opponents and proponents
recognize that a hundred and
seventy five percent of the
problem and cause complacency is
causing harm because thirty six
percent is just more affordable
than a hundred seventy five
percent and because nobody in
New Mexico regardless of their
background deserves a predatory
one hundred and seventy five
percent thank you.
Thank you next.
Bob Carroll.
My name's Bob Charle ring for
veterinary member of the
federation military families
caucus for the reasons the
Representative had Cadena and
others that put forth in here to
support the passage of HB one
thirty two.
Yeah recognize predatory nature
of military lending act
recognize predatory nature high
interest loans my concern is
that we can able to compromise
to a ninety nine percent well
there's something that is
equally predatory doesn't
protect people thirty six
percent well is that
establishment in the military
act and that we have established
in our neighbors Colorado and
Arizona that should be the cap.
On the the payday loans thank
you very much.
Thank you next.
On a quarter.
Good afternoon members of the
committee.
And madam chair.
In two thousand and seventeen
prosperity works brought to the
state an alternative product is
called to connect it's an
employer based product and
during the period of time that
it is been enacted adopted by
employers across the state over
eleven million dollars has been
land loaned to over of of fifty
five thousand New Mexico
employees in this time and they
have repaid their loans at that
we're at twenty percent and
there's only been a two percent
before right with this what we
have done is not only provide
access to loans but demonstrate
that the that it can be below
thirty six percent and people
can have access we are just
support for H. B. one thirty two
thank you next.
So yes thank.
Good afternoon thank you madam
chairman and committee members
so be it thank representing a a
AAUW New Mexico members
Representative Herrera we thank
you for your persistence.
Hey you W. in New Mexico Smith
members continue to support
reducing the hundred and seventy
five percent you sorry just
lending rate to thirty six
percent currently with age house
bill one thirty two you have
already heard the facts and
rationales from the we support I
do pass for H. B. one thirty two
thank you.
Thank you next.
We have a great time for just a
few more people if you want to
be quick.
Michael Doyle.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee I stand strong
supporter Sliq goes will well
I'm a workers compensation
attorney I see these companies
growth for lenders targeting my
clients and the workers
compensation act in New Mexico
is designed to help workers get
back to work and to survive
while they're off work the
predatory lenders Linda these
high rates take advantage of
these workers and when workers
finally do get some sort of
benefit for their injuries the
end up having to pay that all to
pay off these loans I stand
strong support of HB one thirty
two thank you.
Thank you next.
right here
there and advocates.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee
occurred right here the director
Richard advocates Mr New Mexico
I do hope you had a chance to
read a letter sent to you from
eighteen nomination leaders from
New Mexico conference of
churches we're here to offer our
strong support for HD one thirty
two all the rational and
reasonable arguments that made
on this issue on there for oil a
problem you've anymore arguments
so we support this bill urge
your support and we're grateful
for the wavering support on this
issue from Representative Ferrer
and the other sign or signs to
the legislation.
Thank you.
Next.
Peter.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you very
Peter's.
God that was a.
And.
And the following two barn from
committee I do have a sense so I
had to do something for us to
get by I took out the loan to
help pay towards bills and how
but it did not help knowing it
another bill having to adjust
financially to the loan also
getting groceries essentials
basic needs for my son and I.
Descending to make car payments
I did not know what I did not
like is that loans take money
out of my bank account I find
out found out later it's against
the law for the companies to do
this the payment card loans do
not seem to get any smaller.
Still
not only affect me but others as
well families the community
It's just too much of a high
amount for loans.
Thank you.
I I'm sorry we have the.
Have the time allotted for the
different public comment we
appreciate everyone being here
and we're going to need to go
back to the committee.
So with that Representative
Herrera knowing our time did you
have anything else you wanted to
quickly add before we go to
questions.
Thank you okay I see
Representative Thomson.
Thank you madam chair and I want
to thank Sanchez of this really
really really important bill and
all of the public who spoke at
it's heartbreaking
to hear the stories but I am in
full support of this bill I'm
I'm just on here to say I wish
we could make it even lower than
thirty six percent and
Representative Herrerra you can
join me in the stubborn caucus
we keep bringing our bills until
we get them and people need to
learn that that we're going to
keep on doing these good things
for New Mexicans so thank you
all to you and all your Sanchez.
You madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I want to start off
the.
Or when we order one of I would
like for permission madam chair
for.
Our.
To take over her role as all of
parliamentarian and the as we as
the chair of rules thank you and
given a position on the fact
that I just moved for an
amendment we just passed one
that took the appropriation out
in this no longer needs to call
of the governor all.
Madam chair representative if I
may.
Thank you and thank you madam
vice chair.
Thank you madam chair so
Representative Pettigrew just
asked if this bill is still
germane given that the you know
The appropriation of strict with
the addition of the amendment
that said it's a great question
and it's certainly a
parliamentary procedure wonky in
the we'd sort of question but in
a in a thirty day session
the general practice with any
bill that has appropriation on
is that theme germane following
that as the
if the appropriation is stripped
out hopefully it's for good
reason being that the
appropriation made into house
bill two so it's been standard
practice to continue these bills
on being that they were already
deem germane at the beginning of
when they were ready and by the
speaker and so they continue to
move forward
and and essentially that's been
the standard practice I
appreciate the question and
believe the bill should
continue.
Thank you madam.
Perfect thank you very much for
that.
And
madam chair I have one question.
This.
The presenters I am curious.
This.
to Senate bill sixty six.
my history because only been
this my second set.
Stewart is Senate bill sixty six
it came across.
on on the house floor there were
amendments that passed the house
why does bill madam chair not
include the amendments.
Made it through the house.
In the sixty day session.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative it's a great
question and one that I really
struggle.
when I first introduces eight
legislation that taken over at
from the Senate I was always in
danger at thirty six percent
right.
Representative where I have I
try not to let the US perfect
stand in the way of the possible
and I I carried those amendments
to the floor and did my best to
get it passed hoping that when
we got to conference we could
probably maybe possibly get a
lower rate Senate agree didn't
agree to go to conference and
that's pretty much where it
stood I've always I've always
been in favor thirty six percent
right really I was trying to get
in the right.
Lower than what it is and that's
what I did.
I appreciate the honesty in the
answer
When it went through C. pack
last year voted against this
bill and right now I still stand
in that same position I look
forward to seeing what happens
is your progress as I'm sure you
will and I'm I'm not opposed to.
Repairing the issue that exists.
Not sure this is the right
solution yet thank you.
Thank you Representative I
appreciate that.
Representative Lord yes I thank
you madam chair and colleges a
little frazzled I just.
It's been wet said take the
trash out and slip by so we
decided to a trauma assessment
on him real quick so despondent
braces no compassion so I
apologize if I missed my
question about to ask which is
Madam chair representative
I remember this bill went
through before and this is the
the copy of the Senate side of
that bill but I thought there
was an amendment which I have
right here last time that
everyone agreed upon is there is
a positive test discussed like I
said I was just doing
assessment.
Was there is a reason why you
brought back a carbon copy to
Senate bill without the
amendment as last time.
Madam chair and representative
yes there is I I just I just
told.
Representative Pettigrew ****
same question but it it's
because I was always for thirty
six percent right I mean that
that's right started it was
amended and I and and as I told
him I'm old enough to not let
the perfect getting with the
possible and I appreciated that
both the house I was trying to
get to conference the Senate
decided not to go to conference
and that's that's really the
regional and projects I just
like I said moment I'm okay so.
Because I think my understanding
was is there was agreement on
the thirty six except for that
small fraction of high risk no
collateral loans they wanted to
do to at ninety nine percent is
that correct is that with the.
You know that the bill is passed
in the house it that loans over
eleven hundred and there is
bipartisan support on this stuff
loans over eleven hundred would
be at thirty six percent right
and loans under eleven hundred
would be at ninety nine percent
okay that's what it was yeah
okay and with this ammendment
correct well there are a lot of
the members.
Final bill and okay so I guess
what I'm getting at is it
I see.
What I'm understanding is the
last question Representative is
that there was an agreement with
everybody including the loan
companies on on the last with
the amendments with the ninety
nine thirty six and that was all
good and everybody was in
agreement are my problem.
Oh now madam chair that there is
still a lot of debate and people
on the on the right and left
where you know I'm comfortable
with that I mean there are
several long companies that
didn't want any any lowering of
the loan right there advocates
said wanted to keep it at thirty
six so it I'm just saying it was
always a hot mess.
it's it's it's just what goes
with this kind of legislation
there are advocates on both
sides and you know very strongly
about this bill okay and and
thank you I appreciate all that
is going to be a thank.
St why we wanna we want people
to have access loans the same
time I want to try to figure out
balance right I don't want the
low income based out of business
and they have access to get
money when they need it but it
is a very high rates I don't I
don't have an issue with the
smaller amounts being at higher
rates
and that's all I have to say
thank you may go back and
actually Boca chica my husband
again thank you all I hope he's
OK thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
Okay is there.
I move it to pass.
Thank you as amended I will not
madam chair thank you.
Cool okay there's been a motion
for do passed on house bill one
thirty two as amended is there
any opposition.
Yes yes state I'll take all I'm
sorry yes okay not thinking.
Representative Lord.
With an explanation please.
Representative Pettigrew.
I have already explained where
work work where I stand on this
some good.
Representative Thomson.
Yes.
Vice chairman.
Yes.
Madam chair for our.
Yes.
Three to due process amended
chair.
Thank you and Representative
Lord would you like to explain
your.
Right I thank you for that
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna do some more research on
this and hopefully I'll have
some more answers from the time
you get support that's All I
Want stand opposed to lowering
the rate just want to do some
more research on it so thank
you.
Thank you Representative had a
very did you have were you said
you already had explained right.
Okay all right so on as three
did to you have a do passed on
house bill one thirty five and
as amended.
Thank you thank you madam chair
is one thirty two and I
appreciate thirty two yes my
astigmatism changes a little
numbers no problem thank you all
very thank you.
Okay next we have house joint
resolution eight are created
office of consumer affairs as a
constitutional amendment
Representative Eli
thank you madam chair members
the committee nice to see you
again today
so.
I want to give you a little
background about this bill I'll
try to be brief
and this bill is really designed
to open up a discussion.
About what is a growing scandal
nationwide and in New Mexico the
only way to describe it is it's
a pay to play that's what is
yes.
And so I want to walk through
what it is that I'm talking
about before we get to the
reason for this house joint
resolution I sent to various
things I'm sorry about the
lateness the first is a New York
times article from December of
two thousand fourteen eight
years ago.
That describes in real detail
about what's happening what was
starting to happen around the
country.
and it starts with the S.
private lawyers to scour the
news media and public records
looking for potential cases in
which a state.
Or it's consumers have been
harmed approach to turn general
and then I skip private lawyers
have donated tens of thousands
to campaigns individual attorney
general's
one Democrat was quoted as
saying this is gotten out of
hand it's seriously threatens
the perception integrity and
professionalism of the office
the reporting to Attorney
General as it raises the
question of whether attorneys
are taking up these cases
because they are important
public matters are being driven
by potential gain for private
financial.
Here's what's happening.
Yes.
You have and I am talking to you
as a trial in fact as president
R. years ago more than I care to
remember The New Mexico drivers
Association I'm proud of being
able.
But what's happening is around
the country going back now
decades yes that.
Lawyers are giving money in
campaign contributions to
Attorney General races.
I'm hoping that they will get
lucrative contracts from the
attorney general's office.
And.
All I did was to take a look
this goes back when that New
York Times wrote the article
back in two thousand fourteen I
decided well you know why not
take a look and see what's
happened since then in New
Mexico have these campaign
contributions happened and and
I'll quickly state so that
everybody understands I'm not
saying that although we'll talk
about this a little bit that
it's actually happening New
Mexico the contracts is
in direct relationship between
the contributions and contracts
being awarded but I can tell you
that these out of state
travelers think that they have
to make these contributions in
order to basically happened and
mission to be able to get these
contracts that we're going to
talk about
so I started with and this is
one of the attachments and by
the way these numbers are rules
in terms of what you see I gave
you first thing was New York
times are the second was the
contributions from out of state
lawyers to Attorney General came
and then of the Attorney General
of all terrorist in two thousand
thirteen and then in two
thousand seventeen and what's
happening is the numbers are
going up so travelers and this
is just contributions from
travelers from out of state so
in the attorney general's V.
three kings last raised fourteen
thousand dollars from outside
lawyers went into his campaign
the first race for Attorney
General all Deris hundred fifty
six thousand dollars so went up
more than thirty percent then
there was another increase I
think I have the numbers
somewhere I think was two
hundred twenty thousand dollars
went into the G. I. the Jack
number yet two hundred twenty
two thousand six hundred dollars
when last attorney general's
race for it but are.
Attorney General here sitting
crucial forty four percent so
the Attorney General could say
Gee are set up to review panel
some really careful not to do
this
but the fact is is that are
these private lawyers clearly
think that they have to
contribute and what's happening
is is they are contributing in
record numbers on these are
contributions from waters like
in New York Pennsylvania
sorry where we were getting all
these things on capital outlay
some trying to turn my phone.
Are your taxes I counted up I
think about twelve streets out
of state they're giving very
large contributions from a
thousand to five thousand
dollars per person on to these
attorney generals why would a
lawyer in New York City care
about the attorney general's
race in New Mexico if they don't
think they're gonna somehow
benefit from and they're gonna
benefit substantially as well
talk about but I have given you
contributions listed for what
I'm able to see just from the
listing of attorneys out of
state but sometimes I see
homemakers with the same last
name or a paralegal sometimes a
list of them those numbers are
low I promise you so the idea
that the Attorney General is
getting all of this morning the
question is yes what impact does
it have on litigation and and on
the attorney general's office
well the first thing is is.
And I'll I'll go backwards in
terms of getting to the consumer
protection bureau.
Is the first test is that by
doing a lot of counselors so
there are I get in you should
what what are these contracts
well they like to do back a
litigation started it opioid
litigation.
understandable that you would
send those to outside lawyers
because of sensitive they're
risky they're complicated and
maybe a small attorney general's
office wouldn't have the
resources to do that but now
we're suddenly getting into
professionalizing outsourcing
which should be court Attorney
General functions so the one of
the nefarious side effects is
that you don't value as the
Attorney General your
institutional knowledge so it
has affects you go well beyond
consumer litigation or or
anything else on with the last
example I gave you is the first
ten digits much longer report
from the US department of health
and Human Services on studying
New Mexico's Medicaid fraud unit
and
what what they found was that
the New Mexico Attorney General
who houses the New Mexico K.
president have the lowest number
of indictments and fraud
convictions and the second
lowest number of patient abuse
or neglect convictions in the
country and and the reason for
that was because they saw it for
its review the office of
inspector general order twenty
seven staff departures twenty
seven hires and only stick six
staff members remaining
consistent over the three year
period so what's happening is
the general is not evaluating in
house lawyers in house
investigators people that build
up a department so that you can
properly be the people's lawyer
and that has impacts will be on
anything we're talking about
what Medicaid fraud so that's
that's number one.
Number two and this is the last
chapter.
Is that once you start down this
road.
Of need we're gonna go to
outside lawyers then the problem
becomes the public's perception
of are you now benefiting your
campaign contributors and your
friends and as an example of
that
I attached
general.
The sole source contract so this
is between sessions yes for
emergency appropriation firm
that she has close ties with.
And he says we need one point
one million dollars nobody at
we're just going to send it to
this lawyer are in the Texas The
New Mexico K..
And here's what he says about
the lawyers says the officer
turned generals determined that
no other **** other than the
perspective kinder this means
lawyers has the expertise and
knowledge necessary to perform
the contract because the ongoing
litigation matters other
contractors would not have
unique knowledge understanding
and specific specialized
knowledge of the current case.
I want to be careful when I say
this because Pat Texas Mexico is
still in the middle of
litigation but I would encourage
members of this committee to go
talk to any water law lawyer and
find out of this firm the
current general said was the
only firm in the country that
can handle the case if that was
even close to the truth it was
not and we're talking about an
exposure to the state of New
Mexico over a billion dollars
and the idea that we would not
be putting out to contract
something like yes is just
frankly it's terrible it's bad
public policy and it's something
the legislature needs to start
looking.
So now we get to the consumer
litigation and I want to talk to
you about the case which has
been in the paper what first
caught my attention about the
problem is that David was a
solar company in New Mexico
operating in New Mexico and the
Attorney General received
thousands of complaints from
consumers about the bad actions
of this come.
So these are our fellow citizens
we have been taken advantage of
by a solar company that more
just put under house didn't know
about that we're paying more
than they have been with your
utility bill students were
promised it would all of these
were allegations.
So that was reported that the
Attorney General successful
settle this case so what
happened the settlement was this
more than half a million dollars
was awarded to an outside for
this is an important I think we
should surely are going
Pennsylvania the Pennsylvania
lawyer of course had given
contributions to the attorney
general's office of about five
thousand probably more
and in return to court awarded
fees of about half a million
dollars not a bad return on your
investment.
On in addition to that the state
was awarded one point two
million dollars to put into a
consumer settlement fund I'm not
statutory form the Attorney
General says what we need that
to fund operations they have
been turned down by our budget
committee just check any time
they ask for money they're going
to get the money all this money
went into a fund didn't directly
help consumers and help
determine general's office
consumers received nothing so
thousands of consumers got no
money as a result of the
settlement the settlement of the
Attorney General declared was a
victory and worse than that the
Attorney General decided he
would see all over a million
documents so that these people
went out and filed lawsuits it
would make it even more
difficult for them to after
having and hire their own
lawyers to collect money from
the solar company by the way I
would quickly at just so we're
clear that the attorney
general's office under authority
we have given the Attorney
General can seek restitution for
individual consumers just chose
not to.
So you're for real problem
here's why bring Ellen I'm
almost done I promise you.
I don't do consumer work I mean
I I'm I'm that's not what I do
and I'm not interested in any of
these contracts.
But I am interested in the
Attorney General being H. to
advocate for New Mexico
consumers that's what they're
supposed to be is an advocate
for New Mexico consumers and if
this isn't a scandal today it's
going to be because these
contributions every year are
getting larger and larger and
what's happening is is that they
actually we're gonna have an
outsourcing operation at the
attorney general's office where
they will deprive their office
of institutional knowledge and
we will have an actual rate a
place you were people your
contributions to the attorney
general's office in return for
contracts so there's several
ways that we could address this
we could have frankly a statute
that says you can't give
contracts to anybody that are
gives you turn general money
that would end this practice
I didn't do that because quite
frankly if I'd done that we
would have received a message
from the governor and I want to
take that risk so I decided why
not have the discussion around a
constitutional amendment where
we set up a bureau of consumer
protection or department of
consumer protection appointed by
the governor or however to get
away from you've got to give
contributions to the attorney
general's office in order for
you to go after
other bad actors that may be
ripping off consumers and maybe
consumers get money or maybe not
the lawyers make money the
attorney general's office makes
money but the consumers that are
out there left out in the cold I
am very concerned about this
issue and we all should be
concerned about this issue the
legislature does not have the
ability to have investigated by
we just don't have the funding
for the Attorney General is not
going to investigative self
there really is nobody out there
watching.
What's happened and I'm sure the
Democrats or Republicans that
doesn't matter to me what
matters to me is I want to get
back to the Attorney General
representing the citizens of New
Mexico with out the implication
this really isn't about that
this is about giving back to
your campaign contributors that
is the perception now you should
not be and I'm hoping that the
committee will pass this bill so
that we can continue to have a
discussion are committees
because frankly that's the only
thing I can do is shine a light
on what I think is a growing
scandal and by the way it's not
just happening in New Mexico as
the article in New York times
makes clear it's happening all
over the country and I think I'm
just shocked that there isn't
more attention paid to this
because it really does go to the
core of what an Attorney General
should be doing and I think this
is a direct conflict and we
should be looking at it and I'm
sorry I took up so much time
madam chair with that I will
stand for questions thank you.
Thank you Representative did you
have any experts to make okay
so we will
and go to the whole.
And.
See who is in the audience to
take the survey.
Those in favor and those opposed
please indicate.
We have twelve in favor and one
in opposition so
will start the person in
opposition if they would like to
make a comment for one minute.
No hands a range not position
madam chair okay
Those in support of this please
raise your hand.
Do you have anyone.
Yes madam chair David how to me
up.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee David
Hotmail here I'm here today as
just a private citizen and a
lawyer I am a former president
of the New Mexico trial lawyers
association I've been a
litigator for twenty eight years
twenty two of those years have
been on behalf of plaintiffs and
I think that the issues that
Representative Ely has raced
through this joint resolution
are serious in Rio they mostly
concern who is representing the
citizens of New Mexico and why
what are their qualifications
what is the money being spent
where is the money going it's as
simple as that it's in the state
of all of transparency and I
applaud Representative Ely for
this effort and urge this
committee to move this matter
forward so that further
discussion can be had thank you.
On order.
Good afternoon again committee
members and and chair I
appreciate that the
Representative Ely has brought
this forward we have prosperity
works are in the business of
building wealth and without
powerful consumer protections
wealth stripping is happening
all over our state we need.
A department that is willing to
step up on behalf of consumers
thank you for bringing this
forward we support.
Thank you next.
Michael Doyle.
Thank you madam chair committee
members and Representative Eli.
Did a fantastic job as his own
expert if I was allowed to make
motion as members of the public
I knew that he not be allowed to
retire I'm a trial lawyer and I
stand in strong support reach
your eight I want to thank him
for bringing this in and doing
the work to understand the issue
and explain it so clearly it's a
great straight step in the right
direction for ensuring that
victims receive the rights in
the benefits of their claims and
not out of state lawyers.
Again standing strong support
thank you for your time.
Thank you next.
Derek Scott.
Hello madam chair members the
committee once again you I agree
with you on something and right
to believe that we've seen this
repeatedly and also another
election issues and I would say
I've seen it here where I'm
trying to run so I appreciate
and applaud what you're doing I
hope we can find a harmonious
and.
Conducive way for investigation
and understanding what might
have happened or what is
happening and I would love to
volunteer myself thanks for for
somebody who's done
investigations and stuff like
that and would love to help so
thank you for the committee for
hearing me.
Thank you.
Jamie Graeser page.
Madam chair representative Ely
once again are are fine
integrating with you.
I urge you to pass on this joint
resolution so we can move
forward for the discussion and
ultimately go to the people of
New Mexico for their vote I
think transparency is important
I have never liked the idea of
carpet baggers and all of these
outside attorneys who are
seeking to curry favor are
exactly that so you know you
want to call it stand I
corporate banking lawyer law at
law I I would love to see that
this state needs to take care of
its own before he takes care of
anyone else charity and
everything else begins at home
so I urge you to pass on this
bill thank you Mr presentation
thank you very much for your
time and your efforts
Representative Wheatley the
line.
Thank you.
Next.
More to make sure.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Yes go ahead.
Our programs are where.
There are more than half of our
New Mexico R. I would reckon
remote or not allow
Representative Eli you require
from the work in our not be.
Office workers are now a part of
where
Right when I grab our our.
Pourtant Representative here are
therefore.
There were I can cardinal health
park very I've been with will
Ferrell offered one my family
who are in the victim of fraud
and your arm parking.
Staff reporter will offer
very will have now we are
working what however to follow
up on complaints your.
We're growing amount across our
country I thank Dr.
Thank you next and I think this
is our last person.
David.
These are these are yes.
And that is the one one madam
chair thank you.
Act thank you
Representative Ely did do
anything before we went to the
committee.
No I don't think so madam chair
this I guess the one thing I
would say is this isn't so much
a local attorney bill on local
attorneys I it's it's it's
really I just want to understand
I I I want the Attorney General
will be focused on building
institutional knowledge and this
perception of people buying in
as just got to stop and the
reason I excluded orders in the
status because you know he could
say anything Attorney General
state listen I'm not in the
legal community people like me
but the state orders larger
vessel in your New York why are
they giving money it's clear
they're giving money because
they think it's.
Thank you madam chair all
transaction.
Thank you and we have several
questions from the committee
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair I don't
think there was first but I'm
happy to ask some questions
right away so Representative Eli
on the topic of that office
function itself and the vision
for you know what we're looking
at so we've talked a lot about
you know government officials
and the worry about procurement
and and other sort of.
Ways in which that gets
extremely dicey and our folks
might be compromised does that
would that be able to work with
local governments with
municipalities how does the sort
of vision for that procurement
take place and and of course
with the idea of the consumer
being protected how does that
you know intertwined.
So madam chair and chair on a
The question I haven't really
given it much thought I am
worried obviously on any pay to
play scheme but the reason this
one caught my attention is
because it is an issue that I
have been worried about for the
Attorney General's office for
many years and when I saw the
story in the Albuquerque journal
on the the event litigation
where it was so clear to me what
happened the consumers were not
benefiting even though they
thought they were gonna benefit
that I really went after but
it's a good question I mean I
think once we start to look at
this carefully you could
certainly be expanded in terms
of you know our people getting
money I I'm trying my candidates
now in return for favors and I
you know obviously I'm always
gonna worry about that at any
level this was one we're just
cried out for just looks so
terrible if nothing else that
these lawyers from out of state
or giving money and in return
and I have Celeste of they're
getting contracts I mean there
are lawyers getting contracts
and now I mean you can set up
all the blue ribbon panels you
why and protect yourself from it
looks terrible and wipes out the
institutional memory of the AG's
office so I know that it really
answer your question I I I
haven't really given it much
thought until now and I think
it's right something the
legislature should be looking at
and hopefully when we get paid
legislature with staff
we start looking at those issues
I think it's one of the time.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think just
trying to wrap my head around
having that separate office or
how it sort of is able to
function independently you know
we're I recall New Mexico a
small town often right in the
sense of how challenging it is
for many members much less a
citizen legislature or any other
body to to keep the object
objectivity and you know we've
seen that in the news I think
you're description of this case
in particular you know is is
something that we absolutely
should be looking at that said
you know as far as you know how
this office again functions with
that objectivity independence
etcetera how is that essentially
set up in order to sort of have
that arm's length or further.
A way of from you know the sort
of general activities of of
state governments and and so on
and so forth so madam chair
representative now I I I fully
as soon as you start I I fully
appreciate your question.
Yes you is just a constitutional
amendment.
All this would do is allow
apartment be shut up.
In terms of the specifics.
What department of consumer
affairs would be doing how they
would be doing two ways that's
going to be him one is with
labeling legislation and if this
were to get to the voters voters
passed it it would come back to
Legislature twenty twenty three
I will not be there so we'll be
up to you and your colleagues to
pass enabling legislation and
then of course just like with
the ethics commission they can
pass rules stand for any
commission itself of the
department itself can further
determine that but the specifics
of the department of consumer
affairs I have not gotten into
on purpose this is literally
just what said about let's give
you guys the option and then the
house and Senate governor can
work out the statutory framework
and the department to work out
the real details through the
rule making process.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for that I think
that's sort of you know the the
wrestling that I'm doing as far
as the vision the scope the
understanding in different ways
where we've seen departments
come and go in different ways
for instance the housing
department we used to have and
that was dissolved so I I would
I would worry about that I and I
understand fully wire coaching
this and I so appreciate the the
conversation and the ability to
have that and in particularly
how this would play out for
voters and for
the the public that said it's
it's hard to do that build it
and they will come in the way
that we've tried to work with
informing the designation of an
office or
you know in in the in this case
an entire agency to oversee this
without sort of wrapping our
head hands around what that
would do and so you know I I
super appreciate the
conversation I think it needs to
be on going about the need but I
would hate to do a build it and
they will come without sort of
having the the scope worked out
as to the reason what it
actually does how it functions
and why before we ask taxpayers
to to to set it up on the
understanding that of course you
know we need to we need to have
it and it's very important and
and again I appreciate the
conversation but you know as far
as just being able to build for
that I would absolutely love to
support an initiative that looks
at why we would need to and for
what certain exactly what you're
talking about to inform voters
as to how it would respond to
the needs of New Mexicans today
I think it's your you know bang
on as far as what it is that why
would we would need it and
perhaps how it would function
but I carports for me is just
being able to
have that information before we
put it.
For the voters that said I I I'm
I'm interested to see how this
continues in this conversation
and I appreciate you bringing it
forward thank you madam chair.
Thank you now go to
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
the legislation.
I.
I will probably get to a
question as I go through this
I'm I wrote down a whole bunch
notices as our.
You went through your
discussions and.
Just to be clear is the only
engineer and legislative body.
We have plenty of attorneys in
the state of New Mexico that are
very confident with respect to
Water Rights that's
disappointing that we we have
outside attorneys involved us.
Representative madam chair with
respect to.
The the solar thing I am
concerned and then you bring up
a very valid point I am
concerned with with some of the
solar companies that are in our
state right now because it their
their contracts for damaging to.
Our constituents very damaging
and and I I do not feel like
we're putting in US.
Effort into something that the
state is subsidizing.
That that scares the heck out of
me.
So I appreciate that point as
well.
I will tell you that this since
we've been in session are
attended some events either
virtually or in person.
Where everybody from the
governor all the way down
through the leadership of talked
about just the offer of money we
have in actually.
One leader of the Senate on the
Senate side.
State we have so much money we
don't know what to do with it.
And in so one of your comments
Representative.
Was that we don't have the
funding to have an investigative
body.
Maybe we should.
Obviously we have more money
than we know what to do so maybe
we should maybe that's something
that you can consider.
Is it does make me nervous and
again.
We talk about.
Madam chair representative as
you went through this attorneys
from out of state funding.
Certain things you know we have
a lot of people out of state
learning certain things so we
can we can go back and has a
separate debate on on the how
much insurance puts in the
District Court.
And those members groups so
again those things concern me.
And we talk about the number of
people that have transferred
through to.
Thank you the attorney general's
office we could probably have
those debates with respect to
cabinet secretaries are what set
two years as well.
Well that after.
Madam chair and and
Representative.
Not opposed to your to your
joint resolution.
I am opposed to growing
government I I believe in the
old concept of we're gonna bring
something new and in government
we should get rid of to I can
give you a list of those to see
what
or you can take your own to that
you probably have your own
thoughts on.
I am concerned and I do
appreciate sure America's.
Reference to the field of dreams
and having at the same time
having framework in place that
is important to me.
The last.
Year and a half of work on a
piece of legislation does very
specifically chair
representative with respect to
the rule making process.
It ensures that we have an equal
amount of legislators involved
in that rulemaking process to
where.
If any one member on either side
of the aisle.
Disagrees with the rule.
Then the rules automatically
taken to the legislative body.
For a vote so that we all have a
registered vote on it.
Before that rule actually goes
into place and so.
I.
In the current position right
now not sure how I'm going to
vote on this I I do say that I
don't like growing government
and so with that.
I would love to see a slew shin
madam chair and gentleman
Representative that.
before you going to put in a new
office that we we come up with
an idea of maybe something that
we get rid of because I don't
think.
Thank.
I'm very passionate about the
fact that we have too much
government in New Mexico right
now those that Madam chair I
greatness so thank you have a
question but I am not thank you
madam chair may I respond to
that.
Yes Sir so couple things you.
A we we start with the solar
company.
If you buy a solar company today
the bottom line.
Would you go to the attorney
general's office would you
complain to them why they're not
gonna get you any relief and
they're supposed to we've given
the Attorney General the
authority to get relief from the
condition.
Clear from the general manager
that
lawyers pay money you're going
to consumer settlement fund
consumers better off general
water so if that's going to be
the system the White we as a
legislature would write it so
that the Attorney General candy
that was just take it out which
I don't agree with I think the
Attorney General should be
pursuing on behalf of people
that have been ripped off if
it's a large enough numbers or
the principles there as it was
in the solar K. I think they
should be doing and they're not
and your consumer today in New
Mexico and you've been ripped
off by the solar company you
know better than to go to the
Attorney General asked for.
This is that this is our
resources this is an
independent.
We have to have somebody out
there that is representing
consumers this is for this I'm
nonpartisan yield far as I'm
concerned we have to have
somebody out there that when
they've been ripped off in
massive numbers we're not just
going to say well you go hire a
lawyer.
What if if that's our system and
the attorney general's office
should just be doing criminal
law we should be doing anything
else because when you're a
massive rip off or massive harm
done to our community the German
generals must be involved or
exposed to the peoples Act as
far as investigators concerned
Madam chair representative I
totally agree with you on it
would be nice the legislature
had money to really investigate
these kind of things it's not
because gosh are we need to grow
government I'm not trying to do
that I am a very much a
protector of legislative
proctors that's why
you know I supported the house
joint resolution with
Representative night were to
I have some rule the emergency
proclamation because I very much
believe in legislative power.
We don't have the ability to do
any kind of investigation which
is why I've had to do with this
way through house joint
resolution otherwise I had no
method by which we can shine a
light on what I think is a
growing problem in this country
and in this state so I a hundred
percent review as far as rules
and everything else that's going
to work like hell I can address
that with you privately is the
former rules chair but I will
tell you quickly take it off of
the current rules chair who is
setting up virtually next you
in this committee thank you
madam chair.
Percent of time I think we'll
wait
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair
representative intriguing
everything you said to me today
is very tricky.
I'm very much
I believe something is wrong or
something needs oversight.
And I'm like you I don't matter
it doesn't to me just matter
with us Mr public internet
across when there's an issue
there is an issue.
I understand what you're saying
to your government it does he
lacks the same way get one get
rid of something else but I do
also understand you're saying
Representative Eli.
Oversight is eight.
We can't have people running
amok and one of the things I
noticed in New Mexico honestly
compared to other states is we
do have things happening where
there's not enough oversight
I'm.
You will read that old capital
outlay found six hundred
thousand dollars it's been
sitting there for six years and
with that's another thing we
need to oversight on what what's
happening there capital outlay
money that thank and I'm not
blaming anybody for that
distinguish Tax oversight and
everything she oversight on
everything that we do there
should be watch groups and and
In organizations and
The commission to oversight
everything that we do the firm
believer that every single
elected official should have
their feet held to the fire at
all times to make sure that
we're not going Mr.
Representative what has that got
to do with this bill please.
To the bill yes in a point.
In order I I noticed that you
keep doing that to Republican
speakers not Democrats so I will
finish up with this and just say
Representative thank you so
much.
Bringing this forward very
intriguing and I do want to talk
more to you about this thank you
I yield my time.
Thank you are there any other
questions from the committee
Representative Thomson.
And I think I may have to do
something with my hand make it
purple or something out there.
I'm sorry no that's okay I don't
mind them looking like a fool
and jumping up.
I'm so thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative Eli
somebody said that they wanted
to make a motion that you not be
allowed to retire I I could make
that motion I would make that
motion but I know it's what you
want to do we will miss you and
we know that Representative
Romero will do a great job thank
you are you are kind of our
state.
R. so I'm but with that some
years back madam chair I was the
chair of the it was the
development disabilities
planning council at the time and
I got involved in during
training on a conflict of
interest and one thing that was
pounded into me and all the
trainings that I did was the
appearance of conflict of
interest is the worst than real
conflict of interest because you
could go back it you know I'm
not saying anything one way or
the other in terms of what's
going on in the AG's office but
the agent could go back in the
state you know we chose this
firm to handle this because the
A. B. C. D. E. and F. were in on
the cut very they have won this
case they have to you know there
could be data and proves that
there wasn't a conflict of
interest but when the conflict
of interest is of appearance you
can't prove that you I mean
because there's not a single
thing that you can point to
where you can get evidence so
I'm throwing that out there Mr
madam chair I just to just to
say that we really need to think
about even the appearance of
conflict of interest and I think
this is a good a long way around
but that I took to get to the
point that I think this is a
good way to to start looking at
even the appearance of conflict
of interest for all of us so I
want to thank our Representative
Ely for bringing this and now
thank you madam chair.
Thank you okay seeing no further
questions what is the will of
the committee.
Your recommended do pass just
because I'd like to have a
conversation to continue and and
see what it is that you know our
legislative body you know
continues to process with this
we have this conversation Missy
Representative Eli.
With his handout.
Madam chair I can't I don't I
know that some usual but I do
see and is totally up to you and
I know you've got a full agenda
but I think the Attorney General
is one of the attendees you
don't have to stand up I don't
know if you want to talk but I
at least wanted to alert you to
that fact that if you did you
get out Miller or we can wait
till the next committee it's up
to you got something it gets out
of this committee but I would
I'm sorry the process already is
where we have a motion.
And
I'm sorry I didn't the Attorney
General it was unable to be here
for the public comment.
So we have a motion do I hear a
second.
But I miss hearing it second all
second madam chair.
Okay
Is been moved
We'll take a roll call vote
please.
Representative Lord.
Representative Pettigrew.
I'm gonna vote yes with an
explanation.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Vice chairman.
Yes is a member of this consumer
and public affairs committee I
think it's a appropriate and for
the title and after the vote.
Madam chair for our.
Thank you I will vote yes also
for those same reasons.
I hear you have a past.
Thank you our representatives
you have of five zero OO I'm
sorry do we go to Representative
Lord do we get her vote she okay
okay I didn't hear exactly okay
you have five to zero
On that house resolution eight
thank you madam chair I did ask
for an opportunity to.
Explain your vote yes please do
I'm sorry.
Thank you very much
Representative Eli I look
forward to the further debate
and.
How this move forward I do have
I do have some concerns with
respect to the growing of
governments and I'd like to have
offline and but I do look
forward to seeing and.
To.
I shared Romero's comments with
respect to have the framework
works on those so
But I do want to see it go
through and I want to see it
move forward thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you so much
thank you and with all due
respect to the tourney General I
hope they will be able to give
input on the next committee
thank you thank you madam chair.
Okay.
Thanks
house bill sixty eight criminal
code changes
Representative Dixon.
Good afternoon madam chair.
Good afternoon of.
Go ahead Representative your do
you have do we have all of your
Experts in other committee
members Sanchez.
I'm thank you madam chair I am
not sure that we do you if fund
the committee could look for
James Grayson secretary Jason
but we and W. W. secretary Ben
Baker to move over that would be
fabulous.
All three madam chair.
Thank you.
So when you're ready.
Thank you madam chair
and we also have an amendment
that has been distributed for
this bill can you guide me as to
when and how you'd like that.
Address.
Yes you can
Explain the bill explained the
amendment first if you'd like.
Thank you madam chair of the
amendment that has been
submitted would remove section
two of the bill in its entirety.
Could you explain please what
section two is being removed yes
I thank you madam chair section
to relates to changing the
terminology in New Mexico law
from school premises to school
zone there's already existing
federal law relating to schools
owns and so.
We're simply removing the
section.
Hey I'm.
Madam chair I make a motion to
accept the amendment it to.
Yes to accept the amendment.
Thank you I want to make sure
that I have the correct
amendment is this doesn't seem
like it's.
Is it point to to to to.
Five six point one.
That is correct madam.
All right thank you Hey we have
a motion on the table to adopt
the amendment.
Your second.
Okay and is there any opposition
yes Representative the
provisions of this section okay.
As is there's been some addition
okay I'm sorry one of the it
sounds like
Representative Garcia that is
needed
Okay we'll have to take your
call.
Representative Lord.
Okay so if I will go.
I want to keep the amendment.
And we were asked to not keep
the amendment so that a yes or
no I'm trying to figure access
double negative at this point no
it was moved to accept the
amendment you can yes to accept
it and now the program section
so to keep it okay chair I want
yes to accept the amendment
through of section two.
Representative.
Madam chair I though
yes to accept the amendment I do
wanna clarification for
everybody to understand with the
peace of.
That strikes made strides
forward for page one by thirteen
two fifteen is with respect to
the section to that this
amendment would strike so yes
madam chair of a yes to accept
the amendment to adopt them and.
Representative Thomson.
Yes.
Vice chairman.
No.
Madam chair for our no.
Three to the amendment up is a
yes.
Okay.
Representative Dixon if you'd
like to go ahead and explain
your bill.
Thank you madam chair yes I'm
here today to present house bill
sixty eight as amended
and as many of you are aware of
violent crime and especially
violent crime involving guns is
on the rise and threatens the
safety of every community here
in New Mexico this bill seeks to
close gaps in New Mexico law and
allow for penalties to reflect
the level of danger that they
represent to the community or
the level of harm suffered by
victims.
Filling these gaps in the
criminal code will improve
public safety and ensure that
our criminal laws target the
most dangerous criminals in our
society.
Just describe briefly the
different sections section one
madam chair prohibits the making
of mass threats each year are
there more and more mass threats
and more and more tragic mass
shootings at vulnerable
populated places like schools
and businesses this provision
would make a mass threat a
fourth degree felony and bring
New Mexico in line with other
states.
Sections I now section two
increases the penalty of
unlawful possession of a handgun
it changes the penalty from a
misdemeanor to a fourth degree
felony.
Inspection three makes
possession of a firearm by a
serious violent felon a second
degree felony.
Currently a felon's possession
of a firearm is a third degree
felony regardless of the type of
felony that person was convicted
of.
Our list of the type of
felony they were convicted at
this provision recognizes the
heightened danger when a firearm
is possessed by a person
previously convicted of a
serious violent felony.
Section four.
Increases the penalty for
aggravated fleeing resulting in
injury.
Activated fleeing is a felony
because of the extreme
recklessness and likelihood of
harm posed by a high speed
vehicle chase under current
statute however there's no
increase in punishment when the
conduct results in injury.
Other crimes that depend on
reckless endangerment such as
child abuse and drive by
shootings have graduated
punishment depending on the
level of harm cost this
provision would do the same.
And section five creates levels
of penalty enhancements for
firearms based on dangerousness.
I felonies are more dangerous
when they're committed with a
firearm but the degree of
dangerous miss depends on
whether the firearm is merely
possessed or used brandished or
discharged this provision
provides for an increased
enhancement for more dangerous
conduct involving a firearm.
So madam chair at this point I
would like to offer my expert
witness is an opportunity to say
a few words if they would like
otherwise we could go to a
public comment.
It is totally up to you if you'd
like to go ahead.
Okay
let's see
Mr Grayson
Were you interested in speaking
now or would you like to wait
for questions.
Yes thank you Representative
Dixon madam chair members of the
committee.
Want to thank you for the option
to speak today I want to say
that I'm the chief deputy of the
Bernalillo county district
attorney's office and the DA's
office in Albuquerque is
strongly in support of this bill
for a couple of different
reasons.
One is that it targets
specifically targets serious
violent offenders and their use
of guns and I would like to
direct committee to the LFC
status update on Bernalillo
county crime that page for that
describes the number of shooting
shootings and shots fired in
Albuquerque as having increased
by fifty percent from two
thousand seventeen to two
thousand twenty.
Our office deals with firearm
crimes on a daily basis and this
bill will give us the tools we
need to target those very
serious violent offenders as a
massive National Institute
justices recognized two to five
percent of those charged with
crimes are responsible for more
than fifty percent of crimes so
it's very important we target
the very serious offenders.
The other the other thing I want
to highlight though is section
one because all of the other
sections of the bill basically
modify existing provisions and
give us extra tools with respect
those provisions but section one
fills a gap New Mexico law.
In section one is about mass
threats I listened with interest
to the debate earlier today on
house bill ninety nine.
And so the the need for a statue
in New Mexico to protect
children's rights that is
absolutely necessary and that
type of statute is provided in
other states and not in New
Mexico right wise though New
Mexico doesn't have a statute
that protects against threats
against public officials
Oregon's public buildings and
schools.
that's very needed and it is
existing in other states and not
in New Mexico and so like the
statue of threats against judges
New Mexico is behind the times
because why the reason we need
statutes prescribing MassRoots
is to prevent the violence that
those threats resulting right
now schools there directs using
threats that are directed to
schools.
Trigger law enforcement to
react.
but law enforcement doesn't have
the tools it needs in order to
have an appropriate response we
have a yes Representative group
of multi agencies Representative
group in New Mexico that makes
threat assessments of threats
against schools they deal with
up to three threats against
schools per week.
Not all of those threats are
true threats that would be
captured by this bill but it
tells you the amount of law
enforcement response is needed
to protect our children and our
teachers.
The rule that law enforcement
has right now is that there is
not a crime of mass threats
against mass restaurants and so
when they try to investigate
these crimes they are very
limited in what they can do in
terms of seeking warrants in
terms of reacting with speed
they need to prevent violence
our schools and I just wanted to
the committee one recent
example.
boards example from the last
couple of years there was a
student who posted pictures of
himself with guns a are fifteens
and other
high powered rifles on social
media he indicated that he was
going to have the highest to
account any showed a fascination
with previous school shootings
and with mass murders this is a
very serious threat he also said
that he wasn't going to attack
us on screen because of the
amount of security there and
because he believed that
students there were able to
the fight against him so he
planned on attacking the school
with younger children with less
security.
this thread did provoke a law
enforcement investigation but
again law enforcement lacked the
tools they needed and ended up
having to turn to federal
authorities in order to properly
pursued investigations case
which created significant delay
and could have
it could have stopped law
enforcement from being able to
prevent a school shooting so I
just want to emphasize madam
chair members of the committee
that this is a very important
provision is very needed in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you madam chair and I do
believe that secretary but we
would also like to make some
introductory remarks thank you.
Madam chair senator Dick hello
Representative Dixon I I really
appreciate it thank you for out
to make a quick introduction I
guess me what I want to kind of
start with real quick is just
kind of talking about the impact
on law enforcement of the crimes
hand cannon General coming
calling come sing the reason
we're kind of pushing for this
bill and then maybe described
just for a moment in this
introduction the the amount of
police officers are out there
working
have an average against the the
population that we have and so
you think about populations in
Albuquerque and say Rio Rancho
together we're looking at about
six hundred thousand people for
the C. Rio Rancho we're spent
twenty seven years as a law
enforcement officer about a
hundred four thousand infancy
Rio Rancho we had a hundred to
thirty seven policemen people I
think that's quite a bit of
officers to to work the streets
and be out there actively taking
care of the community but what
does not account for that I just
wanna kind of re attention to is
that of those are there some
people you have please
administrators cheese deputies
captains you have command staff
officers assigned over a
different divisions which are
our new tenants then you have
those officers and sergeants who
are are signed to train
recruiting community engagement
a department wide training
conversations specialty units
like swat motors and traffic and
all those things and so we will
all that down what you're left
with a our patrol ships rather
actively working community and
where this is going is if you
really think about the amount of
officers are out there working.
Versus the population how many
times those same few officers
come across the same repeat
offenders time and again really
is remarkable think for a moment
the the officers on each shift
you might have a day shift the
swing shift graveyard shift is
relations maybe staff between
eight and ten officers
and you see where this is going
additional number what a staff
in any city becomes pretty low
the reason why I mention this is
that.
The same offenders time in.
Find the attention of those few
officers who are actually out
there working there really is
remarkable when you think about
the vast majority population
we'll go a lifetime without
without ever drawn the attention
along.
effective they do have an
encounter with law enforcement
often either dictum maybe
involved in a car crash or
something or maybe cross past
for minor traffic violations get
the repeat offenders that we're
talking about today and all the
bills are being passed in order
to address crime is really these
people that are managing to rack
of felony charges month after
month.
Time after time and it really
demonstrates that as we are
trying to raise the
accountability for the people
out there who are committing
crime.
Why this is necessary and so I
just kind of want to start off
of that because in a lot of
discussion of crime and the
impact that law enforcement
should be doing and social
services we should find we
really will down to the line of
officers are responsible United
community like Rio Rancho a day
shift starts at about ten people
and again there are a cross
section of criminals are
community continuously find
their way to to to drive
intentional law enforcement and
I'll mention to say that the
time we are respite it's not a
coincidence that they committed
a crime in January economics
than we the rest again in March
their habitual offenders they
commit crimes Daly just as those
of times and I believe it was
happening catch them so I just I
want to start off that for a
minute and then I'll call psych
segue for just a minute the
school threats of any kind of
address that from that
perspective.
again my years
Representative Dixon this has
eliminated the school's out or
additional apply to different
things on school grounds.
I'm thank you madam chair we've
eliminated the section
Representative relating to the
school zone however I believe
what the secretary is speaking
to is section one.
Rating a criminal threat.
Okay thank you just wanted to
make that clear thank you for.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee so I want to just have
provides this kind of the
perspective not only as a law
enforcement officer in this
particular case but as a parent
who has seen the impact of the
school threats and and again my
history of the city Rancho left
me in a position to respond to
quite a few of these are
despondency the M. court
shooting in the City of
Albuquerque which is active
threat or active shooter James
on growth quite road middle
school for an active threat a
person armed at that school bank
of America call center Rio
Rancho aren't active threat
Cleveland high school where we
had active shooter here recently
the most recent Tony Harmon
middle school here in
Albuquerque and so what I want
to find just remain this
committee you side of all this
as you think about the impact of
the threat and what times you
talk about the impact it has a
law enforcement we think about
the operational side but when
you respond to these and you see
the true fear that instills on
teachers children and parents in
the moments not only responsible
in the days to follow it really
is tremendous as.
Mr Grayson just mentioned even
just the social media correct we
immediately ramp up we sent
police officers to schools in
order to make sure that we have
an increased presence and you
can see the fear on people it
makes them uncomfortable that
it's needed but all these offers
law enforcement officer there
and I just want to do is find
that that you side to just for a
minute because again haven't
seen from the law enforcement
side but also as a parent I had
a discussion with my son
recently after one of these
social media threats came in the
doctor and it was the same thing
he was he is questioning whether
safe to go to school and you
know many parents must like
myself for having this
discussion with our children and
and given them the courage to to
go on and get an education and I
just want to mention that for a
minute that often we talk about
the impact not only on the law
enforcement officers that in the
operations but really everyone
is victimized in this particular
case I remember responding to
Cleveland high school we had act
the shop place the.
Shots being fired in school
there and running code running
over there calling my knees and
urging her not to go to school
because you know the threat the
threat out that was taking place
in the school and when we
arrived there law enforcement
officers from all around the
district you ever off duty we
have federal police there
anybody who is very much gun
toting was there and want to
address the issue so these are
these are very real threats that
are just saturating our
communities with with fear we
try to drive on of course make
sure kids get a proper education
but this is something really got
to get our arms around and take
seriously when people decide to
make these threats were to be in
person or across social media
and that package wraps of my
introduction I don't have a
deputy cabinet secretary David
Baker on as well he might have
some perspective on this if not
a manager will stand for
questions asked this is
deliberate thank you ma'am.
Thank you and
Representative Representative
did you want Mr Baker to say a
few words.
I'm thank you madam chair at Mr
speaker would you like to make a
few brief comment.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee I know
time is is of a concern is I've
been with you most of the day
today and I appreciate your hard
work and giving us the attention
on this very important topic I
will confine my
remarks as they relate to my
twenty five years and statewide
New Mexico law enforcement and
making sure this committee and
the larger body in the community
that we belong to that this
problem is not confined to our
large cities or one quarter
within central part of New
Mexico I've responded to threats
at mass are gathering places
from communities such as tech
all the way to communities
Carlsbad.
I've had the benefit of
reviewing the legislation
participating in some of this
process particularly pleased and
supportive of the notion that it
provides solutions for law
enforcement to solve some long
standing problems with tools
that they can add to provide
larger public safety or
community particularly as it
relates to violent offenders
choosing to arm themselves with
firearms and it's our belief
that we need to do incentivize
previously prohibited folks
domestic violence offenders and
convicted felons from picking up
arms and continuing to commit
criminal conduct of our state
we are grateful for the
opportunity to present from you
and will serve stand for
questions thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
So are you ready we can go to
public comment okay will put a
call up and see all the people
who are in favor and those
opposed.
Yes please
Take the survey.
Okay opposed are ten of the
fifteen and in favor are I.
Okay we'll go ahead and take of
those in favor you have one
minute and also if you would
like to speak if you just want
to take this survey that's fine
you don't have to speak but also
if you can remember that this is
not
that the school's own has been
removed but I am amendment so if
you can keep your comments that
out
Indication of that
Okay do we have someone.
I'm sorry I didn't state if you
are in support of this bill
please raise your hand.
Terry called.
I had Terry and mute yourself
please.
Thank you thanks rob good
morning madam chair members of
the committee on Terry Cole
president and CEO of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
businesses and residents about
what Turkey support this
legislation because it's
addressing the very problems we
see each day repeat dangerous
felons loaded down with guns and
a disregard for human life drug
deals that are wrapped into
shoot outs among young our men
are where weapons turned drug
deals in two robberies these are
real problems we must get
illegally held firearms and
those who use them off our
streets as a police chief Bob
and says some offenders just
simply have no regard for law
enforcement or innocent life we
have to make New Mexico a much
tougher place for these
criminals to live we're also
supportive of the bill because
it would make threats of mass
violence a crime thank you very
much we are committed
Representative Dixon for caring
the legislation and we urge your
support thank you.
T. Gardner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Keith
Gardner responds to the national
shooting sports foundation one
of first bank Representative
Dixon for the work she's done in
working with us specifically on
the removal of of section two in
the unintended consequences of
that section could at
biding citizens but it also it's
important to remember that
maintains that school property
remains the same where you can't
security we also appreciate the
portions of this bill that have
accountability specifically for
threats of those who wish to
disrupt the educational
processes religious functions
public events accept read just a
fear monger also it toughens
penalties of those who should
not be in possession of firearms
specifically the most violent
offenders who have offended and
continue to re offend so thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative Dixon.
Thank you next.
That was the final hand raised
and support.
Okay now will go to those would.
People who are in opposition
please raise your hand.
And you have one minute.
Lose health Campos.
Members of the committee my name
is Lucy let them both I'm a
policy manager with gold
futures.
Mexico is deeply impacted by
combining and and it had a huge
impact on the let's of Mexican
families however in the Maltese
of not present to reduce them by
and has been tasting not address
the root causes of violence.
There has been a significant
reason uptake in the use of guns
by young people in New Mexico we
must address the reasons why
young people are seeking
outcomes young people need
access to quality healthcare
mental health care substance
recovery programs housing.
Alright and even gun control
policies that can reduce gun
violence this is critical in
keeping our schools.
Policies and procedures like H.
B. sixty a my only drawing more
young people into.
The criminal legal system
instead of providing those
necessary resources.
I ask that you please vote
against HB sixty eight thank
you.
Thank you next Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is Ricky will
Chavez legislative coordinator
for the New Mexico defense
lawyers association.
She the work to address public
safety concerns by the sponsors
and advocates however we
respectfully oppose the measure
before you as residents and
citizens of New Mexico we
recognize that we are in a time
of increased violent crime and
struggle in our communities in
New Mexico and across the
country policy changes such as
those proposed in H. B. sixty
eight would not make our
community safer or prevent our
community members from becoming
victims of crime well
accountability is a real part of
our justice system preventing
crime should be the broader goal
the way to prevent crimes is to
invest in communities where
social work a portable housing
behavior health services and
outreach to start growing
struggling populations measures
such as H. B. sixty eight and
increased penalties eliminate
judicial discretion increase
your crimes do not have a
meaningful impact as they are
responsive to events in which
crimes of already happened we
ask that you oppose this
legislation thank you for your
time madam chair members.
Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender I echo the
comments that have already been
made as far as section one goes
I hear the proponents reasons
for creating the crime of
criminal threat that the crime
that they've created goes so
much further than what they
described and will include a lot
of it is otherwise innocent
conduct it should include a
requirement that the threat to
be imminent and that that threat
the intended and or objectively
reasonable like other threat
crimes do the increased penalty
to felon in possession the
increased enhancements to
firearm enhancements are we're
just updated and just increased
in twenty twenty and twenty
twenty one and it is too soon to
come back and increase them
again I have a full written
analysis of this bill which is
really six built in one now I
that I submitted is a hand out
to the committee and I hope you
have an opportunity to read a
more detailed assessment I want
to conclude with aggravated
fleeing to make clear that if
great bodily harm does result in
a fleeing incident there is a
separate crime to address that
thank you and I hope you do not
support house bill sixty eight.
Barron Jones.
Madam chair members of the
committee on my name is Erin
on ACLU Mexico well we
appreciate the ten of the
Sanchez we respectfully opposes
Mr and and this is a we
recognize the uptick in crime
and the City of Albuquerque
another place throughout the
state this isn't the solution I
most commonly was this
legislation a species that would
that would negatively affect
black in business and other
communities of color this
legislation will result
an individual being sentenced to
years in prison costs the state
million dollars any annually
that could be invested in
evidence based treatment such as
job training and substance use
disorder and behavioral health
treatment programs known that
are known to have positive
impact with primaries the size
research shows that students
half moons and creation process
all the AC sixty eight our loan
no deterrent effect on crime
this bill burns every problem
the only business from the
public defender's office
district attorney and especially
the course they don't have the
capacity to hear and plus the
case basis that this crime would
create thank you for your time
and please not just.
Criminal defense attorney in New
Mexico and I'm.
I have the same concerns as miss
Kirk as far as the
On the criminal threat as to the
ability of a person to carry it
out or is it just somebody
talking that has absolutely no
ability or no no there's no
imminent way that they could
exercise such throughout and
also I would object to that the
second part is on the aggravated
fleeing you're seeking to remove
the part that says it cannot be
like an unmarked vehicle and I
would submit that that gets
around recent our case law that
said that it does have to be
it does have to be a marked
vehicle of some sort of a person
wearing their uniforms and so
for those reasons I object to
those the others are people who
carry hand guns are going to
continue to carry handguns
you're not going to be able to
stop that with this bill.
Thank you.
Jamie the creature page.
Chair members of the committee
and representatives who brought
the bills.
Hi I'm opposed.
In detail in general I support a
good many of the things in this
bill is a retired police
officer.
Making the carrying of a handgun
General and lawful for persons
under nineteen dollars means
that a person charged with this
crime was no criminal intent
becomes a felon barring them for
life from increasing exercising
their second amendment rights
and your rights under the New
Mexico constitution most
criminal charges owners could
also involve unlawful carrying
of a handgun have the gun charge
dispensed with in the first
round of the plea bargain
process in my experts.
This means of their possession
of that handgun with criminal
intent potentially goes away a
person under nineteen was
charged only with unlawful
possession of a handgun this not
have that option I urge you to
vote no not to change
disciplines to a phony.
Sacks four.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Zach for to
the president of New Mexico
shooting sports association.
First I want to thank the
sponsor for removing the school
promises all of the bill the
firearms in school zones are
heavily regulated on the on the
federal side.
Well
it's still important to effect
here in Mexico I want to make it
very clear that I am not opposed
the bill overall the section the
bill I want to highlight is the
printer is operating the
criminal charge misdemeanor to a
felony for someone who is guilty
of.
I'm also possession of a firearm
registered should be applied to
solidify system is nineteen
years old or younger so this is
a very heavy charge for a young
person if you are going to
continue to carry this language
I ask the some element of
criminal intent the included as
well thank you for your time.
Hand written on.
Hello thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
required I'll Representative a
coalition of conservatives in
action from Las crucis speaking
in opposition to HB sixty eight
with knowledge of the intent of
the Sanchez what this bill
creek can create criminals out
of law abiding citizens and has
confusing aspects many of our
concerns rules for the debt new
definition of schools on I thank
you for native removing it
because I live three hundred
seventy one feet from a school
zone but we need to know just
what is the federal definition
of the schools on how many feet
you know it's crucial to this so
in in closing
we are are we respectfully
oppose this bill because it has
the potential to create
criminals out of law abiding
citizens rather than punishing
any bad guys in following the
spirit of your remarks that were
Representative award and
Pettigrew enforcing prosecute
the wrongdoers with existing
laws on to laws that are
hindering public safety thank
you.
Erik Scott.
Madam chair members of the
committee I want to thank you
for your patience today and with
me and my comments today it's
been a great day and I just want
to comment on my opposing of
this bill only on a few points
like it's like the couple before
me Jamie and such that said you
know yeah yeah I see where you
guys are going with this but I
have a few issues with section
one and section three section
one I think we need to redefine
what we're saying is threaded
that childless to say I just you
know and tired and I just want
to tear down the school that
doesn't mean a direct threat
it's just something they're
talking about that the other
criminal and they're scared now
they're freaking out and being
charged on section three I think
we again I want to echo the
people before that we need to
redefine it to be with criminal
intent and I appreciate the ACLU
for coming forward and also
going against this bill but I
appreciate you guys on your
efforts thank you.
I love McGrath's.
Hello thank you madam chair and
other can many members my name
is Ashley McGrath Scott I am a
says one educator
and so that's one means social
emotional supports I work with
students that are.
If you've neglected they have
gone through so much in their
lives you they say weird and
sketchy things yes they do it
doesn't mean they're going over
the schools so section one needs
to be re written number three
need to be rewritten also we
don't need people to be.
Charging her in going through
the system because they say
something's.
I think they're just people
so please.
No we know thank you and have a
great day about.
We.
Madam chair that was the final
public comment.
Okay thank you very much.
Representative Dixon did you
have any words before you went
to the committee thank you madam
chair I think we can take
questions from committee
members.
Okay thank you
Representative Lord.
Needed.
Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
Representative respond want to
thank all the callers that
called in there's a lot to be
said a lot of things angry with
on this bill and this bill is
extremely unfortunate bill
I'm very very pro law
enforcement and have been the
entire time I've been up here
and I proved that over and over
again but this bill would have
been better off of it was
divided into different sections
and I'm gonna break it down why
it house recommendations to
change us.
So in section one.
No I understand and I've said
this before program
brought a Bill endorsed that
said if you made a threat to
shoot up the school thank you
should be charged with a felony
and I remember that very
distinctly because I actually
testified for that and
what we heard that it was the
pipeline present so there was a
lot of people are very concerned
about this so I think you're
gonna have to come up with the
people have suggested with.
I don't want to devalue it but
there needs to be something I
don't want kids state I hate my
teacher whatever whatever I
don't want them to be penalized
at the same time there was a
shooter in Florida.
Nickolas Cruz I'm sending his
name he had told people for two
years is gonna shoot the school
forget it so there is something
to this I think that just need
to be worded differently I wish
systems that totally separate
bill so we could just discuss
this because there's so much to
unpack in this bill so highly
recommend that there be some
sort of amendments are looking
into this deeper on how you can
change the wording.
To make sure I just want to be
fair and I want to make sure.
We're picking up the kids that
have been posted on social media
and saying that they're going to
shoot up the school or they're
going to do something verses it
just says something and I don't
want them going to have criminal
charges for something that
wasn't there attention K. first
part of section one section two
is done and then okay so section
three.
All right so I need some
clarification on something so if
I'm understanding the law.
So we're talking about
possession of that person.
Is a person knowingly have a
hand gun in their possession and
only transporting that and then
there's all the exceptions like
it but and child was taking are
also someone under nineteen was
taking a gun to ranger they were
going to for each person like
that those are excluded.
But is it my understanding and I
want to make sure I ask
questions on this that if we
someone is under the age of
nineteen they cannot possess.
A fire arm maybe they can't have
a gun on them is that correct.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative lord.
For two deputy district attorney
Gracin up for this and then I
also believe that Act Secretary
Bowie I'm may have some
comments.
Madam chair Representative Lord
at an individual who is under
nineteen cents does not capture
nineteen year olds.
The under present law it is it
is unlawful for them to have a
hand to.
absent one of the exceptions
that are currently in the
statute.
And if if I could just respond
briefly to
Representative was comments
about section one that section
is is modeled after language in
other states and their trust
statutes and is consistent with
the constitutional standard in
the loans first United States
that constitutional standard
requires under the first
amendment that there be a true
threat so this this bill would
not capture individuals were
just blowing off steam
individuals making a joke it has
to be a true threat which the
United States Supreme Court has
to provide as a serious
expression of the purpose to
inflict harm which is why the
language in the bill refers to
and intent or reckless disregard
to caused a lockdown evacuation
or disruption and aid the
communication of an intent to
inflict one of the types of
important in those different
subsections one two and three.
Thank you I appreciate that so.
I guess what I'm trying to think
about is I'm trying to think
about different situations and
section rectus three here.
In in different situations
Let's say a seventeen year old
girl listed in requests nineteen
years old just for example and
he cannot have a gun for
whatever reason and he gets
pulled over and he says here
hold my gun and she's not
supposed to be in possession of
a nine because she Center
nineteen.
My understand just a long not
like what may happen and not let
the party down wouldn't that
make her found under this law.
Madam chair representative Laura
I apologize to could you repeat
the age of this individual I'm
not but
the girl is under nineteen she's
eighteen whatever seventeen or
seventeen she's teenager and
she's dated nineteen since your
whole my god and it's just a lot
of the data typical fashion she
says yes also this is this is my
got because she wants protected
under this law would that make
her a someone to be arrested for
felony.
Madam chair representative lord
no it would not because just as
a seventeen year old she would
be subject to juvenile
disposition and the statute
actually does not change
juvenile penalties
juvenile penalties are set out
in the children's code and they
apply irrespective of whether a
crime is a felony for Mr.
So juveniles they're not
convicted of a crime they
receive an education of
delinquency unless it's a crime
for which they can be charged as
an adult which this would not
be.
Would not affect anyone who was
under eighteen in terms of the
penalty what it does in terms of
people who are under eighteen is
that it become because it's a
felony it would have to be
referred to the district
attorney's office so there will
be greater awareness of
juveniles who are in possession
of firearms
our our guide Hankinson
particularly what we see right
now in the system is that we
have people who are involved
shootings and may should another
person they have no criminal
history they have no
they have no involvement with
the system and yet they've had
very big have many previous
incidents where they have
possessed guns or possess
weapons even in schools where
the schools don't refer it to
juvenile probation or juvenile
probation does not refer it to
the district attorney's office
because for a misdemeanor
offense juvenile probation may
resolve misdemeanor fences
informally up to three different
times before referring the
matter to the district
attorney's office so that would
be the only change with respect
to juveniles is that the
district attorney's office will
be notified and would be
involved in resolving the issue
but it wouldn't affect the
penalties so.
Okay Madam chair representative
I believe that secretary but we
would also like to comment on.
Madam chair representative lord
I guess maybe the only
perspective that I would just
find from the law enforcement
side regarding the threats made
in an example that you provided
per child being in the schools
is blowing off steam verses you
know those that are intending to
harm someone you know as long
for him we respond we always
assess credibility to a threat a
lot I don't think it's gonna get
made all there on the dispatcher
by adults as well in the so my
maybe and and and the moment are
in say the next time because you
on the street I'm gonna kick
your **** you know we don't we
don't start charging people you
know on those idle threats you
know we look for begin
credibility of the crime look
our steps being taken to.
To commit that crime and
basically looking for the
elements obviously that's that's
good contained within every
statute see the person needs the
elements of the crime and so you
know those elements are
certainly can be built in our
bills and and and those are the
tools of law enforcement use in
order to assess whether they
would either someone's make
physical rest or or to get
arrest warrants are you want to
just clarify this for me.
Thank you madam chair
representative and nice to face
the name secretary by this.
Okay so maybe give me another
scenario let's say let's take a
Hispanic male who got in trouble
when he was younger was arrested
a few times whatever reason is
not for us to have a gun on him
and let's just say he's.
Working and he takes somebody to
work with them they put their
gun in his car he's not supposed
to have done he gets pulled over
officer sees and says he's not
supposed to have a gun now it
technically would he be arrested
as a family.
Even though it was an accident.
Madam chair representative lord
I can I can answer is welding
goes back to into what's written
in there about knowing and
knowingly I think we would have
to be able to demonstrate that
as an element of the crime be
able to ensure that the person
knew that they were possession
of a firearm if I was on the
street trying to make an
assessment where the to charge
someone again we're dealing with
this problem causes exist for
arrest so I would be able to
prove that this person new and
so at the moment that I would
stop similar questions start
investing further and try to
assess credibility to the story
provided by that example you
that you get into the other
person the other person that say
yes as mine it is you know that
person will be of course not
prohibited from having farming
these are all steps to law
enforcement take to insure that
you know person either in New
York did not knowing it make
sure the islands Department.
Thank you
Mr chair Senator and and
secretary I guess what I'm
trying to get at and trying to
look at the law the losses right
what I don't want to see as I
don't want to say a couple
things happen.
I would hate for someone who is
low income they got in trouble
before you're looking at their
rest record their stamina guns
not mine and it can happen we're
just like okay I don't believe
this person maybe do believers
and I'm not I'm just saying it
it's I love the law enforcement
has discretion.
What I don't want to see what I
don't want to see is there not
being any justice for this
person who now has to go through
the whole criminal system to
prove that they're not a felon
my suggestion for this bill
because things can happen we
yes to make a beeline to your
yes it could be true we don't
want to see somebody who is
lowincome was gonna lose our job
might do some time and how some
previous staff.
And they are unable to prove
that it wasn't there since we
did put in the glove box and I
don't want this to end up being
some sort of pipeline to prison
for people where on and very
first offense and this is one of
my biggest heart earns this
bill.
This is my just my personal
suggestion I would like to see
the first time that they get
charged with this it's a
misdemeanor then second time to
tell and now they know better
than not supposed to do it that
would account for anything where
there's any type of accident I
just don't want.
Somebody to get a charge when it
was in the state is what I'm
trying and trying to be fair I'm
trying to understand that.
Yes you should have gone when
it's not supposed to but then I
would hate for somebody.
I thank you my domestic violence
situation a woman is leaving an
accent he's extreme abuses and
say once the killer so she goes
on was done never happened
doesn't know she can't carry a
gun on her and she is full or
something happens she has
personal can still carry I would
also hate for that person to be
charged with a felony so I this
is my massive heartburn for this
entire billing again I would
like to see all these separated
out so that nobody's forced to
vote on a bill that has good
stuff in it but then how these
other things that are giving me
massive heartburn I'm thanks
The other thing too is when
you're convicted of a felony
there's no way you're going to
be able to get a concealed Kerry
so I don't want to see and be
used woman lose her rights
discussion no surprise a lot of
people don't know anything about
concealed carry and that they
can't carry them or not have the
the whatever that look you know
those things.
So for that's fine you know I
don't think anybody would have
and the problem with that family
and has gone second degree
felony fine total imports at
Barton nothing policy about that
section whatsoever.
Your column divided up so we
could have had opportunities to
go through but I I guess so
amendment I would love to see
first time you get busted with
that gun and Mr leader second
tax our what what definitely
make this bill easier committed
to.
Absolutely right on point zero
problems section five and that
that is great as a matter of
fact I wish section I was on
bill we just pass it right now
there's no reason why they
should be passed.
So we go to section six men time
money or permit this one while.
My problem is and and I don't
have what you're doing that's
not the problem the problem in
the amendment I would like to
see on this is possession use
Francine I guess it would make
sense for just chart is just a
news brandishing a deadly
weapon.
So that you're covering
everything and a fire in a fire
arm reason being I don't think
we should separate out somebody
during a violent crime with a
knife or an axe or a straight
razor anything all of those
things should be able and not
just if you have or you're using
a gun.
I would love to see then the
economic replaced fire arm
I don't know it just seems to
make the most sense for me that
if we're going to do this we're
going to go after someone that
it should be anything that
have occurred the baseball bat.
Your state got a crowbar hammer
to me it's all the same you're
doing a crime and you got that
deadly weapon.
So able to me.
So one last question this how
much is going to process for all
these new felonies and putting
people in time more what's the
total cost on all that Madam
chair representative.
I'm thank you madam chair and
Representative Lord our
secretary but we I don't know if
that cell is something
department of public safety
might have a sense on or W.
trade St if if you want to
address that.
Thank you madam chair
representative of course there
were quite a few comments there
from Representative in terms of
cost I believe that's covered in
the FIR
I think she's one one a point of
particular note in the FIR is
that the section six.
of the original bill section
five the amended bill would
actually reduce the number of
people subject to a firearm
enhancement.
It would increase the costs of
Prison confinement because of
the increase in the amount of
time but it reduces the number
of individuals subject to a
firearm aspect which goes to the
idea that this bill targets
those people who are the most
violent and the most dangerous
in our society.
And madam chair representative
of ward just to address your
earlier comments in earlier
concern which is a valid concern
about an individual who's caught
up in crime I just want to make
it very clear that the district
attorney's office in every
district attorney's office
across the state we look at
where we look at crimes they're
charged very carefully to
determine whether we can prove
the crime beyond a reasonable
doubt and that scenario that
Representative Lord raised in
terms of someone's car and
somebody else was in the car
placed on under seat we actually
see that I quite frequently and
we don't charge those crimes
because we can't prove it beyond
a reasonable doubt and
Representative Lord expressed
the concern that this person
should be able to should have to
prove that they didn't commit a
felony that's why our system
requires the state to always
carry the burden of proof we
have to carry the burden of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt
and we take that standard very
seriously and that's why the
statute requires that the
individual knowingly possessed
the Scott.
it's it's not meant to capture
people who innocently or
knowingly possessed the gun
and as another point I would
mention that it's it's an
eighteen year old who was
charged with fourth degree
felony of unlawful unlawful
carrying of a firearm.
it's highly likely that that
eighteen year old be eligible
for conditional discharge or
deferred sentence that would not
then prevent them from
possessing a firearm later in
their life.
Thank you madam chair and
representative yeah the going
back to the cost.
I saw.
One of these and now assess
where they were talking about
two point one million dollar
increase which is substantial
I'm trying to wait those
benefits out but let me just
wrap it up with this.
My concerns are three set for
the big concern for me I would I
would hate for a young she is
twenty years old again all the
crime gets busted for this gets
a felony and that ruins lives
and later on it could affect
technically faxed him I'm trying
to get ahead trying to get a
concealed Kerry I I don't like
that on the very first offense
that really bothers me and I
know that dust you have to look
at proving the crime except are
but I don't like.
I don't like the fact that
someone's going to be charged
that very first time that that
gets me it doesn't alleviate my
fears are somebody's going
through a bad time or somebody
just makes a bad choice young
and I I don't want this to be a
pipeline to prison bill I don't
want this to the fact people of
color and I don't want this low
income people I don't want us to
fax people that make mistakes
that's my biggest thing the rest
of it I'm a great honor to be
divided up and goes in that's
fine but for me to ask you this
okay you did it once.
You're gonna get a misdemeanor
you do it again you're get a
felony not care crystalline at
that point and I just.
We get that it's just.
A fire arm and not deadly weapon
I think that definitely needs to
be changed as you see that state
discharge of a firearm and and
that I think would make a lot
more people happy but what I
don't want to say I don't want
to.
Penalize people because it was a
kind of all but at the same time
I do want to penalize people if
they're doing something bad with
that done and all so that's all
I need to understand that for
now I am going to be voting no
on this bill and we'll see and
from some amendments come out of
that it is not because they
don't what law enforcement do
you and I do want to be tougher
crime I just have issues with
this giant Norma's bill that
have so much in it that would
have been better that was
divided up thank you for your
time.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
I think it just have one
question
what.
What level of judge would hear
the initial case on any of the
sections.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Pettigrew I.
W. R. district attorney Grayson
would you answer that please.
Yes madam chair Representative
Pettigrew thank you
Representative Dixon thank you
for your question Representative
Pettigrew all the statutes still
excuse me all the sections of
the bill deal with felonies.
so those would be decided by
District Court judge of the case
could initially be filed in
magistrate court or match
following court for purposes of
the preliminary hearing but
would eventually be heard by a
District Court judge has accused
moved along if it were to be
bound over for trial or indicted
the exception Representative
Pettigrew madam chair is four
section the section dealing with
unlawful carrying of a handgun
by an individual under nineteen
years of age if that is a
juvenile it would be heard by
the children's school.
Thank you very much I.
Thank I asked that question very
specifically because I feel like
our magistrate judges.
Are more in tune with the moral
turpitude the of the of the
area.
Then sometimes the higher courts
and and wanted to ensure that
that.
The initial discussion happens
with that court level it sounds
like it could be either
magistrate or district there's a
bit of a concern stay with
respect to that.
Because.
West of a chance to understand
the the person involved in so
but I do appreciate the answer
madam chair that was the only
question I have thank you very
much.
Thank you are there any more
questions from the committee.
Okay seeing none of what is the
will of the committee.
Madam chair only to motion for
divest.
There's a motion for do pass.
I hear a second.
We make a motion for do passed
with no recommendation.
Legislation that.
I think it's just no
recommendation okay.
I will second that.
Okay
is there any opposition.
First yes.
Okay well take roll call.
Representative Lord okay so this
is that same time we have before
we make sure body correctly no I
do not want this bill to pass.
Representative Nibert.
Yes with an explanation.
Representative Thomson yes with
an explanation.
Vice chair Romero no.
Madam chair for our.
Yes with an explanation.
Read a to do pass but that
recommendation.
And I'm sorry of this would be
the bill as amended.
You madam chair no
recommendation with as amended
Representative Pettigrew did you
want to go and give your
explanation.
Thank you madam chair and and.
I have seen through this
committee for the last two.
Sessions had had the opportunity
to sit here and the pleasure to
stay here because I've learned
so much but
So many times this committee
will pass something to see how
it matures before it makes it to
the house for.
I think there's been some great
discussion today.
And I'm looking forward to see
how Representative this carrying
this bill addresses as a make it
to that to to the next committee
and.
There are things about the bill
that I.
Despite.
There are things about the bill
that I do like and.
At the end of the day I I'm very
conscientious about my kids then
when I say my kids
Representative the same as
everybody else on this on this
committee thirty thousand people
and I hope to school districts
and I'm.
I get concerned about that.
So.
I'm interested to see where this
goes I'm curious to see if if we
have a chance to debate those on
the floor and any amendments to
make it through the next
committee which I think is
government if I if I understand
this correctly I'm not sure why
this going there but
anyway I wish you the best of
luck Representative what's your
bill and I appreciate the open
debate.
Was there anyone else you want
to explain Representative
Thomson thank you madam chair
I'm.
This.
I'm I'm I'm hi Representative
Albuquerque I live in
Albuquerque we have a
significant issue with crime but
it's not just Albuquerque
there's a lot in this bill I
don't like but I I voted to move
it on to continue the
conversation and hopefully get
to something that can actually
address the crime issues
throughout the state so I'm not
a big fan of this bill but but I
do want that the discussion to
continue thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Dixon
does this go to government not
Judiciary.
I'm madam chair because
Judiciary.
Thank you that worried me
because that's my explanation
for my vote
I feel as working with victims
of crime and often
The the families of don't get
the justice because of the
penalties not
being hired two what is
commensurate with the action and
so with that
but I also understand that there
is a lot of things that need to
be changed such as you know
someone who flees and there's if
there's an unmarked car that you
know they would not know that
that was a police officer so
those are things that I'm hoping
will be changed amongst many
others
because we don't want people
staying in jail just because of
theirs and mandated
a penalty and especially against
you
so with that I reluctantly also
vote yes and this is for
but I do passed with no
recommendation as amended.
And that is on.
The house bill sixty eight thank
you Representative thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee.
Okay
so we are done for today that
was our last bill thank you
everyone for hanging in there
Over five hours I really
appreciate your Saturday
hopefully our bills will
lessen but we do have this next
week with a full agenda so
we will try and get through
these as quickly and maybe just
have this week of bills and see
what comes through
the third week yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Madam chair I would like
it may be on the web I just turn
my computer off.
Confirmation of what bills you
think that we may be looking at
on Tuesday.
Yes we have I got it
okay
Tuesday is house joint
resolution ten.
Public officer salary commission
is a constitutional amendment
House memorial twenty four
develop a plan to save
adoptable dogs and cats HB fifty
six temporary veterinarian
veterinary permits house bill
one twenty three thanks masks
sale gross receipts house bill
forty six family representation
and advocacy act and house bill
one fifty six UP possession of
large capacity gun magazine.
And then on Thursday we're going
to have for bills together so we
can here Representative rains
bills.
House bill twenty six twenty
seven twenty eight and one forty
and house bill one fifty eight
real estate transfer taxes and
social security.
Thank you very much sure we'll
get that out to you but it it
should be available so with that
thank you all again very much
and for the great discussions
and we'll see you.
Probably on the floor Monday
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you committee Act analyst
and a staff we really appreciate
your Saturday.
Meeting adjourned.
