Representative Lord.
I'm here.
Representative Pettigrew.
Your.
Representative Thomson.
Your.
Vice chair Romero.
Madam chair for our.
Present.
All members in attendance you
have apartment.
Thank you.
So that's go head since this is
our first meeting and introduce
ourselves to anyone in the
audience
Hi you madam chair but.
Representative Thomson you in
the first.
Thank you madam chair I'm
Representative Liz Thomson house
district on twenty four and I
handed the proverbial imaginary
gavel to madam chair woman so
I'm looking forward to thank
you.
Thank you Representative vice
chair.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Andrea Romero
from a northern Santa Fe County
from the City of Santa Fe
through the beautiful Pojoaque
valley into the beautiful
Espanola valley we also at our
house to for sovereign sovereign
pueblos to see again to settle
the funds so and Pojoaque
pueblo's thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
pedicure.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Randall predators
from Lee County Representative
loving to questions of Lovington
arms in unison job.
And Representative Lord thank
you very good idea we did same
time as Representative Lord
district twenty two and
beautiful east mountains very
happy to be here today thank
you.
Right and I am Representative
doing it for our each year
consummate.
Can
anyone consumer public affairs
committee and I'm from house
district thirty seven in Los
crucis and mostly the side
although that changed a little
bit with redistricting but I'm
very glad to
be here and with that we'll go
ahead and
Have our first bills which is
house bill thirty two.
Thirty to thirty seven and.
I'm sorry house bill thirty
seven
the calls I had was I put on
note on there is thirty two
possible thirty seven I'm sorry.
Representative Ortez and staring
on at and robot can be here are
the sponsors.
If we can.
I will meet them to share.
Hi madam chair members of the
committee.
Shall I begin you want to tell
us who your experts are and we
can bring them yes let's move
them over thank you madam chair
my experts are Tammy people corn
with the southwest energy
efficiency project and keep the
CENIC from you in law school.
Okay.
Representative yes
Representative Sarinana you're
also I don't believe that she's
here but I also would like to
move over Representative robocop
I yet who is also on on the bill
she's not.
Okay.
EE Representative Sarinana was
able to make it.
You should be all set.
I thank you thank you madam
chair members of the committee
members of the public click on
zoom and watching on the web in
our Christine or yes
Representative from towns and
intractable HB thirty seven
which is the community energy
efficiency development block
grant we call that seed for
short this bill will improve
energy efficiency our utility
affordability it'll reduce
energy burdens and increase
utility access for all low
income New Mexicans all around
the state I'm not sure if you
know this but it is a surprise
to me New Mexicans living in a
rural low income committee spent
about fifteen percent of their
income on utility bills and that
is just simply too much this is
what the bill does first
establishes a fund that and to
give block grants to local
governments and tribal and
tribal governments and the
mortgage finance authority to
make targeted energy efficiency
improvements and underserved
communities secondly the bill
provides additional provisions
to address energy burden
management across the state so
many New Mexicans don't have
consistent access to utility to
electricity or water we don't
really even know how many so the
bill requires reporting on
utility arrears disconnections
access and requires the PRC to
hold hearings and take action to
increase affordability and
access it allows us that the PRC
to set in motion to move toward
the goal of achieving one
hundred percent energy
affordability for all due low
income New Mexicans by twenty
fifty and the PRC is given the
authority to prove low income
rates which we know is a really
important tool for increased
energy affordability long term
long term where we stand now for
questions with Tammy people corn
and keep sending Act and I'd
like to invite Representative
cadre that Colorado to.
To make at because even.
Thank you Representative and
good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and
congratulations to Madam chair
in this the new the members of
the committee I'm happy to join
representatives
this and setting and on this
bill I just want to briefly say
that I've been involved with
community development block
grants and for.
The entire my entire
professional career in the
beauty behind block grants is
that engages local communities
on it involves local communities
both from the government sector
as well as the communities in
general to advocate for and be
strong proponents for
everything that matters and
development and increasing
access and opportunities to our
communities and this particular
bill as
Representative Ortez eight
sponsor mentioned is
particularly critical at this
juncture of time because of all
that it does and she described
and so I look forward to a
vibrant discussion and being
available to answer any
questions and I'm fully
supportive on in however way we
can move this forward and
grateful to you thank you very
much thank you madam chair.
Okay thank you
we'll go to the hole if you
could get that up for us people
who are in the audience
I'm I'm your computers if you
see
the poll and take it.
Rob is that put up for everyone.
And and the committee members
and sponsors do not vote.
We.
And do you show us the results
are just tell us from.
I'm happy to share them I'm top
of this there is one person in
the committee room who is for
this bill.
Okay.
We have fifty seven in favor and
seven against okay so we'll go
to public comment.
those who are in opposition to
this bill if you'd like to raise
your hand we will take you in
order.
R. then the virtually all.
I am in favor.
Okay
let your hand please and if you
are in opposition and would like
to speak about the bill.
The grant.
Thank you.
I appreciate the opportunity to
speak to the committee I divide
my life between Santa Fe and a
small farm in Taos County and I
am asking the committee to pass
HB thirty seven which is a win
win solution to improve the
lives of our less affluent
community members well reducing
our collective use of energy.
Representative which has already
pointed out the terrible
statistic of fifteen percent of
New Mexicans or sorry twenty
percent nearly of New Mexicans
living below the federal poverty
line to spend about fifteen
percent of their income for
energy and it's worse in several
counties caption Guadalupe
hiding Lincoln Torrance and how
those counties they may pay
twenty three percent or more so
the V. thirty seven would
address their needs by doing
such necessary actions as
insulating homes paying less to
stay one can mean being able to
afford get groceries or medicine
two thousand homes are projected
to receive energy efficiency
upgrades if the seed grant act
pass passes.
The bill allows local
communities decide how to apply
the funds and local people would
be employed to do the work as
the improve their neighbors
quality of life they are
ratcheting down their use of
power and reducing emissions
that drive climate change when
when thank you again for the
opportunity to speak in favor of
the bill.
Thank you I'm let's try this
again if everyone will lower
their hands that is in favor of
the bill and let's go to those
who are in opposition against
the bill.
To raise their hands and they
like to speak.
Hey
Let us see if there's I think
rob is checking to see if
there's anyone in the committee
room.
Are we have none in opposition
in the committee room would you
like to keep going down the
panelists.
Yes if there is anyone in
opposition with third hand
raised is that right.
Okay.
Okay.
I'm sorry I reached my hand for
something else earlier I'm
sorry.
I am in favor.
Okay maybe there's no one
speaking in opposition to start.
Rob did you see anyone else in
their hand raised are changing
them are we going to have okay
Carlos Serra.
In hearing.
Yes we can't okay good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee Carlos's are with the
Public Service Company New
Mexico.
You know strongly supports
energy efficiency programs and
grants are held New Mexico
reduce their energy use we work
with sweeping others a few years
ago to help raise the cap on the
energy efficiency act line for
more funding to go towards the
creation of new programs and
broaden our reach as well
additional one million in grants
will go a long way to help our
most.
However we have concerns with
house bill thirty seven
especially and sections eight
nine and ten and are
disappointed that the sponsor
advocates did not take the same
approach with the supper however
we are willing to work on these
concerns but let me let me tell
you a little bit about these
concerns the bill requires
energy companies to perform
studies and reports and
disconnects the rear Gen how
many prospective customers for
not receiving Chiles service in
their service territories also
requires an immense and M. P.
Garcia or PRC issue in order to
perform analysis on energy
efficiency for low income
affordability low to low income
and ensure utilities are
providing essential household
services energy companies and
coops are already required
report disconnects in regards to
that to the PRC especially
during the COVID nineteen
pandemic also utilities in
collaboration lie he make sure
qualified low income customers
are not disconnected for non
payment every year from November
fifteenth to March fifteenth
Furthermore the way the bill is
right and energy companies will
now need to try to gather
information on persons or not
customers improve to be a which
will almost proved to be a
almost impossible even with the
cabinet best yes ma'am.
Yes estimates this creates an
additional burden on both the
utility and PRC personal
information that is already
being collected another concern
is in section ten which creates
the ability to authorize utility
rate practices for low income
customers issues a special rate
would be paid for by other great
classes including our next most
Robert because boulder because
customers that are not eligible
for lowincome right the rate
making process is very
complicated and not designed
correctly can have negative
ripple effect on other rate
classes this is more complex
complicated and just making a
simple amendment could have
lasting effects down the road
due to lack of consideration and
and several energy companies
again PNM supports energy
quality for all New Mexicans the
NMAA programs in place to help
struggling New Mexicans with
their energy efficiency goals
and reduce our energy but energy
bills.
Porting studies and right
preferences are concerns to PNM
that we cannot support again we
are willing to work with the
Sanchez and have an expert
witnesses on this the way it's
written right now we cannot
support these topics should be
addressed.
These topics can also be
addressed in the interim where
you chose to participate to
participate in the discussions
as they and their customers are
most affected by this bill thank
you for your time.
Thank you is there anyone else
in opposition and we are a
private you could put up the
timer when we get to having a
quite a few people speak.
One to two minutes or two
minutes Max.
Yes.
Kevin Greenwald.
Good afternoon madam chair
Committee I'm Kevin role all the
the CEO The New Mexico
overlooked Association
much like PNM.
The whole block grants Energy
Commission block grant I think
is laid out fairly well the
first fifteen pages of Bill it's
the same sections eight nine ten
that we have some issues with
the PRC has demonstrated that
they have the ability to make us
do all the reporter requirements
we've been making monthly
reports and I've been making
them on behalf of my M.
discretion what members for
since November of twenty
nineteen.
And.
We've been tracking the
disconnects reconnects
happen track in life he numbers
original members
so the commissioner has on that
I don't think it needs to be
added the other thing is we're
in the worst situation where at
two hundred percent of poverty
level.
We got about fifty five percent
of our members out there Senator
by Rolex to co ops that are
gonna have to subsidize forty
five percent that would qualify.
So the sheer numbers just really
don't work out for us.
And on the low income stuff we
don't have that information or
the ability to really collect
that from our members so and
quite frankly we don't what
personal income numbers from our
membership.
again we're like
like others I'm sure we're all
for energy quality but I think
this bill goes too far to older
some in the last three sections
thank you for allowing me to
comment.
Thank you.
That are.
Adam chair and committee my name
is Neil ice near me.
Yes we have any for me now.
All right my name's Neil high so
madam sixty year business here
in New Mexico one of the few.
And.
I have been acutely in all PNM
and the co ops in the electric
providers the mines up there in
four corners I think the
committee I think.
The representatives of our state
don't have come all right a good
understanding of where the hell
are lectures to come from the
more you shut down the power
plants the last electricity
areas you have to have something
to keep the electrical grid to
full the wind won't do it and
that's soul won't do it so this
business of bank and we're gonna
get by like Texas did we're not
gonna have a freeze is just
hogwash what this this bill
we're going to get the money the
money comes from the business
the working folks the tax folks
to pay the grants to get to help
the people that need the help
and there's a hell of a lot of
fraud in that too but you know
we're trying to help people in
need help at the same time
you're limiting the ability of
the providers of electricity to
do their job which is to provide
use by May NGOs and the cheapest
electricity you can make is
burning clean coal and we've got
it here and yet you want to shut
it down are you happy with the
sea of red lights out there
there on top of all these
windmills have you flown over
New Mexico lately and look at it
you talk about a global climate
problem I'm sorry can we keep it
to the apartment to the bill
please.
And I.
R. all right then the point is
you're you're you're cutting off
your nose to fight get spite
your face still my you know road
improved thank you thank you.
Our Hanover in our.
Hello this is a recurring and it
right is my daughter and she
helps you know with my
technology but anyway I am a
retired engineer from white
sands I'm a registered
professional engineer mechanical
engineering and I'm going to the
bill here and one thing that
without her down the county they
were trying to push up solar
through these requests solar
panels on the house House but
what people don't realize in a
friend of mine put solar twenty
thousand dollars with us on the
roof of his house with his own
money and a month later he
wanted to sell this house well
he had to pay off that loan not
at closing here to pay it off
before you sell this house so
anyway there are strings
attached that I don't I don't
know that low income people
realize that all of a sudden
there House bigotry twenty five
thousand dollars before they can
sell it so that's that that's
all I want to say that.
sometimes these things aren't
the full information needs to be
given to the consumer and thank
you for allowing me to
The COVID.
Derek Scott.
Madam chair and members of the
committee but insert Scott I'm
just a concerned citizen about
this bill that you do in the
wording of it it seems to be a
little bit persuasive for people
with low income not in the fact
of that they will necessarily
get help on lowincome myself I
have a solar plan through a
lease which is not helps more.
Money or lower my bill in any
way it's increased it it is not
lowered energy in any way it's
increases so if you think this
is going to help low income
people especially like that
means that before if you sell
your house you're stuck with the
solar panels that are not
necessarily part of the house
and you have to literally
convinced the fire to take the
solar panels or take the least
that I have right now and then
turned around and leases to
somebody else and they have to
take leases they don't I'm stuck
with the bill which is I would
never be able to for so it
doesn't necessarily mean that
you guys are trying to make a
difference but also doesn't the
state have a money issue right
now if we're getting requests
out with money why are we doing
that why can't we encourage
customers by maybe giving them
the money to do it themselves
and let them apply for the
grants I would love to apply for
my own requests for money.
Then then have it would put
through the mortgage company in
a whole bunch of more
bureaucracy I think it should be
given to low income customer and
give them the choice on how they
can efficiently help their home
because I would get requests you
know for my disability and I was
given the way to say okay here's
how it needs to be for the home
here's what I need it for and so
what I think you guys are doing
is handed it to the wrong people
you're you're handing it to the
wrong place you really should
handed to the people that own a
home or rent a home or whatever
thank you can find a better way
to be efficient is yes I would
love to have a requests but I
want to go through all this
bureaucracy and then have them
give up mining some and all this
other stuff you know it's it's
getting to the point that we
need to help the people not
help some other direction of a
government agency to decide
who's better known as worse why
can't you just have accounts
that would then allow us to put
for grant and say here here's
what we need here's what I
thought you Sir your time is
your time is up sorry about
that.
Well thank you.
Michael the Antonia.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee Mike
Antonio SSL Energy we do
businesses southwestern public
service serve not to the to the
eastern part of the state.
The energy efficiency portion of
this bill we like.
However were opposed to a on to
the bill based on the other
elements of the bill as
mentioned previously the and at
PRC already mandates Chiles
reports on a monthly basis
every item just about in here in
in the bill here and this is the
digital items so we feel like
again the PRC is the best
Thank you for that.
Reporting we already do it so I
think that's just not needed in
the bill in section nine the
there are many reporting
requirements that are just own
not only at the owner respect
utilities don't have the
necessary data as as as
mentioned before we don't have
to come data on customers school
difficult for us and we don't
even want income information
from customers confidential
breast put together some of the
metrics that are proposed in
that reporting requirement is
just not feasible we can do
without the income information
so please take a look at that
and make sure those are more
reasonable bill also lastly I
guess on lowincome rates.
Socialize right right making is
very difficult to do fair manner
of is the low income folks if
they are given lowincome rates
their energy burden has to be
spread over the rest of the
customer base and how you do
that fairly not of our kind of
special concern to us is the
level of customer just about low
income you're usually.
you know you very folksy
retirees on fixed incomes they
will feel the brunt of the
additional
Bill to subsidize the low income
folks and others are are your
time is up okay thank you.
Charles good marker.
Yes madam chair members the
committee on Charles good marker
speaking on behalf of the
national resources defense
council today want to thank the
sponsor profusely for this bill
this is an excellent bill
we fully supported you know to
meet our state house state
greenhouse gas emission goals we
absolutely need to reduce carbon
emissions from residential
buildings by at least thirty
percent relative to today.
retrofitting homes at the speed
and scale of at least twenty
thousand homes per year through
the twenty twenties as necessary
this bill is a big jump start.
Prioritizing energy efficiency
and electrification in the fifty
thousand plus homes and New
Mexicans that burned within
propane for heating or cooking
also leads to significant health
benefits for those households by
limiting indoor pollution these
homes are primarily low income
rural and tribal communities.
this bill provides jobs in every
New Mexico community many there
seem to be a little confusion
from some of the prior callers
and.
Individuals don't apply for the
grants the local communities or
tribal communities will apply
for the grants and then they
work within our local community
using local small business
contractors and related business
suppliers.
And there are no doubt going to
favor their community you know
people in their community to
provide the services so this is
a job growth bill this is also
the physical health of every
family whose home is whether
rise will be enhanced having a
temper home not having to suffer
health consequences of extreme
weather or engage in risky
behaviors to warmer homes the
state of Texas of course but
also think of
the terrible tragedy recently in
the Bronx were so many people
perished in a fire because space
here.
We should be funding this bill
in the hundreds of millions not
just ten million or so S. as in
the budget I'm sorry your time
is up.
I just like to clarify
That and do we have any more
people who are her wanting to
speak in opposition.
Okay then what we'll do is and
everyone will lower their hands
and then we will have you if you
are in support of house bill
thirty seven raise your hand.
And I think there's quite a few
people who want to speak so
we'll go to we don't have a a
timer it's not working yet so
more or do it of one of we'll do
it one minute and or you know if
you go a little bit over so
let's go ahead and those in
support.
Raise your hand.
I'm going to start with those
who are in attendance and room
three seventeen year around
hasn't person.
We have one.
We have one member of the public
who wishes to speak for the
bill.
Okay go ahead.
Thank you
madam chair thanks to Romero
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
I am a less seconded by air from
Santa Fe.
I earned a master's in public
and I'm speaking in support of
the weather is ation funding
ironmasters in public health and
spent my career in the social
determinants of health
including over the last ten
years as a state representative
from Oregon before moving here
last summer I served on the
Energy Environment committee in
twenty eleven to twenty twelve I
share the consumer protection
and government efficiency
committee in twenty fourteen to
twenty fifteen and I served on
the health care committee for
all ten sessions most notably.
Human Services and housing
committee twenty fifteen to
twenty twenty where this was one
of our huge priorities I worked
on what we called healthy homes
initiative for many years and
last year the Oregon legislature
allocated thirty million dollars
for this initiative under house
bill twenty eight forty two
which passed with bipartisan
support weather is ation is such
an incredible win win as you've
heard from others it reduces the
economic burden and increases
the help of low income
underserved communities creates
more jobs in the energy
efficiency and utility sectors
reduces carbon emissions and
helps New Mexico achieve its
colleges ma'am your time has
expired.
Okay just just want to say I
know there's a question about
where the funding should go
whether it should go to MFA's
weatherization Fund order to
EMNRD but I hope that these
issues get worked out and that
it's amended to include that
appropriations so it compacts no
time to lose thank you.
great a number of people who
have their hands raised in
support I apologize for
interrupting but I am gonna try
to keep it to the one minute so
that the committee is able to
move forward I apologize the
timer isn't working we will have
that worked out by the next
session.
June Parsons.
Representative Ferrary chair and
honorable Committee members my
name is June Parsons.
Community energy efficiency for
low income households and
underserved communities is
absolutely essential to provide
opportunities to ensure every
American child has a chance for
the American dream because
without adequate and affordable
energy provided to every
household food security is
threatened without refrigeration
studying after sunset without
reliable electrical lighting and
power for computers is untenable
so much U. S. education is now
dependent upon online delivery
of education we are responsible
for our children in rural and
underserved communities and our
future depends on our children's
success therefore I implore you
please vote for H. B. thirty
seven thank you.
a lot of it.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name's and called
on a vision of the
administrative director of the
auto anti progressive caucus and
member organizer with Ole New
Mexico more over on the fixed
income.
starkly marginalized Human was
seen first hand the dire
consequences of lack of energy
to buy pock specially indigenous
homes is disheartened to hear
power companies rely on fossil
fuels in droves against helping
New Mexicans most in need as a
recent homeowners home we
stopped solar panels went like
hot cakes eight are owned
watching elders in rural New
Mexico burn their clothing to
keep their children warm is
boring we pay taxes have
Medicare Medicaid and there are
plenty ways to track low income
plainly put this will bill will
give low income by pop folks a
chance to heat their homes it'll
bring jobs to New Mexico it'll
make homes more energy efficient
and it will start our need to
address our abuse of fossil
fuels on the environment for
these reasons I plainly ask you
to vote yes on this bill thank
you.
Sami how are CVM.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Stanley
coun the climb and energy
advocate with conservation
voters New Mexico is one of a
high priority bills because see
the NM advocates strongly for
New Mexico reaching our climate
goals in a just and equitable
way this bill puts our most
vulnerable New Mexicans first
slide ensure that they have
access to reliable highly
efficient and affordable energy
in our homes the bill also
ensure that utility companies
are held accountable by
requiring them to report on
disconnection arrears and issues
to access you heard from him
earlier about their opposition
to the provisions of the bill
they say that they are already
doing their effort and the
requirements well over burden
the utility companies but what
they fail to acknowledge is that
despite their efforts many New
Mexicans are still suffering
from burdens that are
detrimental to their daily
livelihood.
Twenty six other states provide
at least double the amount of
low income energy efficiency
energy efficiency investments
per capita through state or
utility funds than what New
Mexico provides to our low
income residents so the bit the
us this bill are not out of the
realm of possibilities we just
need our utility companies to do
better.
Those twelve ample upon New
Mexico can achieve our clinical
such as one hundred percent
policies ma'am your time has
expired.
Travis Kalanick.
Thanks rob madam chair committee
members I'm speaking in support
of house bill thirty seven it's.
Near and dear to me because I've
been watching what's happening
happened in the housing market
and also what low income and
working class New Mexicans of
struggling with.
In the past few years the energy
burden is quite willingly staff
to human futures and potential
and I really want to lean into
the economic opportunity here
the fact that in the energy
transition there are two
competing forces are least
they're seen as competing the
fact that we have to
decarbonize our energy system
and also we need to provide
affordable energy everyone.
What this bill proves what it
starts with a pilot programs two
thousand homes is just proving
that competition these are
actually complementary efforts
and this bill complements the
already past climate solutions
act.
So I want to urge all the
committee members to support
this bill it takes a step
towards reducing energy burden
giving people back their future
taking out a way that oppressive
income theft.
And improving this brand new.
Very high potential economic
opportunity to have a transition
economy towards a clean energy
system here in New Mexico both
efforts are important both of
them were started with this
pilot program thank you.
Brown.
Yes good afternoon and thank you
chairman thank you sponsors of
this important bill I'm John
Brown with New Mexico interfaith
power and light we work with
state committees all over the
state and many of the state
communities are the ones on the
ground that assist our families
communities people who are
unable to pay some portion of
their utility bill so the
solution or part of the solution
to this is to address the
inefficiency in the home so this
is an excellent bill regarding
that in this very much supported
by faith communities the other
element of this is it's really
just what we call in Catholic
terms an integral ecology
approach because it takes care
it addresses the health of
people the dresses the economy
and looking at new jobs and also
saving god's resources it
creates dignity for four people
by having comfortable homes and
it also looks at our ecology and
are great concerns of climate
change which will grow and as
though those grow so will energy
concerns in many ways so we're
very supportive of this bill and
thank you for sponsoring it.
Kristin Sherri gate I cast.
Center for appropriate
sustainable technology
I cast manages the New Mexico
weatherization program for multi
family properties and the energy
efficiency program for New
Mexico gas the public service
company of New Mexico and el
Paso electric sh we serve over
two thousand households each
year in New Mexico and
investment five million dollars
in local communities and saving
on average about five hundred
thousand dollars in annual
utility bills at creating over
sixty jobs annually we're here
to support HB thirty seven and
would like to highlight the
requirements for applicants in
the seat act to provide a
commitment to employ
apprenticeships are paid
internships in a way that
promotes diversity this actually
is alignment with the study that
was previously done by the New
Mexico department of workforce
solutions and twenty twenty the
highlighted the in order to
advance New Mexico's clean
energy workforce they must do so
by adding paid apprenticeships
providing jobs to those without
advanced degrees and focusing on
workers within the state for all
those reasons we support HB
thirty seven.
Mmhm Louis Carrera.
Yes thank you good afternoon
madam chair and members of the
committee as we scattered on the
provided a political organizer
with the Sierra Club Yogananda
chapter representing over thirty
five thousand members all
throughout New Mexico we very
strongly support this bill for
reasons that have been mentioned
by other folks.
It brings a much needed solution
to help low income New Mexicans
and also the key in fighting
climate change in addition to
many New Mexicans don't have
access to electricity or water
and it is alarming to know that
it's not we don't even know how
many of those are we strongly
support this bill and it is an
important move not just to
combating climate change but
also providing energy
accessibility and equitable
access to New Mexicans and also
making sure the families in New
Mexico just have better access
to services there are many
communities in New Mexico that
don't have basic utilities
needed for life this bill works
to address that so we fully
support this bill and ask for
you to vote yes today thank you.
Here are Cordova.
Good afternoon everyone my name
secure record and the younger
members a you can add for
compressed action we aren't
organization that focuses on
Community caring action I'm also
speaking on behalf of my
community that would be most
impacted by HB thirty seven I'm
in favor of HB thirty seven
because it provides support to
lower income communities as well
as tribal communities which I am
part of
this this bill would very much
be important because sustainable
and energy is the basic right
for everyone and it would also
create more local jobs for us
communities and people most
impacted
and it's it's incredibly
important that each B. thirty
seven is passed because it would
you know greatly improve our
lives thank you so much.
Thank you and we have about
twenty eight more people to
speak in favor
if you already in in the poll
which I think was fifty seven to
seven thirty seven in favor and
if you can keep it as short as
possible and maybe.
Help us get through but we
appreciate you being here so
we'll go ahead to the next
person thank you.
That hello.
Sorry I'm this is Christian get
CS I'm logged in in the the
wrong account I apologize
discretion to see is with the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico which
represents the city's of
Albuquerque Los crucis Santa Fe
Santa Fe County in Los Alamos
County our members strongly
support HB thirty seven which
will help our members you at the
chief their climate inequity
goals
we also support the requirement
for public reporting on the
scope of energy and water
affordability among low income
households is sort of
comprehensive benchmarking and
transparency is necessary for
creating targeted solutions we
also support the creation of low
income rates this bill provides
concrete solutions for ushering
in a more at equitable energy
transition for our most
vulnerable households I urge you
to vote in favor of HB at thirty
seven thank you.
Rennie Ashman.
Yes is there any actual chairman
members of the committee with
the legal limit voters we
strongly support this bill
particularly over the
conservation aspect for reasons
that are being ridiculous all
save you a little time thank
you.
Don our order on.
Donna.
Hello.
Yes we hear you.
Donna we can hear you.
Donna you need to I need your
cell.
Yes now we can the new agency
doesn't work around with anna
thank you Madam chairman for
letting me speak
this bill it has been well
written.
full circle and it covers.
Everything that we need to make
low income.
Percentage safe and.
Safe in our homes be able to
stay in their homes and live in
energy efficient surroundings
also this bill creates jobs for
apprentices who are learning a
trade.
it it is just a very well
rounded Bill all level point say
throughout because they've been
reiterated so many times.
I just want to say that I am in
support of this bill.
We are.
Hello my name is Janet Carter
I'm from Santa Fe and I'd like
to thank you for the opportunity
to speak I'll be quick I just
want to say I understand there
are those who feel that this is
the money spent on these
requests is money that we can't
afford I say we can't afford not
to spend the money that we must
do this not only are we helping
people to reach help us reach
our goals for energy efficiency
in the state we are also as has
been pointed out helping their
health and if health and healthy
families are families that can
contribute to the work force and
that don't burn the rest of the
state with unnecessary medical
bills
Electrified homes are healthier
homes there's no question about
it people are using unhealthy
technologies to keep their homes
because they simply can't afford
to make their homes more
efficient and I say it's high
time that we made this simple
step to helping those who need
our help and thank you for your
time.
Red white men Jennings.
You need to and yourself Mr
Jennings.
Sorry about that hi my name is
Fred white and Jennings I'm with
a lady I'm also an ecologist and
I just want to say how important
it is that we reduce the amount
of energy that we use
it's a basic equation we and it
too much carbon so we get there
by using less energy and they're
finding ways to make energy that
don't emit carbon this bill is
it just makes sense thank you.
Angelo telematic.
Thank you madam chair in the
committee members of for the
opportunity to comment on the V.
thirty seven which I'm strongly
in favor of I'm a family
medicine physician living mostly
in Albuquerque working and
Sikora County Representative
myself and many of my low income
patients as mentioned earlier
there are many health benefits
of this bill can be accomplished
many patients I see of high
utility bills sometimes related
to essential services like home
oxygen for respiratory illness
the high does make it difficult
to afford medication and other
essentials the funding this
block grant will reduce energy
burdens of low income residents
of forgetting energy efficiency
improvements that will lower
their energy bills it's also
important that enables our state
to me it's goals to address the
climate emergency thank you for
the time.
Mr that is why HB thirty seven
sixty five it may not.
Chair committee members my name
Justina Christodoulou and I'm
the vice chair of the
environmental justice caucus as
well as a retired navy in energy
and environmental engineer
everyone so far is spoken about
the social environmental aspects
the local jobs cleaner air and
economic justice we're in full
support I just want to mention
that this bill does not require
the utilities to give
preferential rates but allows
that PRC commission to approve
such rates if there is such a
problem with helping those in
need maybe it's time for the
state to consider having public
utilities.
Rachel Biggs.
Members of the committee my name
is Rachel Biggs with Albuquerque
health care for the homeless and
we stand in strong support of HB
thirty seven increasing rent
burden is driving more New
Mexicans and homelessness every
day and the impact of rising
utility costs is only adding to
the homelessness crisis in our
state this is a smart solution
that will lower the cost of
utilities while also reducing
energy burdens we thank the
sponsors and ask for your
support of HB thirty seven
thanks for your time.
Mostly.
Thank you madam chairman for ari
and members of the committee
thank you for sponsoring this
important legislation I am
standing in support of HB thirty
seven from my background as a
professional registered nurse
doing home visits across New
Mexico for asthma and as a
member of the New Mexico Public
Health Association who list this
bill as one of its priorities
I'd like to underscore the
health impacts of of the
positive health impacts of
reducing the need for folks to
rely on combustion sources for
lowcost heating up for the
impact it has on as Mina COPD
so again NMPSIA and myself stand
in support of H. P. thirty seven
thank you very much.
He leaves you.
Hello my name is Kelly ship and
I'm a community organizer with
citizens caring for the future
and Carlsbad I'm here today to
voice my support for H. B.
thirty seven as a young woman
that organizes around oil and
gas issues and lives in the
Permian basin I make constantly
aware of how much work must be
done and how much change must be
made to address the climate
crisis within the oil industry
these changes happen at a very
slow rate and we face many
complex issues in order to cut
emissions from the sector that
is why when I see something like
the sea Act I immediately get
excited it's a little bit more
hopeful for the future why
because you see return on your
investment and when you take
action such as this these
requests will not only help
people in need in a real and
tangible way they will also
slowly began to address the
issue of emissions in this study
a very measurable way they also
give communities the opportunity
to collaborate and depend on one
another as the years pass and we
face the ramifications of
climate change such as food
shortages pandemics and natural
disasters it will be essential
that folks know how to lean on
each other and work together
this actually the groundwork for
that team work in at the same
time cuts emissions that in turn
will lessen the burden of what
young people future generations
will be asked to face in the
near future thank you for your
time.
Nancy so set up.
Thank you a good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Nancy so set up I'm
with or lay and this is why
support H. B. thirty seven of
the older homes are state are
less likely to be energy
efficient my home is no
exception my current home is
large drafty windows that allow
cold air in and warm air out
even after when I was in every
window Our last electric bill is
five hundred two dollars five
hundred and two dollars and
thirty days if he we desperately
need subsidies for comprehensive
efficiency measures especially
with language that creates jobs
in our communities like this
bill does as climate change
rages on efficiency measures are
the most cost effective way to
address climate change and make
sure Clemente goals for it and
the US and in New Mexico low
income residents by pocket other
disenfranchised communities are
disproportionate
disproportionately affected by
climate change high energy bills
and poorly whether as homes ask
you asked that you not only
consider them but that you sent
to them in your decision making
thank you for your time.
Eight nine.
Members of the committee my name
is Paige nights with New Mexico
voices for children and the
environment the public health
network and I'm here to stand in
strong support of house bill
thirty seven at no family New
Mexico should have to spend
fifty.
Percent of their income on
utilities when there are so many
other needs that must be met for
child well being and things like
paying for food and stable
housing this bill also increases
access to energy efficient homes
and reduces carbon emissions
which is so critical to both the
health of our children and
families and our environment.
We want to thank the sponsor for
their work on this legislation
and I urge your support for
house bill thirty seven thank
you.
Virtual.
Linda you yourself.
I'm sorry hi I'll be brief just
want to add that in addition to
providing energy assistance to
low income households and
reducing our greenhouse gas
emissions.
All of these retrofits and
weather is ation and
installations will provide local
jobs that don't need a college
degree and can't be outsourced
it's a great job fell thank you.
Melissa Martinez.
Hi can you hear me.
Yes.
The Representative Andrea Romero
another representative
and committee the groups that
are here my name is Melissa
Martinez I come from northern
New Mexico Health for overlay of
the members this really touches
home I know you that not all the
facts but I want to let you know
that.
Well community of two mile a lot
of the customs and traditions
and strong with elderly
individual where we never
thought would fire stove we're
going to go out of style there's
been a lot of people thought you
know.
I for seven years with that in
the house
thanks we've all.
When it started happening a lot
of these people that realize
that that the prices are
transitioning to renewable
resources of energy we're going
to be so high a lot of them are
you know it's not raining but
they're putting it out and
sheltering dollars.
I think it's important to
reflect on the people that we
need for our elders the people.
The people in our community that
are most important because they.
Yeah are you heard of them thank
you.
Is in Homer.
You madam chair committee
members my name is Susan Homer
I'm from Albuquerque I'm a
member of this year hello.
I stand in support of HB thirty
seven the community of energy
efficiency development block
grant at.
In several ways just bill will
move us toward our goal of net
zero carbon.
It will increased utility access
it will help with utility
affordability.
It will reduce the energy burden
for those least able to afford
it.
About eighteen months ago.
I finally was able to replace my
single pane rationally windows
that we're about almost fifty
years old.
And so I know how expensive it
can be to try to whether Is Your
house.
This bill recognizes that we're
all in this climate change
predicament together.
Whatever we can do to help those
who are in
a quandary as to be able to.
I'm sorry your time has elapsed.
Thank you.
Page grant.
Thank you I was able to speak
first so you have heard from me
and I very much favor the bill.
Thank you madam thank you.
Tom Solomon.
Thank you madam chair money to
some Solomon the co coordinated
with three fifty New Mexico and
many others have spoken before
me eloquently in favor of this
bill and we strongly support
this bill focusing on energy
efficiency helps those who need
and deserve the help the most it
lowers cost lowers emissions for
the climate and improve their
health and for all of those
reasons three fifty stands in
strong support of this bill
thank you.
Condit and associates.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is Deborah Condit
and I'm the registered lobbyists
for western resource advocates
and we stand in strong support
of this bill for all the reasons
that the many others who spoke
before as I have before me
stated I would like to thank you
and the members and we just
sponsors of this offer bringing
this forward thank you.
Senator Johnson.
Good afternoon my name is Senica
and I'm here is the official
spokesperson for yucca or used
in economic crisis action
hundreds of youth members that
are in New Mexico and I'm also
here representing our mother
organization care which is a
community based organization on
this outside of Senate led by
you can families from low income
and communities of color Senator
court each speaker the second.
The New Mexicans live without
regular access to electricity or
water especially our most
vulnerable community members New
Mexico needs to invest in our
low income rural and families
communities right behind other
leading states that comes the
funding energy efficiency
improvements for low income
households and over half of the
states in US provide at least
double the amount of low income
patients investments per capita
the state or utility funds this
time New Mexico invested
services with low income
residents reduce energy burdens
while enabling the state to
reach its chemicals where
frankly running out of time for
me to come actions to be taken
and every step that we can take
to reach our goals in a good way
is a vital one energy
accessibility is a basic right
and it's vital that as we
transition to a more sustainable
and energy efficient economy we
do not leave anyone behind you
must have a just transition and
we feel each PT seven is a
stepping stone in weight just
transition should look like I'm
a justice is also energy just
I'm sorry your time has a lot
thank thank you.
Steffi was part.
Thank you madam chair and
members of this committee
including my own Representative
Lord in the beautifully sounds
which we'd like to keep that way
I'm a member of the rural caucus
and everyone else has given
great reasons for supporting
this bill as we do to so thank
you very much.
Mahdi al Masih.
Hi good afternoon my name is
merry on the nesting on the
executive director of new energy
economy and I want to say that
we stand in strong support of
this bill I like to give you
some facts basically before
comment PNM would send out
approximately three hundred and
fifty thousand disconnect
notices per year and
disconnected approximately is
somewhere between seventeen and
twenty thousand people per year
as of August eleventh twenty
twenty one during the COVID
thirty three thousand four
hundred forty five residential
rate payers we're subject to
disconnection and Monday August
sixteenth twenty twenty one PNM
began disconnecting people from
electricity at a rate of about
five hundred people per day we
stand in strong support it's
extremely important that the
legislators understand that well
PNM maybe hundred ninety million
dollars in profit last year it
it kicked people off and
electricity and that's a climate
justice and economic justice
matter and so we stand and
support and and support the
other the other statements by
those has spoken before thank
you.
We now have better data.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee members.
My name is Matt not been of the
this I'm a community organizer
on behalf of New Mexico cafe in
requests Luna and Hidalgo
counties as you know all very
rural counties I'll keep this
brief and just say that we
concur with all of those who
have spoken in ahead of us in
support of HB thirty seven we
stand in strong support and have
the support of each of our three
communities thank you.
And use.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Jan Hughes
about twelve years ago the last
time there is money for energy
efficiency block grants came
from the federal.
Stimulus program at the time
very creative applications came
in and we're just all throughout
the state just one example of
damning for sixty homes had
direct install of energy
efficiency improvements by the
southwest regional housing group
which now does weather's ation
for the southern half of the
state so I think this is a great
program to give local
governments a chance to come in
and ask for energy efficiency
improvements on behalf of their
constituents thank you.
Ze'evi you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
My name is bill and I can see
you.
I'm sorry if you can hear that
echo.
I want to give any additional
time I just want to say that we
stand in strong support of HB
thirty seven the seat act for
all the reasons previously
stated and thank the sponsors
for bringing forward.
First UCC ABQ.
Thank you madam chair committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak my name is
Ruth struggle I'm a retired
public school teacher and I am
the co chair of the board of
directors of New Mexico
interfaith power and light.
As a teacher I worked with a lot
of students whose families
struggled financially for some
paying even five dollars for a
class field trip was difficult
it's our responsibility as a
society to help raise the next
generation of resilient strong
adults we need a wide variety of
tools to help families work
their way out of poverty and I
C. H. B. thirty seven as one of
these tools.
HB thirty seven will benefit our
communities in multiple ways
creating got jobs for those
doing the weather's ation and
retrofits lowering the
disproportionate burden of
utility costs for lowincome them
New Mexicans and making our land
of enchantment of cleaner and
better place for all it's a win
for everyone as a person of
faith I support this bill
because it helps my neighbors
and our precious earth I hope
you'll see it in the same light
thank you.
Shelly Man Lev.
Thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Shelly Man Lev and the
president of the New Mexico
Public Health Association and is
one of our members spoke so
clearly we stand strong support
of this bill it is a public
health bill in addition to many
of the other things you've heard
it addresses housing conditions
of very important social the
chairman of health it mitigates
helps an adaptation to climate
change and of course provides
jobs as the previous speaker
just said in terms of bringing
people out of poverty it's an
equity issue and we hope that
you will strongly support it
thank you Sanchez and thank you
to all have spoken before.
Madam chair that concludes
everyone would raise their hand
for public comment.
Madam chair I was able to get
into the zoom meeting I'm just
waiting to be let on as a
panelist.
I'm sorry Representative Lord
what did you say.
Sorry I am finally got into the
zoom meeting on my computer just
waiting to be let in as a
panelist okay will look for you
here thank you.
Yes I was I'm sorry I forgot to
and you debt we do have our
timer just in time so we'll be
ready for the next
bill to be presented and thank
you on to the public for their
comments
and so we show all go to the
committee are there any
questions
Word the bill sponsors and their
experts.
Representative Thomson.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one I think what's a quick
question Representative or two
or ten is this the bill deal
with renewable energy or energy
efficient.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair I a quick answer and I'm
gonna allow in the record to to
answer this but you really this
is focused on energy efficiency
not not solar and I want I would
like for man charged like for
Tammy to elaborate a little bit
more.
Madam chair representative
Thompson yes in the bill deals
only with energy efficiency it
does not include any renewable
energy provisions so for energy
efficiency we're talking about
things that actually improves
the building stock of your home
to make sure home better long
term it's envelope improvements
things like better insulation
better windows and doors system
upgrades like a better H.
listening much more efficient
and better lighting so these are
things that unlike solar energy
these are things that actually
improve the long term
housing stock for New Mexico and
that's what this bill is meant
to improve for everyone.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and I the reason I asked that
question it seems like a lot of
the people who were particularly
the anti we're bringing up solar
and this is not a solar bill so
I just wanted to clarify that in
my own head and for everyone
else and not madam chair I just
a point of personal privilege I
want to congratulate.
Miserable corn issues are a new
city council in Albuquerque.
Thank you madam chair that's all
I had.
Thank you and yes
congratulations
next we have Representative
Lord.
Okay thank you secretary gonna
try.
He's turning
on second.
Can you hear me.
Representative I think it would
help if you muted yourself so
that we can hear.
Resented the.
Right hander.
Okay hold on one second can you
turn your speakers on so that
people can hear now are with
that give me feedback.
Okay all right sorry the
technology is a.
Trying to figure this out right
now as we go because this is a
whole New World here okay madam
chair representative so I have a
question on this bill and can
you tell me what any of the
energy company's a loss or PRC
work did they give input into
this bill.
Thank you madam chair
representative lord you know
that the process for taking
input was a pretty long one it
started even before you when I
Representative Lord were part of
the of the legislature and so we
we did hear we did hear comments
from utility companies that
throughout the process last year
and and this year as well one
twenty twenty one as well Madam
chair representative lord I'd
like for of one of my one of the
experts either at Boller corner
Mr Justin Act you out to make a
sum additional comments that
they like.
Madam chair representative lord
yes there was an extensive area
and before last session as you
probably know this bill was in
the it was her last session to
and before that there was about
a six to seven month time period
where we held meetings with all
of the utility companies all of
the advocates for all of the
organizations you heard from
here today multiple meetings
over that six or seven months
period we negotiated many many
many sections of the bill the
bill had an additional section
in the last year the bill did
not pass so this year's bill is
exactly the same wording that
was negotiated with through all
of those public input sessions
and so we feel that we have
given ample opportunity for all
interested parties to have input
into what they should look like
thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative I'm quite
surprised by that answer because
I did reach out to PRC and they
said they were not involved with
this at all so can you tell me
whether PRC was involved on
every single thing in this bill
that is presented this year
every single thing where they.
Able to have input on everything
in here Madam chair
representative lord yes so last
year we did presents to the PRC
Mr Bissonnette and I both we had
multiple meetings with the PRC
and in fact one of the
commissioners actually came in
support of the bill in hearings
last year and again the language
has not changed one bit since
then so yes they have been
informed and I've got a
presentation and it had input.
Okay Madam chair representative
that's interesting since it told
me no they were not consulted on
this so I move on to the next
question because that seems to
be the problems of the people
that I reached out to were not
consulted in this bill hello and
so it's problematic when I'm not
hearing from both sides anytime
we have an aide to the comes
forward I like to hear let your
ballots bill and I don't see
anything I don't see any emails
I don't see any analysis I don't
see anything from any of the co
ops and anything from P. Garcia
do you have something in writing
from them that would show that
they were consulted and what
their opinion was on this exact
bill for next twenty twenty two.
Madam chair representative lord
I you know I don't have anything
in writing but we can certainly
look back and see districts and
economic or on a public hearing
at the PRC in which we presented
this bill before the twenty
twenty one legislative session
started.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative so you don't have
anything currently in writing
from PRC that says yes we agree
with this yes we think this is
great we like it just the way it
is.
Madam Madam chair representative
lord I we I believe we just
answered that question.
Okay thank you and the reason I
keep asking is because I don't
see anything and I'm getting a
different answer from PRC.
So the other question I have is
would you tell the companies on
coops aren't the still reporting
on disconnects or anybody who's
in arrears or and when this
connection issues do they say
they report that correct.
Madam chair representative
lawyer they they do report some
of that information yes okay so
what is the importance of
putting that into this bill what
is important but a lot of
something that appears to be
does.
Madam chair representative
Representative Lord I'd like to
four of ten year again to send
weigh in on the screen that
thanks.
Thank you and chair
representative Lori so first it
is true that since COVID but
only since COVID as the PRC
required utilities report
anything at first it was just
about a religious so this bill
is consistent with
recommendations that came out in
twenty nineteen from both the
national association represents
public utility commissioners.
National consumer advocates
association which represents the
public in front of public
utility commissioners I don't
often agree they both came out
and has a joint resolution
explicitly urge states to
consider consider adopting.
Fireman's for regular reporting
of such data is very consistent
with the other states are doing
this Washington just take passed
a bill that requires the same
kind of thing
And it also noted the PRC is not
require we require importing
them all the same information
that includes information
focused on what people that
already are eligible to receive
licensure are in prior to
receiving disconnection notices
have been disconnected have been
regained it I think what we are
trying to do with this bill is
to create a comprehensive
framework so that we are working
towards that goal one hundred
percent affordable and
affordability and access to
energy throughout the state for
all people part of what we need
for that is information
specifically about those people
who are already eligible for
large one note on that we heard
from some utilities staff this
is our they don't want to
collect our customer income data
this bill does not require that
the only explicit requirement
here is that they report on
disconnection we can in Rick
reduction data of people who are
qualified to receive federal
income low income energy
assistance that's a federal
program our state department of
Human Services already collects
information there is already a
process for utilities to check
which people are eligible to get
why he that's what this
reporting party risk.
Thank you.
Thank you and I'm madam chair
and representative
Representative so here's my
final thoughts on this very
important bill I do agree that
people need assistance with a
lot of cost what I would like to
see the census is a bill that's
going to affect the energy
companies PRC coops is that
there would be some cooperation
and working together and some
sort of document that comes
along with this bill this is yes
this is good yes we're ready
doing this yes there's no need
for this yes we agree we do need
to change this and that's what I
would like to see in the future
for this bill is something since
they're the ones who are going
to have to do this with their
action work and there's
cooperation between the percent
of the bill and the energy
companies thank you I yield my
time.
Thank you Representative Lord
next we have Representative
Andrea Romero.
Thank you chair woman thank you
Representative purchased a quick
shout out to Melissa Martinez
gave testimony today while
obviously taking care of kids
and I appreciate everyone for
the public comment today and
taking the time to address this
is a really important issue I'm
really grateful for
Representative Ortez having the
due diligence to continue this
effort was a co sponsor and in
the past and just wanted to
address I think Representative
Lord question about the PRC
knowing about this if you look
at the F. I. R. the PRC was
directly engaged in
understanding what would be
necessary to implement this
program so it discusses the need
of having a full time employee
other folks up contributing to
the responsibilities that the
bill would basically promulgate
as far as what us with the PRC
we need to do so they were able
to chime in on some of that in
the FIR
that said I just I also wanted
to bring to the committee's
attention that this includes a
ten million dollars
appropriation that's in the LFC
budget so I'm hopeful that this
gets through as well that
understanding that the costs of
this program to be implemented
should be covered in you know
House Bill to that we hope to
pass I know that appropriations
is is dealing with that as well
all in all I think you heard for
many of my constituents and and
across the state in agreement
with the nest necessity of this
program I'm mostly commenting
because I'm grateful that it's
continuing and that we now have
the funding for it not a whole
lot of questions as far as just
what it what it does and how I
think many of our house members
and certainly this committee has
for this bill before I was just
sitting on the other side of the
table the last times.
So I just a hopefully support
this and this effort and I'm
just grateful for how it's
continue to move along and again
congrats to Council women of
people corn and glad to have you
back in these chambers and I'm
grateful to continue our efforts
that's it madam chair thank you.
Thank you madam vice chair and
then we have Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair.
One questioning the I think the
first one I want to do.
With the presenters some of the
comments made the this
recommendation for recording
came in two thousand nineteen
Madam chair of love to have an
answer on what what that
occurred.
In two thousand nineteen.
Madam chair representative
Pettigrew I'm not exactly sure
so I think Miss maybe Mr
Bissonnette can give that answer
to you.
Madam chair representative
getting a I am point I I I if
the question is when when the
meetings when outreach started
on this bill
I don't have that on the top of
my head perhaps ten does that is
that the the question that
you're asking.
I can tell you that we presented
at interim committee hearings.
Going.
Or office under my.
I'm sorry Sir I was unable to
hear your response could you
please read that again.
I was.
Everything that I believe that
the first time that this bill
was ways present.
But we always make interim
committee session.
Prior to three legislative
sessions ago I can probably find
that interim committee session I
remember that it was in farming
Adam attending I would bear with
some students I'm presenting
this bill language that included
both the C. portion of the C.
portion of the bill and then I
believe that we began that the
second part of the bill which
includes the reporting
requirements
begin to start being presented
two and half years ago so that
would be the summer of twenty
twenty where we had multiple
meetings with utilities and that
included all of this language it
is here today.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that answer re looking
at this as we have seen each
students for doing testing on
COVID until December of two
thousand and nineteen this
reporting requirement came
through.
In the interim two thousand
nineteen current trying to catch
the.
Why this is happening here see
it makes rulemaking we're in
though but I'm sure that.
Our utility companies to report
monthly on the number of
disconnect notices issued the
number of disconnection but
actually made.
The number of subsequent
connections made.
The total amount of federal and
state another funds.
Eight expended.
What purpose.
Monthly dollars change and
delinquency total billing
dollars.
Residential customers L.
eligible for disconnection.
Dollars eligible for
disconnection average road
resident customer.
I I can continue down the list.
We are seeing done this for
rulemaking why.
Do slide now.
Make a law and so I'm a bit
confused I do believe that we
give our agency way too much
leniency with respect rulemaking
and I also believe that we
should be doing that.
From the legislative side.
We're going to pass that mark on
this chair.
So I'm confused this would be
extent what the purpose of that
is.
So.
Move move on.
That part doesn't make sense.
I do want to make a statement
very clear.
Talking to almost every electric
utility in the state.
None were given this bill.
This is not the same bill who
run from Los in two thousand
twenty one.
What Burbridge language is not
the same bill those people the
PRC will not give in this bill
with this language.
I just want to make that known
to the audience with respect to
total transparency with the way
the.
I feel we should.
That's my opinion.
That's fine so.
Why do we.
Want to write well.
What personal income
information.
Along with the number of
prospective customers why do we
want to make that law what what
what's the end game.
With respect to that.
Question madam.
Madam Madam chair representative
who were you finished with your
question I don't want to they
want to cut you off yes
Representative thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative Pettigrew we're
not collecting we're not asking
To collect the income
information but what what we are
asking is so is for reporting on
disconnects reconnects we want
to better understand you who
doesn't have water and
electrical utilities so that we
can serve all New Mexicans to
ensure that they've got
affordable utilities and
everybody has access to that
that that's the that's the
purpose of this thank you what
we know madam chair
Representative Pettigrew is that
so many for New Mexicans are
paying way too much and so this
information is going to help us
ensure that one we can.
Reduce the year that the costs
that they're paying on a per
monthly basis and really so that
we can also just understand how
to find you know the electricity
and other utilities that they
need and you know who really
needs them that's the purpose of
this reporting but I'm I'm happy
for for Mister Synacor met miss
pointed to elaborate further.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative for
that response.
I'm a bit confused and I'm
trying to find the perfect one
because.
Where are read the the it is it
does suggest that the rulemaking
we collect that information.
Madam chair and.
With respect to the to the
response just K. help me
understand if you would please
how.
For rulemaking.
The EMNRD is going to deal with
the map state court decision
prohibiting social us right.
Madam chair Representative
Pettigrew.
Again why don't you jump in on
this.
Thank you madam chair
representative group thank you
for the question this is
something that we look at
specifically I'm a professor at
the university school New Mexico
school of law
and you're correct to point to
the mountain States court
decision which is relevant that
quite bold decision prohibited
the PRC to institute basically
low income rates are special
rates in that case for elderly
low income people without
express explicit state
legislation the court explicitly
wrote in that decision that this
is the job of the legislature so
that is why we are asking this
legislation to explicitly
authorize such range is being
allowable under the twenty other
states have authorized such such
range including our neighbors
for example Arizona
also point out that the
legislature is also specifically
authorized specific rates for
economic development other words
lower rates for industry so this
is consistent with both of those
prospects thank you for
questions.
Thank you for that response
With respect to the community
block grant how to.
Madam chair presenters out how
do we get around the anti
donation clause with respect to.
Taking state or federal funds to
inside the private property.
Thank you madam chair
representative Pettigrew yes
this legislation was drafted
specifically with that anti
donation clause and mind NO
number of commenters were
concerned about you know just
just not giving money directly
to to consumers and we we can't
do that but what we can do is
work directly with
municipalities and other
political subdivisions to to
flow so state funds through to
to work with you know members of
communities and so that's how
that's that's why it's drafted
in in the way it is we're
focusing on housing affordable
housing is sort of exams in the
antidote ation Clause so we're
we're able to do those kinds of
projects with with affordable
housing news through through a
political subdivisions and
working working in in
partnership with that you know
with that community
organization.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you Representative for the
answer so if if if I take some
of the information I think I
just heard.
We're talking about new
subdivisions how do we help low
income.
an existing subdivisions where.
Right additional.
Right I'm mentally can't make
that we can make it from an
economic development league with
respect to new housing and and
making energy efficient homes
are we get into an existing
won't do that.
Right Madam chair representative
group thank you for that
question and this is for
existing homes right so this
year this does you know it it
gives the municipality or state
that house public for instance
can apply for funding from and
merry to you know to make fifty
homes are energy efficient and
so and and they're they're not
looking at you know full weather
is ation efforts necessarily you
know they're they're able to
purchase fifty heat pumps using
this funding from seed so you
know they'll be able to to go in
and and make these some
retrofits essentially all right
to to make that home a little
close here so it's not for new
subdivisions unnecessarily it it
totally can be but it's also for
you know for homes that already
exist.
And I'm and and and and miss
corn if you'd like to
if you like to comment on this
please please do so.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
pedigree which I just want to
clarify that there is an
exemption to the anti defamation
law that are the indigenous
clause that says that we can use
funds for affordable housing and
that definition of affordable
housing includes energy
efficiency and so that is how
this bill as written so that we
can get around that and I
donation Clause this money goes
out to local jurisdictions and
then the money in coordination
with the local into the
community partner can then be
spent to help individuals
improve the stock of their homes
and we assume that local
jurisdictions are going to go
for the most energy burdens most
low income portions of their
jurisdiction which are.
Almost always going to be
existing homes probably very old
homes that need this update.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you presenters for that so.
Trying to wrap my head around
this are we suggesting that the
municipality you were.
So municipal agent.
There are actually purchased an
existing home and then do the
efficiency appropriations how we
to provide affordable housing
for the people that live in that
all.
Let me so if I if I understand
the representatives response.
Misleading go out by fifty eight
votes but that could go into an
existing home that that's not
been purchased.
Somebody's actually living in it
right now when I say not been
purchased on the purchase by the
misplaced it are we suggesting
that.
I'm literally the my next door
neighbor qualified.
My municipal agent could go out
but he.
And install it in my next door
neighbor's home.
Thanks for your and and with no
expense.
Madam chair representative
Pettigrew I'd like for gauge it
to dig into this question little
bit more.
Thank you madam chair
representative Pettigrew thank
you for the question and
understandably this this is a
block grants bill so the idea
here is that the state creates
what grants just the federal
government does and allows
different local and municipal
governments to put together an
application to provide energy
efficiency improvements to a
group of homes the local
governments don't buy those
homes local governments have to
meet specific they're gonna be
evaluated on their applications
based on specific considerations
that are in the bill on page
twelve section six and those
include so the local government
has to partner with somebody a
company that is experience in
providing energy efficiency
services and with the local
community organization that
knows the community the whole
point of this bill is to try to
reach people who I have a high
energy burden to pay a whole a
big part of their income to
their utilities that might not
be reached by the existing
federal work programs that have
very high administrative burdens
lots and lots of paperwork this
allows local governments to work
with with community partners
that know those communities well
and they can say look this
mobile home park or you know
this this group of houses or
this part of our rural community
really needs improvements these
people are paying way too high
energy bills and they're
suffering because of it and they
can choose to do small things
they can choose to do bigger
things local governments have
some flexibility but they're
gonna be judged in their grant
application based on these
criteria in section six the
government doesn't own these
homes they're gonna look at
things like you know
how high is the Energy burden is
there is.
Geographic diversity in their
portfolio program state funds to
make sure that the funds are
going all over the state to
rural communities to urban
communities
what is so those are you can
look at all the different
factors on page twelve and then
they'll choose a number of
projects to fund in again those
projects will be implemented by
a partnership between the local
government the experience energy
efficiency provider in the
community the local community
group that knows that community
and Zabel to reach out and help
make sure the services are
delivered well.
Senator answer questions
Representative.
Yes.
Sure thank you again for that
answer I I understand the the
use of community block grants
I'm.
Doing my best to make sure the
the the people that are
listening and understanding
exactly what the extent of the
bill is.
And
How can help and I have
communities and in all for the
the metropolitan areas or.
Well.
We don't have huge huge
populations down there but you
know I represent thirty thousand
people just like every other
Representative in the house
does.
So.
As we continue through here.
Madam chair.
If I can get the the presenters
to do me a favor and expand on
their vision of how low income
is defined in lowincome rates
are defined.
I guess we can add to that will.
Will other customers end up
subsidizing some of those low
income rates what do you see
room grow and if this bill were
to pass at least you were making
grow and to provide those three
things thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative Greg
just want to make sure I have of
the questions that you're asking
you would like to know how we're
defining low income.
Madam chair representative and
then low income right.
And how the madam chair how the.
P. R. C. will do the rulemaking
on the right making on that is
that what you're asking.
Chair representative Custer
Representative thank you for
asking clarification.
The last part of that is.
Do.
There's a presenter on this bill
and the and the experts on this
bill do you envision the.
Rulemaking would set to where
other customers would actually
be paying the also for the low
income rates.
I thank you madam chair
Representative Pettigrew I I
will answer the first question
and Tammy and again you can come
in and
And give us a little bit more
more details but for the
purposes of of this bill low
income is defined as twenty
percent to excuse me two hundred
percent of the federal poverty
level
and in terms of low income right
but I'd like for Tammy Abraham
and gate to to jump in on that
madam chair thank you.
Representative Pettigrew thank
you for the question so to start
with I just note that the bill
does not require low income
rates it does require does
authorize the use of low income
rates and again twenty other
states have authorized low
income rates many of them like
our our our our neighbors
Amazona have implemented
different kinds of low income
rates
what the bill does is it
requires utilities look at
affordability to see if all of
the tools that we're implying
especially energy efficiency
which helps lower.
Makes those bills affordable to
low income New Mexicans now
should utilities implement low
income rates that does not mean
that those rates would be
subsidized by other customers
I'm just like we do with any
kind of customer class they can
be based on the cost of service
many cases the cost of service
for low income customers is
lower the cost of service for
all residential folks general
because they have smaller houses
you you the cost of providing
Tricity to low income customers
can be lower than the cost of
service are providing to see to
residential folks all over
that's been the case in several
jurisdictions also point out
that we have other specific
great classes again this
legislature has authorized
economic development rates as
have many other states so that
utilities can try to attract
businesses providing them lower
rates I'm not saying it's good
policy or bad policy I'm just
saying that this legislature has
stayed termination that trying
to attract business it's
something that we can use right
making to do but is not so far
right explicit authorization
right over twenty other states
have to ensure that low income
people can have affordable of
Tricity rates if that's what's
required is one of the tools
used thank you and I I apologize
but I'm gonna have to leave the
call.
Thank you madam chair thank you
presenters for those responses
Senator Representative reference
two hundred percent of federal
poverty level.
Can you give me an example what
that would be for.
Merry family of four.
Madam chair representative
pedigree you're gonna have to
give me a second I think it
changed and I'm getting getting
back on the twenty twenty two
informational less and less
Tammy has that at the ready.
Madam chair Representative
Andrew I believe although I
don't have it in front of me
right now and I apologize for
that but I believe it's twenty
seven thousand for a family of
four.
So two hundred percent of that
number for for our listening
audience will within the what
would that final value the.
I would be about fifty fifty
what little under fifty four
thousand for a family court.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that answer so as I
understand it merry family with
with two dependents
With an income.
Assuming an income not a
adjusted income fifty thousand
would qualify.
For this and so there's a
community for this block grants
to states to block the city
block that the that everybody
that's within those guidelines
that that city block.
Everybody on that city block the
would fall within that and that
would be one of the things that
the the help them I'm writing a
grant that be a fair way to say
that.
Madam chair Representative group
thank I believe so so you know
the the way would be chosen is
that a local jurisdiction would
go out and take a look at their
community and find out where the
greatest pocket of need is and
then they would rate their
proposal for that there may be a
situation where there is a block
we're one family you know is not
lowincome and that would have to
be left out of the proposal but
that the the intent here is that
local jurisdictions are going to
look at the biggest pockets of
need in their community and
write a grant to help back
pocket increased increase their
their energy burden
and and we are sorry decrease
their department increase the
quality of life for those people
living in those homes that are
at most risk.
Madam chair and thank you
presenters Representative for
that response madam chair
appreciate your your patience
with me I think I just have a
couple more questions
the first one.
Going through page twelve of the
list I'm I'm curious we've been
talking a lot about electricity.
This committee but we're at the
the we're talking about.
We come in and look at it in and
do an analysis as an engineer I
would I would do an analysis on
home I would look at it the
third so you know the best thing
for the cell would be brand new
windows and and
Installation re doing the
insulation in the attic.
verses the new heat pump or
something like that who is this
this deal is this piece of
legislation don't support that
forces strictly looking at
things from
of lectures to the state will.
Madam chair representative a
group of yes this bill is not.
I'm sorry that's me this bill is
designed to allow for that
tailoring for the individual
communities so one community
might look at their most energy
burden area and say these are
you know all of really old homes
they all have you know a fifty
year old H. fax system and so
what we really want to do for
them is get them a new he caught
another community might look at
their biggest pocket of energy
burden and say these homes all
just need installation and so
they could do installation for
all of those it's really
designed to be tailored to the
individual needs of the
community.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the for that answer so.
As I look at this.
I can get behind sections one
through seven of this of this
bill there's there's things
inside here I I have no issue
that I had community of areas
within.
Within my my district to the can
really uses I can get behind
this will want to serve the
standpoint really don't
understand cannot wrap my head
around why sections of eight
nine and ten or necessary here
when when so much of this is
already been done and utility
companies already have mandates
for them to be very specific
things with respect to our our
their customers issues so as I
look at this I can't support the
bill in its current condition I
would I would challenge the the
the the
Bill sponsors to consider and
and discuss with the.
The co ops.
The PRC and the electric
companies that this truly
impacts of what they're actually
doing is they're all very
adamant with me that this
legislation will not the same as
last year for legislation and
The things that are being
requested already exist in so
many places within some of the
rulemaking the that we already
have so I would challenge that
we consider removing sections
eight through ten in here and
and maybe looking at something
that you can bring in the twenty
twenty three.
Session.
My computer just a phone with us
so so.
Looking at keeping sections one
through seven something that
that I think to just about
everybody in the industry would
sit there and and may not.
May not support but wouldn't
oppose.
And then work with industry.
On sections eight through ten.
When I say industry I'm also
talking about the PRC and so
work with them on sections ten
through the interim member in
piece of legislation that that.
With respect to a representative
of ward said earlier that the
you have the support of those of
those people that are ultimately
the ones that have to be and and
that will be required to perform
work in none of them are opposed
to.
Concepts.
They're completely oppose in in
my opinion the way I read and
lack of conversations there
opposed to.
The sections for very specific
reasons and the fact that they
were allowed to be part of
secede this legislation.
And so with that madam chair
thank you for your patience
thank you presenters for your
patience and thank you boards
are committee members for your
patience right to me trying to
get a good understanding of the
bill making sure that everybody
that's listening in at the same
opportunity I yield back.
Thank you and there are no more
questions from the committee
so I will what is the will of
the committee.
Madam chair I move it to pass.
In that chair thank you I will
take are there any of.
I guess there are objections to
the bill the state roll call.
Representative more.
No with the explanation.
Representative.
Representative Pettigrew.
Now in my explanation was given
in my closing so thank you very
much.
Representative Thomson yes.
Vice chair Romero.
Yes.
Madam chair for our.
Yes.
So we would passes.
Okay thank you so house bill
thirty seven has a do pass with
three to vote so congratulations
and good luck on your next
committee thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm sorry I'm not to have us
Representative Lord get her
explanation I apologize thank
you so much just everybody knows
I'm completely on board with the
concept of helping people I just
think this bill needs more work
and some working with the purity
and other energy associations
that this bill comes back the
next time with a little bit of
fixing and tweaking in
cooperation with other energy
companies brother that I I I
would be on board with this bill
thank you.
Thank you okay thank you and
thank you madam chair.
Thank you for being with us
Representative Popp robot have
here.
So our next bill is house bill
sixty by
our vice chair Andrea Romero and
Christine or yes and and hello
to Rubio and this is
housing clarifying the
requirements for written
statement of deductions in
certain circumstances
and increasing the time
delimiter remedy not payment for
rent for rental agreements I
will let the bills bill sponsors
eight explain their bill thank
you madam chair we have several
experts in our attendees
including of course our sponsors
so he could
let them and we have a Maria
Griego who will be helping us
three Larsen is it C. pre Larson
she's a celebrity what's pre
celery pre celery is in the
attendees but she is also
captain.
Marvel so we'll go with that
Who else
Rep Rachel actually no she's not
gonna be with us today and Tom
up pretty men I think Thomas
premium should be.
In our yes there is okay great.
Okay everybody's.
Okay.
Very good.
I think so.
All right thank you madam chair
this is house bill sixty five
nothing new to this committee
this is our housing
modernization bill that this
body has heard understanding
that this is gone through many
iterations all just be brief
about the overall framework of
this bill essentially it's for
different things it expands the
time frames to allow tenants to
be able to cure there rents
payments so right now there's
only three days to get current
on rent this looks founded to
eleven days on this will also
provide tenants the opportunity
to pay in state in order to
avoid eviction being able to pay
what they can to prevent
eviction from happening of
course being that now that the
time and minds are so short and
of course resources today are
difficult to come by being that
our economy is what it is
and folks are are in transition
in many ways
three this allows for quirks to
be able to explain to tenants
what their rates and
availability of rental
assistance as we have many
subsidies available right now as
both a state programs and
federal programs so this would
allow courts to explain that to
folks who are called into the
system for eviction and provide
only during a state of emergency
this prevents landlords from
refusing to renew a lease as
we're in now where folks don't
have a lot of places to go well
we've been amidst COVID times
this will help with protecting
tenant rights in that way with
that again we have Maria Griego
who's from the New Mexico Center
for lawn poverty as our expert
and burst Representative Rubio
and I have been working on this
bill I'll defer now to
Representative Rubio and that
will go from there.
Thank you I won't say too much
other then
you've all been you've all heard
this bill many many times last
session it's been vetted many
times we have the support well
folks in industry and others who
believe that this is a
fundamental start to how we we
built a really strong
comprehensive housing plan here
in New Mexico that's that's
statewide and so we ask for your
support and all all handed off
to Maria.
Thank you Representative Rubio
Representative Romero good
afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to speak to
you all today
as a representative said this
bill is really about
expanding and balancing the
rights of attendance and
landlords in New Mexico it as
many of you know our state was
already in a housing crisis
prior to the onset of the COVID
nineteen pandemic our state had
the highest increase in
homelessness between twenty
eighteen to twenty nineteen as
well as the highest increase in
chronic homelessness we also
know that close to half of all
New Mexico renters are are cost
burdened meeting today pay more
than than thirty percent of
their income on housing in fact
about twenty two percent are
extremely faster in meeting they
they spend upwards of fifty
percent fifty percent of their
income on housing each month
Our state also has some of the
tightest timeframes eviction
time frames in the country and
there are only eight other
states with at infection time
frames as short as are shorter
than New Mexico's and other
those states we have the third
highest rate of addiction prior
to the pandemic our courts
forcing approximately sixteen
families per day evicted and
when you're affected it you're
very likely to end up homeless
given that having an eviction on
your record makes it
increasingly difficult to seek
alternate housing and so add
this bill has is the
representative said his
Really attempted to look at ways
that we can at protect housing
stability for New Mexico's
ranchers giving them more time
in cases of non payment of rent
to get caught up to pay in state
it also insurers that tenants
know about resources available
to help pay rent so that
landlords can get the money that
there do
and so I think that is a pretty
good overall summary of the bill
and I will I'm here to answer
any questions that the committee
may have.
Thank you madam chair with that
we'll go ahead and go to public
comment or whatever you'd like
to do next.
Okay thank you first will hold
the audience if you will look to
take the call in favor or in
opposition.
Hey and our results are of the
two people thirty nine or in
favor and third teen are in
opposition.
Okay thank you.
There is one in favor in the
audience in the committee room
as well madam chair okay let's
first and if you'll be really
careful to listen only those who
are in opposition and would like
to speak.
if you would raise your hand.
Sharks can calling the madam
chair yes and how many are
there.
Are there are two okay great.
First in Hedrick.
we're receiving an error message
Mr Hedrick is using an older
version of zone that it is not
allowing me to get permission
for him to talk about the trip.
Okay perhaps you can put
something in the chat.
We can get the phone number to
them as well.
It's a great idea.
Mr really can you let the next
person speak.
Well you get him the phone
number.
Absolutely madam chair next is a
grand the valve Verde.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Randy
poverty and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors the real
technical concerns with HB sixty
five that have been shared with
vice chair Romero and we hope to
continue to work with her on
those concerns.
We are most significant concern
is that there's language
providing for the order of proof
to prove retaliation occurred at
page fifteen lines nine to
sixteen that does not require
the resident actually prove
retaliation rather the resident
must only prove that protected
activity occurred we've
suggested in order of proof to
the sponsor that doesn't that
doesn't require the tenant
retaliation and tracks with New
Mexico delegation line other
contexts.
Another concern that we have is
that page fourteen lines eleven
to fourteen that allows for
complaints to gas electric or
water utilities to be considered
as a protected activity however
the owner may not be aware of
these types of complaints and
this is especially concerning
given that the order approved
does not require the tenant to
prove retaliation for that
protected activity.
Finally on page nineteen nine
seventeen eighteen there's
language that allows the
resident to make a first partial
payment within five days of
filing an appeal and there's no
other mention our definition of
partial payment so it's unclear
if the partial payment sorry
ma'am your time has a lot.
Thank you we truly appreciate
the bill's sponsors attention to
these concerns.
Are the previous gentleman has
locked out of the system and not
locked back and madam chair.
And that was the final person
raise their hand against.
Okay thank you let's go to now
if you are in support and would
like to speak if you'll raise
your hand.
And we do have a one minute.
Timer and you can see that on
your computer.
Robeco the light at.
Yes we can.
Okay my name is Rebecca
providing them the senior
director of policy planning work
in New Mexico mortgage finance
authority well this is not on in
the face legislative agenda as
approved by legislative
oversight committee believes the
COVID nineteen pandemic has had
unprecedented it makes sense of
impacts on how schools across
New Mexico the passage of this
bill will allow for greater
flexibility by allowing more
time to ready delinquencies
find affordable housing the
potentially avoid homelessness
this will also ensure that
individuals and families are
protected from addiction during
emergencies including public
health emergency.
I also understand the bill
Sanchez worked very hard last
general session to work with the
New Mexico apartment association
to address their concerns on the
scale and it appears to be a
good compromise that budget New
Mexico's renter households we
think the bill sponsors to bring
attention to this issue of
addiction and attempting to ease
the burden of New Mexicos low to
moderate income households.
Nicole a lot of it.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name's Nikolayevich
and the administrative director
with the Audubon to progressive
caucus and member organizer
polling New Mexico as earlier I
spoke data that I was a
homeowner but I want to explain
why I was told in mid twenty
twenty that may thirteen hundred
dollar rent would go up to
fifteen hundred dollars I am one
hundred percent disabled veteran
and my partner took a job cut
during the pandemic at express
scripts are tenet writes New
Mexico New Mexico are basically
nonexistent I'm lucky enough to
have the GI home loan but many
like me have been evicted and no
fault of their own deposits Capt
thank you alright Mr in the peak
of the twenty twenty pandemic
we're spilling water from the
above levels and went through
the wall shooting electricity
out of the walls and forced me
to move not only did they not
return my deposit they try to
bill me for the remaining
contract the six inches of water
was on the ground and they did
not do that emergency many on
the same first level were
subjected to this and paid the
price to provide safe housing
this bill starts to grant
renters rights we deserve in a
state that is open for business
and is to be open for the people
and ranchers deserve rights for
the above reasons I ask that you
please vote yes on this bill
thank you.
David how to me.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee David how to be on a
registered lobbyist with the
City of Albuquerque in the city
in the more want to thank
Representative Rubio and Romero
for their hard work and multi
year hard work on this very
important project to insure that
folks that are on the margins of
our society remain housed in
don't find themselves in the
hunt on house and I'm sure
situation.
it's important to note all the
hard work in the committee
members will remember the hard
work of the sixty day session
especially in House Judiciary
we're all stakeholders including
we believe the realtors were
heard fully in their comments
and their concerns were
addressed as this bill this bill
passed this body we urge passage
of this bill so we could get to
the Senate get a proper hearing
get to the governor's desk for
signature to ensure housing
security for all of our citizens
thank you.
Donna order on.
We're doing can you hear me.
Hello.
Yes ma'am.
Donna you're on mute.
Okay.
Thank you we're drawn with the
late although I don't think this
bill goes far enough yet from
three to eleven days
I think that a
three days three days to come up
with your rent for people to go
to those places that have those
product price drove Gen loans
sometimes
It's cruel.
So I am in favor of this bill
and I ask that you will pass
this bill.
Randy trainer.
Madam chair of rainy trainer
with the
New Mexico apartment association
house bill sixty five represent
the compromise reached last
session on house bill one level.
We work very hard on that and
Health bill sixty five
represents the greatness that
were reached so the apartment
association of New Mexico
supports this compromise thank
you.
Rachel Biggs.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is Rachel
Biggs but Albuquerque health
care for the homeless immediate
action is needed to ensure New
Mexicans can maintain housing
and landlords can access
available rental assistance
funds to address rent backlogs
COVID has increased the need for
rental assistance and the
federal government responded in
unprecedented ways to address
the rent act during that action
more toria it would be
irresponsible to not address the
barriers to spending this money
to ensure both landlords and
tenants benefit the connection
between housing and health care
has never been more evident a
recent report on a direct
connection between housing
stability and public health
demonstrating that states that
might Texans continue headed to
times higher incidence of COVID
and a five times higher
incidence of COVID mortality we
must act now to ensure we can
continue to leverage federal
dollars and help our economy
recover as quickly as possible
we urge your support HB sixty
five and Sanchez thank you.
Daniel were what.
Hi there thank you my name is
Daniel were awesome the acting
executive director of the Santa
Fe community housing trust tier
content to corporations and New
Mexico interfaith housing
together we've developed over
three hundred and fifty units of
affordable rental housing
statewide noting I projects I've
also worked for more than a
decade is a planner around New
Mexico helping communities do
affordable housing planning from
Dona ana all the way up to PTA's
County and I think the thing
that I want to get across is
that is tough four ability
markets like we have right now
the first thing that go our
tenant rights and tenant
protections and we don't have
strong enough protections in
place right now and this is only
gonna get worse as affordability
crisis is intensifying and so
it's critical that we pass these
housing modernization changes in
H. P. sixty five thank you.
Karen Canaday with all.
Hi this is Karen.
The national association of
social workers.
Mexico chop or excuse me and for
all the reasons stated and not
to waste too much time we are in
strong support of additional
thank you very much.
Deanna Creighton.
Hi my name is Deanna Creighton
with ABC community school
partnership and a small housing
nonprofit named M. Paro if you
can support of this bill the
extension of time frames and the
balancing of tenant protections
in this bill are important to
address the systemic flow of
people into homelessness it
allows for more realistic time
frames and applying for rental
assistance it's a critical step
for our housing continuing to
develop better systems to
intervene before people are
evicted as people slip from
housing and security into
homelessness it becomes
exponentially more difficult to
recover which we see every day
with children and families in
schools who are facing
homelessness housing instability
any direction this is sound
legislation has been well vetted
as mentioned before with local
groups including the New Mexico
department association who did
just speak in favor it will
support development of systems
that increase community
stability throughout New Mexico
thank you for the opportunity to
speak in support of this bill.
Alley a motion.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee for the
opportunity to speak today and
Representative Romero Rubio for
introducing this bill again this
session my name is alley pushing
with Albuquerque health care for
the homeless and I'd like to
express my strong support for
each be sixty five working with
our street outreach team I'm
regularly meeting individuals
and families with children story
homelessness started with an
eviction and this led to
compounding negative impacts on
their health and mental health
education and employment
stability and ultimately
resulted in those families
living in their cars and
offering canton's other places
that are unsafe and unhealthy
for these families and for
communities eviction is a huge
driver of homelessness in
Albuquerque with as many as
forty two percent of New Mexican
families currently at risk of
addiction and just want to urge
everyone to make sure that we're
supporting HBs sixty five and
allowing all New Mexicans to be
able to take advantage of the
request rental assistance and
affection moratorium
receipt policies are put in
place and create lasting
solutions.
Thank you.
Yes.
Hi can you hear me.
Yes.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is to be a ship with New Mexico
voices for children and I'm here
in support of house bill sixty
five I first want to thank the
sponsors for their time and
commitment to this bill no
family should have to face the
prospect of housing two million
homelessness especially during
the pandemic this bill is
essential to increasing housing
is to housing stability in New
Mexico and making sure that
families who rent can stay
securely housed in addition
lengthening the eviction
timeline is critical to making
sure that families have the time
to access rental assistance
after receiving an eviction
notice given how short New
Mexico's addiction timeline as
we strongly urges support for
house bill sixty five thank you
for your time.
Samuel Nevada's.
You guys hear me.
Yes.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is some way of
this I am the CD one traveled
along to progressive pop yes I'm
in support for H. B. sixty five
I'm December twenty twenty I got
my renewal offer from my rental
place and my rent went up forty
percent plus a monthly fee of a
hundred dollars totaling a
hundred dollars actively paid
seven hundred I struggle during
the pandemic to pay money to I
read numerous times in my rental
property was not compassionate
and what's some you to court
every time wrecking fees on fees
add to will twelve point where
my fees equal the amount of my
records the new they couldn't
get me and they still did this
during the pandemic it's
predatory in very poor practice
this bill will allow residents
to keep protected from the
victims in case of the party
margins is part of the bill take
your time.
Grace school.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is grace school like and the
director of the New Mexico
commission on access to justice
with the administrative office
of the courts and the commission
supports the extensions of the
noticing hearing timelines in
this bill this will give courts
more flexibility to hear these
cases and will also give
landlords and tenants more
opportunity to access federal
rental assistance money if
that's appropriate for them and
also to participate in the
administrative office of the
courts new addiction prevention
and diversion program that will
begin statewide on in March of
this year and will be on
beginning February first in
Of curry and Roosevelt counties
thank you members of the
committee and madam chair.
Just in our.
Hello hi thank you chair
committee my name's Justin
Rogers I'm a home rancher and a
member of the centrist coalition
of Albuquerque it's just it's I
support this bill because that
will help renters in many places
Looking at who's spoken on this
once I'd be for will be from
approve this on the other side
of it many people who are unpaid
community members who are here
because we Karen that's access
disproportionately if there's no
objection dispute the landlord
stands to lose some investment
incomes
which is every investment has
risk Senate verses of the
tenants face eviction
homelessness unsafe situations
with COVID or family members.
Well even the apartment
association supports this bill
so I want to urge you to support
passing this and talk to your
colleagues but getting it
through the committee thank you.
Carburetor.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Kirk record on the director
with one FC mystery New Mexico
we also advocate on behalf of
the New Mexico conference of
churches I'm here today to state
or strong support for H. B.
sixty five not begin by state
again this year that we believe
housing is a fundamental human
right it was for all policy that
supports the creation of for
housing and in this case the
preservation of housing we
believe that are outdated
uniform honor reservations Act
is an example of poor public
policy that contributes to
homelessness there's no
disputing the fact Mexico has a
longstanding housing crisis and
this is only been made much
worse by the ongoing pandemic HB
sixty five is one step that can
help ease this crisis I urge
your support for H. B. sixty
five and thank you for this
opportunity to speak to you
today.
S. Martinez.
Hello my name is Melissa
Martinez
I speak on behalf of away I also
speak on behalf of single
mothers out there
and part of my cells I am a
single parent I did walk away in
two thousand seventeen from a
very domestic violence abuse
relationship that individual to
support us so it was hard to get
on it when my daughter was just
six months old and then my son
was in utero.
Asking for you to participate in
considering this bill because it
is important to women like me.
Trying to make a better future
for our children and don't
believe that it is there your
bills are read.
Landlords don't but contracts
with the agreements is.
Hold.
With me and I hope that you can
help me participate in the
future thank you.
Robert Nelson.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members my name is
Robert one else and and I'm a
member of the rivers coalition
of Albuquerque I am in strong
support of HB sixty five an
issue in the previous comment on
folks needed here our
communities ten protection our
state can projections are so
critical now more than ever in
our state in this will go a long
way in bowstring housing
stability for those that need it
the most I thank you
Representative Rubio Romero and
we urge your support of HB sixty
five thank you and take care.
Right now whose waters.
So hi my name is Roy not least
what is and I'm
facilitator for the
international district healthy
communities coalition and also
the community school coordinator
at Whittier elementary school.
There's a lot of the state but
all I can say to that mom is I
know we all heard her I know we
all heard her and her little
baby asked why are you crying.
And and and that's the end of
the day that's what this is all
about this is a poverty issue.
Well if you and who makes money
who gets to have.
And who doesn't who makes money
and who gets to walk away and go
to bed and I spent that night
when that baby and how many
hundred thousands a little
babies as that one why you cry
and the mom has to dump maybe
because I don't have rules for
you tonight.
Let me off of that that's all I
have to say all my gosh.
Thank you for reminding us why
we're all here.
Please support just.
Meredith make information.
Thank.
Our nation.
Four four one Bernalillo New
Mexico also for American
Association of university women
I don't think I need to spend
one full more are you have heard
from our our in order advocating
the organization also are very
important for all and all are
you for your support.
Response to.
Search Martinez.
Good afternoon my name is Serge
Martinez I am on the faculty at
university Mexico School of law
but I'm speaking today in my
personal capacity I'm also the
director of Haro nonprofit that
works for housing stability.
The the believe that housing is
a human right I'm a lawyer who
advocates for tenants and I have
seen how quickly the process can
Moul how hard it can be for
attendance to get support in
that short window and this bill
if by extending that timeline
incentivizes folks lemons
intends to work together for
solutions that keep people
stateLee how the benefits all of
us to so many many ways I'm I'm
one of the priest.
Express my appreciation to the
Sanchez into the apartment
association of New Mexico and
other folks have come together
to the table to craft something
that works for landlords and
tenants in New Mexico I strongly
support that thank you.
The military of Burrell.
Good afternoon thank you for
having me administrative Tripura
L. and speaking on behalf of the
working poor
housing in New Mexico especially
in Albuquerque is so very very
difficult
to combine deal with because you
get to choose between decent
affordable you don't get both
and that isn't there resources
to maintain your housing it's
they're so few and far between
and there's so many of us were
just doing the best we can to
provide for our families and
rents continue to rise and we
just don't.
And it's not sustainable if
we're going to.
Make.
For our children and for our
society please please vote for
this bill thank you.
Madam chair that was the final
public comment.
Thank you and thank you everyone
who participated
yeah.
To the Sanchez you would you
like to say anything else before
you went to the committee I also
just want to thank the
commenters for calling in and
talking about how serious this
issue is for New Mexicans and
just my gratitude and will go
head to any questions the
committee may have thank you
madam chair.
Okay first up we have our.
Representative Lord.
Our manager we have to
coordinate how we do this so
well done get the speaker
Suffolk you can hear me okay.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair
representative so.
I'm gonna ask you a different
perspective which was horrific
for me when my parents passed
away I inherited their house.
Not everybody's altruistic and I
get a little concerned about
people saying.
It's almost like they're both
fine people who own a house.
And I had a perfect experience
where my first tenet that moved
into the house is a great guy
did a background check you moved
in my house and then he decided
he was not going to pay.
I didn't have the money to pay
the mortgage I didn't have the
money to pay anything so I had
to take money out of my credit
card and use my credit card to
pay the mortgage and to pay the
utilities because he wasn't
paying utilities either.
So I went there on addiction
process to get him moved out
after that two three months to
having to pay out the bills and
then I found another renter and
that was great for about six
months and then she moved out
and her daughter moved in and
right away she did not pay the
rent so I get what you're saying
I mean we we all want people to
have housing but there is a
totally different perspective.
Not everyone is a big fat rich
person that is sitting there
going I get to collect all this
money was barely getting by with
this.
House that I had so what I want
to know is there anything I mean
I know that there's funding and
you're gonna stay well lowincome
funny excerpts cetera what about
for someone who moves and they
have an income they have a job I
don't qualify for anything they
just if the landlord what it is
there something in here to
protect the person that owns the
house so they don't have to go
through the same nightmare that
I did.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Lord so current
law already has many protections
for landlords including the
option for eviction so we're
trying to actually work the
opposite sort of side of that
we're right now because of many
of the events advantages for
landlords in the legal system
and do exist we're trying to
sort of help motivate an
opportunity for landlords and
tenants to have that discussion
and dialogue and for this in
particular low income or
indigent you know tenants to
have the opportunity to be able
to cure if they're in a
situation like we are today and
with COVID where even employment
can be quite fleeting so
I'm happy to talk to you about
some of the Landler protections
online but this is not what that
bill does as per your question
I'll defer to our experts for
any filling.
Madam chair representative
Romero and and Representative
Lord I'm happy to speak to that
Representative Lord to answer
your question there there
already are protections in the
New Mexico landlord tenant act
so is it is Representative
Romero explained if someone is
not paying rent you can still
file for eviction this would
just delay but when you can when
you can file so currently under
New Mexico law you have to give
your tenant three days notice of
nonpayment of rent before you
can file the case the simply
would expand that time to eleven
days to use it as a landlord you
still have the opportunity and
the right to evict somebody if
they are not paying rent this
bill doesn't change that.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative thank you with
there be anybody would there be
any way of grant anything to
compensate these landlords are
now out the extra day like for
me I I it was horrific because
it didn't go through the
adoption process which is very
very very expensive and very
time consuming to now if let's
say someone like me who's barely
getting by has house my parents
given to me when they passed
away so now I have to wait elect
an extra eleven days to start
the process will be any way to
reimburse somebody like me for
those extra Levin days that I
have to wait.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative work so this is
actually one of those pieces
that we work through last year
and brought forth today said to
make sure that exactly your
concerns were responded to so
even in current law there is a
provision where if someone is
lawfully evicted that they are
meant to pay the full amount of
you know the state that they had
within that household that
remains so all of those you
know.
Necessary payments that needs to
be matters additional current
law and of course you know what
you're talking about with
damages you know including
deposits etcetera that are owed
to a landlord remain so as as
far as you know any sort of
legal requirements those those
are still intact and and the
landlord can recover from that
all defer to add money have with
any other additions of that.
Thank you Representative Romero
Madam chair and Representative
Lord to answer your question
I'm.
Yes is as Representative Romero
said that there is already a
provision in New Mexico law that
you are able to recover for any
days after which you did not
receive grants this would just
out in the divisional eight days
you're still going to be able to
recover for those days so right
now what it might look like it
is you know after the tenant has
a three day notice and doesn't
pay the rent as a landlord you
can file for eviction save this
tenant has not paid January's
rent I'm advocating for
January's rent plus a late fee
plus as a daily pro rated amount
you know from the time that the
judgment is entered plus
attorney's fees are allowed to
ask for those and costs
associated with filing so this
bill doesn't change that you
would just assuming you know
everything else remains the same
you're going to get an
additional eight days of pro
rated rent.
Thank you madam chair
representative I totally
understand that the point I'm
trying to make is yes totally
understand we have COVID going
on people can't pay they can do
is say Hey I need these extra
days to make the payment that's
fine but in my case a person was
defiant and I never got any
money I got nothing back from
second one involved criminal
activity I got no money back on
that so I had to cover all that
now I'm looking at this from a
different perspective this is
another eleven eight extra eight
days don't have to wait now.
To collect and like I said
before it was like two or three
months to get first first person
I was another two months to get
the second person out I never
got any money back and yes there
is ways to do the lawsuits and
there is ways to file which are
very costly and I never got any
money back on that ever so I'm
trying to make sure then in a
way what we're trying to protect
people from being tossed out of
their homes are COVID there were
also two different ways of all
then if somebody has to wait
eleven days now to remove that
person and they're just purely
being defiant that's another
eleven days that you don't get
back as I didn't get anything
back either one of those ever in
this lifetime so my question is
is this bill indefinite.
Is this going to and and the
comment pandemic ends or is this
something that's going to be
here forever.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Lord I'm going
back to your original point well
it I absolutely empathise and
sympathise with your situation
we're trying to obviously try to
prevent certain situations for
what it is that you experience
happen but the overall policy
that we're looking at is
essentially not as nuanced I
hope in it and in your situation
in order to protect landlords
and tenants to a lot of
landlords as well including I
think the conversations that we
had with the apartment
association are very much in
favor of this yes it is very
difficult to find new tenants
that are good in particular for
Justin you know the lack of
payment to be able to stay in a
place we this doesn't prohibit a
landlord from of course evicting
someone who doesn't belong there
who is that for tenant not from
means but because they're
mistreating the promise these so
this would not you know
basically prevent any landlord
from doing that and and your
situation where you had was that
activity that was you know
perfectly reasonable to activate
someone so this you know is
hoping to basically create a
better relationship with
landlords and tenants two I am
sorry your second question was
about
That I I forgot I can read and
asked again is is it a sorry
what what is this a permanent
bill or is just temporary during
the pandemic.
So madam chair Representative
Lord this is we're changing
current law and in that I think
what you're asking in particular
is about an emergency situation
where the governor has declared
an emergency so what we're
clarifying implies that if you
have a current lease that's
outstanding this would basically
prohibit landlords from evicting
you able and and some of the
testimony that we heard we're
folks were kicked out in in in
the midst of a public health
emergency and could not could
not find new housing so this
prohibits landlords from doing
that in the state of emergency
so right now we're in COVID it's
unpredictable what possibly
could happen next and we
certainly don't want folks
having to navigate finding a
stable home during the public
health or public emergency so
this is where I think there
there are at least as would be
honored during that time.
Thank you madam chair
representative sorry I didn't I
don't think if I I don't think I
understood the answer to that so
after let's say everything's
over done with the we now have
we no longer have a state of
emergency.
Is this bill gone or assist bill
on the books permanently no
matter what I mean when during a
time of emergency or is it.
All the time for any reason
Madam chair representative lord
we would be changing current law
so it would be in statute in
perpetuity helpfully and only to
improve upon in pre and
subsequent sessions.
Thank you to answer my question
that's all I have a yield my
time thank you.
Thank you I don't see any
further questions unless it is
Representative Pettigrew.
Anyone you yourself
Representative.
Level.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you presenters for your time of
bills.
The madam chairman with students
are projected
For the presenters assist bill
create ballots.
if you go ahead and clarify
what you mean by balance.
Representative some you.
Thank.
All right
For clarification on that as
this creative balance for.
The less certain we'd see.
Madam chair representative can
you clarify what you mean by
balance I guess just as it
pertains to the bill so I'm.
Look at what you're looking at
and got to respond to something
specific to the bill.
With the.
Thank you try again I think.
Thank you pages of.
Legislation here from me.
Trying to understand inside this
legislation.
What.
Over conversations and of
her testimony.
From.
From people that the.
I have had issues with respect
to their.
They set their their leasing.
one of two people process that.
strumming ownership standpoint I
don't see where this balances.
This creates a balance where.
We we put the onus back on
personal responsibility.
I don't see where it.
If I signed a contract with
somebody I'm responsible for
meeting the terms of that
contract.
So if I know.
And and
When times were were I've been
between jobs.
I know that I'm gonna have a
problem.
Chain of Bill.
I contact the people that I owe
the money.
That's my responsibility I have
a contract credit card.
The utility be at my landlord
for my mortgage.
Whatever it is I contact them I
work through a payment system
with the L. it becomes agreed
upon.
I don't see where there's a
balance in this bill the service
there and puts the onus on the
person that made a personal
choice.
To sign a contract.
Question.
Madam chair representative can
you just clarify the question
once more for me I apologize I
didn't get that the question.
I don't see anywhere.
Sure present Representative I
don't see where this bill anyway
put any onus on the person that
signed the contract.
It agreed to terms I don't see
what anywhere in this bill it
becomes their responsibility to
work with the person that they
have a contract with.
Payment structure.
All I see here is we extend
timelines.
To give them more grace I'm all
about that I have is lord and
savior the gives me all the rest
of the world.
This.
I'm all about providing great
six I'm just trying to
understand Wirth the onus on the
person that signed the contract.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Pettigrew so
actually this brings to the at
portion of the bill I believe on
page four that will be
clarifying in many circumstances
prior to the writing of this
bill basically the landlords and
tenants didn't have an actual
written agreement as per what
you're saying as far as a
contract would be between them
explicitly this actually
requires that there is an
explicit contract between a
landlord and tenant in order to
both protect the landlord and
the tenant as to what the rent
would be and that they both
signed an agreement to that so
when they when and if they do
happen to need to go to court
for dispute on landlord tenant
that they would have that
contract in tow so unfortunately
as part of what we have learned
and why we wanted to add that to
this bill today is that many
landlords and tenants you just
have an oral contract or sort of
a handshake and then
unfortunately that does get
folks into some dicey situations
without having that actually
written up and and sign to so
we're actually clarifying that
as far as that contract and what
that would be I hope that
answers your question is as far
as some of the balance goes but
I hope that helps you understand
that we're trying to protect
both landlords and tenants in
that regard and I'll defer to
our experts to clarify anything
I I hopefully I answered your
question.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for that
response thank.
I'm not as confident with with
garbage inside it here with
respect out it protects both
sides I look at the current
process right now.
Rents three days late.
they get a notice.
Three days they they they get
that.
Monday eight the the landlord
files for addiction if they
can't that there is no
resolution.
So by day twenty three if I if I
wrote went H. them right I could
be.
The first under their overall
but by that time.
The researchers should have
already received notification
or add the ability to go through
rental assistance and state the
addiction before they get in for
you know.
A twenty three is the best
possible scenario for getting
from the judge.
I mean thank the judge at that
point in time can find that
information state the eviction
allow things to happen.
It just makes that determination
that that doesn't happen by the
thirty first minute out in by
day thirty eight potentially
depending on the damages.
The the units back online I
don't see how that helps and.
Our solutions is.
Fort increases our expenses we
have somebody out there Madam
chair and representative.
That they could make the payment
to begin with.
Court state okay well you know
this expense euro court costs
you know the issue of that.
We couldn't get the right thing
maybe are working with the rest
of it I just don't see
resolution really truly works
share with that madam chair.
Current condition I can't
support this bill I do
appreciate your thank you.
Thank you Representative and
would you like to conclude
before we go to a doctor.
I'm sorry madam chair you know
I'm sorry not be Representative
I mean this L. Sanchez I guess
rigor thank you thank you madam
chair just want to just again
thank everyone for their due
diligence on helping that this
bill to its current state and as
stated we're just hoping to
continue to move this along and
in the best interest of New
Mexicans and I'll defer to my co
sponsor with anything else.
I guess we're going to go to a
vote.
Hey well I just wanted to add
that this is so much needed it
sounds like you worked with you
know all of the stakeholders
involved and
I don't think we could have had
any more personal testimony than
the young mother and and and
even the person who followed her
just how important this is
You know for
Homes you know first security of
having homes and a place to live
so thank you for bringing this
forward what is the will of the
committee madam chair I move it
to pass.
And I will second that manager.
Thank you so we have.
Passed by Representative Thomson
and the second by Representative
Romero
Let's have a roll call.
Representative Lord.
If we can skip over
Representative award for a
second she stepped up to take
a call
your doctor.
Representative.
And nope.
Representative.
Yes.
Vice chairman.
Yes.
Madam chair for our yes.
Representative more.
I hate to not have her vote
Representative Pettigrew can you
let her know we're bodhi.
She she's aware she's still
she's still on folks okay.
It's.
Sure okay.
When I say that I I.
Zoom.
Close I don't know at the.
thank you.
Will will go I had since we do
have the votes to past
So I believe we have three two
one three in favor and you have
a due pass for your bill
House bill sixty five thank you
good luck.
Okay thank you all.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
I I should've explained earlier
that in case people were here to
presenter here about house bill
forty nine it was
The exempting of social security
of from the income tax.
And
Representative.
decided to table that bill she
told and so it was off of today
I believe goldenrod but it was
listed earlier and then I just
got word that for house bill
sixty eight that Representative
Dixon and Garrett are going to
pull that bill or roll it and
we're trying get it heard either
Thursday or if we do meet
Saturday.
So that brings us to house bill
sixty nine.
And I believe
Representative.
Natalie Figueroa will be
presenting.
And if you could make sure she's
brought up into the.
Panel please.
I see merit in Representative
Dixon are you going to go ahead
and present.
Representative Dixon you're on
mute.
Sorry madam chair Representative
Figueroa is still going to
present.
Okay great and do you have any
expert you like just to bring
forward.
Would you please madam chair
bring in commander Aaron Jones.
And Jason Weaks if they are they
should be in the attending
broke.
Both have been promoted madam
chair.
Okay thank you.
So.
This is house bill and sixty
nine and it's relating to
creating a crime of operating at
Topshop and Representative
Figueroa you'd like to present
your bill.
Thank you madam chair and if I
may cosponsored joy Garrett has
joined us or will be joining us
in the attending around so if
you want to slip her into the
panelists as well she wanted to
be available to answer
questions.
So thank you and I will present
well you will take take care of
that so we don't want to hold
things up thank you appreciate
that.
Well thank you madam chair thank
you committee I am delighted to
be here to present this bill you
have already done a hard
afternoon's work so we're going
to be as brief as possible in
the presentation and try and let
you get to questions.
House bill sixty nine addresses
a couple current gaps in our
statute we have laws that we
pull and twist to try and make
cover these situations but
currently it is not efficient
these are.
This bill is a combination of
two bills that have both passed
the house previously
unanimously.
And they still all out on the
Senate side so we're trying
again to get them through we
can't give up because the
statutory gaps are allowing
crime to proliferate across the
state in a couple of areas and
we really have to dress it this
legislation is brought forward
at the request of law
enforcement across the state the
office of the superintendent of
insurance will be here to
testify because it affects the
insurance rates of all New
Mexicans.
An industry share holders who
also will be testifying in
public testimony a host of
industry stakeholders are also
asking for legislation to
address these issues so the
first part of the bill when you
look at it section one is what
madam chair mentioned is the
identification chop shops.
It's going to page two.
You see the definition there
this statute is me it'd because
currently the only way we can
pursue chop shops.
Is under racketeering.
No we all know that auto theft
is booming in the state we've
made some strides to not get
back but it is still
a serious problem that our
constituents are asking us to
address not just in Albuquerque
but across the state of New
Mexico as it's affecting our
insurance rates.
Across the state.
And the chop shops are driving
the demand.
For that yes the racketeering.
Statutes that we have we can
pursue racketeering under
federal law the problem that our
officers bring forward and our
law enforcement agencies.
Is that racketeering is
incredibly resource intensive
generally takes a minimum of two
years and that involves under
cover observation stake out.
Usually federal agencies it's
it's the kind of case that is
what I believe long term to
build and resource intensive and
we don't have a lot of resources
to devote to this so they are
focusing on really big cases and
a chop shop is that intermediate
space it's not the low level
individual car theft.
But chop shop owner who tops the
chart sells the parts and keeps
this criminal industry
functioning.
We need a way to pursue those so
that is part one of the bill.
Part of the bill.
Is criminal damage to property
by that or attempted theft of
regulatory regulated material.
This is getting at the issue of
metal staffed that is also in
the last few years just exploded
across New Mexico.
And it's.
A difficult crime to prosecute
right now because pieces of it
to fall under different areas of
law we have a larceny statute
for that we have a criminal
damage statute for damage.
But in these cases the whole
activity the whole incident is
inter twined and prosecutors and
law enforcement have to usually
choose with which one they're
going to pursue there's no way
to go after the entire crime
unless we have this proposed.
Combination statute.
Combines the criminal the
criminalization of damage or at
ten.
Property damage or theft or
attempted theft.
So this this would cover the
situations I'm which I believe
that were sent to a one pager.
I'm just an example of the Santa
Fe church where a few hundred
dollars copper were stolen from
the church but the damage to the
boiler cost eighty thousand
dollars worth of damage so it's
difficult to prosecute the
combined issue.
The last section three part of
the bill.
was also part of the bill that's
been passed unanimously by the
house it's a compromise and it
is civil.
Statute.
And involves civil penalties not
criminal.
And requiring auto recyclers
sorry metal recyclers recyclers.
Two double authenticate is that
two step authentication we all
hate but turns out it's
necessary.
I'm.
To determine that the metal
being brought in is not
unlawfully obtained.
So madam chair I think that's
probably enough.
If commander.
Jones would like to say a few
words.
All handed off to him.
Madam chair Representative
Figueroa thank you for the
opportunity to speak today can
everybody hear me okay.
So in the spirit of fission CM I
won't be long winded I will I
know that you guys have been
working very hard to create that
just to reiterate some of the
points currently we're going
after the first year of that see
if you can say with the book
with the the statutes that we
currently have in the book we
can arrest and charge those who
are committing the theft or
receiving transferring a motor
vehicle that that has been
stolen but we're not going after
the second year the criminal
enterprise if you will those
were facilitating making money
off of that now it was
It was mentioned early earlier
that this is an issue for every
New Mexicans has auto.
Insurance because our insurance
rates go up as as the staff to
issue permeates throughout the
state and by introducing a chop
shop Bill number or the statute
into
Into the statutes economic
betterment quality as we can he
quipped law enforcement with the
ability to go after those who
are profiting off of
building a criminal enterprise
through the stealing an altering
of stolen vehicles very quickly
I'll tell you that I work too
case earlier in my career where
a drug cartel in Mexico was
ordering vehicles that they want
to deliver down to Mexico so
that they can use in their
dealings as as a criminal
organization.
And they will are stealing
vehicles out of Albuquerque
altering those vehicles
operating a chop shop and then
taken down south to Mexico we
were forced to go with a a
racketeering charge
and the amount of the labor
intensive charge and in the
years long investigations that
we had to do we were able to go
after people who were stealing
vehicles but we could not go
after those who were operating
chop shops because we don't have
that on the books I'm here to
speak with a decade of
experience in and all the staff
can tell you that it's much
needed our surrounding states
and everybody that is doing well
and out of that they have
Topshop bills we're just asking
that we would be able to equip
our law enforcement officers
with the ability to charge this
so we can go after those
profiting from our citizens here
in this great state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
commander John.
Madam chair members weeks
registered lobbyist for the
responsible not metal recyclers
initiative.
as the name indicates we
represent metal recyclers that
state of New Mexico
this bill or the the singular
provisions related about that in
this bill passed by the house
last year with little opposition
there are a couple quick changes
I wanted to talk about we change
the definition of regulated
material with only this act not
within the civil matter
recyclers Act
a little bit from last year to
address some concerns raised as
the bill tractors Senate
committee Senator sure to
attract through Senate
committees last year remove cake
specifically as a reference in
written in to address some
concerns raised on the Senate
side one and then we also
put language in that said that
the damage need to be based on
fair market value and that's
just ensure that people are
planning a massive amount of
damage that's outside the realm
of fair market value want to
make sure that the that the
alleged amount of the damage is
in line with actually with the
damage would cost to repair
place and also the the loss of
the regular material and
Representative Figueroa
definitely explain it right
The issue is that when law
enforcement officials go out and
tried to investigate these cases
and when they come in contact
with the alleged offender have
trouble parsing out the two
separate
Elemental requirements or levels
intent related to larceny and
criminal damage.
Then it becomes more complicated
when they have to assign value
each one of those terminal lacks
and because it's very hard to
differentiate at some point when
you're doing all this what
damage was related to the the
criminal damage because when you
column wall initial value of the
property typically the value of
the copper is pretty low so it's
hard to meet the relevant
monetary threshold for larceny
to become a felony and
alternately these cases just
going prosecuted which means you
know folks who maybe organizing
larger criminal criminal
enterprise are never discovered
because you actually don't come
in contact with and effectively
prosecute the lower level
offender who's actually
committing the act the other
issue that I think needs to be
brought up is that is one of
intent with respect to criminal
damage there is an intentional
actions standard for criminal
damaging the existing statutes
related to criminal damage and
this isn't this bill isn't
simply creating a problem
relative part to prosecution
it's actually resolving it
because if you go into a a house
and you Representative a bunch
of copper out of the wall you're
probably intending to damage the
drywall which may not be
intending to damage all of the
electrical outlets that are
impacted when you read that
column.
But under the criminal damage
statute you can't count the
value of all that additional
damage unless there's that
specific intent to cause that
and that means it's hard to
prove the actual value of the
criminal damage so we take this
new statute we just say that the
intends to damages essentially
online with the intent to steal
and we combine the two accidents
say if your values don't dollar
value gets to twenty five
hundred dollars you're gonna get
charged with a felony if it's
under five hundred it's a petty
misdemeanor if it's between five
hundred I think I think I I kind
of the site and and want to make
sure I get these numbers right.
if it's less than one thousand
dollars it's a petty misdemeanor
if it's a thousand dollars below
are up to twenty five hundred
it's a misdemeanor and anything
twenty five hundred dollars or
more is a felony and the reason
we have these varying levels is
because we don't want to be
unfair and how we prosecute
these cases right we don't want
to make it too easy to get to a
five hundred dollar limit to
charge somebody with a felony we
want to make sure that that that
the felony level kicks in an
appropriate dollar amount and we
feel like twenty five hundred
dollars is that is that level.
Again the criminal damages the
huge value item on this one the
that when these acts occurred
and we need some point of
deterrence under the law as a
criminal statute actually
effectively prosecute these
cases with respect to the civil
portions of the bill I can't
comment on those brand more has
been the expert on those and I
don't know if French as a
panelist or if she might just
offer public comment if you want
to be elevated to a panelists to
give quicker of the committee
would like to and unsponsored
would like to and it would into
accounts to be able to describe
those portions of the bill but
obviously would stand for
questions on the the criminal
portion as it relates to metal
theft thank you.
Okay anything further I'm.
Your team.
We as J. sentenced said we have
a brand new or and OSI in the
attendee room to pull up if
there are questions for them
that we thought to expert
witnesses was probably enough
for a committee at the end of
the day.
Okay great so I assume you have
OSI's endorsement since they are
here on your behalf.
Okay.
We'll do a whole in the audience
if you are in favor and answered
correctly and the call will be
up in just a moment.
This is for the audience and
we're not the presenters or
committee.
Here we go.
Okay
Those in attendance I have to
get close sorry we have eighteen
in favor and I in opposition of
will start with the opposition
first so any one in the audience
who wishes to speak you'll
please raise your hand if you
are in opposition.
And we have one minute for each
person.
Going to start with the those
physically in attendance and run
three seventy.
Okay thank you.
Madam chair we have one member
of the public would like to
speak on this bill.
Okay go ahead yes I'm directed
madam chair members of the
committee hi my name is parents
online with senior policy
strategist ACLU of New Mexico
the ACLU of New Mexico is a
member of the New Mexico state
coalition the Clovis is
approximately thirty communities
organizations Senator New Mexico
state coalition traditionally
doesn't support creating new
crimes and therefore cannot
support H. B. sixty nine as
mentioned earlier law
enforcement problem using law
enforcement prosecutors already
have laws on the books to
address the issues outlined in
this bill and while there's no
evidence they hello would
increase efficiency in
addressing the issue of the bill
requests for there is there are
there is tons of evidence that
suggest this as with other new
criminal laws would have expired
impact on low income and I
popped communities thank you for
your time and I heard you all
not to support bill.
Thank you okay and then we'll go
to those on the internet.
In opposition.
Make it.
I'm.
Mr.
Support levels.
Okay if you'll please lower your
hand and we'll get those in
opposition just make sure
they're if there are any.
Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee at Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender and I echo
Barron Jones of the ACLU there
are already crimes on the books
to address this behavior
specifically but with regard to
the chop shops I sincerely
question the assessment that
racketeering would be too
onerous to prove as it only
requires them to prove law
enforcement prosecutors to prove
to instances of the crime of
receiving a sort of stolen
vehicle or larceny two instances
and then the fact that they've
received proceeds that go back
into the business which is by
nature the same exact evidence
that would be required to prove
the charges created in this bill
so I'm there's also other crimes
of racketeering proved too
complicated proving accessory to
the people who were doing the
actual chopping would also work
we don't believe that there is a
need for this bill and that the
prosecution approach just needs
to be tailored to the statutes
we already have thank you.
All.
Near record.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is me out rocker on the policy
council and regional manager of
the ACLU of New Mexico based out
of Los crucis I'm here on behalf
of the still you of New Mexicos
organization and statewide
membership in strong opposition
to HB sixty nine in an already
over inflated criminal legal
system we propose creation of
new crimes it is time to move
away from relying on the
criminal legal system as the
primary means of addressing harm
in our community we need
creative and compassionate
interventions that address the
roots of our I urge this
committee to oppose this bill
thank you.
Maddie M..
Maddie EGM with all right you
need to on you.
Marianne was listed as the last
person in opposition R. I do not
know if they are able to speak.
Maddie can on mute herself so we
can hear.
Mattie can you on mute yourself
please.
Okay maybe we can come back to
her after we take those in
support.
So everyone who is in support of
this would you please raise your
hand.
Do we have some people in
support rob.
Yes the shot they can collect
yes please.
And remember we have a one
minute timer if you would watch
that thank you.
Randy trainer.
Thank you madam chairman already
trainer registered lobbyist I
have for clients support this
bill in real estate construction
and the auto industry those
being a day off the commercial
real estate development
association the apartment
association of New Mexico the
New Mexico homebuilders
Association the New Mexico
automotive dealers association
each of those industries have
struggled with this issue and
with I'm looking for some relief
these these events happen on on
their job sites it's very
damaging very expensive and very
time consuming thank you very
much.
David at Hotmail.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee David
ought to be on a registered
lobbyist for the City of
Albuquerque
I think commander Jones for
offering his individual
perspective as a law enforcement
official with respect to the
specific crime and to address
some of the concerns this is all
this bill does not seek to
target any particular
individuals or at risk
individuals are at risk
communities instead it seeks to
address the specific in targeted
criminal enterprise that has
grown in the communities
throughout New Mexico in which
folks are profiting off of.
Property crimes that are not
just valued on the items being
sold with the disruption to the
business so this is a very
targeted all of the criminal
enterprise that is is is is
thought to be around educated
and for those reasons the City
of Albuquerque urge this body to
do what it did last year in past
this bill on the Senate
unanimously thank you.
Made us.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee appearing this
evening as private service and
offer my support to house bill
sixty nine.
Your of endemic theft primarily
to fund one side or the other
the drug trade strong supports
steps taken to the Turner and
prosecute car metal theft.
Note given some of the opposing
Committee is that I will
personally be curious to see if
the person from the ACLU who
spoke today will appear as
vehemently later this week
regarding house bill sixty eight
including section two.
If not I'll find that
particularly telling regarding
the honesty of the position of
the SLU on the creation of crops
thank you.
Steven and I am.
Madam chair of my name is Steve
and I CEO of the New Mexico
association of realtors copper
theft has been an issue for
years and the real estate
industry and we stand in support
of house bill sixty nine.
Sarah zero.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Sarah fitz Gerald and senior
vice president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
and we stand in strong support
of house bill sixty nine.
We believe in all the above
approach is necessary to
overcome the serious problem
auto theft in New Mexico
especially in Albuquerque we
need a license plate readers to
identify stolen cars as they go
through intersections we need
detectives dedicated to
investigating these crimes we
need our justice system to deal
strictly with those who commit
auto theft and we should
absolutely punish those who
operate automobile chop shops.
I'm researching Bernalillo
county found that of those who
were arrested for auto theft
over recent seven year period
nearly one third of been
arrested ten or more times
during that same period usually
for other types of crime other
than auto theft it's astounding
we have to crack down on chop
shops because they're just one
important piece of the whole
auto theft operation so we are
support thank you.
Erik Scott.
Hi chair of madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is there Scott I'm a pro law
enforcement officer myself and a
concerned citizen I believe that
this law should be put into
place as of I testified last
year in support of this law and
many other laws that do need to
target certain crimes that are
rampantly out of control in our
community I have physically
heard and seen from my family
and friends of robberies and of
lost.
Property that has heavily
affected them because they have
no money to replace what is lost
and once it's gone it's gone and
these people have been were
operating with impunity in our
community especially here in
Albuquerque New because of the
officers not having enough
through all the way up to the
laws not being enforced so I
would ask that this be passed
and enforced thank you.
Meredith making.
Madam chair members of the
committee on their vacation
thank public policy chair for
all.
Working for stations University
women are we are celebrating our
hundred forty will for the first
reason is here we will long
working for freedom from
violence and your violence in
homes schools workplaces and
communities and mission to all
of the operator public safety
measures we will that.
Yes
R. the public for general.
What are some of the guns off
the during not allow the metal.
Any part of.
Topshop Walter.
Gun violence are we really
appreciate the sponsor.
Working on that's the experts
are working on it
Organization for what we're
all awful thank you.
Carlos the sarabande.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee
this is Carlos lose Cerro but
the Public Service Company New
Mexico.
Copper theft is an issue that
affects communities and
businesses all over the state in
many cases of that can be done
quickly and done under the cloak
of night can go often unseen
Representative Dan instances
where property damage from
copper that has exceeded over a
hundred fifty thousand hundred
fifty thousand dollars with our
customers PNM is committed and
continues to collaborate with
local police organizations that
such as that Albuquerque police
department.
Other utilities in regulation
licensees Department of the
state to help protect our
businesses communities and
customers stricter stricter
penalties can only help to fight
criminal out damage of property
due to metal theft and PNM is in
support of house bill sixty nine
thank you.
Daymon Martinez.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Damon
Martinez on the senior policy
adviser the Albuquerque police
department along with commander
Jones the Albuquerque police
department strongly endorses
this bill and asked that you
pass it today
this last summer more Keller
convene the metro crime
initiative M. C. I. along with
other low.
In law enforcement partners and
community members and came out
with forty common sense
proposals this chop chop was one
of those forty common sense
proposals can make a difference
and so we ask you to please
consider that also as a past
prosecutor and a person who
actually ran a prosecution
office
the racketeering type of
investigation of prosecution is
done very rarely because of the
resources that are needed to do
it so this is a common sense
solution for a need that's out
there right now thank you.
That was the final public
comment madam chair.
I'm I'm thank you very much and
thank you participants is there
anything you'd like to add
before we go to the committee.
No madam chair we stand for
questions thank you
Are there any questions by the
committee.
Okay seeing none
I get to have
Who are you pointing to
Representative Lord it's
Representative Romero was
pointing that way because of
where she should.
Sorry.
Vice chair your your hand is
really hard to see over the
implement.
The days and I was your fault
your right to say that we were I
was a bit out of order you were
quick apologies thank you madam
chair
I just had a question on
the sort of level of crime that
we're I I was looking through
some of the analyses and I
couldn't find you know we know
that.
Car theft is basically academic
in Albuquerque and I've you know
and and not and many of our
urban areas
And so I'm just curious what
percentage of car theft and they
come in all sorts of shapes and
forms end up in a chop shop
particularly I'm curious if
there is any sort of analysis as
far as identifying when we have
been able to look at where
chop shops exist in and how
they've continued to perpetuate
but to questions I would say one
is what percentage and to our do
we know of certain locations in
the state that they are in
particularly high.
Yeah hi percentage as any in
existence chop shops
particularly.
Thank you madam chair I'm gonna
do this for two the and
representative I'm going to
defer to commander Johns and if
he has an answer to that
interesting question.
Yes madam chair Representative
Romero thank you for that
question
so.
It's a bit difficult to answer
because of the fact since we
don't have a chop shop bill
currently we don't have a
statute currently that's not
something that we track you this
actually be
ask us tracking something that
we can't charge we we have been
focused on tracking.
Rest of offenses if you will
that's recoveries what I can
tell you experience however is
that
We have seen a trend of.
More and more vehicles or I
should say this way less and
less vehicles being recovered
within the city limits of
Albuquerque which indicates that
those vehicles are being
transported out of the state and
I can also tell you or at least
out of out of the Albuquerque
area I can also tell you that we
have seen an increase in
vents which stolen vehicles
altered vehicles ones that have
gone to a chop shop and they've
had their identity change and so
we see that those are recovered
by neighboring states and we
also see that those have been
poised sometimes to go outside
of the country and I can tell
you an experience that that that
number has gone up over time.
So so madam chair we don't so
dependent short I'm hearing that
we don't have an exact
understanding of where these top
shops may exist themselves but
that they they're sort of we
moving.
Essentially wait from New Mexico
it to other places we just don't
know enough in the way that
we're currently taking in data
because those crimes don't
exist.
Madam chair representative
Romero just to clarify we do
have we do we have identified
several locations that would be
operating a chop shop as it is
identified in this proposed bill
but having that particular
information that we've done a
statistical analysis on I can
tell you through my experience
and remember in and and others
that I've worked with over the
years I can I can show you
several locations in the city
and outside of the city but
giving you a statistical
analysis percentage locations
because that hasn't been on the
books it's not something that
would capture but absolutely I
can venture to say at least for
the Albuquerque police
department and my knowledge with
with outside agencies that we
work with they definitely can
tell you exactly where these
locations are because it's not
on the books is not something
generally that will that will
happen in our system.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that response so I'm curious
to you know when it comes to
what we were hearing about sort
of stacking up all of the
different crimes together and
creating this ability to
identify this crime as the
Topshop crime
is that is there a difference
can you clarify the difference
about bringing those multiple
charges from different locations
and why identifying the one
location would be how how this
sort of works in in what helps
you do your job.
Madam chair thank you Mander.
Madam chair representative
Romero.
You find a little bit more
clarification on exactly what
you're asking.
So I I understand that we have
many madam chair commander we
have you know crimes on the
books that describe the ability
to recover stolen material
stolen vehicles stolen property
generally so how does this sort
of clarify being able to pull
that together in a different way
that allows us to.
A prevent this crime from
happening in future and also
prosecute those who are part of
this type of crime.
Madam chair representative I'm.
I think your question pertains
more to the second section of
the bill
the larceny and criminal damage
to tempted theft and theft of
regulated medals I'm not sure
but do I understand that
correctly.
Yeah well I'm I'm not sure where
in the bill I'm I'm just trying
to follow how we currently
prosecute crime we're we're
talking about stolen goods
stolen materials stolen vehicles
and how does having a chop shop
essentially clarify.
You know the ability to both
prevent crimes like this from
happening and to to be able to
prosecute in the way that
we're saying you we ran a chop
shop and that's a new crime that
is illegal just how does that
sort of fit versus what we
currently do which is sort of
stock all these crimes together
and then you know basically
probably tell a judge this is
the crime of hosting a chop shop
with how does this sort of
change that from what you're
suggesting today.
Madam chair and representative
commander John can take it a
stab at the Topshop part but
then I'm gonna ask Mr weeks to
talk about the larceny and
criminal damage.
and how those are integrally
intertwined here.
Madam chair representative route
I think I'm tracking on on the
question that you have
pertaining to this that in a
chop shop so there's a couple of
things one I guess maybe an easy
way to explain it is when we're
talking about illicit narcotics
someone it's in possession of of
illicit narcotics versus the one
that's trafficking the narcotics
so the chop shop bill would
would be closer aligned to a
trafficking charge for narcotics
verses them your possession so
currently when I talk about
years of after those individuals
and the tears of that we have
those who are in possession of
stolen vehicles those who have
transferred to receive the
stolen vehicle and we don't have
an adequate way to go after the
criminal enterprise who are
altering those vehicles chopping
them up changing the identity
those vehicles for a profit
those individuals who were
making a lot of money based on
the fact of of the citizens
property so you definitely have
crimes on the books to address
those who have taken and
committed the crime of this
staff but we don't have Topshop
would would definitely go a long
way in fixing the fact that we
don't have a crime on the books
that addresses those for
facilitating the profit in the
criminal enterprise of
trafficking stolen vehicles for
lack.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that clarification and for
it sort of how it ties together
and that leads me to my next
question and this is just
something I under our analyses
that it's those that are
operating maintaining or
controlling these types of
enterprises how does how does it
treat perhaps like the person
who owns something like this who
owns the enterprise to runs it
versus those that may work for
an up and and I shop like this
that may not know that it there
it's an illegal operation being
that it is car parts and things
I'm just curious do we treat
that any differently under the
statute and I know that.
Are you know analysis shows that
that's confusing in the way that
it's listed as a crime can you
just clarify that for me.
Madam chair representative
Romero thank you yes there's I
think probably the experts that
I would look to either be Damon
Martinez who's has vast
experience new agency or Devin
Chapman from OSI
get their prosecution
perspective I think that that's
probably a better perspective
when we're talking about
charging numbers is a law
enforcement perspective.
Thank you madam chair would it
be possible to bring in Mr
Chapman of OSI to address.
The question and Representative
Romero.
Yes probably do that.
You madam chair and thank you
Representative zero it's it's
commander Jones is As indicated
there.
There are.
A complications with charging
especially and I I apologize got
a little sidetracked with some
of the other concerns been
raised which with regard
especially with regards to the
racketeering charges some of the
other charges and is an allergy
the commander Jones use is
pretty good about trafficking
we're talking about the the
statute that would penalize
individuals who are doing the
organized fast.
And dismantling and and resale
of stolen vehicles which the
what it currently does not cover
the some of the critics are
right point out that there are
some overlaps with the
racketeering charge as currently
written but there are some
problems with its scope I'm not
only those mentioned by Mr
Martinez from the complication
of those cases but there are
situations that we have seen
just anecdotally that would not
be covered by
to buy the current racketeering
statutes one for instance I can
speak other magic commander
Jones probably recall this was
the first case you got this this
ball in the auto sector issue to
begin with here in Sydney Melker
I was a solo individual that was
suspected to be responsible for
up to three hundred staffs
dismantling and eventual resale
of those stolen stolen vehicles
and their component parts and he
was the sole Act.
and as an individual you would
not have been subject to the
racketeering statute would not
have been subject to excess
recharge would not have been
subject to needs conspiracy
charges and would only be we've
only been able to go after him
same as we would any other autos
auto cease here in the state
now granted there may have been
additional charges if we could
have tied him to all of those
vehicles but obviously a
significant number of them had
already disappeared into the
ether as we would not have been
able to hold him responsible for
the scope of his activities
so in that particular respect
this is this is the whole we're
trying to plug
and and address with these
particular cases and need the
pernicious problem we have with
our staff throughout this entire
state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
I appreciate that and I you know
I think the clarification
although I don't have any up any
suggested language you know my
concern it just overall I've I I
support this bill as far as just
how to it's being targeted this
crime and and being able to you
know utilized essentially the
tools that we have to target
this specific
issue that we have I would look
forward to the statistics that
will be available once we have
you know are able to prosecute
understand what what's going on
with this type of enterprise my
concern is you know those who
get caught in the fray for
something like this an operation
that might you know be going
down like this and have no
understanding that they're part
of a criminal enterprise if that
should be the case I'm always
reluctant to create new crimes
on the books you know it rather
than look at some of the
criminal justice reform
opportunities we have I
understand this is an epidemic
in our urban areas in particular
Albuquerque which brings you to
my next and final question do is
there a sort of is this
mimicking what is currently
happening in Albuquerque as far
as you know local crime efforts
are we looking at this is the
statewide issue and how does
that help both enforcement of
this law and basically upending
any and preventing this from
happening in the future.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I'm here getting
right at the heart of it there
when you ask how why is this a
statewide issue because it is an
both pieces of this bill both
aspects of the property that in
the the top the webshop in
middle that are happening all
across the state and the chop
shop the driving out of that is
driving up our insurance rates
across the state so we have to
address it is a state the metal
theft issue is happening it is
streetlights it has been
commuter trains it is
construction sites and real
estate commercial real estate
and businesses all across the
state have been impacted by
this.
Which is why we need to address
that with the statutes and I
hope I hope that answers your
question.
Thank you madam chair thank here
Representative Rowe I yeah I'm
and to just the prevention side
if if there is an understanding
about how this prevents us from
moving forward and
yeah I know that that's possibly
part of the statistical analysis
moving forward but if you do
have a at prevention side of
making sure this crime ceases to
exist I would love to hear it
too.
engines did you have something
else to add.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Romero just to
tell you as far as statistics go
currently Mexico New Mexico
it's.
Ranks number ten nationwide for
facts which is also why this is
an imperative that this is a
statewide initiative because as
a state we're ranking in the top
ten in the country for drugs
that.
And then just build on that for
the metal that comes madam madam
chair members the committee
Representative Romero I would
say for mental that.
Certainly being able to actually
prosecute these cases will have
a prevented impact and by being
able to prosecute the offender
hopefully get the large criminal
enterprises beyond that.
The civil portions of the bill
have some additional
requirements there being placed
upon the recyclers in terms of
them purchasing regulated
material so that is a
preventative measure because
it's trying to catch on the on
that that that side of the coin
the prevention of actually
purchasing regulated material
and if you one knowingly
purchased stolen regulated
material at least gives
investigators and information
about the individual who sold
you the material and so my
answers on the out from tier
itself so that is absolutely
prevented component.
Thank you for that thank you I
don't have any other questions
thank you madam chair.
I keep forgetting thank you
madam vice chair next to have
Representative Pettigrew.
And if we can keep the questions
and the answers pretty concise
because we are already going on
for hours today thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill back.
I don't really have any
questions I have a couple
comments or as the bill moves
forward.
Maybe important for our.
Bill sponsors to.
Center and and be for.
In one of the analysis will I
read the Office of the Attorney
General points out to portions
of the bill that some clear.
In section one the talks about
the unit of the prosecution.
So in reviewing.
Where you.
In reviewing where you go I
think you're next office
Judiciary some relatively
confident there's gonna be a
group of attorneys to start
asking some questions about that
and then the second part is
instruction one well with with
the phraseology the phrase in
there reason to believe.
Thank the AOC where it sees that
is being to make a may prove
insufficient court.
They will also notice that.
Motor vehicle components section
one paragraph C. is not defined
in may prove.
To be an issue for for you well
enforced I'm.
This legislation I supported the
last year.
I'm reading something different
in the analysis than the one I
read last year you that that are
just completely rested which is
possible so.
What the legislation like we're
we're trying to do we have this
is the issue all over the state
commissioner my County as well
and the.
But I am not a fan of.
Legislation that we have to fix
later I think we have too many
of those examples already and so
I would ask that as you go to
Judiciary you look at those very
specific areas and prepare for
that.
However you see fit and.
I wish you the best love thank
you madam chair.
Thank you thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative
you did cover Representative
Pettigrew some of my concerns
and things that I have spoken to
the sponsor about
do you plan to make these
changes are haven't and it's to
them before you go to the
judiciary.
Madam chair regarding the first
page language
Knows or has reason to believe
we are in conversation with
the Albuquerque police force
with OSI with with others it may
change to who knows or has
reason to know which mirrors
others statutes and is an under
is that commonly used standard
or it may be deleted but we're
gonna wait until the
stakeholders come to consensus
between now and Judiciary and
make sure that happens the
language on page two around
component will likely be struck
it's a left over from a previous
version of the bill that had a
long definition section which is
gone I'm a motor vehicle and a
vehicle are defined in the motor
vehicle code so we'll stick with
the.
And the last question was about
yeah an intended unit a
prosecution.
We're investigate that but that
is fairly clear also in line
single identified Topshop
operation is a unit of
prosecution one charge would be
the entire identical time span
of that operate nation that's
use already in criminal
enterprise operations so I'm not
sure what they were after.
In your analysis but will follow
through and take care of those
things before Judiciary.
Okay thank you and
our representatives also on page
two unlawfully obtained
means obtained by that fraud or
deceit with or obtain without
the permission of the owner
what if the owner is complicit
you know with their vehicle
you know looking like it's being
stolen.
Madam chair that's an
unanticipated question for me a
commander Joan to want to tackle
that.
You know off the top madam chair
Representative Figueroa thanks
for the question off the cuff I
would say that that would
definitely if we find that the
owner of the vehicle is
complicit then the individual
who who has that vehicle if they
wouldn't no matter or they would
never obtain that vehicle on
lots of so that would negate the
criminal of unlawfully obtained
for them if we're able to prove
that that individuals complicit
for some sort of insurance fraud
purposes I know that
Mr Chapman has dealt with these
situations in the past and I
think that we have.
The station ways to handle those
situations we go into a
different crime categories of
fraud or forgery in that
situation but this one would be
narrowly focused on a victim
willing to prosecute with the
statement that we're able to
that we can take and ensure with
with you course that we're
dealing with someone who's not
complicit in the crime itself
and and some of that goes to a.
Pretty much a prosecution
statement that we obtained here
are that ciation to ensure that
they meet that threshold of
actually being a victim.
Okay thank you for that answer
and also when you're having the
double proof on the second hand
metal dealer to have the
rightful owner had or has
permission from the rightful
owner and that the material was
other lot otherwise lawfully
obtained does that make it much
harder for our recycle
Recyclers I should just say to
be able to have to have that
double proof on everything that
they per chair of the recyclers
were part of the stakeholder
group that sat down and came to
this compromised and they
thought it was doable and
reasonable.
Yeah madam madam chair members
committee Representative Ferrary
at that is absolutely accurate
they think it's doable I
represent them it is an
additional that the have to
comply with but it is something
that they agreed to and think
that they can do.
Right I'm glad to have that
reassurance thank you and I
don't see anything any other
questions is there anything else
you'd like to stay to close.
No madam chair thank you for
your time this was a thorough
discussion and gives us a lot of
feedback moving forward this is
an essential issue for New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you what's the will of the
committee.
I move it to pass madam chair.
Thank you.
Okay it has been moved and
seconded for do passed we take
roll call please.
Representative Lord.
Sorry I was over there yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Vice chairman yes.
Madam chair for our yes.
I hear you have a do pass madam
chair.
Thank you and
To our sponsors and all of your
a great experts you have a do
pass and I think that what was
five zero thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay so
Thank you all for and staying
and sticking with us and
For Thursday we have.
I bills were going to try and
get through so if we can
Yes breaking and sizes we can we
will have all the public comment
also I'm also and I was just
reading the word awesome so at
anyway house bill seventy one
seventy nine eighty one ninety
six and eighty four we will
trying here all of those on
Thursday and also if our
committee members can keep in
mind that we might need to meet
Saturday please reserve at ten
o'clock and will be able to let
you know soon whether that looks
like we need to do that is one
of the first committees at a lot
of bills need to go to so thank
you all and we'll see you
Thursday.
