Members will cost close more
important.
Please rise for today's in the
location offered to us by the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative bash.
Right.
Okay we thank you for our
families we are especially
thankful today for the
sacrifices that they have made
that we might serve the people
of the state of New Mexico.
We thank you for our
constituents we pray that we may
serve them well.
We thank you for our friends and
colleagues in this house.
And though we may disagree may
we do our work without strife or
Rinker.
We thank you for all the good
gifts that you have given us.
And prayed that we might do our
work to your honor and glory in
your name we pray amen.
Thank you gentle lady with the
gentleman from Santa
Representative Hernandez please
leave us in the pledge of
allegiance.
And with the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative that
at us please listen saluting
Mexico's flag.
Z. a symbol of perfect
friendship among United
cultures.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker good afternoon Mister
speaker members of the house Mr
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
No objection it is so ordered.
The gentle lady from catch and
score of once you have
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to to make an
announcement that we talk about
trusting the process we talk
about integrity.
We talk about the committee
experience and to trust in that
process as a rancher farmer.
woman on a ranch that is capping
out two hundred head heifers as
we speak not personally but.
A lot of people with good hard
working hands.
Really good evening that
cellphone steady if it was you
you're doing at the same time
generally.
Yeah well thank you Mr speaker
I respectfully ask that Senate
bill thirty two be referred to
that committee thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you generating are there
other assets.
Generated from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much.
Along those same lines I too am
asking that Senate bill thirty
to be sent to the house
agricultural committee Mr
speaker the reason being.
This bill directly affects
farmers ranchers and everybody
living out in the rural areas
this is a means of being able to
protect.
And care for our livestock and
wildlife at the state of New
Mexico Mr speaker we are asking
begin that Senate bill thirty to
be sent to the house ag
committee thank you very much
thank you gentle lady as members
know we are now into the phase
where every bill is coming to
the house from the Senate is
getting a single referral the
twenty sixteen jurisdiction over
matters of wildlife was moved
from what was formally
agriculture water and wildlife
Committee to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee.
Where for many many many years
all matters related to wildlife
big game parks and public lands
and wildlife were heard in that
committee yes that was the
reason for sending their I'm
sure it will have a good eight
zero hearing that committee.
And if it passes will have a
good debate on the floor as well
but that's the that's the reason
gentle lady she's I'm sure folks
is seen.
Hi everybody will they came in
yesterday and the day before I
believe from the Senate got a
single referral they're not
doing that for House Bills and
so I sent a bill to the
committee with jurisdiction over
wildlife we're which is been the
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee since twenty
seventeen thank you.
Are there other announcements
the gentleman from Colfax curry
party Quaid Roosevelt San Miguel
and you.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
level a little small rights at
the northeastern New Mexico
Senate bill thirty two affect me
and each and every one of my
neighbors I truly know of no one
in the energy business that will
be affected as much.
Or just constantly because it
will affect the agricultural
community and I respectfully ask
that you consider sending it to
Ag and water thank you Sir.
Thank you John are there other
announcements.
He gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I just want to say
how thrilled I am that during
this women's history month we
have thirty six women and thirty
four wonderful bet as well but
we have thirty six women are
leading the way an incredible
legislation in our house of
representatives so just a salute
to all the hard work that but
all the women in here thank you
Mr speaker thank you generally
the other gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative
Stapleton Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business messages.
Hearing a judge's order Cllr to
read message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
eleven.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty.
Senate bill eighty two as
amended without emergency clause
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
twenty seven as amended Senate
bill two eighty one.
Senate bill three fifteen as
amended Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
zero four and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
That we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objections order members we have
on the speakers table memorial
in memory for Representative
plea Pattison.
I understand his services are
tomorrow and others are Crowder
is requested that we take care
of that memorial today there's
been an agreement to do all of
the pending memorials on a
consent vote as we done I
believe twice before the session
in order to do that I need to
remove a few the Morial's also
the temper calendar the speakers
table so we can get a new
concurrence calendar published
to take action on that here a
little bit so I am removing
house memorial is twenty eight
twenty nine thirty from the
speakers table placing them on
the consent calendar as well
House memorial twenty removing
the temperate calendar placed on
the consent calendar hearing
objection it is so ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee report.
Hearing objection disordered
clerk read.
Mr speaker your state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee Toomas been referred
house bill two ninety has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it do
not passed but that house state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to ninety two passed
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Reduction.
We are honored option of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill two ninety a
favorable committee for a state
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to ninety.
All those in favor please
signify by saying hi of.
I agree with the point of that.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee to miss been
referred Senate bill twenty nine
has had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that I do passed respectfully
submitted this Martinez chair.
Mr speaker I move adoption of
the committee report unanimous
consent of the committee
pursuant to get our act on a
single vote reflection the
journals of their act one
individually hearing objections
order clerk to read.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate health
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
nine do pass.
Senate bill ninety nine as
amended to pass.
Senate Bill to eighteen as
amended do passed respectfully
submitted Javier Mart√≠nez chair.
The committee reports Mr speaker
we are adoption favorable
committee for the Senate bill
twenty nine a favorable
committee for Onsted Dick
substitute for specs up to
percent of bill forty nine
Senate bill ninety nine as
amended in Senate bill two teams
and it also fairly signify by
saying aye.
I.
This was nay committee point
reductive.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred Senate bill one forty
four as amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that I do passed
as amended respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair.
Unanimous consent of the person
together act fund singleton
reflected in the journal so they
rectified individually hearing
objections work clergy.
Senate bill one eighty seven do
passed.
Senate bill three forty one to
pass respectfully submitted
Patricia A. Lundstrom chair.
Move adoption Mr speaker your
induction favorable Canadian
forces at the one forty four
submitted Senate bill one eighty
seven a Senate bill three forty
one all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was named reports are not.
Mr speaker you're willing and
grossing Committee too is been
referred house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five as
amended has had it under
consideration reports the same
has been duly enrolled in gross
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted Brittney
Barreras chair.
Mr speaker we please move
adoption.
We are on and option of a
favorable committee for a house
taxation revenue Committee cestu
for House with two fifty five as
amended all the favor please
signify by saying aye.
I was nay.
For his doctor.
The record reflect that all
actually there Sir let's record
reflect that the duly enrolled
in a gross copy of house
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty five as amended has been
signed by the officers of the
house in open session.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
You Mr speaker I move that we go
to the next order of business
introduction of legislation no
objections were.
to read.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
eleven and after relating to the
environment and acting the clean
fuel standard act providing for
the establishment of a clean
fuel standard for transportation
fuels directing the
environmental improvement board
to promulgate rules to implement
the clean fuel standard act
implementing the assessment of
an annual registration fee
creating the clean fuel standard
fund making appropriation Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill eleven.
Senate finance committee says
two percent of eleven having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty an act relating to race
prohibiting the imposition of
discipline discrimination or
despair she meant in schools
based on the here or cultural or
religious parents headdresses of
a student defining defining
terms in the public school Code
and the Human Rights Act Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill eighty.
Senate Judiciary Committee
system Senate bill eighty having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Education
Committee.
Senate bill eighty two as
amended introduced by Senator
Steinborn and act relating to
radioactive materials amending
the duties and composition of
the radioactive waste
consultation task force
prescribing responsibilities
regarding private disposal
facilities making technical
changes declaring an emergency
Senate bill eighty two as
amended.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
twenty seven as amended and act
relating to child welfare and
acting the family representation
and advocacy act creating the
office of Family representation
and advocacy establishing duties
of the director creating the
family representation and happy
advocacy oversight commission
Senate Judiciary Committee sub
two percent of bill one twenty
seven as amended Senate
Judiciary Committee sensitive
Senate bill one twenty seven is
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senator eighty two is amended
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee.
Senate bill two eighty one
introduced by senator.
On.
By Senator Neville.
An act relating to economic
development providing for
contract renegotiations for
certain businesses adversely
affected by the public health
order Senate bill two eighty
one.
Senate bill two eighty one
having been read twice by title
is referred to the commerce and
economic development committee.
Senate bill three fifteen as
amended introduced by senator
Munoz.
And act relating to public
employee retirement including
certain state police division
officers under the state push
police member correctional
officer member and probation and
parole officer member coverage
plans one providing for an
election pertaining to the
adoption of the state police
member correctional officer
member and probation and parole
officer member coverage plan one
providing for the adjustment of
certain service credit earned
prior to the adoption of the
state police member correctional
officer member information
parole officer member coverage
plan one making appropriations
Senate bill three fifteen as
amended.
Senator three fifteen is amended
having been read twice by title
is referred to the labor
veterans and military affairs
committee.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
zero four and after leading to
motor vehicles creating a
special registration plate for
supporters of make a wish New
Mexico making an appropriation
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
oh four.
Senate finance committee says
two percent of bill for for
having been read twice by title
is referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
House memorial thirty one.
Introduced by Representative
Johnson a memorial declaring
March fifteenth twenty twenty
one New Mexico makes a day in
the house of representatives
House memorial thirty one.
This morning thirty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections order
members are for got to move to
memorials under the consent
calendar their items twenty nine
and thirty on the third reading
calendar house memorial twenty
three house memorial twenty
four.
Removed the consent calendar.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
consent.
No objections order remembers
this is gonna be our consent.
Calendar.
The members.
And we think this is gonna be
House memorials twenty twenty
three twenty four twenty eight
twenty nine and thirty.
We are on.
Final passage of house memorial
twenty twenty three twenty four
twenty eight twenty nine and
thirty the vote is now open.
Was about to close.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Maestas.
Yes Representative my S. of both
yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Sarinana votes
yes Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton both
yes Representative yes yes.
Those are closer to sixty five
in the affirmative zero negative
house memorial twenty twenty
three twenty four twenty eight
twenty nine thirty have duly
passed the house.
Gentle lady from there and Leo.
We go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation hearing no objection
it is so ordered.
to read.
How straight resolution fourteen
introduced by Representative
Baldonado.
Thank senator Sanchez in all
three.
And Senator Baca.
A joint resolution authorizing
the General Services Department
to grant easements for a road
over seven parcels of land
consisting of thirty two point
two zero seven six acres of land
more or less to the village of
Los Lunas for the use of an East
West traffic relief quarter and
interchange with interstate
twenty five how straight
resolution fourteen.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation no
objections so ordered we're
gonna start item fourteen
gentleman from the Canada Tero
Representative cook are you
ready on house bill one seventy
seven I'm ready Mr speaker.
The record reflect on to
necessary replacing agriculture
water resources committee
substitute for house bill one
seventy seven on final passage
is been taken.
Gentleman to explain the bill
and provide free samples.
Mr speaker thank you house bill
one three seven it it's S. R..
Expand economic freedom by
making it easier for people to
sell homemade foods.
Thirty nine states now allow the
sale of homemade foods but New
Mexico has one of the most
restrictive and complicated laws
in the nation this bill would
fix that and bring our law up to
date and it would help many
people support themselves their
families farms Mr speaker I'd
like to think Representative
Matthews who.
Was not originally a co sponsor
on this but she saw it being
committee where was tabled and
activity early on.
And she
like what what the bill did and
basically signed up as a co
sponsor and has done all the
heavy lifting to get this far so
if it's okay with the speaker
like to hand it off to
Representative Matthews.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Matthews.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from Otero and Lincoln
County here.
I'm Mr speaker I would I would
just adds a bit to the
description of the bill
I think one of the most
important things is it allows
for shelf stable homemade goods
like cookies that meet the
standards of the New Mexico
environment department for food
safety to be so throughout the
state.
And.
As Representative Cook mentioned
it yet that develops and
encourages a cottage industry
for bakers and cooks but it but
it also means that we all as
consumers have an opportunity to
enjoy and by
and support our neighbors but in
the process enjoy some what are
going to be just incredibly good
out wonderful homemade foods.
And gives is an alternative to
definitively finding grocery
stores as and made in into
factories and so forth but often
like Cheetos don't really find
as much joy and pleasure
and dent instead will have a
chance for the cookies and cakes
in the other wonderful foods and
with that percent for questions.
Thank you there is debate the
gentle lady from Chavis
Representative you sell.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
or the gentleman yield please.
Madam speaker I'm sorry Mr
speaker Representative
gentlelady we.
Mr speaker gentle lady we heard
this bill and how sick there was
one concern that the New Mexico
environment department had and
the bill was amended and Mr
speaker in light of everything
that has happened this past year
this gives those particular
families the opportunity to may
be.
Do something to help their
income a little bit Mr speaker
gentle lady for not only talking
about farmers markets where they
can sell their show for it shelf
stable foods such as jams
jellies.
Baked goods whatever the case
may be but it also opens up the
door especially in the
Albuquerque area if we're.
As a lot of these people were
not able to participate is that
correct Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is correct Albuquerque has a
total ban on the sale of home
made food and this will change
that.
And Mister speaker it's it's
very important for everybody to
understand that this is.
Shelf stable food Mr speaker
gentle lady we have a lot of
budding cooks out there that
have to follow all the
guidelines that are set forth by
the environment department they
have to go through a food safety
training course they have two of
they're packaged foods they have
to have their name their address
of up front for their license
number is all of that and Mister
speaker I am just very
encouraged by this because the
entrepreneurship of our citizens
of the state of New Mexico to be
able to do a little extra
especially in light of what is
happened this past year with all
of our businesses being shut
down and Mr speaker gentle lady
I think that we need to back
this to be able to let those
families get ahead a little bit
Mr speaker gentle lady gentleman
from Lincoln thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
This for the debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Stapleton.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
with the gentle lady from
Bernalillo and the gentleman
from Lincoln please feel.
Mr speaker and gentle lady at we
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady can you please tell me what
is the definition of homemade
food in the bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady at the
definition.
Is and.
On page two of the bill lines
nine through thirteen
And it's food is cooked at home
and packaged.
In that process is private farm
rancher residents
and then as you go down that
provision of for example it
makes clear that it's only a
food that is not timing
temperature controlled other and
that means that the food is not
doesn't require refrigeration.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady cookies baked goods Max so
much
mass potatoes and beef and
chicken and fish not that kind
of food.
Mr at Mr speaker at gentle lady
that is correct.
Those bakery goods normally do
not require Mr speaker that
environmental Department
approval.
Does that normally they would
not require that would they
require that.
Some in Smith's grocery store
all of the bakery goods that is
so of the year that my question
is does that normally require
environmental approval on that
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady
those are not homemade items
there are different rules that
replied that applied to the food
that's sold in grocery stores
and restaurants.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
where would these.
Thank goodness B. so that
anywhere.
Without conditions of any
guidelines Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady on page
three of the bill
it list of places where this
food can be sold
is lines nineteen through twenty
two are they can what what what
happens now that the state law
now except in Bernalillo county
except in Albuquerque is
homemade foods can be so at a
farmer's market if the farmers
market approved and can be sold
at roadside stands but the same
folk food that you're selling at
a roadside stand you can't sell
to your neighbor.
And so what this bill does is it
makes it possible for the seller
to sell directly to consumers
and all of the sales are with
the in New Mexico
and if they need the approval of
the farmers market they can sell
to farmers markets they can sell
festivals on the internet in
trough state sales again
roadside stands at their home
they can do pick up or delivery
they can do mail so it really
opens it up so that these foods
become much more available and
much easier and and have a much
broader market that they can
reach.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo
You mentioned goods and cookies.
So what.
Based on your bill would.
Actually no that they can't go
out and make.
This really does and so
all of the items that is.
Goes.
Items that will be sold that is
not considered bagels.
I know that jams and pickles
that kind of stuff can be sold
right that's made up of home Mr
speaker and gentle lady yes in
the anything that is would not
time and temperature
Any anything that that.
Additional stable.
So the stores in the restaurants
they have to have a Mr speaker
they have to have a shelf life.
I also.
A certain date that a certain
time.
These today and
to settle tomorrow Mr speaker.
Hi I am.
Saturday so I can bring them
back and wanted to say is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady up the if
if you don't mind let me check
with my experts for a second
about want to be sure I answer
your question correctly and the
expert is Eric the right to is a
an attorney and is an expert on
homemade said laws so if you
give me just a moment please.
The only requirements are
essentially the same.
And.
They more someone to someone
could put an expiration date on
there but
The key thing is that the
expiration dates don't relate to
safety they only relate to the
good taste of the food the
quality of the food and so
in general
Someone's selling homemade food
part of the I think the allure
of the food is that
is fresh and if the bank the
bank items are are pretty fresh
and I kind of assumed that if
somebody is making copies and
selling I'm weeks and months
late after their maybe they're
probably not going to be very
successful at this.
Speaker gentle lady thank you
for your responses.
Next to the gentle lady from
where we have Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Does the gentle lady from
Bernalillo the job.
Mr speaker that gentle lady we I
think we yield.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
gentle lady I too was on the
agriculture and water committee
when this bill was first heard
and I want to commend both of
the Sanchez for the work that
you did on this when we first
heard the bill on its first
iteration there were several
problems with it was concerning
from a regulatory perspective in
the health and safety
perspective and the
bipartisanship of both you
Representative Cook coming
together to work on the bills
bring a substitute back that
fixed all the concerns were
identified and then came up with
a really great bills that helps
economic development during the
tough times Mexico I was really
encouraging to witness and I
just want to commend you both
for that work that was a perfect
example of how our committee
process in our vetting process
works and I just hope to see
more of in the future thank you
very much Mr speaker.
Here is for the debate the
gentleman from Rio Arriba
Sandoval and San Juan
Representative Lente.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county and the gentleman from
making counties yield.
Mr speaker adjustment we yield.
Thank you of gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady really just
want to echo the comments and
sentiments by the our previous
speaker from Bernalillo county
really proud of of how this bill
to utilized and I know that
there were some issues that were
reverted first time in the
committee but with the guidance
leadership in a true bipartisan
way see here the for today
because a lot of great joy in
really truly inspired by the
bipartisan support and and and
work that you both this so thank
you very much Mr speaker thank
you very much gentle lady and
and gentleman.
Thank you.
Thank you our.
Si no further debate and I said
if I may just ask one question
R. the gentleman from the
committee still with this thank
you Mr speaker.
The
gentleman with this a lot of the
sale of the cupcakes.
I'm sorry did you say cupcakes
yes.
Yes Mr speaker.
General regular kids.
Yes these.
Yes Sir Is.
I'm sorry highs.
I don't know the pies treating
their.
With the poppers.
Thank you my friends.
I don't know the publisher duty
their donuts.
I think donuts would count yeah
being a.
I don't know about that how to
read I'm sorry however.
Yeah I think so Sara yes
snickerdoodles.
I don't remember what a
snickerdoodle this.
Probably not they're close.
For sure.
One of the close.
mist
Gentleman close okay thank you
Mr speaker and again I just like
to thank my co sponsor
Representative Matthews who
really stepped up and saw the
value in this bill and
basically took over developed
all that
Bipartisanship that was
discussed during the debates
thank you to her the key to the
members of the committees that
sign and and I would ask for
your vote to date and Mr speaker
now I would I would now move
that house bill I'm sorry that.
House thank you.
Committee substitute for House
Bill once in the Senate do not
pass.
Passage of agriculture water
resources committee substitute
for house bill one seventy seven
the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Scott.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative close by a vote
of sixty three in the
affirmative one in the negative
house agriculture water
resources committee substitute
grant the one seventy seven has
passed the house.
Next we'll take up item number.
Fifteen gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Martinez are you ready on that
item.
Thank you Mr speaker can you get
me to that point with the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing taxation and revenue
committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety six with an
emergency clause about messages
were taken John to explain it
all.
Thank you speak your house
Exeter and new Committee
substitute for House internet
states is there annual
reauthorization bill for capital
outlay projects and for that
without all separate questions.
The German club's.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that has taxation revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two nine six now pass.
We are on final passage are
House Bill.
Two ninety six with an emergency
clause the vote is now open I'm
sorry Representative final
passage of house taxation and
revenue committee substitute
restituted the six members
across the vote is now.
You call Representative Chandler
Mister speaker.
Of the we I don't know who said
something or what was that.
I'm sorry Mr speaker this is
Representative Chandler did you
call.
We will we're not there yet okay
sorry.
Include calling members without
a recorded vote.
Representative Chandler.
Yes Representative Chandler yes
Representative Eli.
Representative Ely is yes
Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthews yes
Representative Serrato yes.
Right of yes.
We go to close my go to sixty
seven in the apartment is it has
taxation and revenue committee
substitute house bill two ninety
six of an emergency clause has
duly passed the house.
Generated from very.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation.
No objections so ordered we have
house joint resolution fourteen
which is previously read twice
by title.
I ordered it and referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Generally from Bernie.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Almost.
Mr speaker.
You don't wanna know.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business.
This is.
During the hearing of.
Junction.
It is so ordered.
Representative jury.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed the Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill eight.
Senate bill twenty three as
amended.
Senate bill sixty one as amended
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
twenty nine.
Senate bill two eighty five.
Senate for substitute for Senate
bill two ninety nine.
Senate bill three twenty eight
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk.
Gentlelady from going into.
Thank you Mr speaker we go to
the introduction of legislation.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill eight
and actually ready to the
environment amending the air
quality control act in the
hazardous waste act to allow for
the publication of rules more
stringent than federal law
requiring a determination after
notice and a hearing that a more
stringent will be more
protective.
What health and environment we
organizing able making provision
related to ozone into the powers
and duties section of the air
quality control act repealing
section seventy four dash to
dash five point three NMSA
nineteen seventy eight being
lost two thousand nine chapter
ninety eight section one Senate
finance committee substitute
presented bill eight.
Senate bill eight having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Judiciary Committee.
The generating from going into.
Thank you Mr speaker we got
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections were.
Why there announcements.
The members we are going to.
Planned to.
Come back on the floor Saturday
and Sunday at one o'clock.
tomorrow we may start later if
we end up wanting to start after
one we'll get you all out in the
morning one o'clock let's let's
plan a one o'clock.
Saturday one o'clock Sunday.
All right so we'll plan to be
here one o'clock tomorrow one
o'clock on Sunday and again if
we need to come in later we'll
get a message out to the
majority minority offices.
The generators running in a
Representative Rubio.
You Mr speaker house
transportation will be meeting
tomorrow to for one bill at
ninety in.
Number signal the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Lewis.
Representative Louis Georgene
Louis okay the gentleman from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance and
Valencia Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
the House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee will
not meet Saturday.
We will meet Sunday at nine AM
in the morning.
I apologize for any
inconvenience that's Sunday at
nine AM thank you.
Members take note the generous
Maria Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker I was
waiting to hear when that house
floor was going to make house
judiciary will we're we're gonna
planet ten on Saturday
but if necessary I would like to
we will send messages.
You're all the sponsors and so
forth if if there are any
changes in that
we are.
We're pretty much having to move
on from hospitals we had a
couple on our agenda today that
we did not have time for but it
has gotten to the point where it
is difficult but there are two
Joe how strict resolutions that
we may need to to do
So are actually our agenda we're
going to try to get it.
Posted as soon as we can but we
don't have it for sure yes
we do have built and I know that
all state government has to meet
so on.
We're we're going to negotiate
with everybody Mr speaker we
will let everybody.
Thank you the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative last
thank you Mr speaker honourable
members great work by the
commerce committee probably you
know commerce committee tomorrow
or Sunday we will reconvene on
Monday at eleven thirty thank
you Mr speaker.
Never say no.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis.
Thank you Mr speaker good
afternoon members the whole
state government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee will
meet ask promised on Sunday
morning at nine AM.
And we will continue the agenda
that we didn't finish today
thank you Mr speaker members
take note are there any other
announcements.
Okay member so we have that
mostly gone through all the
house built on the.
Four so from this point forward
it'll be mostly Senate bills one
of an exception or two I'm sure
you're aware there
but that's will start working on
two more one o'clock.
The gentle lady from down here.
One PM tomorrow.
Thank you Mr speaker if we could
adjourned till one PM tomorrow
morning or tomorrow afternoon
they take the message thank you
everyone for today thank you for
great working committees.
Enjoy the rest of your evening a
normal dinner time for everyone.
I generous meetings state St
worry mask.
We will be back here tomorrow
one PM the house is in recess.
