To give short dinner break.
I think our Denters rather it's
six fifteen so we'll take a.
Fifteen twenty minute break then
come back and the we'll get to
our Senate bills and then we
will.
The on to whatever we have to do
with regard to the Senate action
on house bill two.
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
It.
Fifty nine AM I will be
adjourned until twelve OO one
PM.
House and order Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that they be
suspended and that they are
General showing that all those
present in this morning session.
In this afternoon session also.
Speaker I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended.
It could show that the judge has
been that in full approved
subject to the approval of the
rules a lot of the business
committee.
Here in objection this word.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Eleven fifty nine AM I move on
to twelve oh one PM.
Yes order Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended I'm not sure all
those present this morning
session.
In this afternoon session your
introduction this order.
I ask unanimous consent that.
That could show that the general
has been read in full.
Subject to the approval of the.
no objections so ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
This is.
That we go to the next order of
business committee reports no
objections so ordered.
Cllr to read.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to them is been
referred Senate bill one has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
to pass respectfully submitted
this Martinez chair.
We are in.
What.
Your.
What is your move adoption
production favorable committee
reported Senate bill one all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
May the force that.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
as amended has had it under
consideration point in his
recommendation that I do pass
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
adoption Senator committee
report on the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two as amended all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
I.
This is merry.
Three point Dr.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
I move that we go to the next
order of business third reading
of legislation no objection it
is so ordered.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero are you
ready on Senate Judiciary
Committee sets you percent of
bill to.
Sensei Representative Romero I'm
I'm thank you Mr speaker
We get to that point.
The record reflect election
necessary for the Senate
Judiciary Committee subsidy for
Senate bill two as amended on
final passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker I thank you
members of the body Senate bill
two today does two main things
number one in relation to the
cannabis regulation act this
automatically expunge is the
records of those who would have
a cannabis related crime that is
now no longer a crime based on
the passage of the cannabis
relation Act can cannabis
regulation Act when we legalize
the substance we expect the
anyone that previously was
criminalized by possessing that
substance would have those
records removed
and this is exactly what that
does on an automatic basis this
should that bill passed without
that built this bill does not
exist either secondly while we
set up a brand new industry and
relating to the cannabis
regulation act we want those who
may have been previously
criminalize to be able to access
the jobs related to this there's
a lot of opportunity here and
and along with that means that
there's a streamlined approach
to anyone to more broadly that
had a felony record has a way of
being able to apply for jobs
with the state one in five jobs
within our state requires a
license.
And one in three New Mexicans
has a criminal record so this
allows us to provide access to
that upward mobility for those
who get trained in different
fields who want to better their
lives and of course there would
be a pathway through that to
that through this bill so again
two fold one we explained
expunge the records of those in
it for substance that we would
be legalizing and to providing
access to licensure for those
jobs with that Mr speaker we
stand for questions.
Others may we first have the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
currently yield I will kindly
yield my friend Representative.
Speaker gentle lady long time no
talk I just got off the phone
with the gentle lady appreciate
her taking the call so I can
chat a little bit about this
bill Mr speaker gentle lady I I
do also want to thank.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
because we we did previously
debate at least portions of this
bill previously is that correct.
Of mac Mr speaker and gentleman
that is correct we've heard this
in our body before the sixty day
session we passed a portion of
this law through and yes the
film licensure component was
something that we well
established and we accepted a
friendly amendment that you had
then that you'll that was did
unfortunately become law that's
why Review looking at it today
and we've continued to keep that
friendly amendment that you
suggested prior to in this bill.
Mr speaker gentle and from Santa
Fe you are quite sharp you're
you're ahead of me on that and
that that is exactly what's
going to highlight in a very
much appreciate the fact that
you did and did keep that in the
bill and it wasn't just lip
service previously so I do I do
genuinely appreciate that
the the issue that I would like
to chat about is in section six
of the bill.
In this it'll give the gentle
lady at the moment to get their.
I mean there Mr speaker
gentleman.
Speaker gentle lady thank you
and so what what the issue is
that I want to make sure that
that the Sanchez aware of and
that we have a good handle
things is if we look on section
six subparagraph a.
Well what this requires of
correctional facilities to do so
this could be a county jail to
be a juvie or could just be a
regular correction facility is
that within thirty days from the
day that this piece of
legislation is effective they
have to call through all of
their current inmates to see if
any of those persons are are in.
Incarceration basically because
of an of a.
A conviction of an offense that
is no longer an offense is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
correct.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe and so I I think that
process makes sense given what
the bills trying to accomplish
but my concern is is is thirty
days seems like a short time
sprint time frame for me and I
worry about the liability that
may attached to one of these
correctional facilities if they
happen to miss somebody within
that thirty day period and now
we've got someone who who is now
incarcerated for an offense that
is no longer a crime and we have
a statute that expressly says
they're entitled to be released
and it puts the burden on the
correctional facility.
To find out who these people are
and so if they happen to miss
somebody I have some concerns
about the civil liability
results because of that person
being missed and that person
remaining incarcerated Mr
speaker gentle lady from Santa
Fe can you help me I maybe
understand.
Of why the thirty days and and
why maybe this isn't much of an
issue for state.
Twenty eight thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen so
as far as the time line and I
walk through this in with me is
our expert Megan Dorsey to help
me with this should I get this
incorrect we have on the phone
but that said Mr speaker
gentleman so I believe you at if
this bill passes the governor
has twenty days to sign it into
law from that point then you
have thirty days additionally to
to create that expungement
autumn automatic expungement
provision that we're seeing in
the bill and then ultimately
within that decision and review
I believe there is an additional
time period to review that
record and insurance correct and
let me just get that make sure
that that let me make sure I
have that time line correct just
me one moment Mr speaker gentle
and.
Mr speaker gentlemen so we're
based on the time line so if in
the case that the governor was
to receive it tomorrow and
Senate's tomorrow the earliest
points of that these records
would be expand would be end of
July based on the time line that
we understand from from the site
signature to the to the
enactment of the law and then of
course when
the thirty days would take
place.
Mr speaker generated from Santa
Fe thank you for the
clarification of timeline and so
I guess I'm wondering if if
let's say once correctional
facilities Mrs a defendant and
the remaining course rated
beyond the July thirty one
twenty twenty one date does that
create civil liability for the
state of New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman based
on the conversation that we had
earlier and just doing our
background reserves the right to
be able to talk about this we
understand there's about three
records at this point Mr speaker
gentleman that would require
that automatic situation I
believe there are with any
there's that I'm getting at Tax
there's an additional addendum
to the US if you just give me a
moment all add to the my
response in just a moment Mr
speaker generally please six
times.
So Mister speaker a gentleman
we have got some data last night
and Senate Judiciary so let me
just clarify what I meant by
this three that would be
eligible in my previous
statements Mr speaker gentle and
so
there was a recent article that
identified that about a hundred
and eight people in prison not
jail but in prison maybe held on
current cannabis related crimes
that would then be able to be
reviewed for this expungement
law Mr speaker gentleman but
only three of those a hundred
and eight would be eligible for
complete release so it only be
so certain parts of that record
that would be expunged but they
would not be eligible for
release those are the three that
I was referring to earlier that
would be eligible for complete
release however Mr speaker and
gentleman all inmates what have
to exhaust all remedies prior to
being able to seek out any
additional release option
outside of the expunged record
and they would have to also
petition the court for that as
well Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker Julie from Senator
thank you for that and so.
it I just wanna make sure I'm
I'm understanding sort of what
the data says so in state
correctional facilities there
are three people currently we we
we think.
That would be released
immediately is that correct.
Mr speaker gentle up then yes
based on the eligibility
criteria within this bill that
within the cannabis regulation
Act only three would be eligible
for that release Mr speaker John
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe and so the the the
hundred or so others their
sentence would would likely be
reduced depending on whether the
sentences run concurrently or
consecutively is that correct Mr
speaker German yes that's
possible.
And Mr speaker generated from
Santa Fe and do you have any
data on because I noticed that
the language here also says a
county jail.
or or juvenile correction
facilities so do you have any
data with regard to our county
facilities.
Mr speaker and gentleman we
don't have any data on that
except for just one second.
Okay.
Mr speaker and gentleman
services can bring expert
up I guess in twenty eighteen in
the same article Mr speaker
gentlemen to about two thousand
arrests were made for a cannabis
possession and within six months
and so with that Mr speaker
gentleman there may be more that
maybe could be eligible within
the jail system Mr speaker John
what are the juvenile system but
we have not received any clear
data on what that would look
like Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker Julie from Santa Fe
thank you and so forth
I certainly don't want to make a
mountain out of molehill but I
I'm just thinking out as from a
liability perspective for the
state of New Mexico especially
when we we consider that that we
passed out House Bill for the so
New Mexico Civil Rights Act and
so that that does have a new
cause of action
that if your your rights as
defined in the New Mexico bill
of rights are violated.
that you're entitled to a new
cause of action and at the
discretion of the court
attorney's fees and so I just
wonder if we are sort of
inadvertently creating a new
liability because I think that
would be a violation of due
process if you are.
Continuing to remain
incarceration past the date that
you should be incarcerated and
so I just wanna make sure we're
not inadvertently training
liability for the state that it
in an area that doesn't
currently exist because right
now the persons are incarcerated
are there because of a
conviction in what we're saying
is we're going back we're saying
well that that conviction is no
longer going to stand and that
person is entitled to release Mr
speaker generated from Santa Fe
and what have we done anything
else.
Like this in our state where we
would not just explains but but
release someone from
incarceration just wonder if
there is any sort of track
record of doing this in effect
for injury liability for the
state previously.
Mr speaker and gentleman as we
you know have discussed discuss
this in previous committees this
is one of those unique
situations Mr speaker gentleman
where we're actually making
something that is currently
illegal legal typically when you
see us working with different
crimes on the books Mr speaker
gentleman we may tweak that
timelines differently we may
extend the amount of years
incarcerated or the the penalty
overall Mr speaker gentlemen so
just to clarify though even
though we're doing something
quite different with this lot
here Mister speaker gentle and
the bill under this bill the
inmate would still have to
petition the court for release
if it what other than those
three cases that we discussed
that are currently in our state
prison facilities Mr speaker
gentle and and essentially the
ill the.
Use me and they would be
The night before a civil case of
action would become available so
they would have to basically go
through the entire process and
again Mr speaker John we're not
the first to do this I
understand that six states our
current have currently gone
through this process of
automatically expunging those
records directing the government
to provide that automatic
release should add out again
with our legalization effort we
want this to be part of of that
seem sort of range of
opportunity to rectify the
justice for those add to
restored you know their records
appropriately Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe New and I do I do
recognize there are.
There is relief within this bill
for a person who's incarcerated
and even if he here she
disagrees maybe with the
conclusion of the correctional
facility that they thing no no
actually what I'm incarcerated
for is is no longer a lawful and
so therefore I I do have a
remedy to petition the court to
have my conviction expunged and
potentially either released from
incarceration or my sense
reduces results so I I do
understand that these the bill
but again when I look at
subsection a here within section
six
it does have an obligation you
don't use the word shall that
these correctional facility
shall notify the court.
That the person's case may be
possibly dismissed or expunged
and then in in here sort of why
I think that.
There may be some potential
exposure for the state is the
next paragraph paragraph B. as
in Bravo then puts the onus on
the court to re open those those
files and so it's not like a
situation where the correctional
facility gives notice to the to
the inmate and then they leave
up they may to decide whether he
or she believes that they're
wrong we being held but it it
puts the onus on the
correctional facility to call
through all these files.
Identify who may be eligible and
then notify the court and then
the court has the obligation to
re open these files not not the
defense counsel in so my fear is
what happens if we miss somebody
in these county jails were
doesn't sound like we know for
sure how many inmates may be
represented by this and so I
just wonder like what what is
the response to to my concern Mr
speaker generally from Santa Fe
about there being potential
liability for the state.
Mr speaker gentleman I
appreciate that consideration
you know about the the what ifs
but again Mr speaker gentleman
we've been working really
closely to make sure that the
process makes sense you know
that we've been you know
deliberating and collaborating
in understanding how this would
work with our our government
structures and course just the
record keeping in that regard Mr
speaker gentleman under the
Civil Rights Act and the TCA the
end meant inmate
It would be legally held must
exhaust all available remedies
before being able to file a
civil suit
and that includes asking the
court to reconsider so Mister
speaker gentle in the court has
traditional in unity for the
decision to deny that request as
well so as far as just
understanding the process Mr
speaker gentleman we feel like
there's a lot of important
checks and balances to be had
and of course in reviewing the
data
there's you know enough time at
for us should this lot become
upset should this become law
enough time for us to ensure
that all of those records are in
order and we are ready to
expunge when this becomes law Mr
speaker common.
Mr speaker gently from Santa Fe.
thanks for the response so I'm
trying to dust off my memory on
on the Civil Rights Act I I
thought there was some language
and and you you trigger this by
how you responded.
I've in and I could be
completely off but I'm just
trying to recall I thought there
was some language in Mexico
Civil Rights Act that didn't
require you to exhaust.
All administrative law remedies
is it is do you recall that
provision in the bill.
Mr speaker gentlemen the as far
as what we what I recall repeat
what I said Mr speaker gentleman
that yes under the Civil Rights
Act and the tort claims act the
inmate must exhaust all
available remedies before being
able to file a civil suit.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe so my memory then was
off that.
I can't go around the
administrative process and so
when you talk about liability
within this as the two before I
would have a claim what you're
saying under the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act.
Is that I would have the
obligation to petition the court
and that is a form of
administrative are remitted
exhaustion is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman yes I
believe that's correct.
With the settlement gentlelady
and and gentleman I believe the
references to the prison reform
act which is a federal law that
requires that there be an
exhaustion of administrative
remedies available to inmates
and prisoners before they can
proceed civil remedies to
redress any claims they have
against the detention or
correctional facility since the
federal law general
applicability in a preempt the
tort claims act or any state law
to the country.
Mr speaker I I do appreciate the
clarification I just found some
items on the prison litigation
Reform Act P. L. R. A..
Districts thank you I I don't
prices there'll also it's
helpful appreciate the
information and I don't either
with that came up one of the
committee meetings I believe the
P. L. R. A. thanks for this
call.
Mr speaker thank you but I think
that's helpful for debate to
help frame these and so it it
sounds like I am in fact making
a mountain out of molehill and I
certainly don't want to do that
I just you know when you think
about the liability workforce
introducing this new concept for
correctional facilities that
and as far as I can tell we're
not appropriate any additional
money to these facilities so
we're asking them to use their
current employees our current
resources to take on new tasks
to call through these files and
I certainly don't want anyone
remains incarcerated that that
under law is not required to be
incarcerated more.
But it sounds like we have a
federal statute that that
prohibits this whole issue that
says that next year she must
first exhaust all of those
remedies including following the
petition process that this bill
outlines Mr speaker gentle lady
is is that a correct
understanding.
Mr speaker gentle yes and my
working with my ex for and and
hearing the speaker and thank
you for the clarification yes
that that's my understanding as
well Mr Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker gentle lady so I did
have a a new equipment offer as
I had shared with you and and
I'm not going to introduce that
now because again I don't want
to come out on Wall the I think
this this so I I hope this is a
far fetched possibility that
never comes to fruition I
appreciate the dialogue it has
helpful in terms of help me
better understand this bill
hopefully it is for any members
of the public that are watching
as well so thank you generated
from Santa Fe for the dialogue
appreciate it thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen for
the thoughtful debate I
appreciate that this for the
debate the gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker real gentle
lady from Santa Fe County
you'll.
I will yield to the gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady we talked
at some length about section
five of this bill in committee a
couple hours ago and I was just
wondering if there been any
resolution to some of the
language that.
hi and another representative
brought up.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman we
did conference following that
just to be sure that the
language
For that we were reading into as
far as the act being in effect
Mr speaker gentleman just for
the bodies of reference Mr
speaker gentle and we are on
page eight looking at section
six in the dismissal of
sentences area just for so for
folks to follow along Mr speaker
gentlemen we basically
conference to specifically on
the question of whether or not
the act was in effect Mr
chairman and and and this is
means it's an action by a
defendant is not quote unquote
in a fact and so we just did we
we just disagree with your
reading of the bill we do
believe that the language is
correct in the way that we
worded it after having
conference and sort of kids over
the that term Mr speaker
gentleman we believe it it reads
properly.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I often
times hate to leave it up to the
courts to have to interpret our
intention and think that we
could make it clear Salazar said
and the city that maybe we could
clarify that sense that that
appears there seems to me to be
a fairly simple fix but you're
the sponsor of the bill you do
what you wish of was there any
discussion with respect to.
The issue of criminal penalties
and whether those should be
included in this bill.
Yes Mr speaker gentlemen why we
include that again and I'll just
reiterate what our expert Megan
Dorsey discussed in committee Mr
speaker and gentleman often the
addition of of penalties may
prohibit someone from being able
to access a license access
government benefits being able
to apply for certain other
benefits maybe nongovernmental
or otherwise if they have those
penalties on their record Mr
speaker gentlemen we just want
to make sure that they are
removed and in particularly in
our state Mr speaker gentlemen
we often deal with security
clearances if there are
penalties on a record sometimes
that would be prohibited
behavior for being able to
receive a security clearance so
with our labs with our different
military bases and the jobs
available in those spaces Mr
speaker gentleman we don't want
to create that barrier we want
to make sure that if we now
maybe something legal that those
things get removed from your
record Mr speaker and gentleman.
Well Mister speaker gentle lady.
It seems to me that this effort
is to.
Maybe modifies a person's record
such that it looks more pristine
than it actually is and like I
said in committee if I'm hiring
a truck driver.
To drive
hazardous chemicals.
I want to know what the record
is and this bill allows the
expungement of records that
would otherwise be relevant to
the job that I'm intending to
fill and trying to fill it with
a person who has a pristine
driving record one that I can
count on a one that's not going
to increase my risk of
conducting the operations that
I'm engaged in and so I'm I'm
concerned that by expunging some
of these records we are.
Prohibiting or not allowing.
Employers specifically to really
get a good feel for the
candidate that's in front of
them and their record as it
pertains to invest seven cents
driving records that might be
wholly appropriate for the
position that their sentiments
for that reason I am very
Concern about this I I certainly
would support this is that only
involves.
Cannabis only involve the
expungement of those records
because obviously we passed the
bill hours ago on this very for.
And those records.
Would be irrelevant but this
bill goes much further than that
one issue and adds that
additional issue that causes me
some apprehension and supported
this bill
again on I'm sorry that the we
can't to.
seek some some middle ground on
that and for that reason I would
urge my colleagues not to
support this this bill in its
current form thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady.
There is for the debate the
gentle from COVID curry Harding
quite Roosevelt San Miguel and
you.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield.
Yes I will yield to the
gentleman from all those
counties.
I'm looking at page nine section
six.
Line eleven.
And it says already for.
January first two thousand
twenty two the department of
public safety shall review the
public records in state
criminal.
History databases and shallow
verify all past convictions.
That are potentially eligible
for dismissal.
And respond with.
Or redesignation pursuant to the
catalyst regulation that.
Department of public safety
shall notify.
The corrections department
prosecutors and public defenders
Department in all cases that are
eligible for dismissal.
And expungement redesignation
that review in this bill and
looking through some of the
other bills that we have a.
I don't see any money
appropriated to do that it seems
like a tall order so my question
is which part of the department
of public safety is our task to
do this and how will it be for
the.
Mr speaker one moment while I
will confirm with me expert.
Mr speaker and gentleman
administratively the department
of public safety it has the
discretion to put together how
they want that to get
accomplished so this's and
they're at their discussions or
speaker gentleman.
Speaker gentle lady how will it
be funded.
Mr speaker gentleman with the
current budget that is already
allotted to the Department
safety public safety to
to handle this their enterprise
when it comes to of these
records Mr speaker gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from.
Mr the debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Santa Ana Santa
Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please yield the
floor.
I will yield Mister speaker
gentle lady.
Thank you I do have some
questions on this and you want
to walk me through because there
was one Senate bill there's a
new Senate bill so I do have
some questions on this
Can you explain to me.
Yes.
Somebody was arrested for
certain cannabis offenses and
their record is expunged.
According to this if I'm fully
understanding they would get
their complete second amendment
rights back is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman as far
as they can cannabis regulation
act Mr speaker gentle and I'm
sorry gentle lady they shouldn't
I have always had their second
amendment rights unless it was
compromised by another crime Mr
speaker gentle gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
but my question is.
So.
In our state
and federally.
If you're convicted felon you
cannot purchase a gun or own a
gun so does that change of
somebody was a felon the record
is now expunged does that now
mean that they can purchase and
own a gun.
Mr speaker gentle lady just one
moment while I can for with
expert.
Thank you so much for that and
specifically at talking about
title eighteen US code section
nine nine two G..
Mr speaker gentle lady so just
to clarify this actually if you
are convicted felon Mr speaker
gentlelady you
Under federal statute cannot
possess a firearm so unless the
the FBI or or federal government
does want wants to find a
restoration of rights that can
be applied for
that felony record prohibits you
from being able to access a
firearm that has nothing to do
with state law it's it's a
federal of provision extra
speaker gentle lady thank you Mr
speaker delayed I want to get
some clarification on that
because I now as it stands right
now with the.
With the law that we have in the
US code.
That even if you smoke marijuana
you can't possess a gun so I
wanted to see if that was
expunged we're just talking on
the state level that is that
what you're planning okay thank
yes United had okay take that is
yes okay okay so my other
question is is so thirty dash
seven dash for that is in New
Mexico that is basically being
high and having a gun you can't
do that that's a criminal
offense with a firearm so if
that were to get expunged in our
state.
If it was a misdemeanor I'm just
talking misdemeanor only and
that was expunged with that them
give them the right to have
their concealed carry permits in
the state of New Mexico.
One moment Mr speaker gentle
lady well I can further expert.
Mr speaker gentle lady were you
we were trying to thirty dash
seven dash four is that correct
yeah it's and and yes Mr speaker
delay it's Mexico thirty dash
seven dash for New Mexico is
negligent use of a deadly weapon
that's being higher drunk while
you have a gun on you so what it
is so that makes it so that you
can't have a concealed carry
permit in the state if it's a
misdemeanor so I'm just
wondering if that gets expunged
if that then allows this person
now to have a concealed carry
permit.
Just one moment gentle lady now
that we thanks for the
clarification just give me one
moment.
Mr speaker gentle lady so based
on that portion of life so in
the case that someone was
possibly convicted
of abuse with a deadly weapon
and it was a meat misdemeanor
and it was expunged
Mr speaker gentle lady that it
would be subject to likely
federal limitations but it
really depends on that specific
case that you described Mr
speaker at gentle lady there
would be state provisions that
may provide of a needs to be
able to access that opportunity
but at this point Mr speaker
gentle lady we can't think of a
hypothetical that would yield
the result to a concealed Kerry
license without those federal
limitations Mr speaker gentle
lady and thank you Mr speaker
July I'll check with the PS two
because they're going to be the
ones that have to rewrite the
whole booklet for that so at
some point part B. good idea if
you guys get with them if this
does go through so that you can
walking through all the steps
because this can be quite a bit
of changes because there's a lot
of language in there that deals
with
being intoxicated or out being
in possession of marijuana can
still care says can be something
you can help them with and that
some of the questions I want to
make sure I understand this
correctly a based on a question
one of my colleagues asked so if
their records were expunged does
that mean that they would be
able to possibly get a high
level security clearance at
let's say Landel.
Mr speaker of the gentle lady so
I bought likely not just
depending on what you're
referring to as far as what gets
expunged this still are expended
in laws Mr speaker gentle lady
still out for background check
these records or not from the
perspective of having a at a
security clearance Mr speaker
gentle lady would be able those
acts those records would be able
to be accessed because it would
be a public entity would be
essentially for the provision of
of of a security clearance to my
understanding and I'm not an
expert in security clearances
all with that they would be able
to act access those records in
order to be able to provide
those high the sensitive
security sensitive jobs so
Mister speaker at we gentle lady
I'm as far as that goes I
believe that it would be those
those records would still be
available.
Mr speaker Julia I get confused
on that because I thought when
expungement is totally sealed is
totally sealed up and I and I'm
concerned because my husband
who's working had a high level
security clearance as a new
engineer and I get really
concerned I really don't know if
I want somebody if there's
somebody who's competing for a
job who's fresh out of prison
who and I'm not saying they
didn't rehabilitate themselves
but you have a really good
candidate who's put a lot of
years and and then we have
somebody fresh out of prison he
just had the record expunged
that's something that I think
somebody should know if they're
going to have access to those
records because and all services
that's what they do a background
check and that's why it takes so
long and that's why they
actually go and talk to your
neighbors and if you know that
they talk to your neighbors and
they have to have references
from everybody who lives on your
block and all around you so I
want to make sure that if I have
somebody who's doing no can do
more work and you cleanup or
somebody's calling with those
huge heavy trucks it's filled
with
say new debris that goes down to
whip I want to make sure that we
have the best candidate for that
and that we are able to access
all of their records just
because it's not important I
mean they go through a lot of
work to do the background checks
on these people so Mister
speaker and a lady can you.
Tell me I was looking on page
seven.
Gets with my glasses I can see
so where it says.
from page seven line fourteen.
R. S. R. line thirteen every
person was charged with an
offense involving cannabis is no
longer crime an effective data
cannabis regulation Act so are
we saying.
We're just talking about someone
who has a charge just for
cannabis offenses that correct
would be cannabis and other
crimes.
Mr speaker generally that's
correct it's just for cannabis
related offenses that are now
with that would be changed
should the cannabis regulation
act go into effect.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I was trying to I was just
wondering that if it I want to
make sure that it was just the
cannabis and not like cannabis
and robbing a bank or cannabis
and other charges and I've heard
of when you were speaking with
the other people that it sounded
like those but a hundred or so
people that would be eligible
for that sector.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady
that's based on an article that
was written about a hundred and
eight folks in a state prison
that could be held on charges of
specific that would be removed
by that I cannabis regulation
Act thank you Mr speaker and
telling can you just walk we
briefly really briefly to that
process so is it like on a
mixing and the who who figures
it out let's start with that
he's a person who knows if
they're eligible and then how
did how did they go through the
steps if you could just explain
it to me briefly thank you yes
thank you just one moment just
so I can make sure that I get
this right with our expert when
we.
Thank you generally.
Mr speaker gentle lady so on the
expungement of records
department of public safety
would do an initial review Mr
speaker generally than they
would send out a list of the
court and they would look at the
the prosecutor and the defendant
with an overview that that
petition and then Mr speaker
gentle lady they went to make a
decision on that record.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
are that's all the questions I
have I just wanted some
clarification on that and thank
you for your time.
This for the debate the gentle
lady from Santa.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
I will yield to the gentle lady
from Santa.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
Just a couple of questions and
I'm on the little historical for
you to get to.
my my question.
You know
In the late nineties up until
about two thousand and nine.
There was the
three strikes.
And you're out.
along.
And under that many individuals.
caught with cannabis.
At any particular time that
third time they went to prison.
And a lot of times those you
know these individuals the guys
were usually accompanied by a
female.
The New Mexico.
many times.
It was just the amount.
Of cannabis that that.
But she was also pregnant.
And they were sentence.
And so my question is embedded
in New Mexico have right at
thirteen hundred or so women
that we incarcerated here in the
states seventy percent of those
women.
Were in there for building meals
for bay of holders of drugs for
the guys that they were with.
And so my question to you and I
are looking at page five.
Women served five to seven
years.
So looking at this as far as
it's gone too much.
The state of New Mexico.
Compensate.
These individuals.
Record gets funds okay.
But for the seven years she also
gave birth.
Which usually the foster care.
Into the foster care system and
was adopted.
So far the seven year strictly
under cannabis charges.
Then the state of New Mexico
compensate.
This individual.
Mr speaker gentle lady while
what you describe is absolutely
horrific that you know this
would have happened as far as
being able to think about
someone who did that time and
and
You know we're criminalized by
something we're trying to fix in
the special session session Mr
speaker gentle lady but
unfortunately this bill doesn't
have any reparations attached to
those three strict rules
you know that would be another
or social justice efforts for
those who were criminalized I
used in the past but our bill
today solely Mr speaker
generally rectified as the
record wrong for anything that
does get legalized but it
doesn't in fact Mr speaker
gentle lady do anything
regarding reparations.
This lady I could care less at
this point about three sides
three strikes.
I'm talking about the history.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady.
There are a number women today
who are imprisoned strictly.
For possession.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
These many of these women have
had to give up.
Their children today just like
they did back then.
And though there's no
Compensation.
For that.
No that's not the bill.
These women have lost a lot
given up a lot no problem the
the committee to drugs but.
None the less it happens.
And so are you saying to me
you're going to bump the record.
Which funds the fact that she
lost her.
For children.
And the state is not going to be
liable for that.
Whatsoever.
So now we're gonna go back and
clean up her record and try to
clean up for life.
With this new law.
That's going to help this
individual.
Mr speaker gentle lady you're a
hundred percent correct this is
not going to change
the wrongs that have been done
for criminalizing the possession
of cannabis this is a baby step
for what you're describing as
far as being able to rebuild
someone's life and give them
back what they have missed out
on having been incarcerated for
something like that
Mr speaker gentle lady if
anything this is an effort that
looks at the opportunity to
rectify those wrongs and
possibly compensate for the
injustices that we will now make
hopefully the legal Mr speaker
gentle lady this will help
hopefully and getting access to
a job where those records aren't
prohibiting someone from being
able to have employment
following the expungement but Mr
speaker gentle lady you know
women victimized by the state is
something that we would help to
to fix but this is definitely
one step in that direction Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentle lady I think about
two years ago the state of New
Mexico
Pass the bill dropped the box.
And it was a solution.
It'll all those individuals who
have been incarcerated.
To apply.
For jobs and hope.
To and the opportunity to
perhaps to be interviewed.
And then they'll call you
according to the legislation was
allowed to ask them any question
they wanted to but I supported
dropped the box so that these
individuals would at least have.
The opportunity.
I'm working with the group.
Of felons they were all felons.
I learned a lot about the
destruction of life.
Now as I said once before I
believe that one third of the
folks incarcerated should be
incarcerated another third just
finally got called in the last
third.
Which is probably in the wrong
place at the wrong time another
people never see in the in the
system again.
But when we start talking about
and I said on the parole board
for seven years.
So when we start talking about
expungement of records and you
have the opportunity to sit and
go through an individual's
history.
I'm at a loss.
Really the good that explains
what is going to do.
I'm sure you know what off of
piece of paper and give me a
certificate let's say you're no
longer.
Charged with possession.
But.
Of the real impact that this is
going to have.
I would be sold on this if we
were talking about maybe I do
so.
If we were talking about.
From the special session
forward.
But the like the state.
Is good even though there's
nothing in here.
That addresses these issues that
the state is definitely going to
be liable I was one of those
individual I feel the state of
New Mexico.
To know and.
Because my life was totally
destroyed and now you're going
to go back and explains director
and I've lost my family I've
lost my kids and I know
individuals that have gone
through this so I'm definitely
trying hard to understand.
How this.
Is going to affect.
Somebody's quality of life to
date for the for the time that
they serve eight ten twelve
years ago.
So if you cannot drive response
thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady in
response to that I would just
hope that when we have the
opportunity to rectify the
wrongs that have been done by
the criminal justice system that
I would stand United with you in
that effort Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Agency for the baby John from
the Representative Scott.
Thank you.
The lady from San.
Yes Mr speaker I will yield to
the gentleman.
Just a couple of questions.
Previous questions.
Expunged.
Rather does.
Only for private sector.
Or straight employment is.
Then Mr speaker and gentlemen so
but the record is not publicly
available Mr speaker gentlemen
so as far as being able to
access those records they would
be sealed there on an
inaccessible to to the public Mr
speaker gentle.
If.
For example.
Still in fact illegal or and
federal security clearance.
Or some sort of federal law
enforcement position those
records would still be available
to those organizations as part
of their.
Employment investigation.
Mr speaker at gentlemen my
understanding is that yes that
that record would still be
available based on the fact that
again federal databases and
federal requirements that are
tied to those clearances would
it likely insure that they could
when they were conducting a
background check that those
records would be available to
them so again I'm not an expert
in security clearance protocol
but Mr speaker gentle in my
understanding and you know
previous working understanding
job access at Landel is that if
you had that record that was
expunged would still be
available for the background
check for security clearance
that you're describing Mr
speaker gentleman.
That would seem to be.
Important point.
Thank you for much still views
these activities with the.
Is
this.
Yes.
How much to all our members you
switch I'm sorry about that we
we can't hear you we used to use
the other microphone again
please thank.
Districts Mr speaker.
It is likely were plugs in.
I just yet it's just easier to
use different like thank you.
Mr speaker gentle lady is this
better for.
That's great Mr speaker John.
Reestablish of trying the full
year.
Mr speaker gentle lady is there
any consideration.
As to the severity of the
marijuana of censorious somebody
was arrested with four thousand
pounds of this material with
that record be expunged in the
same manner as someone who was
trafficking fifty pounds.
Mr speaker and gentleman so
trafficking is not I believe in
us expendable offense within the
cannabis regulation act so that
would not be eggs that would not
be included in this expansion
provision here Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
we're talking about here is
expunging possession convictions
only.
Mr speaker gentlemen there were
expunging convictions that are
related to the cannabis
regulation act becomes legal
should that bill passed again
with the previous reference to
trafficking that will still be
illegal unless you have a
license to do that legally so
those crimes would still be not
expendable at this with this
legislation Mr speaker
gentleman.
The speaker
one last question is there any
consideration as to how many
offenses were committed.
Mr speaker gentlemen the volume
does not matter as long as they
fall within the confines of what
would be.
Maybe legal Mr speaker John and
so in the case that you had many
possession crimes perhaps on
your record where you were
carrying cannabis that would be
then legal multiple times those
would all be expunged volume is
not part of the bill it we don't
we don't look at how many times
that happened Mr speaker John.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for your interest
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Eddie.
Mr speaker rules gentlelady from
Santa Fe yield.
I'm sorry said the gentle lady
from any.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe please
yield I will yield to the gentle
lady from any thank you so much.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
gonna look at and ask you to
join me here looking at section
six of the bill it's on page
eight.
And this is the section having
to do with dismissal of
sentences for incarcerated
persons.
so one of the things I'm.
Curious about is.
R. who is the movie for.
Requesting a dismissal.
Mr speaker gentle lady can you
just clarify what you mean by
movie.
Mr speaker generally movie M. O.
V. A. at C. who's the one
petitioning.
One moment gentlelady well I
confer with my expert.
Matt Mr speaker gentle lady so
in section six let me just make
sure that we're talking about
the same things as as far as
what you're asking Mr speaker
gentle lady so the first part
the movie as far as what you're
saying is that they in order for
this automatic expungement to
take place Mr speaker gentle
lady that corrections department
facility that might be holding a
person in their custody would be
that who would provide the
record Mr speaker gentle lady
and so that would go to the
court to then automatically
removed that record Mr speaker
gentle lady in this provision of
the bill which doesn't talk
about how expensive it works
which requires a petition that
is currently the law on the
books this is about automatic
record removal Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much
So as as I read it and I I think
I'm paraphrasing what you just
said that
the responsibility is on the
correctional facility the county
jail or eight juvenile
correction facility and so shall
notify the court that the
convictions convicted persons
case may be.
Either reopened or expunged
so is there a is there a here is
it is making the decision
regarding
possible dismissal or
expungement.
It's done with the reason I ask
Mr speakers because it sounds
like the court is just going
through the motions of whatever
it's told to do by the
correctional facility the county
jail or the juvenile correction
facility.
Mr speaker gentle lady so if you
look at section B. essentially
the courts reopens the case Mr
speaker gentle lady and then
reviews it and the prosecutor
can still object to the release
if necessary Mr speaker gentle
lady and some still goes through
that process before it's at the
expungement is removed.
Mr speaker gentle lady so it
says in the that the court shall
re open the case pursuant to
subsection a which we just
talked about.
And dismiss the person sends if
it is legally involved invalid
so what I see missing here are
gentle lady Mr speaker is any
wording about the the duty or
the action of the court it's not
really fleshed out it sounds
like that and the court just has
to dismiss I think that's a
that's a flaw in the bill and I
think if we're going to charge
court.
With our particular duty it
should be somewhat flushed out
so we're very clear that the
court really has the the final
say in terms of the
determination is that MRI making
sense.
Mr speaker gentle lady although
it clarifies that you know we do
not legislate court rules and
proceedings so Mister speaker
gentle lady is an independent
branch of government they do
have the discretion as to how
that proceeding would take
place.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
it's been quoted before that we
have just the words before us
and I think this is omitting
some very critical language is
processed we're not telling the
court how to rule but there's a
process to fall and I think
that's that's not clear.
Let me move on Mr speaker.
And gentle lady so I'm going
down now to.
US part do it's on page nine.
It is here that on or before
January first of twenty twenty
two.
The department of public safety
shall review the public records
in the state criminal history
databases and show identify all
past convictions that are
potentially eligible for
dismissal and expungement or
redesignation pursuant to the
cannabis regulation act to the
next sentence is the one that
really concerns me.
It says the department of public
safety shall notify the
corrections department.
Prosecutors and the public
defender Department of all cases
that are eligible for dismissal.
And exposure to re designation
so Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I I'm questioning the use of the
word prosecutors.
we have this of.
First of all the department of
public safety is mentioned it
shall notify the corrections
department.
And the public defender
Department but then it uses the
work prosecutors and I think
that is going to be quibble
language I think you could be
more clear if it's said that.
DPS so notify the corrections
department the prosecuting the
district attorney's office and
the public defender department
and someone the reason Mr
speaker gentle lady is that this
could be interpreted or
construed as meaning the
individual prosecutor who did
indeed prosecute the case.
We know that prosecutors
sometimes don't stay in one
place.
Are they may move to another
employer.
And so someone could say very
reasonably so based on the
language that you go to notify
that particular prosecutor.
But by broadening the language
to say the prosecuting district
attorney's office.
There's there's no need for any
additional clarity it's very
clear so gentlelady would you
like to address that.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you for the court what I
understand is the question which
is that the prosecutor who were
talking about in this statue and
in general throughout our our
statutory language is that that
always means the elected
district attorney so we're
talking about the prosecutor
that's commonly understood as
that person so
it I don't know if there's any
additional ambiguity with that
understanding.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so I
think we should always draft to
be very exact.
And there's a parallel is a
parallel is an issue here just
in terms of the English of it
we're talking about a department
another department and just to
be consistent we should probably
say office in there I mean I
mean the of the district
attorney that offices to the
prosecution.
So I think an amendment to that
would certainly be beneficial to
the bill it would also remove
any room for argument about that
and might as well do it right
from the start.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
so I see here the notifications
as we just mentioned to those
two departments into our
prosecutors does the person
who's incarcerated get notified.
One moment Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker gentle lady so this
just requires a bit of a
description as far as what
happened on the Senate floor
last night to clarify exactly
your question you just asked
about how notification takes
place so Mr speaker and gentle
lady on page eight whiny first
and foremost the state Supreme
Court will have to promulgate
rules in order for the how the
process will take place at to
also clarify previous question
about that the start to finish
who's in charge of the process
so with that we also clarified
on the Senate floor just last
night
that the defense counsel of
record is the
Is the party that is to tell the
person in question and that they
would have a record that could
be expunged and so Mr speaker
and gentle lady the defense
attorney would be the one who
notifies on that feeding and the
court would be the one to notify
the defense attorney Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
we're is that language I've got
the committee substitute in
front of me the Senate Judiciary
Committee sub we're we're is
that language.
I believe page nine line just
give me one second and Page ten
sets of.
Second.
Mr speaker gentle lady if you
look at the Senate floor
amendment that's what we're
referring to so it's not the
committee sub and if you're
looking at that.
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
believe I have that in front of
me I don't know if it's even
been published yet
but let me let me kind of zone
in here a little bit more I
guess the word is assumed in Mr
speaker gentle lady so the bill
here on page nine.
So part of the and it we've
talked about this again that
there's notification by DPS to
the corrections department
prosecutors and the public
defender Department of all cases
that might be eligible.
So specifically mentions public
defender department which seems
to make an assumption that could
be not accurate at all that the
incarcerated person was
represented by a public defender
in fact that person might have
been represented by a private
attorney.
So.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
are we not missing an important
piece here.
Mr speaker gentle a great catch
that was called on the Senate
floor last night and we did
amend that to talk about defense
counsel of record that so that
the public defender is not the
only defender that exists Mr
speaker gentle lady it's the
defense counsel of record who
would be notified
by the court in that case so not
not just the public defender.
Very good thank you so much and
I notice on page ten of the
currently adds page two of the
committee substitute that.
The first reference I see here
in the bill
To notifying
The person his dismissal or
expungement is being challenged
so this notification occurs only
at this stage if there's a
challenge to the expungement and
I do believe then again I have
don't have a Senate amendment
that are amendments but it would
the bill would be much helped by
making sure that that person the
party of the greatest interest
is notified as soon as anybody
else about what might be
transpiring.
Mr speaker gentle lady I just
have one other question and that
is regarding.
Seems to be the we're making a
judgment call.
That a person who's incarcerated
persons been convicted and is
incarcerated.
Would want to have
to either be released or have
records exposure both.
Mr speaker generally there are
some people who actually prefer
to be in jail.
And maybe you don't want to have
records expunged.
Does this bill provide for them
to not be released.
Perspiration or maybe that again
to let the record stand.
Mr speaker gentle lady we I have
not heard of that sort of
hypothetical situation but Mr
speaker gentle lady the intent
of this law is for it to be
automatic again if we now say
that something was illegal is
now legal that should not be a
crime of record in our opinion
and why we're doing this
automatically the the prosecutor
can still of Jack's there is an
opportunity and if the defense
attorney per of record perhaps
didn't found out that there was
someone on record that didn't
want to have that removed
there is a possibility it with
the rules that we're we've
described in what the Supreme
Court may provide for to ensure
that that may stay on record Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady so I I I
appreciate that answer very
much.
I believe there are people who
truly do want to stay were where
they are it's maybe even safer
for them quite frankly than
being out.
But this of this legislation
just seems to turn everything
upside down.
I'm not sure that that's the
right way to handle this I I'm
I'm not gonna be able to support
the bill for a number of other
reasons that I won't get into
but I do appreciate your time
and answers to my questions
thank you so much.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative right.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe you I
will yield to the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
want to talk about a couple
traps that you actually have set
up for individuals under this
bill.
So
we the state can go ahead and
say we're going to expand state
records.
You cannot expunge federal
records.
So there were a rest will remain
at the FBI.
And you can't get rid of that.
So when we go ahead and take the
first one and will do
employment.
So in individual applies for a
job with the federal government.
And they're going to do a
background check.
And that individuals going to go
ahead and check no I don't have
a conviction because it's been
expunged.
When the background check is
done it will show up.
It will be that you lied on your
application and you are rejected
based on that.
Mr speaker gentle lady let me
tell you the second one.
On the forty four seventy three
important which is what you use
to purchase firearms it ask you
if you are the legal user of
marijuana.
Or if you've ever been convicted
of a felony or marijuana.
When the individual goes ahead
marks no because it is expunged.
They have committed a federal
felony.
Ten years in federal prison and
two hundred fifty thousand
dollar fine.
So this legislation doesn't warn
the public we're setting up
traps for you.
Anyway Mr speaker thank you very
much.
Si no further debate the gentle
lady to close thank you Mr
speaker thank you body this is
been a tremendous effort by this
legislature to rectify wrongs
and the criminality that the
drug board has has yielded in
our state this is the right
thing to do and expunging
records will each seek to
legalize cannabis and ensure
that folks can get jobs so thank
you all I move I now move that
house I'm sorry Senate bill two
as amended do now pass we are on
final passage of Senate
Judiciary substitute for Senate
bill two as amended the vote is
now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes.
Representative Anderson.
No Representative Anderson votes
no.
Representative Baldonado.
No Representative Baldonado
votes no.
Representative Weisel.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty one in the affirmative
twenty eight in the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
as amended has passed the house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
No objection it is so ordered
members I think we're going to
take about a.
Let's take a break till seven
fifteen.
And then we'll come back and
take consideration of Senate
bill one and then we'll decide
at that time whether we break
for the evening or if we're
going to stay here and wait for
the Senate to finish its work
the where we take a break to
seventeen dinner is here.
so it is a up to the please.
It's set up in a.
Of way that folks can just kind
of come through and and get your
pre packaged dinners all right
outside the door of my office.
So please help yourself to
dinner.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Mr speaker massive question
based on your statements yes if
the Senate.
Finish their work tonight.
We can stay and finish our work
we don't have to be here
tomorrow possibly possibly
depends with the Senate does and
how quickly they take action to
consider house bill two.
Okay yes Mr speaker I move that
the house stand in recess
subject to the call of the chair
is it take the motion I think
we'll be back here right around
seven fifteen.
the house is in recess subject
to the call of the chair.
