Father god of the universe as we
begin this Holy Week no we thank
you for sending your son to die
for us that we may live.
Thank you on behalf of all who
are here today thank you for the
many an abundant blessings thank
you for life itself as we
remember the many who walked
past June this pandemic lord we
thank you for the measure of
helped we need to fulfill all
calling all the most gracious on
the total down we thank you
right now.
That as we begin we start this
Holy Week that would be
definition of grace and mercy
and you have the story to your
children let it all might be
stored upon us right now as we
begin the whip for the state of
New Mexico.
We thank you for the opportunity
to stay the people of all state
that the new money this that all
primary goal is for the sake of
the people we serve the
strength.
Well as we have called to make
difficult decisions even as we
will have different opinions law
that gives you an idea of most
merciful god.
It's still likely.
Share their points of view we
play a great god that all
basically be heard and that we
will have the mindset of
inclusivity yes place and this
place for people to express
their opinions and the place
with ideas
madam of the house you.
Let's find principles that we
can
do.
To to work together even want
this disagreement my father glad
wisdom to govern with justice
and a sense of righteousness
grace and mercy all of these we
ask in
the name
of the son and the Holy Spirit
thank you most gracious god a
man.
Thank you Representative
Townsend would you please leave
us in the pledge of allegiance.
Representative agencies the
looting New Mexico Sliq.
That also come to order.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the house of
representatives proceed subject
to revision under the rules
adopted by the first session of
the fifty fifty Legislature
hearing objection is so ordered.
The clerk to call the roll.
Representative Alcon here.
Representative Alcon is here
Representative Allison.
Representative Allison is here
Representative Anderson.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong I'm present
Representative Armstrong is
present Representative Gail
Armstrong present.
Representative Gail Armstrong is
present Representative
Baldonado.
Representative Baldonado is here
Representative about us here
Representative Barreras is here
Representative bash.
Representative bash is present
Representative black.
Your Representative black is
here Representative Brown.
Representative Brown is here
Representative Cadena.
Here Representative Cadena is
here Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano is
present Representative Chandler.
Representative Chandler is here
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey is present
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield is here
Representative Cook.
Welcome back Representative
Crowder.
Representative Crowder is here
Representative Dixon.
Here Representative Dixon is
here Representative Dow
Representative Dow is here
Representative Eli.
Representative Ely is here
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Ezzell is here
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo is here
Representative Ferrary here
Representative Ferrary is here
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Figueroa of
present day.
Representative bangles.
Representative Powdell.
Representative Gallegos is here
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative Miguel
Garcia said that Representative
Miguel Garcia's presented
Representative get.
Representative Garrett is here
Representative Harper.
Background Representative non
this.
Representative Hernandez is here
Representative at a.
Representative Sarinana is here
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Here Representative Hochman
Vigil is here Representative
Johnson.
Representative Johnson is
present Representative lane.
Representative Lane is here
Representative Lara.
Here Representative Lara is here
Representative Lente.
Representative Lente is here
Representative Lord.
Representative Lord is here
Representative Lewis.
Here Representative Lewis is
here Representative Lujan.
Here Representative Lujan is
here Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Lundstrom is here
Representative Madrid here
Representative Madrid is here
Representative Maestas here
Representative Maestas is here
Representative Martinez.
Representative Martinez is here
Representative Matthews here
Representative Matthews is here
Representative McQueen here
Representative McQueen is here
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya is
here Representative Roger
Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya is
presented Representative Nibert.
Representative Nibert is here
Representative Ortez here
Representative Ortez is here
Representative federal.
Here.
Representative your.
Your.
Well.
Representative Pettigrew is that
you.
Okay I'll come back.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
is here Representative range.
Representative Rehm is here
Representative Andrea Romero.
Representative Andrea Romero is
present Representative G. Andrés
Romero.
There there Representative G.
Andrés Romero is here
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
presented.
Present we all.
Here Representative Rubio is
here Representative Sarinana
here.
Representative Sarinana is here
Representative Scott.
Representative Scott is here
Representative Serapio here
Representative Serrato is here
Representative small.
Representative small is here
Representative Stansbury here
Representative Stansbury is here
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton is here
Representative Strickler.
Welcome back Representative
Sweetser.
Representative Sweetser is here
Representative cut off of.
Representative us is present in
Representative representative
Thompson here.
Representative Thomson is here
Representative Thomson.
Representative Townsend is here
Representative Trujillo so I do
Representative Trujillo is
booking.
Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora is here
Representative Anderson.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook is here.
Representative Harper.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew is
here.
Representative Strickler.
Okay Representative Strickler is
excused.
Mr speaker.
I'm here Mr speaker is here.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the house of
representatives proceed subject
to revision under the rules oh
sorry Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the proclamation of
the governor called in defense
special session of the fifty
fifth legislature the red before
the house and into the into the
general.
The clerk to read.
State of New Mexico executive
office Santa Fe New Mexico
proclamation whereas the ongoing
COVID nineteen pandemic has
caused significant disruption to
the first session of the fifty
fifth legislature the state of
New Mexico by requiring
legislators to meet remotely.
Where have the remote nature of
the session delayed the
legislative process preventing
legislators from fully
considering important
legislation encouraging the
growth of budding industry that
would diversify and strengthen
our economy as it recovers from
the pandemic.
It is necessary for this New
Mexico state legislature to
convene at the state capitol
building to fully consider this
legislation now therefore hi
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
of the state of New Mexico by
virtue of the authority vested
in me by article four section
six of the New Mexico
constitution do hereby issue
this proclamation and called the
fifty fifth legislature the
state of New Mexico into a
special session at twelve
o'clock PM on Tuesday March
thirtieth twenty twenty one at
the state capitol building in
Santa Fe in accordance with
article four section section six
this special session is called
for the purpose of considering
and acting legislation
concerning the falling objects
and no others.
One legalizing adult use
recreational cannabis and
addressing social inequities
caused by previous drug related
policies in a manner substantial
similar to that proposed by
house bill twelve introduced
during the first session of the
fifty fifth legislature
including and in any necessary
appropriations.
To amending the local economic
development act in the matter
any matter substantially similar
to that proposed by the house
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for house bill three
oh eight introduce during the
first session of the fifty fifth
legislature and three
appropriate appropriating
provided cash balances for the
expenses of the fifty fifty
legislature first session for
special session twenty twenty
one.
Done at this executive office
this twenty ninth day of March
twenty twenty one witness my
hand and the Great Seal the
state of New Mexico Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
Really a Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that the
members of the house of
representatives elected to serve
in the first session of the
fifty fifty Legislature
constitute the house of
representatives for the first
special session no objection
disorder.
Really Mr speaker.
Ask unanimous consent that the
offices of the house of
representatives elected at the
first session of the fifty fifth
legislature designated offices
of the first special session no
objection it is so ordered Mr
speaker.
I ask unanimous consent that the
house proceed to the next order
of business.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business no
objections so ordered good
afternoon everyone.
Welcome to the joint session.
Are there any nonsense.
Generally gonna tell
Representative how are you.
Members we're gonna do a little
bit of bill introduction.
Then.
We will have.
The appropriations committee
will meet to consider the house
bill one the appropriations bill
for this.
Session and house bill two will
be the.
bill described in the
proclamation I believe the tax
committee will meet at two
o'clock.
To the taxing the two o'clock.
we'll have you procreation is in
the tax committees meeting
simultaneously.
the plan will be to reconvene
after those committees to finish
their work to deal with the
committee reports and then we'll
consider on the floor house bill
one before judiciary needs to
consider house bill two.
Those described the proclamation
after the floor session where we
will consider final passage of
house bill one in the committee
reports the tax committee
members who are not on House
Judiciary your work will be done
for the day we will not have
another third reading section on
the floor until tomorrow morning
I will tell you to come in at
eight thirty or nine tomorrow
morning to consider house bill
two on third reading and and of
course House Bill to usually is
the general appropriations act
that's not the case this time.
that is the bill that is in me a
governor's proclamation the
other two bills described in the
governor's proclamation are
going to be starting the Senate.
so after we have the third
reading session for house bill
one.
You can't hear me.
Okay so after we do the
consideration the floor house
bill one as I said all the
members who are not on the
Judiciary Committee you'll be
done for the day.
So we'll now go to gentlelady
from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation no
objections so ordered.
Thirty three.
House bill one introduced by
Representative Sheryl Williams
Stapleton and after waiting to
general appropriations making
appropriations from provided
cash balances for necessary
expenses for the first special
session of the fifty fifth
legislature making
appropriations from the general
fund for necessary executive and
judicial branch expenses related
to the implementation and
administration of cannabis
related legislation house bill
one.
One min read twice by title is
germane pursuit to article four
section six server printed and
referred to the appropriations
and finance committee.
House Bill to introduced by
Representative Martinez Andrea
Romero Deborah arms Armstrong in
Senator Katie do heck and after
leading to cannabis and acting
the cannabis regulation act
creating the cannabis control
division of the regulation and
licensing department providing
powers and duties setting
limitations on sales and
purchases of cannabis providing
for licensure and permitting
permitting transferring license
authority under the Lynn and
Erin compassionate use out to
the cannabis control division
creating a cannabis regulatory
advisory committee creating a
fund authorizing the regulation
and licensing department to
enter into inter governmental
agreements with with Indian
nations tribes and pueblos.
Requiring training for permit to
use an act in the cannabis tax
act distributing a portion of
the cannabis excise tax to
municipalities and counties
preside prescribing penalties
amending repealing and enacting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight House Bill to.
Yes to having been read twice by
title is germane pursuit to
article four section six of the
New Mexico constitution order
printed and referred to the
taxation and revenue committee
that's Judiciary.
House Bill three introduced by
Representative Dow and Gail
Armstrong and after relating to
the to the New Mexico livestock
board authorizing the New Mexico
livestock boards conduct meat
inspection to ensure the safety
and quality of meat for human
consumption.
Exempting producers from the
gross receipts tax and the
governmental gross receipts tax
for the sale of meat and
agricultural products House Bill
three.
Also three having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
No objections order.
Are there any nonsense.
The gentle lady from McKinley in
San Juan chairwoman Lundstrom or
the gentleman from joining Anna
do you have an announcement to
make about the Appropriations
Committee.
Thank you Mr speaker we have an
announcement to make HSC
according to what's coming
through cares was start at one
o'clock.
Okay members take note the
gentleman from the generations
Alamos.
Do you have an answer for the
tax committee.
yes Mr speaker the tax committee
will be meeting at one today.
To today.
Thank you members take note of
for folks are watching it from
home the for the benefit of the
members that also for the
benefit of ever watching from
home committees will operate
during this special session in
the exact same way that they
operated during the sixty day
session information for members
of the public who wish to
participate in the committee I
just zoom.
The links and instructions are
available at NM Legislature out
gov you click on the link at the
top that says quote what's
happening in that will take you
to the agenda where there are
links for the zoom in meetings
that will begin at one o'clock
the appropriation committee two
o'clock for the tax committee as
well as the Judiciary Committee
G. sure we don't have a set time
yet it'll be thirty minutes
after the conclusion of the
floor session this afternoon.
Links for those also will be on
the website on the agenda is.
So that is it listens other
announcements.
Gentlelady from Valencia you
have a job to get started.
I will we'll wait the way for
your job until we come back to
the floor.
The.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo this
recess subject to the call of
the chair Mr speaker I move that
the house stand in recess
subject to the call of the
chair.
Your injection the house is in
recess subject to the call of
the chair and we'll come back
fifteen minutes after the
conclusion of the meeting of the
tax committee.
