The clerk to call the members
without a recorded response.
Representative Alcon you
Representative I'll point is
here Representative Anderson.
Representative Barreras.
Representative but it is is
here.
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative them.
Representative Castellano.
For the last.
I'm sorry Representative
Castellano.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey is here
Representative Chatfield.
Here Representative Chatfield is
here Representative Cook.
Representative Cook is here all
thank all.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Dow.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative I'm sorry.
R. Representative Garcia is here
Representative Garcia is here
Representative Harper.
Representative at a.
Representative it at a is here
Representative Lara.
Representative Lente.
Representative is present
Representative Lente is here
Representative Lewis.
Here Representative Lewis is
here Representative Lundstrom.
Here.
Representative Lundstrom is here
Representative Madrid.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
is here Representative Roybal
Caballero.
On the program.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Representative Scott.
Representative Scott is here.
Representative Serrato.
Here Representative Serrato is
here Representative small.
Representative small is here
Representative says.
Here Representative office is
here Representative Trujillo
here Representative Trujillo is
here Representative Zamora.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Dixon is here.
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow is here.
Roll call is closed we have a
quorum.
Members please rise for two days
invocation offered to us by the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan Representative Johnson.
The state has to do and to top
she J. Austin when the money is
gonna go a how come the
nomination of the the the John
ago a ha thank you know how to.
Quit the New Mexico Jonah going
his hundred sixteen can in
seconds the case of this one he
can he do not bill could the
**** teen the constitution thank
you my done need to be done
he said done in months under the
Acadia the on screen in.
John ago a ya ha.
In the end not the least on the
question of a consolidation
question honestly question
honestly question hostility.
Thank you creator for this
wonderful day thank you for the
opportunity to serve in these
honorable seats we pray that you
continue to bless us plus our
were our families our children
our communities back home that
we can serve in humility and do
the right thing for our
communities all these good
things we pray in your name
amen.
Thank you generally would the.
Jennifer Lee reserve that a
group please listen to pledge
allegiance.
With generally from Telstra
presented were yes please listen
saluting New Mexico's flag.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker good afternoon
members I move that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections so
ordered good afternoon everyone.
We have to memorials today one
of which needs to be introduced
so we'll go straight to that and
we will then recognize
militaries to football team and
FFA.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation your interjections
ordered to read.
House memorial twenty nine
introduced by representatives
Townsend Gail Armstrong Sweetser
he's L. and the more of a
memorial so bring the FFA youth
organization declaring January
twenty sixth two thousand twenty
two FFA day and house of
representatives House memorial
twenty nine introduced by
Representative Townsend.
Gail Armstrong Sweetser the sale
and the more
Twenty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and placed on the
speakers table.
John internally of.
Speaker with the garlic Services
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection is so
ordered.
We will start.
Of house memorial twenty nine
because the sponsor for.
House memorial sixteen is not
here.
The the gentleman from it shows
that you know Terrel to make a
motion.
Thank you and good morning Mr
speaker I move house memorial
twenty nine be removed from the
speakers table made the next
order of business.
Hearing no objection it is so
ordered the record reflect that
all action necessary for placing
House memorial twenty nine on
final passage is been taken the
gentleman to explain the
memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker
House memorial twenty nine is
a recurring theme in New Mexico.
Recognizing and celebrating.
The FFA youth organization
declaring January twenty six
twenty twenty two as the FF a
date in the house of
representatives and if I may
Speaker may I have the pleasure
right.
Absolutely the clerk to read.
House memorial twenty nine
introduced by Representative
Townsend Armstrong Gail
Armstrong Sweetser is L. Zamora
a memorial celebrating the FFA
youth organization declaring
January twenty six two thousand
twenty two after a day in the
house of representatives for as
FFA formally known as future
farmers of America has been a
pretty near youth leadership
organization in New Mexico for
more than eighty years and
whereas FFA sponsors chapters in
rural and urban areas throughout
the state and we're asked for
than three thousand six hundred
youths between twelve and twenty
one years of age participate in
FFA youth development program
statewide.
And we're as FFA youth
development programs are diverse
and help participants to acquire
important life skills such as
leadership responsible
citizenship critical thinking
problem solving decision making
conflict resolution and
communication skills that
directly contribute to the
successful transition of young
people into productive adults
and whereas FFA participants
report having more confidence
positive self identity greater
control in their lives and a
better ability to make decisions
independently and whereas FFA
participants also report that
they set goals take
responsibility for their actions
take pride in many things and
believe that their lives have
purpose and meaning now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico.
That in recognition of the
contribution of the FFA to the
state January twenty six two
thousand twenty to be declared
FF a day in the house of
representatives and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
the New Mexico FFA Association.
Thank you for that the mission
figure and with that I stand for
questions.
The gentleman there is debate
the gentle lady from grant
Hidalgo and Luna Representative
Sweetser thank you Mr speaker
with the gentleman yield I will
yield my friend thank you very
much I am a graduate of New
Mexico FFA I won the FFA creed
contest as a green hand I know
that you are now more in all of
me than you've ever been before.
And I should have had a still
had it memorized but I just
pulled it up a minute ago and I
wanted to share just a little
bit it's a wonderful creed it
has a lot of really good content
that Mr speaker one of the
things it says is I believe in
leadership from ourselves and
respect from others I believe in
my own ability to work
efficiently and think clearly
points such knowledge and skill
as I can secure and in the
ability of progressive
agriculture is to serve our own
and the public interest in
producing and marketing the
product of our toil I just think
there's so much wonderful
content in their my daughter is
this year serving as president
of the Deming FFA chapter I'm
very proud of this weekend they
will have their FFA leadership
organizational meeting in
Albuquerque and that more of
those kinds of leadership and
and just character things will
be instilled in him at that
conference and so for these and
so many more reasons I just
support oil and I'm so proud to
have been part of having today
be recognized as FFA day thank
you Mr speaker the gentle lady
as a point of order that the
record reflect that the members
of the house of representatives
are indeed more and on now than
ever before the gentle lady for
granted all go and Luna thank
you there is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker the gentleman
from Chavis that in Otero please
you'll be happy to yield thank
you Mr speaker thank you Mr
speaker do you know what the
model is of FFA.
He's asking you gentleman.
I thought he just Mr speaker but
I miss that.
Mr speaker so I I even though
I'm not that was not a member of
FFA that their model it's very
short but it's always stuck out
to me stood out to me here's
what it is learning to do.
Doing to learn.
Learning to live living to serve
that's the FFA motto I've always
admired even though I was never
part of FFA and I've also
admired the people that have
come out of FFA and I learned
all about Representative
Sweetser my orders well in her
leadership so thank you for
bringing this and a great
organization for youth.
John I agree that is a fantastic
motto.
The general even Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentleman yield please
be happy to yield.
Mr speaker I can't say enough
about this group of young men
and young women that I'm fixing
to tell everybody my age here
phone number I was in high
school girls could not be
members of future farmers of
America as it was that now and
then.
Mr speaker I had the honor of
being selected.
As an honorary member of FFA
that then at the state
convention probably fifteen
years ago.
I can't tell you the number of
kids that.
We're interested in livestock
judging soil judging crops
judging will judging the list
goes on and on the debate team
parliamentary procedure the
creed contest.
And I did help the young team
from dexter FFA.
That went on to the national
competition and won the national
competition in the debate over
water law Mr speaker of these
kids were so bright and so will
inform they could have gone to
work right then for the at the
state engineers office.
Mr speaker this program teaches
these young men and women
responsibility.
Teaches them.
To be kind and caring and to
help the person next to them Mr
speaker this is such a great
organization I wish every young
man and young woman had the
opportunity and they do to
become a part of the FFA thank
you very much thank you
generally there is for the
debate the gentle lady from
granted all go and Sierra
Representative Dow thank you Mr
speaker will the the kind leader
please yield we have the thank
you Mr speaker I I was in my I
was FFA mom so my daughter was
involved in FFA leadership and
my in our county at her chapter
and also at the state level as
well as for each refer to great
programs that develop leadership
and there's parts of the creed
that are there Wirth.
Discussing today.
Part of the create is the
leading and better way days
through the use of better ways
and our producers in New Mexico
are producing more food with
less impact in our on our lands.
That is putting affordable high
quality food on our tables we go
to the grocery store we can
purchase what we want because of
improved technology because of
improved land use because of
conservation efforts and it is a
celebration to me FFA
celebrating future farmers of
America also celebrating what's
accomplished today on farms and
and and branches across the
state of New Mexico the true
conservationists who are
improving our our lands and in
and even protecting our wildlife
to their to their efforts and
there's another part of the
claim that I think is really
good it talks about being
engaged as a farmer is a joyful
and challenging endeavor and
that is so true today there's
such a disconnect between
consumers and producers and so
many of the bills that we we
don't think through have an have
a negative impact on farming
even if the doctor remote school
and how we fund a school that's
far away and and and and only
serves a farming community on
paper it doesn't make sense but
those people are getting up
before the sun rise they're
going to bed after the sunset
making sure that we have high
quality food on our table and
they counted the joy of
privilege and a knowledge that
is a challenge so I just wanna
thank you for bringing this bill
today and the opportunity to say
thank you to our of multi
generation farmers
we had a local competition here
tobacco competition for the
first year this year for our
ranchers and kids talking about
it what it means what is that
what is the ranching heritage
means in their community and it
is a long legacy of people who
are being that are they're very
proud.
Proud of the hard work.
And do it joyfully despite many
challenges thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlelady there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker I actually
trying to figure out who's
Representative.
Mr leader where you're yield.
I'll be happy to yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman friendly I just
occasionally use this
opportunity to reflect on my
first year of teaching in the
Salinas valley of California
where I had not lived on a farm
I did grow up riding horses but
I have not spent time on a farm
I was at a high school in
Gonzalez California and I was
asked to be a judge in FFA
project competition of course
like many things I've done I
felt quite completely I'm
qualified to do that but I
always remember how.
First I was visiting the various
projects of the students homes
their farms and I had a really
amazing pick that day and
invests and I wish I had the
picture to show you but those
students to participate in that
we're really outstanding
students of the high school as
well so I'm very happy to
support your memorial.
Thank you ma'am thank you
generated this further debate
the gentleman from civil and
McKinley Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon are you
there.
We'll come back to the gentle
lady from Sapporo Representative
Gail Armstrong thank you Mr
speaker online kind leader yield
we have to deal thank you Mr
speaker my husband and I've been
the sponsors of FFA through in
in a for over a decade and the
reason that we we sponsor FFA is
because not only of our children
and myself and my husband and
many before that.
Involved in creating leaders in
the state creating leaders that
move to other states
the if you're involved in FFA or
four H. all will include that to
learn leadership you learn how
to lose.
You learn how to win.
And you learn how to take it all
humbly.
And that's the most impressive
thing to me is a the the the
fact that.
You can do this and you learn it
and it doesn't matter if you
work harder than everyone else
you could possibly still lose
you are not always the best just
because you put the work in and
so I appreciate that about FFA
and four H. I now have a
grandson my eldest grandson JD
Tucker currency thirtieth soon
to be thirteen won the heritage
buckle through the cattle
growers association and his
speech that he.
Did said that he wanted to grow
up to be like his grandpa.
My husband.
So
He sees the hard work that
people put in every day and it
rubs off thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you generally
Representative Alcon are you
there.
you Mr speaker there you go
gentleman.
Mr speaker with the needle we
have to deal.
Mr speaker and gentleman I am
the product of future farmers of
America.
I believe it or not when I was a
young man we signed up in high
school for vocational
agriculture.
And everybody who was involved
Ag this was also a member of the
state.
As a greenhorn I served as the
chapter and what a high school I
services chapter vice president
that was our freshman year.
As a sophomore and junior I
service the chapter Drescher.
And my senior year I served as
the vice president.
One of the things that allow you
still be bullish the budget
people will say
But getting.
We still own sometimes when you
look at something like if the
state we were in our own way
again as we all wore the same
jacket blue and gold jacket.
We all care reach other we all
predicted the each other our
green arms when we were the
senior members were taken care
of by the cedar members and make
sure that the they were helped
along under high school and
everything else it was just a
matter of being a member of as a
state it was a matter of being
in a group.
And I have always been proud of
the fact that I was able to go
through all of those for you for
years remember they probably had
to do a little bit of public
speaking which guided the bugs
some of you'll by no.
But the list also dot we had a
new book the building not just
farming
I think you have to do your
books that you could learn how
to balance your books on your on
your ranting and firing but I
mean the whole thing was not
just be a farmer or rancher it
was basically everything that
you can think of we even did a
welding everything we did it.
It was some of the greatest
things that a farm boy life was
self to do I even I think that
against city the national
convention my junior year so for
farm road from what I would have
get city was really exciting.
So Mister speaker I would that
that are you included all of the
Representative Sweetser but I
think that meter because I use
it a lot more than she did.
Thank you their lives were
reviewed as Romario.
Thank you gentleman next to the
gentle lady from Eddie.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
leader Townsend please you we
have to deal.
Thank you gentlemen Mr speaker
so
The gentleman from just just
north of me is this memorial
specifically for future farmers
of America.
That.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
and in my mind
of all of our young people who
participate in programs like FFA
is just really very much
equivalent to few of to forage
programs the gentleman would you
agree with that.
I certainly would I think it
develops leadership skills the.
Many of those young men and
women today use throughout their
lives.
That's right so Mr speaker and
and leader I I stand actually
to.
If you let me give some
recognition to the Eddy County
four H..
Program
our Eddy County youngsters won
the national championship just
recently in parliamentary
procedure and I just want
everybody in the chamber to know
that we have some really
outstanding people and Eddy
county New I was fortunate to go
to their practice just a couple
days before they headed up to
Denver for competition it was so
very impressed with the maturity
and the preparedness that they
exhibited so Mr speaker
gentleman I just want to get
that in there and say that I'm
very very proud and I think we
all can be of our youngsters
from Eddy County thank you.
Thank you generating next where
the gentleman Chavis and Lincoln
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Chavis said Emma
Jarrell yield they have the
deals are.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for bringing this
memorial forward.
I have the privilege of serving.
For very small school districts
in Lincoln County.
And I can tell you that it's the
FFA program.
It really instills the character
and the.
Gives them the ability to
advance their Education and it
is critical particularly in the
small rural communities to have
a vibrant and active FFA program
Tony Johnson and in corona.
Spends countless hours taking
his students around the state to
competitions to showing the
animals to spending a week and
Rossell during the state fair
with with the cattle out of the
barn there and so we have not
only dedicated students we have
dedicated educators who step up
and teach these young men and
women not only.
Academic matters but life
matters and it's the FFA program
that I am very pleased to
support and have been privilege
to
to provide.
Monies through the capital
outlay process to to fund those
organizations and Lincoln and
and Travis county and intend to
continue to do so because we see
the great benefits that accrue
through the program and that
they have the dedication of the
educators that are involved in
that program thank you Sir.
Thank you gentleman this further
debate the gentleman for doing
in a grant in Sierra
Representative taught us.
Thank you Mr speaker over the
thank you is you'll be happy
deals are.
Thank you Mr thank you for
reading this memorial also and
I'm so glad everyone is that has
experienced the state of I'm
glad Representative Brown
brought up fall for each other
all go ahead and have.
One of the top sponsors here
Grace Jones suggests a low
their hard work and dedication
and if the it just you know
those those young men and women
will come up with to give you a
firm handshake you look in the
eyes the things that we've done
point are losing a little by
little one of the things that I
really look forward to is there
a green chili sale and I by
quite a few sacks of children my
friends family
and it's just I just want to I
mean I don't want to point it
out a lot of people are are for
for all recognizing what that
organization does teachers and.
The students and so I just also
wanted to my hand and thank all
of those our young men and women
and educators who volunteer
their time and the parents
during a press that's a lot of
work as a parent will just for
your child and in that in that
way but it is absolutely
beautiful things of thank you
for raise more.
The Germans further debate the
gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Santa Fe inTaos Representative
at a.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentleman yield we have to
deal.
I too have to stand up and
recognize FFA and really all the
families and all the students
involved in as a for those of
you who don't know and culture
farming and ranching it said
twenty million dollar economic
engine in the north it's really
a vital part of our economy and
a deep part of the culture of
the north of those of us from
rural districts know how
important these organizations
are and what they mean to our
future leadership in this state
and I can tell you there's no
better way to spend the
September weekend in the fall
then going to the Rio Arriba
county fair where all these
families gather they drive up
there are these and they all
just kind of spend the weekend
at this county fair and and it's
so much fun you know to talk to
all the kids to raise chickens
or goats or B. for whatever
they're doing learn about their
lives learn about their families
and it's it's really it's really
an important part of the
American culture and for those
of you who haven't done that I
would really encourage you to
get out to the rural parts go to
these county fairs see what's
going on with the future of the
the future of our country it's
quite impressive and I'm I'm
happy to be a very small part of
that thank you.
Thank you generate is for the
debate the gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman yield we have a deal.
Mr speaker
I stand ins and gentleman I
stand in support of your
memorial the young man the grew
up on a farm and ranch I hi.
Have supported this.
All the way through my career.
I supported personally I
supported corporately supported
through by capital funds as well
in Mr speaker and gentleman I
would just like to remind the
body that this weekend.
ATA in the FIR phage of with was
referred to earlier as having
their meeting at the Marriott
and in Albuquerque I would.
Acid anybody that has the
opportunity to go to me with
your Ag education teachers and
to meet with the young men and
women in this association.
C. would.
Commitment.
When trained in kids young.
Turns into.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen for bring
this for more.
The gentleman next to the
general you Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman yield I'll be happy
deal Sir thank you Sir
I love the FFA they are awesome
I'm talking about specifically
broke and to Brooke and Ramon
over against in.
The work that they do with our
students is amazing they are
creating and developing
leadership.
With students who some don't
have any background experience
at all in agriculture you know
they're just interested in that
they want to learn more.
And I see the impact that they
make in our community
Our culture is very important to
houses or thirty four.
and the the leadership.
And the coordination that they
have with our local growers is
amazing and I think this is
something that should really be
promoted even more.
I wish I wish for students were
here today.
I would die I wanted to support
him as much as I could to come
up that they did come up with
but they couldn't but I want to
emphasize the importance of FFA
and the importance of developing
those leaders and I want to
thank you
Mr Mr leader to for for bringing
this forward and I fully support
this thank you thank you Mr
speaker.
Si no further debate.
The gentleman the because I just
had my comments that of one of
the things we look forward to
every year during the session is
all the blue jackets with FFA
package of patches filling the
holes in committee rooms is just
another thing that we are having
to miss because of the pandemic
but will all look forward to
seeing them here next year when
hopefully the pandemic is in our
rear view mirror and more into a
recovery Jo thank you for being
a memorial and that any of the
FFA kids listening it out there
or watch this later on the web
webcast recording you've got
lots of friends and losses four
in the state house of
representatives from I think
every single member so thank you
for all you do to enrich your
communities and with that the
gentleman close thank you Mr
speaker and I just remind the
body that this organization and
and even the four H.
organization that my
gentle lady from Sapporo
mention.
They develop leaders for the
future.
These days the children.
Not only participate but they
bring their families because it
is a family.
Of the.
For a individual like myself who
was raised on a farm and ranch.
It is ingrained in families.
in any County.
It's in July.
When it's nice and cool that you
go to the fair.
And even with all of that.
You will see.
No.
Dozens of families that have
brought camper trailers and
they're there for the week they
work hard to show their animals
to develop their.
Our projects whatever they are
and and they're really good.
Of.
One of the neat things that I
have always enjoyed about.
That lifestyle.
Was recently displayed in.
Eddy County there was a young
man who had his family had
suffered a tragic loss.
And
To the leadership of the fair
and made sure that his animal
went last.
And that stay here through the
cooperation of many families
many kids.
many organizations many
corporate development corporate
friends.
I think was just shy of a
hundred thousand dollars.
And there was there's not a
child.
that.
Was not actively participating
and making sure that that
happens but those were the
families and those are the core
values that were displayed in
that group and it crosses all
social economic racial coming
all line I mean there's people
in town out of town but they
came together to do the right
thing that's what FFA is about
and I appreciate everybody's
support thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you John and I believe the
we would like to see get animus
consent on the vote to show all
members present voting in the
affirmative hearing no objection
that is so ordered the vote is
now open.
The vote is a close.
Able to seventeen the firm to
zero negative house memorial
twenty nine just passed the
house.
Members I I wanted to make an
announcement the I'm I'm sure
that most folks have heard but
our colleague from Rio Arriba
County Representative Roger
Montoya was in a very very very
serious auto accident this
morning on his way into the
capital
his of vehicle and Stewart
rolled twice he was trapped in
the vehicle had to be rescued by
emergency services can out of
his car he is in the hospital
now he is doing fine he's been
in X. rays and MRI eyes to see
the extent of his injuries he is
life isn't thankfully not in
danger but that is the reason
he's not with us so if you have
a moment to send him a tax I
don't think he's taking calls
right now that you could send a
message
I've just been communicating
with him he's in good spirits
and is looking forward to
rejoining us but that's why he's
not with us today also want to
thank the emergency response
services a state police for
being as a response to this
morning and make sure that he
was able to get out of that
accident safely as a single car
accident he was coming in
early to file some bills so the.
We're gonna go ahead take care
that for him as well so please
give me your thoughts and if you
have a minute I just sent him a
text message or sentiment I'm
sure he would appreciate it we
hopefully will be back with this
in a few days.
let's see we have the gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln I
believe you wish to make a
motion.
Yes Mr speaker I would requests
to remove house memorial of
sixteen from the those figures
that some places and positions
of the presented to this body.
Hearing no objection it is so
ordered.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary necessary for
placing House memorial sixteen
on final passage has been taken
the gentleman to explain the
memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker house
memorial sixteen is
One of those memorials that we
in New Mexico don't get to
present very often and that is a
national championship garnered
by one of our state
institutions.
Mr speaker at this time the
memorial.
Recognizes the.
Hard work and effort the coach
office so and the New Mexico
military institute Broncos have
put in over the past couple
years to become national.
Champions at the junior college
level of for all of the United
States and so it's without that
we would like to recognize New
Mexico military institute Bronco
football team and their head
coach office so in that
accomplishment and the Mr
speaker if you would so allow we
have several co sponsors that
would like to of say a few words
one of which has a special
connection to the team and that
would be Representative
Castellano.
Absolutely there is debate the
gentleman from San Miguel Santa
Fe and towards
the old agency leader gentleman
I certainly yields thank you
thank you madam speaker this is
an exciting time for me my
cousin Brandon by the L. started
as a safety and was on special
teams on this championship team
and I think we need to really
congratulate this team they
played hard they beat the number
one team in junior college
community colleges so I just
thought this memorial bring it
forward and and really again all
H. the team so I thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you John.
there is further debate the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and it
results thank you Mr speaker.
By two employees to rise today
to honor the New Mexico military
institute Bronco Broncos.
Of this being a very old ex
institution here in New Mexico
but none the less older not this
is the first national
championship in football that
our state has achieved and yes
it's very competitive season go
through the playoffs just like
we do with the four year schools
in this country.
And this team prevailed so it is
with great joy that not only
that they did it with the first
year coach.
Shows up first day on the job
and and a few months later he is
coaching and national
championship team the entire
Bronco football team deserves
our recognition and we have not.
Had such recognition since we
talk Roger stop back to play
football at New Mexico military
institute several years ago Mr
speaker go abroad because thank
you.
The Broncos the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Maestas.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
certainly yield to my
representative from Bernalillo
county thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Chavis and yes
just want to rise and give a
shout out to our national
championship team Mexico Montoya
is to run because they had a
incredible running like the
gentleman alluded to disassemble
the now the second most notable
thing from name is Roger stop
back one of the all time great
Super Bowl champion quarterbacks
because this super sees that as
national champions and I just
keep in mind Mr speaker this is
a junior college in terms of
athletics it's a genco and so
these are order freshmen and
sophomores these are eighteen
nineteen twenty old young man
who have developed tremendous
tremendous discipline in their
personal lives and transform
that into the beautiful game of
football I want to give a
particular shot out Mr speaker
A gentleman from Travis to the
quarterback who hails from my
neck of the woods and played it
safe pass a medical cannabis to
which is which are both in my
district and so data Bobby I
have had a heck of a season two
for seventeen hundred twenty
yards twenty one touchdowns
it's just an incredible
incredible leader
that the team that the offense
rallied around so good for him
and and this is just a note to
our our four year institutions
I'd be great to play a spring
spring game with your freshmen
and sophomores down in Roswell
because I think I the levy
would.
In many with my when that came
in fact they will because
they're the national champs so
what I just joined forces
That as all of our higher
institutions play football this
only to call not going to it's
harder to get in the new agency
speaker than the average school
but it's a great pipeline for
the Aggies levels highlands and
elsewhere so shut up to Amy and
thank you for bringing this
forward a tremendous tremendous
joy in for all of our state and
the nation from Folkestone and
Rosalynn naming thank you Mr
speaker M. Mr Chairman comment
the the young man who the
representative does referred to
I believe has signed a letter of
intent to play in the state of
New Mexico state if I remember
correctly.
That is excellent news but you
know we may we may get that
program the elevated to the same
I'd say we're seeing out of me
that would be great the
gentleman from Valencia
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln County yield Mister
speaker I certainly yield to my
friend from fluency County thank
you Mr speaker as a the person
who has had the good fortune to
play a lot of football coach a
lot of football I understand
just what it takes to win a
national championship the time
the dedication that these young
men that these coaches have put
into it is is really it's it's
remarkable and I want to
congratulate these things are so
tough to come by so I want to
thank them for their confidence
thousand New Mexicans we're so
proud of them the only thing I
want to close with I would love
to see many of them of the
cherries over of UNM.
Thank you gentlemen.
This Madam of a junior colleges
UNM in state there's got to be a
joke somewhere in here about
which one of those three is
really the junior college
football program.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler thank
you Mr speaker with the
gentleman yield
Mister speaker I certainly yield
to the gentleman from San Juan
County thank you gentlemen
listen I love New Mexico
military institute for my son's
graduate there one one one on
the Air Force Academy I love the
academics that they provided so
that expanding academic school
and I'm so proud this
legislature has provided
scholarships it's the best
element is the best deal in the
state great scholarship and I'm
in a I was so happy employees
that the football team did so
well because when my kids went
to school there they were kind
of in the middle of the pack
they're very competitive that
middle of pack and the by which
is which is remarkable at the
races high level in such a short
period of time but thank you Mr
speaker thank you Jennifer bring
in this to our attention and and
and legislators police promote
New Mexico military that that
legislators collar ship is a
goldmine but in terms of
benefits thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen.
Thank you gentlemen have seeing
no further debate the gentleman
to close.
Thank you Mr speaker again we're
very proud of that institution
and their compliments on the
young man
and women the the at ten AM
basically do a great job of
representing our state well on a
national stage and so we're
particularly proud of these
young member of the there's a
lot of other men and women there
that the representative all of
us at this time Mr speaker I
would requests to you show that
all members present voting in
the affirmative and that we both
by acclamation on house memorial
sixteen.
And so move.
Okay there is a request that the
free animus consent that the
record shows all members present
and voting in the affirmative
hearing no objection it is so
ordered the vote is now open.
There is a close by a vote of
seventy in the affirmative zero
in the negative house memorial
sixteen has passed the house go
Broncos.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
The next order of business
introduction of legislation no
objections order click to read.
House bill one forty nine
introduced by Representative
McQueen Townsend Here Senator
Tallman and act relating to
public officers connecting the
disclosure act requiring persons
holding or seeking a position of
duty trust authority with the
state to file annual disclosures
related to employment income
assets and liabilities
professional licenses gifts and
procurement providing duties
requiring retention and public
inspection providing rulemaking
authority establishing finds
creating a penalty redeeming the
financial disclosure Act
throughout the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight the disclosure Act
repealing the financial
disclosure Act sections ten dash
sixteen a dash one through ten
dash sixteen a dash nine NMSA
nineteen seventy eight being
laws in nineteen ninety three
chapter forty six sections
thirty nine to forty five laws
nineteen ninety five chapter one
hundred fifty three section
twenty five and lost twenty
twenty one chapter one hundred
nine section twenty one as
amended house bill one forty
nine introduced by
Representative McQueen Townson
Garrett and Senator Tallman.
The one forty nine having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill one fifty introduced
by Representative Dow and
Pettigrew and act relating to
state person requiring state
employees to be physically
present at their place of
employment providing exceptions
house bill one fifty introduced
by Representative Dow and
Pettigrew.
One fifty having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the rules
committee.
One fifty one introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil
endorsed by the courts
corrections and justice
committee an act relating to
judicial salaries providing the
justices of the state Supreme
Court shall each receive an
annual salary equal to the
annual salary received by New
Mexico federal magistrate court
judges moving salary formulas
for magistrates house bill one
fifty one introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil.
House bill one fifty one having
been read twice by title is
germane pursuit to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the Judiciary
Committee thence appropriations
and finance.
House bill one fifty two
introduced by Representative
Garrett and act making
appropriation to the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration for crime
prevention and behavioral health
initiatives and Bernalillo
county house bill one fifty two
introduced by Representative
Garrett.
Yes the one fifty two having
been read twice by title is
germane pursuit to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee thence
appropriations and finance.
One fifty three introduced by
Representative Chandler and act
relating to general obligation
bonds authorizing the issuance
and sale of capital projects
general obligation bonds to make
capital expenditures for senior
citizen facility improvements
construction and acquisitions
for library acquisitions and for
capital improvements and
acquisitions and institutions of
higher education state special
schools and tribal schools
providing for property tax levy
for payment of principal of
interest on and certain costs
related to the bonds requiring
approval of the registered
voters at the twenty twenty two
general election of the state
declaring an emergency house
bill one fifty three introduced
by Representative Chandler.
House bill one fifty three
having been read twice by title
is germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
One fifty four introduced by
Representative Trujillo an act
relating to public school
finance clarifying the
definition of qualified student
house bill one fifty four
introduced by Representative
Trujillo.
One fifty four having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill one fifty five
introduced by Representative
Trujillo an act making it making
appropriation to the Department
of Health for a match of federal
funds for the developmental
disabilities supports division
to increase in provider
reimbursement house bill one
fifty five introduced by
Representative Trujillo.
House bill one fifty five having
been read twice by title.
Is germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee thence
appropriations and finance.
House bill one fifty six
introduced by Representative
Roybal Caballero.
And act relating to crime
creating the crime of unlawful
possession of a large capacity
magazine providing exceptions
providing penalties making
appropriation house bill one
fifty six introduced by
Representative Roybal Caballero
is one fifty six having been
read twice by title.
It is germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the consumer Public
Affairs Committee that's
Judiciary dense appropriations
and finance.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman the record
of that order of business
committee reports to protection
it's ordered.
Click to read.
Mr speaker consumer of public
affairs committee to home is
been referred house bill thirty
seven has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that I do pass
and it's referred to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair unanimous consent of the
committee endorsed right to
gather acted upon the single
vote and reflected in the
journal so they're acted upon
individually no objections so
ordered click to read.
House bill sixty five do Path
and thence to the Judiciary
Committee.
House bill sixty nine do pass
and thence to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair.
Two dot we are on the direction
of a favorable committee reports
on house bill thirty seven sixty
five and sixty nine all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
This was a committee reports are
adopted.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to with the referred house bill
seventy six has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation that I do pass
and it's referred to the
taxation and revenue committee
respectfully submitted of the
sale the outgoing chair.
Mr speaker move the report on
induction of a favorable
committee report on house bill
seventy six all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
Both those names Reports
adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
to miss been referred house bill
twelve has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that I do pass
and it's referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair Senators
consent of the committee reports
read together acted upon a
single vote and referred to the
journals of their acted upon
individually hearing objection
it's worked hard to read.
House bill thirty nine do pass
and thence to the taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill one nineteen do pass
and then city appropriations and
finance committee.
House memorial twenty one do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero
chair.
Mr speaker move the committee
report your own induction of a
favorable committee reports on
house bill twelve.
Thirty nine one nineteen and
house memorial twenty one all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was made reports are
dotted.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hiring objections order
I want to make one announcement
about the committees.
we have of course committee
rooms are open and we've had
some members Senator could
please pay attention to this.
For a second we've had some
members attending committee
in the committee room
we have the best insists that if
members are doing that that they
use a headset with your computer
of we're getting lots of
feedback uncertain committees or
members are in committee rooms
with laptops open and the
feedback is the building is
increased very very destructive
that's fine to be in the
committee room but the meetings
are being at this point
conducted by zoom
it's of you we have to insist
that people that members are
connected had said to their
laptop tablet or phone so we
don't get the feedback and
background noise so if you'd
please do that if if we can get
to a point we're doing that
we're going to have to insisted
members not be in the committee
was I don't want to do that but
I don't know how to make it work
for the public with the feedback
that we're getting from members
who are just using the
microphone and speakers on their
laptops so please please please.
If you need a headset
The chief clerks office last
session purchased headsets
she still has her office still
has them available to members if
you need to have said simply let
the chief clerk no and then one
will be provided to you so if
you should be an issue of cost
but if if folks to please do
that the staff in the and the
public would be.
Very appreciative of the
improved audio quality the
hearings.
Are there other announcements
the gentle lady for Santa Fe
thank you Mr speaker your house
rules and order of business
committee will be meeting on
Monday next week there was a
memo sent out by our chief clerk
regarding any interest in
getting bills teams germane if
you have those questions please
feel free to email me if you'd
like to include your bills in
this session we would we're
meeting next Monday so we're
accepting submissions now for
analysis before that of hearing
on Monday and looking forward to
continuing the process thank you
Mr speaker.
Thank you generating other
further nonsense the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker
and members of the house.
And as you can into your offices
you've noticed notebook.
And the opinion on your desk
this is an appreciation from the
Navajo preparatory school they
appreciate the support that the
state legislatures given them
thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally.
The gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Santa Fe inTaos.
Mr speaker the the rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee will
be in the meeting tomorrow at
nine o'clock.
Members say no the general going
into Representative small thank
you Mr speaker house
appropriations and finance
committee will be meeting today
at one thirty PM
thank you Mr speaker never say
never gentleman from Bernalillo
Santa Fe tors in Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker the House
Energy Environment natural
resources committee will be
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
be assumed we do have three
bills on the agenda I would
expect the first bill to take
the a lot of time so I don't
anticipate hearing the second or
third bill the first bills house
bill four thank you.
Number signal the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Chasey thank you Mr speaker I
wonder if you could give me an
idea of no there's another
meeting that's been called prior
to the one thirty committees and
I could you give me an idea of
when you think the house
Judiciary Committee would be
available to meet I think that
meeting should be thirty minutes
or so so I think two thirty
start time for committees should
be simple to thirty start time
for committees instead of one
thirty.
Representative Germany and the
mystery I I apologize I just
want to ask Mister speaker I
will the afternoon committees
today need to start at one
thirty or two thirty PM I think
we should say two thirty just to
be safe and I've I've just been
told as a Republican caucus as
well so let's of two thirty this
afternoon thank you Mr speaker
so house appropriations and
finance committee will meet at
two thirty PM this afternoon
thank okay.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Maestas thank you
Mr speaker on of the members of
the house commerce would be
today at two thirty sharp of.
We'll have to bills today Mr
speaker house bill sixty seven
excuse me and House Bill House
memorial line has been going on
house bill eighty will be rolled
until Friday so no house bill
eighty house commerce at two
thirty thank you more signal
are there further answers the
gentle lady from Sapporo
Representative Gail Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to let everyone know and
I'm not sure if everyone knows
this but to Representative Roger
Montoya was in an accident this
morning coming into the
legislature kind of players are
asked for him he's safe but I
just want everyone to be
thinking about him for killing
and safety thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlelady the and and
just so folks don't think I'm
insensitive about that we did
make the announcement earlier
the gentility for granted all go
and.
Sierra Representative Dow thank
you Mr speaker and I just want
to point out to folks that today
it is a virtual Grant County day
this year so we didn't get to
have the the performances that
we usually have but there is a
gift for everyone from Grant
County home of tour the let.
For your safety on your bikes as
you ride trails in New Mexico
also there will be a Republican
caucus immediately following
adjournment in room three oh
nine thank you so it is it every
day virtually Grant County
absolutely Mr speaker.
Are there any other
announcements.
Gentlelady from Valencia.
Mr speaker what kind of candy is
never on time gentlelady we're
tied talk a late.
Well that's good okay.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house and result I'm sorry
I'm sorry I see we have the
general from the arena said of
on San Juan Representative
Lente.
Thank you Mr speaker recognizing
me just a reminder that tomorrow
eight thirty the morning your
house agriculture seek is a
water resource committee will
have another meeting thank you
much members take note the
General formerly as the will of
the committees our San Juan en
Valencia Representative Harry
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker I just one
of.
On the body we need to recognize
our staff the work for us you
know every morning I walked on
this fall's afternoons they're
always out there you know
picking up after rose and they
never get noticed and all ended
the high time that we kicker
Department storm and show our
appreciation for that includes
all of Stephens capital thank
you Mr speaker thank you general
service staff.
Even you robin.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house and Reese's of the wi
Levin thirty tomorrow morning.
Very well thank you very for
good work that please be sure to
follow the work for committees
this afternoon starting to
thirty thousand in recess until
eleven thirty AM tomorrow.
