Members roll call is closed we
have a quorum.
Please rise for today's
education offered to us by the
gentleman from Sandoval
Representative Harper.
Our father in heaven.
We thank you for.
The blessing it is to gather
together today we're grateful
for the rich privilege.
Of living in this beautiful
state is beautiful land we
appreciate you just serve.
Representative amazing people of
this great state.
Well we're grateful for.
The strings given us to make it
through this.
These last seven weeks and then
we ask you to please US us.
Through the last week of the
session.
Help us to have a greater
measure of patients.
With each other what was to.
The.
Last with wisdom readers are
old.
Please watch over and bless our
families.
And sustain them for the.
Their sacrifice they make as we
serve here away from them.
Whether we.
so.
Grateful for this time we have.
To.
The server we asked you to help
us remember.
That is not.
Our own will enclosure that we
represent but.
That was wonderful children here
in the state of New Mexico to
put them in the needs of them
and their families first and
foremost in our minds.
Yes you assessed during the
session these things we say and
which is just trusting our.
He John the generally more
livers in Dixon would you please
leave us in the pledge of
allegiance.
Percent black the fleas leisure
and saluting New Mexico's flag.
Generationally.
Mr speaker no one said they
wanted to play ball today.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hearing objections so
ordered.
Members of the at the beginning
of the session because you were
here on the floor during.
the inauguration we weren't able
to take a moment to welcome to
congratulate our new president
as we did four years ago we are
in session today on a historic
day the US Senate has voted
today fifty one to forty to
confirm congressman Dick Holland
to the next secretary interior
she is the first native American
ever to serve in a cabinet.
And I think we should all offer
her our most heartfelt
congratulations on this historic
day and wish you well as she
undertakes for new job the sworn
in tomorrow afternoon the to
let's all give a.
Miss more cost to our colleague
our Congress woman in C. to be
our new secretary of the
interior.
Yes.
Are there other announcements.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
messages.
no objection it is so ordered
Cllr to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate bill two twenty as
amended.
Senate Joint Memorial to request
the concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is really interesting.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
concurred in house amendments to
Senate bill thirty five as
amended respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk this is really enter
message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed the Senate bill two
thirteen.
Senate bill two thirty as
amended Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two seventy nine.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
eighty nine as amended.
Senate bill three sixteen as
amended Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
thirty eight.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
thirty nine with the emergency
clause and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is really entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house bill twenty five.
House bill forty one house bill
fifty one as amended by the
house house bill sixty eight
house bill ninety two house bill
one forty six house bill one
seventy nine house bill one
eighty three house bill two
thirty nine as amended by the
house.
House bill two forty as amended
by the house and returned same
here with respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk.
Message we entered message from
the Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house of
the Senate as passed Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty two.
Senate bill two ninety four as
amended.
Senate bill three seventeen
Senate bill three forty.
Senate bill three forty five as
amended.
Senate bill for ten as amended
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk this usually enter.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation
hearing of judges ordered.
Clear to read.
Senate bill two twenty as
amended.
Introduced by senator serve on
this and actually lady to law
enforcement providing exceptions
to the requirement the law
enforcement use body worn
cameras in certain situations
Senate bill two twenty as
amended.
Senate bill two twenties
admitted having been read twice
by title is referred to the
consumer and public affairs
committee.
Senate Joint Memorial to
introduce by Senator Pinto a
gentleman moral requesting
United States government to base
payments in lieu of taxes on a
fully on a full property tax
equivalency basis Senator
memorial two.
Senate Joint Memorial to having
been read twice by title is
referred to the state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
Senate bill two thirteen
introduced by senator
Candelaria.
An act relating to crime for
prohibiting a defense based on a
defendant's discovery of
knowledge about or the potential
disclosure of the victims or
witnesses gender gender identity
gender expression or sexual
orientation prohibiting a
defense based on the effect of
on the defendant's of being
romantically from opposition to
any non violent or non
threatening manner by a person
of the same gender or person who
is transgender Senate bill two
thirteen.
Senator two thirteen having been
read twice by title is referred
to the consumer and public
affairs committee.
Senate bill two thirty as
amended introduced by Senator
Lopez and after leading to human
rights requiring state agencies
to develop and implement
policies to identify assess and
decrease institutional racism.
Providing criteria by which
state agencies shall implement
such policies providing duties
for the state personnel office
Senate bill two thirty as
amended.
Senate bill two thirties amended
having been read twice by title
is referred to the state
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy nine.
And actually leading to
licensing repealing the or osteo
Pathak medicine act amending the
medical practice act to include
provisions pertaining to
osteopathic medical physicians
and osteopathic physicians
assistants increasing certain
fees transferring functions
person money probation records
furniture equipment supplies and
other property from the board of
Bastille have medicine to the
New Mexico Medical Board Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill two seventy nine
Senate Judiciary Committee says
sourceyour Senate bill two seven
nine having been read twice by
title is referred to the health
and Human Services Committee.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
eighty nine as amended.
And actually to public education
creating a division in the
public education department to
focus on special education.
Creating a special education act
providing powers and duties.
Changing definitions requiring
accountability amending
repealing and acting and
recompiling sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight making an
appropriation Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two eighty nine as amended
sanitation grease of server
Senator two eighty nine is
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Education Committee.
Senate bill three sixteen as
amended introduced by Senator
Hamblen and potentially leading
to data collection requiring
certain executive departments
and public bodies to collected
demographic data pertaining to
sexual orientation and gender
identity Senate bill three
sixteen as amended.
Senate bill three sixteen is
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
thirty eight and act relating to
the peace the public peace
health safety and welfare
repealing a section of the New
Mexico finance authority act
related to the local
transportation infrastructure
fund Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
thirty eight.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
thirty eight having been read
twice by title is referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
thirty nine introduced by
senator meaning when you lost
and others and act relating to
the public peace health safety
and welfare.
Making appropriation for
legislative staff who have been
working in the state capital
during the public health
emergency Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill four thirty eight.
Senate finance committee
substitute Senate bill four
thirty nine having been read
twice by title is referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty two and act
relating to citizens us citizens
substitute Care review providing
for submission review and
resolution of grieving
grievances against the children
youth and families department
pertaining to substitute Care
defining terms in the citizen
substitute Care review act
providing for staffing of the
substitute care Advisory Council
providing for rules pertaining
to volunteer members providing
access to you and requirements
for confidentiality of certain
records and information changing
reporting requirements amending
repealing and enacting sections
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight Senate health of public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill two forty two Senate
health committee firstly since
two percent of bill two four two
having been read twice by title
is referred to the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
Senate bill two ninety four as
amended introduced by Senator
Stefanics and act relating to
marriage increasing the fee that
a county clerk must charge for
issuing acknowledging and
recording American license and
certificate Senate bill two
ninety four as amended.
Senate bill two ninety four has
admitted having been read twice
by title is for the local
governments land grants and
cultural affairs committee.
Senate bill three seventeen
introduced by Senator Hickey and
act relating to health coverage
prohibiting imposition of cost
sharing for behavioral health
services under certain insurance
coverage policies or plans
allowing plans exempt from
regulation under the New Mexico
insurance code to eliminate cost
sharing for behavioral health
services establishing reporting
requirements Senate bill three
seventeen.
Senator three seventeen having
been read twice by title is
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee.
Senate bill three forty
introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and act relating to medical
cannabis amending a section of
the Lynn and Erin compassionate
use act to clarify the
definition of reciprocal
participants Senate bill three
forty.
Senator three forty having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill three forty five as
amended introduced by Senator
Gonzales and act relating to
public officers clarify any car
finding clarifying attendance
pursuant to the party M. and
mileage act changing the range
of per diem reimbursement for in
state and out of state travel
for certain public officers and
employees Senate bill three
forty five as amended.
Senator three forty fives
admitted having been read twice
by title is referred to the.
State government elections and
the Indian Affairs Committee.
Senate bill for ten as amended
introduced by senator for an act
relating to taxation amending
sections of the tax
administrative administration
act in amending and enacting
sections of the withholding tax
act to address federal
partnership audit or adjustment
request resulting in under or
overpayment of certain state
taxes Senate bill for ten as
amended.
Senator for ten has amended
having been read twice by title
is referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
House memorial thirty two
introduce by Representative
Johnson a memorial requesting
the governor to assess the
recommendation in the economic
opportunities and challenges of
uranium mine cleanup in New
Mexico report and to create a
committee of key stakeholders
promote collaboration and
coordination the development of
environmental we mediation as a
key industry in New Mexico House
memorial thirty two.
House memorial thirty two having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
We go to the next order of
business committee report no
objections so ordered Cllr to
read.
Mr speaker your state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
Senate joint resolution thirteen
has had it under consideration
point same as recommendation
that it to pass respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Representative Lewis.
Anybody dealer.
About what Mr speaker right of
action a favorable committee for
the Senate joint resolution
thirteen all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
Eight as a committee for the
doctor.
Mr speaker Education Committee
tomb is been referred house
memorial twenty six has had it
under consideration point same
with recommendations that a do
pass respectfully submitted G.
Andrés Romero chair unanimous
consent that the committee point
read together acted upon the
single vote reflect in the
journals of their act on
individually hearing objections
ordered Clark to read.
Senate bill forty three two
passed and then to the taxation
and revenue committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty two passed respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee report we're adoption
zero three point house memorial
twenty six and Senate bills
forty three and Senate Judiciary
Committee sets you percent of
bill eighty all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
All this was named Canadian
ports are not.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to Mr
referred Senate bill twenty
three as amended has had it
under consideration point same
with recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted ever
Armstrong chair.
Unanimous consent of the
committee point ready other
acted upon the signals of
reflection the journals of their
act on individually you know
Chechens order click to read.
Senate bill sixty one as amended
to pass.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety as amended to pass.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
twenty nine do pass.
Senate bill two forty four as
amended to pass as amended
respectfully submitted Deborah
Armstrong chair.
We're adoption of favorable
committee reports and Senate
bills twenty three estimates
sixty one is amended.
Two forty four is amended in
Senate Judiciary Committee such
you for Senate health of
conversely sub two percent of
the one ninety as amended in
Senate finance committee so to
for Senate bill two twenty nine
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
They replace reductive.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred Senate bill ninety
eight as amended has had it
under consideration point thing
I commission that I do pass
respectfully submitted on twenty
one last year unanimous consent
of the precursor to gather acted
on the scene of a reflection the
journals of their act on
individually hearing of sections
order click to read Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill two zero two two
passed as amended.
Senate bill two eighty one do
pass.
Senate bill three sixty five as
amended do passed respectfully
submitted on twenty moments this
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee report transaction
favorable committee reports on
Senate bill is ninety eight is
amended to anyone and three
sixty five as amended in Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
presentable to a to submit all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was named reports
reductive.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to Mr
referred house bill three twenty
six has had it under
consideration reports a with
recommendation that I do not
passed that house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for house bill two three twenty
six two passed as amended
respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair unanimous
consent to have the committee
pursuant to gather act on scene
vote reflects in the journal so
they're acted upon individually
no objections order where to re
Senate bill forty two as amended
to pass as amended.
Senate bill one thirty three as
amended.
Two passed as amended.
Senate bill two oh four do pass
respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair.
Reduction Mr speaker transaction
and I will the report on house
bill three to six as amended a
favorable committee report on
house appropriations and finance
the subsidy for House Bill three
twenty six and favorable clearer
pores in senators forty two as
amended with thirty three as
amended and to all for all those
in favor please signify by
saying hi I'm all this was named
reports reductive.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to is been referred
house bill two eighty five has
had it under consideration of
forcing with recommendation that
it do not passed that house
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for house bill two
eighty five two passed
respectfully submitted this
Martinez chair.
We're adoption referral
committee report on house bill
two eighty five a favorable
committee report taxation
revenue for the substitute for
house bill twenty five all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
Thanks for listening to reports
about.
Mr speaker your taxation revenue
committee to is been referred
Senate bill one twenty one has
had it under consideration
forcing with recommendation that
I do pass respectfully submitted
Javier Martínez chair.
Well it up to the committee
report on the speaker we're
adoptions Senator committee for
the Senate bill one twenty one
all those in favor please
signify by saying hi.
Hey Hey three point Dr.
Mr speaker you're enrolling in a
grossing Committee to miss been
referred house bill twenty two
as amended house bill fifty two
as amended house bill fifty
seven as amended house bill one
fifty seven has had them under
consideration reports the same
have been duly enrolled in gross
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted Brittney
Barreras chair.
Mr speaker move adoption please.
We're adoptions the role the
report on house bills twenty two
fifty two fifty seven and one
fifty seven all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
Hi.
This was named three point
adopted.
The record reflect the doing
roles in a gross copies.
House bill twenty two is amended
house bill fifty two is amended
house with fifty seven as
amended has one fifty seven have
been signed by the officers of
the house in open session.
Finally some of the.
That we go to the next order of
business third reading of
legislation no objections order
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan are you ready and item
three.
I'm ready Mr speaker.
Can you get me to that point
Representative election
necessary for placing Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill three seventy seven
as amended on final passage has
been taken the gentle lady to
explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker and good
afternoon members Senate bill
three thirty seven as amended
and but we have before us today
is affectionately known as our
junior bill is a supplemental
general appropriations act Mr
speaker and and members inside
house bill two which is our
primary budget bill we provided
for a framework to pay for the
supplemental expenses.
And in front of you you should
have a copy of the overview the
Senate amendments and the house
amendment Mr speaker and members
I would like to say that
it was a very good process a
very easy process for the
Appropriations Committee and I
want to extend a special thanks
to Representative small and
Representative Sweetser for
their good work in shepherding
all seventy members of in terms
of the bill but it but in
general Mr speaker this bill
Is a supplemental general
appropriations act.
House appropriations and finance
committee amendment to Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill three seventy seven
appropriates and an additional
thirty four million dollars from
the public education reform Fund
and an additional three hundred
thousand for provided cash
balances this brings the total
non general fund appropriation
contained in this bill two
thirty five million dollars
house appropriations and finance
committee amendment added an
additional hundred ninety five
million non recurring general
fund revenue in FY twenty one FY
twenty two.
Unless otherwise specified for
broadband to repay federal
unemployment trust fund loans
and for tribal late and for
tribal education programs.
In total nonrecurring general
fund appropriations contained in
this bill included two hundred
and two million dollars that HSC
amendment added an additional
four point two million in
reoccurring general fund
appropriations for various state
agencies in total recurring
general fund revenue
appropriation contained in this
bill includes nine point four
million we also included tribal
education
the total for that was ten point
six million four point five
million for tribal education
departments to develop education
blueprints for community based
education programs four point
five million for tribal
libraries to provide culturally
and linguistically relevant
after school and summer
programming at one point six
million for native American
language programs also.
In the Senate bill three seventy
seven we appropriate a hundred
and ten million for broadband
expansion infrastructure and
support for expenditures why
twenty six hundred million of
the appropriations are for are
to connect New Mexico fund at do
it contingent on the passage of
house bill ten creating the fund
and of that hundred million
seventy nine is from the general
fund to plan design engineer
construct purchased in a quick
broadband infrastructure
statewide at twenty five million
is from the public education
reform Fund for the same purpose
for public schools statewide
both appropriations required do
it to submit a plan of
expenditure to the legislature
before spending more than ten
percent of the appropriation
five million is from the general
fund for grants to local
governments tribes electric and
telephone cooperatives for
strategic planning and grant
writing support an additional
ten million is appropriated to
the Economic Development
Department for leader projects
that support emerging broadband
technology I think one of the
most important pieces of this Mr
speaker and members is the
unemployment insurance we
include a hundred million
general fund appropriation to
the workforce solutions
department to repay federal
unemployment trust fund loans in
FY twenty one and also
authorized an additional two
hundred million from the general
fund operating reserve for the
unemployment trust fund to repay
federal employment laws in FY
twenty two contingent that no
other federal funds or federal
loan forgiveness materializes
before that point and as I said
Mr speaker and members you
should have before you both the
house of.
Spreadsheet HSC supplemental
appropriation our junior items
or page one through thirteen and
then those items at the Senate
have is it's titled at the top
Senate finance committee of
substitute for Senate bill three
seventy seven and that's page
one through six so what we
provided for you Mr speaker and
members is basically
spread sheets is a lot easier
right that actually are I think
it's a thirty eight page
amendment that was prepared by
our staff
in in in response to this bill
and if I may Mister speaker I'd
like to ask that both the
subcommittee chairs
Representative small and
Sweetser said few words about
the process.
I
think generally the gentle lady
from granted although and Luna
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you Mr chair and the thank
you the gentle lady from
McKinley I just appreciated
being part of the process it
looks like I may be frozen some
of the stuff my video here I
appreciated being part of the
process and I greatly
appreciated the house members
not only understanding but
embracing our concept of having
a floor and contribution or
allocation appropriation to
their selected entities and just
the overall positive.
The race the the project list so
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady.
Thank you generally the
gentleman from the Indiana
Representative small.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
at thank you to the madam chair
the gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan I would echo the
gentle lady from Luna any Dogo
those comments appreciating
members they're diligent work to
insure that the dedications they
intended to support a state in
their communities.
quite quicker a late that.
Been chair and by
our house appropriation of
finance committee staff and this
was a very positive process that
will benefit state residents
allow each member the
opportunity to focus in on
important areas of state
interest and really.
Just appreciate all the work
that went into it thank you very
much Mr speaker and thank you
very much to madam chair.
And with that Mr speaker we
would stand for questions.
The gentle lady there is debate
the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does a
gentle lady from McKinley County
you.
Would be happy to yield Mister
speaker gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
don't really have that many
questions on this
Junior money as a matter of fact
stand up to talk about people's
junior money or capital outlay
it's always kind of a dangerous
thing so Mr speaker and gentle
lady I just have one question
and it is about.
Of the hundred thousand dollar.
Disbursement to hire an employee
into the governor's office that
set in this
in in the junior money bill and
I I do understand we are looking
at spending a hundred ten
million dollars for broadband
expansion infrastructure and
support through FY twenty six.
but Mr speaker and and gentle
lady
there are two of bills that are
At different stages of the
process
currently one of the house and
one in the Senate.
House Bill ten.
which is in the state and
currently sitting in Senate
finance committees passed out of
the house.
that.
Bill
Puts in place or creates a brand
new broadband development
division.
And
And that is going to be located
in the department of information
technology.
And Mr speaker gentle lady
there's another bill which is
actually the first item on our
floor calendar that is sitting
there Senate bill ninety three
and that.
establishes the office of
broadband access and expansion
also to be located within do it
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
that is already
Is there already of money the
for that or is this money the
hundred and ten million dollars
for broadband expansion does
that include money for either
one of these two bills that are
that are
making their way through the
process Mr speaker gently.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen yes what we have
in this is that we've included
items that are tied to
somebody's junior request
I don't have the the name of
that individual it would be
appropriate to necessary list
that was somewhere in the
process they think it was either
a Senate ad or how soon yeah
which they've asked for that to
be funded.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so the particular hundred
thousand dollar appropriation is
a a a member's request.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes it
is because what ends up
happening is we start trying to
correlate all of the request
between the Senate and the house
member adds and from that point
it goes into one category so
that means that that had to come
from either a Senate ad or a
house and.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's why I said it at the
beginning the it is dangerous to
mess with the junior
appropriations bill so Mister
speaker July that I had I did
have an amendment prepared of
four it was a thirty eight page
amendment I had a great line
where I was gonna say this
simple amendment merely takes
out a hundred thousand dollars
but Mr speaker and gentle lady
if that is if that is the case
if that is what you're telling
me I am not going to introduce
my amendment at this time thank
you Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you John
there's further debate the
gentle lady from granted Dogo in
Sierra Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady yield.
I'd be happy to yield thank you
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady for all of your
work on this I am looking at the
section of the bill where we are
taking money from the school
reform Fund and we are
transferring it to a hundred and
ten million for broadband.
Four point five for tribal
education departments four point
five mental million to travel
libraries and one point five
million for native American
language programs under the
public school finance.
Twenty two dash eight dash
twenty three dash thirteen it's
explains the public education
reform Fund in that section it
says that under be that these
funds are subject to learn
legislative appropriation.
The funds appropriated to the
department this is a
implementing evidence based
public education initiatives
related to high quality teaching
and school leadership extended
learning opportunities to
students educational
interventions for at risk
students effective and efficient
school administration and
promoting public education
accountability could you please
explain the evidence based
public education initiatives
related to high quality teaching
and school leadership that these
align with and would be reported
under to the body.
Well thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady first I'd
like to let the members know
that
we have the authority to
appropriate or allowed to
appropriate funds under this
statute.
It doesn't necessarily mean that
each appropriation ties directly
to those components so we wanted
to get into the detail of each
one of these and you look at
at and you're looking at those
sections we use the reform funds
based on what we thought were
best years for this upcoming
year.
And some of that Mr speaker and
gentle lady as you know has gone
into our tribal education
package and does some has gone
into broadband.
We have found that that
certainly match within that
criteria the public finance act
and again were allowed to make
those appropriations as a
legislative body thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentle
lady well I I just I continue to
remain concerned that the lack
of flexibility that we're
providing to school districts
that school district school
board any A. A. F. T. that
people are begging for
flexibility in K. five plus
extended learning and that these
funds are almost exclusively
being reverted from those
programs and I'm I although I
strongly support these
initiatives to improve outcomes
for the tribal areas tribal
education department tribal
libraries native language
programs and even the broadband
accessibility these dollars are
being reverted from are are not
being drawn down by school
districts mostly rural school
districts mostly add producing
districts that cannot needs the
in flexible standards that are
being imposed on them and
therefore no students in these
districts are getting K. five
plus no students in these
districts are getting extended
learning those interventions
that are considered something
that this body has prioritized
are reverting to the school
reform Fund and now being
distributed elsewhere and so Mr
speaker and gentle lady I just
want to continue to remind this
body that these are reverted
dollars the that that were not
drawn down and they were not
gone down because we have not
allowed flexibility for our ag
producers if one teacher cannot
continue teaching her homeroom
class that grade receives our
services we're calling in
voluntary but it's an all or
nothing kind of game per grade
if we cannot do it K. through
five we cannot do K. three and
if the extended hours do not
work for district because they
are I'm producers need to go
home and they need to work their
farms and ranches or they.
Do not want their students
parents want their students
driving home in the dark leaving
the house in the dark they're
opting out of these K. five
programs in extended learning
it's being reverted to the
school reform Fund that left my
district that left district
thirty eight and although I
don't disagree that these are
important purpose these are
dollars that left my district
and are not returning and Mr
speaker and gentle lady thank
you for your time.
Senior for the debate gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate the comments of this
afternoon right now the Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill three seventy set
three seventy seven as amended
do now pass we are on final
passage of Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill three seventy seven as
amended the vote is now open.
Sure.
Is about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote and
representative Ely.
Representative Eli.
Representative Ely is yes
Representative Lewis.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative closer to sixty
for the for administrative
native Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill three
seventeen as amended has passed
the house.
Mexico unfortunately from
Bernalillo Representative
Thompson are you ready of that
item Mr speaker can you get me
to that point the record reflect
election necessary for the
Senator one fifty two on final
passage has been taking the
gentlelady to explain it all
thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
one fifty two it has to do with
continuing care contracts and
what those are are are.
Elderly facilities where you
have the big slide in at the
beginning and essentially you're
buying long term insurance that
that the contract will cover a
nursing home care or a memory
care so it's it's just
essentially long term insurance
and what this bill does Mr
speaker is it it out.
Puts into place a requirement
that these these
Rupes.
Put have enough money put away
to to pay for the things that
they have promised the residents
that they would pay for and the
way to do that is to have
actuarial studies that are that
are
Look that are turned into the
aging and long term services the
Mr speaker you may have all
gotten this this email from one
of the residents of one
encouraging us to pass it why
it's an easy bill what's not to
like it's a feel good win win
kind of bills we are work for
three years and can finally see
that don rising no money is
requested so with that Mr
speaker I will stand for
questions.
Seeing gentle lady to close Mr
speaker I move that Senate bill
one fifty to do now pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
bill one fifty two the vote is
now open.
The question other members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Lord.
I'm sorry I can hear you.
Representative Lord is yes
Representative Lewis.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative closer to sixty
seven in the affirmative zero
negative Senate bill one eighty
one fifty two has passed the
house.
Mexico to item I gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative Dixon
are you ready on that item.
Thank you Mr speaker will you
get me to that point the record
reflect on action necessary for
by the Senate bill two twenty
two on final passage has been
taken the gentlelady to explain
the bill.
Mr speaker and members of this
body this is a simple bill
Senate Bill two twenty two is a
statutory cleanup bill to the
twenty fifteen health
information systems act I now
stand for questions.
Seeing no debate gentlelady to
simply close.
Mr speaker I move that Senate
bill two twenty two do now pass.
We were on final passage of
Senate bill two twenty two the
vote is now open.
Representative close the clerk
to call the member.
He was not present at the
critical member that it recorded
the Representative Dow.
Representative Dow is yes.
Representative closer to sixty
sixty for attorney to the
negative cynical to twenty two
is passed the house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis are you
available for item number nine.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis.
Three.
Let's get back to that one could
item ten gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative
Trujillo are you ready on item
number yes.
Mr speaker yes I am.
The record reflect election
necessary for placing Senate
bill ninety two is imagine a
final passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain it all
yes Mr speaker Senate bill
ninety two is twice is going to
be amended I have to amendments
that should have been
distributed to you.
This afternoon.
The first one is
Point two two zero seven three
seven point one Mr speaker point
of order.
Can she introduced of the the
bill before she introduces the
amendments don't know what the
builders at.
My apologies Mr speaker I'll do
the the bill first I thought I
could do the amendments but.
Whatever works for you.
Mr Mr speaker.
Senate bill ninety two simply
requires that the.
The confidentiality of of
found a person status and
location in certain
circumstances what it does is it
allows for a writ nor or oral
request for a law enforcement
agency by the store the
intermediate family member of a
missing person.
And the law enforcement agencies
child immediately request from
the clearing house information
concerning the missing person
that they made the custodian or
immediate family member in the
identification or location of
the missing person.
Excuse me a law enforcement
agency to which a request has
been made pursuant to subsection
may this section shall report to
the custodian or immediate
family member on the results of
its inquiry to the clearing
house within seven calendar days
after the day the request is
received by the law enforcement
agency or as soon as a result of
its inquiry become available.
And you language Mr speaker a
lot of a section C. a law
enforcement agency shall not
report to a custodian or
immediate family members
pursuant to a subsection B. of
the section that the missing per
person is not a minor and this
was a change that was done in
Senate judiciary of.
Has been founded has informed
the law enforcement agency or
the clearing house that the
person request confidentiality
regarding the person status and
location if the missing person
who request confidentiality
regarding the person status and
location is a person with the
custodian appointed by a judge
the law enforcement agency.
Shall inform the court that the
person has been found and has
been requested and I'm sorry and
has requested confidentiality
regarding the person status and
locations and the Mr.
Mr chairman of section to
describes the confidentiality of
records us part of the of the
original bill and at the bottom
of the page for it simply says.
A new languages except as
provided pursuant to section
twenty nine dash fifteen dash
five NMSA nineteen seventy eight
may I now introduce the
amendments Mr chair yes please
the police also true to number
on the the when you wish to move
first well yes two two point
seven three seven point one.
It has a passed out it is on the
website generally these move
house amendment everyone is
Senate bill ninety two as
amended.
Is there the general to explain
disincentive.
Yes it simply says Mr of
chairman that on page two line
twelve strike the closing
quotation mark and we.
Market and between nine to
twelve and thirteen insert the
following new subsection.
Do the inspection of public
records act shall not apply to a
request to inspect records
regard regarding the person was
requested confidentiality
pursuant to subject subsection
C. of this section is simply
exempts the person's location
from in the program question
this was a concern I wouldn't as
Analysts of the house Mr
chairman.
Very well is there a discussion
on this amendment.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Andrea.
Thank you Mr speaker
does the gentle lady you.
Yes I yield to the gentleman
from someone.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady at it appears to me as this
ammendment.
Amends.
A language that we from an
amendment in the Senate is that
correct or is that incorrect Mr
speaker gentle lady I'm I'm
looking at amendment here.
sensibility to amendment
That
is accent section page two line
twelve.
Thanks so could that how does
this how does your amendment
interact with the amendment.
That is also on page two line
twelve.
Mr chair and gentleman from
Sierra let me of the reach out
to my expert witness her name is
Linda Siegel if you hold please.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan.
This particular amendment simply
addresses the different
component.
because they don't want.
my apologies because this simply
allows the guardian.
The.
I'm sorry.
My paper this exempts the
person's location from the pro
we question it wasn't in the
originals of Senate judiciary
committee's request it was so
it's not repetitive Mr chair I'm
sorry Mr speaker and gentleman
was.
The able to read this through so
what it does is that the the
last quotation.
Mark on line twelve is removed
and then section D. is added in
so I believe I understand that
thank you the gentle lady from
thanks for answering my
question.
Thank you yes.
These are further debate on the
amendment.
Is there objection to it.
Hearing on house amendment
number one the Senate bill
ninety two as amended is adopted
gentlelady to move house floor
amendment number two would you
please tell us the two oh two
number yes Mr speaker the second
amendment is point two two zero
seven I'm sorry point two two
zero seven five zero point one
gentlelady to explain house
floor amendment number two yes
the first line mistreatment of
Mr speaker you strike Senate
Judiciary Committee amendment
one.
And number two on page two line
twelve after the period insert
if the missing person who
request confidentiality
regarding the person status and
location is a person with the
custodian appointed by a judge
the law enforcement agency shall
inform the court that the person
has been found and has requested
confidentiality regarding the
person status and location
a law enforcement agency shall
also report to the custodian
that the person has been found
unless there is a couple there
is competent evidence that to do
so may cause harm to the
incapacitated person and Mr
chairman this was also a
discussion that
Prompted this the guardian the
guardian should know but he
should not know the location he
should know that or she should
know that the person has been
found but they don't need to
know the location if the person
requests it.
Learns
a location.
Okay the John Chavis and Lincoln
on the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker does it
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Chavis and you
have the power.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
appreciate you bringing forth
this amendment because the
problem that we saw was a you
have incapacitated person who
was found and if you could not
reveal their whereabouts to the
guardian then you would
potentially be putting that
person in harm's way M.
amendment passed a person may
tell the police officers I don't
want to be found.
But unless there is some
evidence to back that up the
guardian really needs to know
that the person's been found so
they can perform their.
Court order duties to that
person and so I appreciate you
adding that the amendment to
this bill I think it strengthens
the and it's still addresses the
concerns that were raised if the
person says my guardian is a
horrible person it is beating me
if there's evidence of that fact
they can still maintain that
confidentiality the Cork then
we'll be come involved and the
court will then investigate that
and determine whether or not
that guardian needs to be
address store or some action
taken so I appreciate you
bringing bringing forth this
ammendment Mr speaker gentle
lady and I support it.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that was based on the
request that you made in the
committee.
These are for the debate.
Is there objection to the
amendment.
Hearing none house floor
amendment number two to Senate
bill ninety two as amended to
stop it.
Seeing no debate on the bill
gentlelady to close yesterday
gentlelady from Santa.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from.
Bernalillo.
Yes Mr chairman house the gentle
lady because of all COVID.
This lady I'm just curious as to
we know that there's a lot of
federal relocation and the
Bernalillo county sensible area.
And so is this going to infringe
on any way on some of the
federal relocation.
Issues are as far as the state
of New Mexico is concerned.
Mr Chairman no it will not.
Is that individuals hurt Mary
located and their families
looking for they usually don't
know where they are and this is
not the information is in the NC
actually.
Is not going to affect them in
any way.
Me my what.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Santa Fe County no it's not okay
thank you Mr speaker thank you
dental and seeing a further
debate gentle lady to close yes
Mr speaker I now with twice
amended of house Senate bill
ninety two you do pass we're on
final passage of Senate bill
ninety two as amended to vote is
now open.
The vote is about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Cook.
Representative Trujillo.
Yeah I couldn't find my nuvo
but yes I support this bill
Representative Trujillo both yes
vote is now closed by vote of
sixty eight in the affirmative
zero to negative Senate bill
ninety two as amended has passed
the house we'll go back to item
number nine gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative Lewis
are you ready on that item.
Yes Mr speaker thank you will
you give me to that point the
record reflect all action
necessary for placing Senate
finance committee since two
percent on ninety on final
passage is been taken the gentle
lady to explain all.
Thank you Mr speaker it so this
bill is regarding certain
overtime pay as salary and of
the P. R..
It includes overtime pay that is
required for a regular scheduled
tour of duty for fire protection
or law enforcement it excuse me
enforcement activities in the
definition of salary for the
purpose of calculating pensions
other under the public employees
retirement act this would only
apply to employees subject to
the fair labor standards act
overtime exemption which are
municipal fire members and
misappropriation members
additionally I just be ninety
increases the employee and
member contributions to the
retirement fund by one point
five percent in fiscal year
twenty twenty two and I stand
for questions.
There is the the gentleman from
Chavis Eddie Arcaro
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady LA.
I yield Mister speaker.
A gentle lady the state of
actuarial computations are only.
For red regularly scheduled
hours not on call hours and not
for
over time and are succeeding a
regular schedule is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe that's correct but let
me just double check that one
minute place.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen that is correct it is
for regularly scheduled hours no
additional hours and no on call
hours.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady as
S. contracts change and this is
hours of schedule change will
there be a request I have two
questions one including these
hours I have not had the chance
to pull up the FIR so I'm asking
you for your help can you tell
me what the FIR cost is and is
there a schedule for actuarial
rebalancing is schedules change.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman give me one minute
please.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentlemen so it will actually be
a net zero affect with the one
point five percent increase on
the employee and that will
offset the thirty two million
that is reflected in the FIR.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady of
very quickly you're saying that
with the increase in the
employee contribution they're
paying for the actuarial
increase of the retirement.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
This for the right the gentle
lady from Los Alamos Rio Arriba
Sandoval in Santa Fe.
Representative Chandler used to
debate.
Again the general Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generally yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
I think it was just
Representative actually this.
The change was awash with the
one point five percent increase
in the contribution is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct and the speaker gentle
lady won't read return on in
that to retirement fund are we
projecting of for that to come
out even.
Mr speaker and gentleman if you
would just give me one minute
I'm going to consult with my
expert and I apologize that I
did not find this information
earlier but my expert is L. yet
in.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentlemen so the actuary study
is based off the investment
assumption right of the seven
point two five percent and that
is the para and Alice's YG
stated in the FIR.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady what your expert happened a
little what the one five and ten
year rolling average of those
rights return our please.
One moment Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentlemen so
that's an actuarial question and
my expert does not have that
information I apologize.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady that's all the
questions I.
Through the right John from
Bernalillo Representative Rehm.
Thank you Mr speaker does
gentlelady from Bernalillo
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I have an amendment
I'm not sure if you have it do
you have a the two oh two number
is two two zero six two eight
point one.
Gentleman has been passed out it
is
later on let's say and we have
sent it to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
That's correct thank you Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker I now move house
floor amendment one to Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill ninety gentleman to
explain the amendment.
Mr speaker and gentle lady when
you look at this and then that
there was some discussion that
of money could be taken from
different.
groups and taken over to another
group so when they give you an
example under the pair plan
right now there's a state
general the state police
corrections for them the
municipal general the new
minister for police equipment
fire judicial and magistrates.
And what this amendment says is
is that each one of those funds
will remain by itself so it must
succeed by itself and we can't
take it move money from one plan
into the other.
With that Mr speaker I now stand
for questions.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
is this a friendly amendment.
Mr speaker this is and I'm from
the amendment.
Johnny would you like to offer
comment on the minutes before we
go to debate.
Yes so the way I understand it
is that these are these funds
are coal mingled so it would be
hard to implemented.
Okay there is debate the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and
result.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield
County.
Mr speaker I yield to my
colleague from Travis county.
Thank you gentlemen
I guess my question is.
If we.
Create the segregated and
individual.
I'll call them silos of pension
funding for various in public
employees.
Is that a change for where we
are today prior to the bill
passing Sir.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis.
Specifically the.
Municipal fire is funded at
sixty percent.
And it is actually the
projection is going down hill on
that.
The fire members made a
statement that in the future
they could go to other funds and
take money out of those
categories and move it to their
fund.
And.
As you're aware most all a pair
of groups each have a different
contribution ratio.
It would be unfair for one group
to say to another group well
we're not going to put in as
much for the what is needed to
fund our fund and we'll just go
in and take it from another
fund.
And that is the spirit of this
ammendment right here is to make
sure each fund stands on it so.
Thank you gentleman.
Mr speaker chairman.
Then in clarification I believe.
The answer is yes this makes a
statutory change that doesn't
allow in the intermingling
call mingling whatever word you
you wish.
For these various pension funds.
Is that a change that is
affected by your amendment in
this bill.
Sure.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis no you could co mingled
funds for investment.
But you can't go ahead and for
actual world of figure out this
fund is funded at acts when the
money is when I'm taking money
from the other fund or one that
funds going broke.
Thank you gentlemen and and
again for clarification Mr
speaker.
The end these.
Pension funds stand on their
own.
Funded by the employees and the
state.
Already question.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Travis originally I thought
that's how they were but in the
debate on this bill it came up
from the fire that they could go
ahead and take money out of
another fund if there fund
became insolvent.
I see and gentleman Mr speaker
then with your amendment that is
no longer permissible under the
statute that would pass today
with your amendment Sir.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Chavis you're correct each fund
has to stand on its own merits.
Thank you chairman Mr speaker
that concludes my question thank
you this for the debate the
gentleman from Cibola and
McKinley Representative Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from that a lot of the
you'll.
Mr speaker I yield my friend
from Cibola County.
Leo.
This and because you're taking
the original language in your
change in the discrediting that
out you're changing it by the
amendment project.
Mr speaker commission Andrew
repeat the question again.
Okay I'll try Mr speaker and
gentleman.
You are taking the original
language in the field since the.
And to do that with your
amendment is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Cibola County the only thing I'm
changing in the original bill is
just to make it clear that each
fund must stand on its own
merit.
So thank you.
Thank you.
I'm really P. R. A. as a whole
okay and we have a municipal
employees and state employees
and
the different entities the.
Please money into this
retirement.
So the.
We we able to get the money that
this that goes into the
municipalities and but it's
separate in the let me that
comes in from to counties and
but it separate would be able to
do that.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis was so the money coming
in from a city or county would
go into whatever fund it was
directed towards which it does
currently so to speak they all
go into one big I called the P.
R. A. retirement fund my
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis no they're going into
each specific fund.
And then the entire amount is
invested wholly.
Okay.
This correctly so you're telling
me that in municipal employees
money the county employees
money.
Does is invested separately so
therefore the municipal employee
is going to get the the money
that they get from their
retirement differs from the
account really.
Mr speaker gentleman from Cibola
so let's go ahead and say that
you're a fireman in the city of
requests and your and then
another person who's of firemen
and
Cibola County fire department
there under let's assume fire
plan I and so both all of their
money or their contribution
would go into fire plan I is
that this is just saying the
money in the fire fund would
have to stand on its own you
can't go over to the judges
retirement and take money out of
there and bring it into the fire
fund to go ahead and keep them
solvent.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo okay I understand
what you're trying to do but
honestly.
I mean.
I don't know how you can just
take this money again to figure
out of this dollar goes there
and that fixes those there it's
all goes into the same box
there's just no way to separate
it this is really a non from the
amendment thank you Mr speaker I
yield.
Mr the right John from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield.
Mr speaker I yield to my friends
From the southeast.
Speaker and gentleman.
It's all of the funds collected.
In these various retirement
accounts going to a common pool
and is invested in the.
A similar matter to every other
for is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman of.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman Hey
can you tell me there must be a
number of these individual
retirement pools can you tell
may go for example far has farm
have one policeman have one how
many of those order.
Mr speaker and gentleman of here
is it so the state general.
Is currently funded at fifty
nine point nine percent.
The state police and corrections
is currently funded at a hundred
and twenty seven percent.
The municipal general is
currently funded at seventy six
point seven.
The municipal police is funded
at seventy four point nine the
municipal fire is funded at
sixty percent.
The judicial fund is fifty three
point five and the magistrate
Fund is fifty three point four
percent Mr speaker and gentleman
those funded ratios or
consequence of how much money is
being contributed by each
individual member of that pool
and then back to work early how
much money is projected to be of
removed as a consequence of
retirements is that correct.
Mr speaker you are correct
looking at the liability in the
future or current.
So.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
For all of these.
Chairman programs equal across
all those schools that you just
described.
Mr speaker No they're not so
some plans we did some revision
but
there were plans so we're twenty
years in retirement and they're
now twenty five the older plans
or twenty five for now thirty
years and the contribution by it
when you look at the employee
and the employer is different in
each one of these funds.
So Mr speaker and gentleman.
The contribution register for.
The ability to retire.
Varies by job classification and
each pool.
It somehow doesn't seem fair.
That there would be the ability
from one pool with a lower
funded ratio to take money
strong a pool with a higher
funded ratio is that what you're
attempting to do with your
amendments are.
Mr speaker and gentleman exactly
I'm trying to say that is not
fair I think that it could
result in a lawsuit because each
group has a has a of our right
to the amount of money that's in
there but All I Want to do is
clarify that you can't take
money out of one fund and choose
to support another.
Mr speaker and gentleman keeping
track of the individual funded
ratios in each one of those
schools in a a common investment
strategy is so trivial
accounting problems of not.
Mr speaker and gentleman you're
exactly right the thanks for all
the money into one pot to go
ahead and invest it in they know
how much is in there for each
one of those funds.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
jump up leave Arkansas forty
member.
The general release
Representative Stapleton.
Mr speaker with the gentleman
from Bernalillo you.
Mr speaker I yield to my
colleague from Bernalillo
county.
Mr speaker the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Could you explain to me what is
the reason to maintain separate
accounts.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Albuquerque the separate
accounts or the ones that I'm
speaking up so a state general a
state police correction a
meniscal General a minister for
police equipment full fire a
judicial and a magistrate in
keep all those as separate
accounts.
So Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo my understanding is
that this Senate bill ninety
includes all the time K. that is
required for regular schedule
pool duty so I have protection
of law enforcement activities in
the definition of the term
salary.
I'm
calculating pensions under the
public employees at.
This
is subject to the fair labor
standards
the municipal police members of
the municipal members is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Albuquerque you are correct
about of the men of this bill
and that will who it applies to
I would just want to clarify
that you can't move the funds
around.
And the gentleman from
Bernalillo you're taking out the
maintenance of the separate
counted funds shall not require
the actual segregation of
maintaining separate accounts
but the same time you're stating
that.
You know what.
Read accounts so I don't
understand exactly what you're
trying to do.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo of what we're trying
to do is clarify the language in
current law that when we say
separate accounts they mean
separate accounts and you cannot
move money from one account to
the other so Mister speaker and
gentleman from are you checked
are you trying to change current
law that is not part of what the
objective of the bill is.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I'm trying to clarify
because in current law that says
that you can have that there you
will have separate accounts but
this says they're going to be
separate and are not going to be
you can't move money from one to
the other if a plan is failing.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
You also mentioned in your
amendment.
That the association so hold the
assets collected from the
members of each coverage plan of
the money earned from the
investment of those assets
separately and in trust for
public land so.
You.
Firefighters and the police I
just want to know are you
targeting firefighters and
police on this all the time.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Albuquerque no I'm not I'm not
targeting anyone it's just there
became a discussion in committee
thank you could move money from
one plan to the other and I
don't think that that's right
and what I want to do is
clarified that you can't move
money from one fund to another
fund.
So Mister speaker and the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
This discussion in committee was
related to new language in the
bill is it related to current
law.
Mr speaker gentle lady this
ammendment is yes related to
current law so you want to
change Mr speaker and gentleman
from Bernalillo you're asking to
change current law in this bill
that has no association what
what the intent of the bill is.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Albuquerque no I respectfully
disagree the issue as we find
many times in the committee
process there becomes a
discussion about other
unintended consequences what I'm
trying to do is make it very
clear that one fund if it's
going broke can not go and take
money out of another fund to
keep the of solvent particularly
when you look at the
contribution rates are different
in those funds.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I appreciate your
responses but I believe Mr
speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo if you wanted to do
this with current law you should
have you all been and Mister
speaker.
This is
mandated to this bill thank you
Mr.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
The gentle lady from you thank
you Mr speaker I move to table.
The generally these motions to
table the amendment voted yes in
the amendment will be tabled of
no and we will be back on debate
other.
The vote is now open.
What is about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthews both
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
No Representative Roger Montoya
votes no Representative
Townsend.
Representative Townsend both
now Representative close to
forty five in the affirmative
twenty five in the negative the
amendment has been tabled.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker that's a really
troubling because.
Problem is the old adage of
robbing robbing Peter to pay
Paul is there and I don't want
to see this to be used in the
future where you take funds from
one group to another.
And end up causing of problems
within the the of.
The community of workers you
know it may be in the city or
county that there funding
another group because that fund
that group doesn't want to put
in more money.
Anyway thank you Mr speaker.
This for the debate the gentle
lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr with the gentle
lady from Bernalillo you.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you the Mr speaker gently
can you tell me was this
unanimous
Vote from that the P. R. A.
board.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so I
believe that the you're a board
has endorsed this bill but I'm
not sure about the numbers I can
check if you give me one minute
please.
Here thank you.
I believe that the vote was in
favor and to impose.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you Janet I think I
actually some different
information on that and.
Just raised questions and and on
this bill itself
So thank you for the answer on a
just wondering and I just have
some some questions
As being a former.
State employee and the more
paying into this fund and and
and and knowing about it myself
speaker gentle lady on.
Why this has come about you know
what my we're separating out a
specific.
beneficiary here to.
To get to to have this happen in
this bill I'm just confused a
little bit and I I am wondering
if you can answer that.
Sure thank you Mr speaker and
lady so this is actually a bill
about fairness so right now
what's currently happening is
that the firefighters only get
eighty six percent to ninety two
percent of their annual base
salary reported to parents
whereas every other employee
gets a hundred percent reported
so it's just bringing up to that
level so that it's fair all
around.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you generally appreciate that
very very much
I'm just I am just I still have
some questions about it I I do
have a lot of time to read this
and I'm trying to read they're
at today
And I was sitting in the
committee where this was
received.
So.
Is this create any kind of in
balance Mr speaker gentle lady
with them up you know with other
areas or other
The beneficiaries across the
state in the same profession.
I'm Mr speaker and lady again
it's actually bringing them up
to that one hundred percent and
they're actually it would be for
all firefighters excuse me all
firefighters across the state
and it does not affect any other
fund.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you generally I I really
appreciate those the answer is
that it's just a little bit
confusing whenever I hear
something we're we're you know
we're partial or partially apps
you know a certain.
group over another so that's why
I just wanna make sure that you
know and voting on something
like this that I am I am making
it the best decision I can't on
this I appreciate those answers
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
yield back my time senior
further debate gentle lady to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker and body so
again this is just an issue of
fairness this is involving our
first responders are frontline
employees I think we've seen the
work that they've done
especially during the pandemic
and we just want to make them
able to have that coverage like
every other employees and with
that Mr speaker I move that
Senate bill ninety excuse me
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
ninety do now pass.
We are on final passage the
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
ninety the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Chandler yes
Representative Chandler both yes
Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas.
Not much yet you have those yes
Representative Lujan both yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative closer to sixteen
the firm is yearning to Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill ninety has passed
the house.
Listening at IBM eleven.
Jonathan Bernalillo
Representative my Estes are you
ready on that I'd.
Representative my Estes are you
ready item eleven.
Kids come back the gentleman
from Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
Sikora San Juan and Valencia are
you ready and item thirteen.
Mr speaker can you get to that
point the record reflect
election necessary for the
Senate bill one forty six on
final passage is been taken the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Mr speaker a members of the bill
one forty six related to the
military affairs amending the
powers of the added general
authorizing activation
activation of the National Guard
in the state we've been forced
to give the certain advances in
it establishing the New Mexico
state defense for amended
repealing and enhancing up
sections of the New Mexico
military cold Mr speaker of.
The purpose of this bill Senate
bill forty six is to bring the
New Mexico National Guard
chapter twenty in line with the
federal uniformed military just
as.
Mr speaker of.
Senator forty six is the same as
senator bill one seventy five
this bill tracks and the men's.
Those changes were made
availability and if I in the
state judiciary last year Mr
speaker I will stand for
questions.
Others debate the gentleman from
San Juan Representative monthly.
Thank you Mr speaker actually he
just answered my question about
Senate bill one seventy five
thank you Mr speaker the
telepathic gentleman to close.
Mr speaker I do I move the
Senate bill one forty six do now
pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill one forty six the
vote is now.
Open.
First of the members without a
recorded vote Representative
Castellano.
Representative eta.
Representative both yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Is now closed by a vote
Sixty six in the affirmative
zero negative Senate bill one
forty six is passed the house
we'll go back to eleven the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative mass to see ready
on that item I am Mr speaker.
The record reflect on action
necessary for the Senate bill
one of six on final passage has
been taken the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker this is
Senate bill one hundred six and
it deals with driver education
schools increasing the required
surely bond and with that I
stand for questions there is
debate the gentleman from Chavis
at in Tero.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker
yes I yield.
The gentleman can you explain to
me why there is an increased
requirement.
Well good thank you Mr speaker
of.
Gentleman from Chavis any of
federal.
So page two nine sixteen it
changes the existing law of five
thousand dollars to fifteen
thousand dollars sure the bond
in the event that that the you
pay for driver education school
and then for some reason it it
folds up during your classes you
can get your money back.
And Mister speaker is that the
only reason for this Mr speaker
and gentleman I believe so most
some I mean and I was fifty
thousand dollars Maryland is
fifty.
Connecticut's fifteen we would
we thought it was approved to
put at fifteen that we would
have to mess with it
You know for the next couple of
decades Mr speaker and gentleman
there has not been an increase
that we're just getting caught
up with what everybody else is
done we're not we have not
suffered losses no no of
students have separate offices.
Mr speaker gentleman from Chavis
video there I believe they have
I believe they have this the
five thousand dollars was put in
place back in nineteen sixty
seven.
So I believe students have been
short changed I believe that's
the reason for the for the
spring for this bill.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo sequel
of the Kinley Sapporo San Juan
and Valencia.
Representative Jerry Garcia Mr
speaker of the gentleman right
before me just the same question
I'm gonna Bill good thank you Mr
speaker.
Center for the debate the other
telepathic gentleman to close.
Thank you Mr speaker honourable
members so I now move that
Senate bill one hundred six do
not pass we're on final passage
of Senate bill one oh six the
vote is now open.
The vote is that close.
The clerk to call members
without a recorded vote
Representative del.
Representative Lujan.
Yes Representative Lujan both
yes Representative Martinez.
Representative Dow both yes.
Representative Trujillo.
There's not closer to sixty
seventy for is here the negative
Senate bill one oh six has
passed the house.
Next to that item seventeen
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Sarinana are you
ready on that item thank you Mr
speaker yes I am you get to that
point the record reflect on
action necessary for the Senate
bill two seventy two was amended
on final passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain the bills
thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
two seventy two of the men that
allows our military families the
kids to register for classes and
any school district or charter
school for the physically get to
New Mexico once they have their
orders and they know what school
they wanted tend they can
register during the school's pre
registration process which is
really important for high school
graduation it is also important
as an incentive for military
families to come to New Mexico
Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
I see no debate about this great
deal the gentle lady to close
thank you Mr speaker I move
Senate bill two seventy two as
amended do now pass run final
passage of Senate bill two
seventy two as amended the vote
is now open.
The representative closer to
seventeen affirmative zero the
name to Senate bill two seventy
two as amended has passed the
house.
We're gonna skip item eighteen.
Gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln are you ready and Senate
bill two eighty six.
Yes Mr speaker my the record
reflect that.
All actions for placing House
bill or Senate bill two eighty
six have been taken for final
passage and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution John to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker in June of
this past year everyone may
recall that we this past special
legislation to deal with the
general election that would be
coming up in November to deal
with the Corona virus and this
bill is virtually identical
legislation to that past.
In June with a couple exceptions
page three paragraphs do has
been added.
Page seven paragraph K. has been
added and this legislation does
not contain any provision
regarding the legislative elect
electoral health task force so
with that Mr speaker I'll stand
for questions receive a the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker is a
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln counties
you.
Only to my with.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
I see you have a man working
behind you I would just say be
careful.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Prior to this bill
Making its first committee had a
conversation with the sponsor on
the Senate side and there was
some discussion that it's there
would be protections in this
bill that would.
to some degree limit what
happened this last election
cycle which was a flood of of
applications for absentee
ballots many of them coming from
Organizations that were trying
to make sure that people voted
but.
What took place there Mr speaker
and gentleman was just a folks
receiving six seven.
The applications for yes
applications and so Mister
speaker and gentleman I would
like to just to if you could if
you could point me to the
section in the bill where that
limitation is is enumerated.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan on page four beginning
one paragraph yes that is the
page and these
Section that deals with the
question that you just asked and
specifically the secretary of
state web portal maybe utilize
for those applications for the
official application sent out by
the county clerk's.
So thank you for that Mr speaker
the speaker and gentleman so is
there anything that limits a an
organization from sending out.
a duplicate Mr speaker John yes
the word only appears in this
legislation that that makes it
exclusive to the county clerk or
the secretary of state web
portal thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that answers my
question.
Si no further debate the
gentleman close.
Thank you Mr speaker as we hope
that this pandemic is coming to
a close we hope that this won't
be needed but just in case we
need to have it available for
use index of possible pending
election that will be coming up
soon and so with that Mr speaker
I would request that all members
vote in the affirmative on
Senate bill.
One or two eighty six as amended
three times.
Whether emergency clause we are
on final passage of Senate bill
two eighty six as amended with
an emergency clause vote is now
open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Allison.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Ezzell votes yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
both yes.
Representative closer to sixty
for it is your the native Senate
bill.
Two eighty six is amended with
an emergency clause has passed
the house.
Next is an item nineteen
gentlelady from Bernalillo are
you ready on that item Mr
speaker I am a Mr speaker would
you please get me to that point
the record reflect election
necessary for placing Senate
bill three oh three on final
passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain the bill
Mr speaker members of the house
Senate bill three oh three would
add two members to the
educational retirement board the
E. R. B. the secretary of the
higher education of the members
elected by the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico and it allows the
secretary of higher education to
appointed designees ought to
serve on the E. R. B. and I now
stand for questions reserve
rates gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane thank you Mr
speaker of the gentle lady from
Bernalillo kindly you Mr speaker
I yield.
Mr speaker out as I understood
the presentation the one of the
changes that this as a new
member of the board namely
Representative one of the two
existing teachers unions is that
correct that is correct Mr
speaker and gentle lady from San
Juan.
Currently there is one are you a
member have a board NEA and this
one adds the New Mexico American
federation of teachers and that
adds to secretary of higher
education.
Mr speaker thank the gentle lady
I I I know I do have long here
but I'm actually gentlemen thank
gentlemen's I apologize no I'm
just giving you a hard time Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so my question is it
any you're more familiar I think
with the the unions in New
Mexico work with regard to
teachers is it possible to
create additional teachers
unions in the state of New
Mexico for public education.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
know that answer to that
question on whether or not the
groups can develop sure I
imagine so.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and the reason why I
ask the question is I just have
a concern is as we.
maybe as a state there are
additional teachers unions that
that are created how do we
ensure equality of of each of
the teachers union as a
representative on this board can
you help me understand that Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo Mr chair Mr speaker
and gentleman from Bernalillo I
assume that that determination
would come by the ERP board that
currently exists.
Mr speaker gentle lady but what
we're doing by statute is is
adding an additional member of
the board that's currently
representatives of one of the
two teachers unions is not
correct that is correct Mr
speaker and gentleman from
someone.
Mr speaker gentle lady it seems
maybe a better approach is I do
think it's it's reasonable to
have a representative from the
teachers unions.
On this board because we're
talking about management of
retirement funds for teachers
but I just have a concern is as
we progress as a state and as
additional teachers unions are
added we're gonna have to come
back each time to add a member
of that association to the board
so that's one of the concerns I
have one of the other questions
that I have is.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo currently under the
education retirement system.
Of the schools themselves as the
employers they contribute to
this fund is that correct.
The school the school districts.
All members Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Members contribute to the E. R.
B. will often please school
districts across the state and
the universities in the state of
New Mexico.
Mr speaker gentle it is there
also an employer contribution.
I don't know but I find out from
my witness.
Hello.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan yes there is an
employer contribution.
Mr speaker gentle lady so given
that in they're also school
districts that are contributing
to this fund to school districts
have representation on this
board.
let me see I think it says here.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The members of the board
currently Mr speaker is the
state treasurer always designate
one member elected to a four
year term by members of the New
Mexico association of
educational retirees one member
elected to a four year term by
the NEA one member elected to a
four year term by the New Mexico
members of the American
Association of university
professors and two members
appointed by the governor full
four year term.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo due to school
districts themselves having
representatives on this for.
I just read to you was on the
board Mr speaker and gentleman
so I don't know what school
districts are represented by
except for the employees which
is members of the national
education association.
Mr speaker generally in in in
what the gentle lady read there
is no reference to any
representation by the school
board themselves in New Mexico
that is correct Mr speaker and
gentleman from someone Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo when you were coming
up with of this legislation and
thinking through adding
additional members of this for
would you kindly explain to me
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo how can we including
representations directly for New
Mexico school boards Mr speaker
and gentleman from San Juan I
recall many years ago when I I'm
in this legislature that we
voted to put the NEA on the
board I I recall I was a member
of the house of representatives
when that took place Mr speaker
and gentleman I don't we.
We call in this legislature
since I've been here that they
the school districts have
attempted to put anyone on the
board I haven't seen such
legislation come forward.
Mr speaker gentle lady and I
guess that's that's part of what
my line of in court is about as
of these these retirement funds
now are reported on our school
districts books if you will in
terms of annual audits.
And they are a large contributor
to this fund as the employer and
so it seems recently that that
school boards would have a
member because we're here today
talking about adding new members
to this board that's that's
charged with overseeing the RB
funds and so it seems reason
only to me to give our New
Mexico school boards who are who
are socially of the elected of
the school district a place at
the table and so that's one of
the concerns I'd like to
highlight thank you Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo you Mr speaker I
yield to the gentleman from Lee.
Mr.
For us this legislation does in
fact become wall how many home
to non member board would be
beneficiaries of the retirement
system.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee I do not know because I
don't know if each one of these
backlog in exhortations would
put one of them members of
representative designate if they
can each one of these
organizations gonna have a
designate somebody from their
membership so I can't give you a
specific I'm so Mister speaker
and the gentleman from Lee as to
the.
Weights would be part of receive
in benefits from the from the
ERP I I don't know what the
governor would appoint I don't
know if the state treasurer's
office parcel and I don't know
if the university professors
would appoint somebody that is
not been at the university
always retired from the
university.
Mr speaker and gentle lady would
be reasonable to assume however
that the representative from the
handy IDA of Terry the the
retiree and the higher education
a retiree would be looking
toward health benefits of the
numbers in considerations of
hal.
These retirement fund should be
managed was not reasonable
expectation Mr speaker and
gentleman that is assumption in
case you would like to make
that's an assumption up to you I
do not know.
Thank you for that.
And could you tell me how many.
Of the board members on this new
board would be required to have
money management experience.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
gentle.
From Lee
I I'm not sure how I know what
that make up is based on the
different associations all
agencies I don't know what the
board requirement is in terms of
whether they have.
I'm.
Money's.
Abilities on that I don't know
if that's a requirement for who
they select.
Mr speaker gentle lady to a
plain reading of the language of
the bill would seem to indicate
four of the nine members would
be required to have some
expertise in the management of
these kinds of funds is is.
Relatively accurate statement.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you hold on I'll find out.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee.
it says he had to members to be
appointed by the governor terms
of four years and each member
appointed shall have a
background in investment
financial pension fund
administration.
So there's also
the secretary of education must
be a resident of New Mexico and
possesses experience relevant to
the financial also additionally
aspects of pension investment
fund management.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady to
give on the these folks for
responsible for overseeing the
management of the educational
retirement fund would be usual
we ought to have all of the
board members.
Of with some level of expertise
at.
Managing and investing this
money.
Mr speaker and gentleman
it appears to me that the
secretary of public education
and the state judge's office and
the
The ones appointed by the
governor and the was appointed
by the university must all have
these requirements that you're
stating.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
gentle lady LA I guess my
question is is that common is
that the usual make up of a
board of directors of a money
management enterprise would not
all of those children would be
required to have some expertise
in managing money Mr speaker and
gentleman from Lee
I don't know about any of the
board but I'm speaking in
reference to this particular
board and that's what it shows
of the make up of the board I
I'm sure that when.
Really when other boards are
being established that they and
it's it's reference to funding
and monies that the same
requirements are requests and
then.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
gentle lady and can you tell me
joke gentlelady whether this
educational retirement fund is
in fact fully funded.
Mr speaker and the gentleman
from Lee.
Are you use fully funded are you
asking if it is someone if the
E. R. B. E..
Is is.
It is.
Speaker gentle lady no I'm
asking about the projected
funded ratio of the fund and if
it's not a hundred percent what
might be the value of the
shortfall.
Mr speaker.
I believe it is my understanding
that pension fund has to be
funded over thirty of plan there
is a bill moving through the
legislature currently that will
work with the E. R. B.
funding.
Mr speaker gentle lady can you
tell me what the current funded
liability is in this Fund.
Gentle gentle mentally I do not
have that information at this
time Mr speaker gentle lady that
number is nine million dollars.
You have a Mr speaker and
gentleman from the Mr speaker
and gentle lady it would appear
to me the board of directors
looking to overstate a fund.
Nine billion dollars under
water.
Should be looking first and
foremost at significant
expertise in the management and
maximum work return on the
investments of these funds thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady for answering my questions.
is further debate the gentleman
from Chavis the and Roosevelt
Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from San Juan you.
All thank you Mr speaker
generation really of course
incorrect about that will the
kind gentle lady from Bernalillo
here.
As thank you thank you
generating
I.
I had the opportunity earlier
today in a committee to hear
another piecemeal effort to fix
the educational retirement board
and gentle lady I am I am
concerned that your bill is one
more piece of what I call a
piecemeal approach to a.
Very under funded.
Pension that is so important to
so many New Mexicans.
So my my question is
To follow along the lines of the
I believe gentle lady earlier
today I saw.
Fiscal impact report.
Referring to the under funded
liability within E. R. B. as in
fund up late.
In the San.
And that was rather
discouraging.
And as a result of that I happen
to know gentle lady there's a
bill coming to the floor.
Which increases the state's.
Our commitment to this under
funding to the tune of one
hundred thirty five million
dollars in recurring revenue
once the ramp up has been
achieved.
So that gentle lady took us to a
forty two year solvency funding
under this increase.
And I'm back to gentle lady of
concern I have.
About.
The qualifications of
individuals who serve on the
board.
I do not gentle lady see them as
as short of
Commitment.
I see them.
Of.
Trying to solve a problem that
they do not necessarily lacked
Hey can bring the skills
therefore my question gentle
lady on these.
These.
I'm a little confused how many
but I'm confused that were not
requiring more people to have
the qualification of.
One being a resident of the
state of New Mexico and to
possess experience relevant to
the financial or fiduciary were
aspects of pension or investment
fund management so my question.
Would be does that bother you
that we're enlarging the board
but not requiring these new
members to have of these
qualifications question.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis is says the secretary of
higher education all the
designate the secretary is a
resident of New Mexico is a
current employee of higher
education and possesses the
experience relevant to the
financial all food dishes
aspects of pension investment
funding management and so Mister
speaker and gentleman from
Chavis.
Once.
What if the bill passes and
becomes law.
These vacations all.
Representation associations that
exist.
Then then look to put somebody
on the board that possesses
those experiences relevant to
financial position aspects of
function.
Thank you gentle lady.
However.
If I.
I'm a little confused the gentle
lady and that's because I have
an amendment in my mind which is
not before the body so you have
to understand that.
Gentle lady this is my concern
my concern is we are piecemeal
addressing E. R. B. insolvency I
believe that is so much state I
believe it should be a
comprehensive look to solvency
for the this important pension
plan and I think simply to
expand the size of the board.
To not required qualifications
and to
Add to the state's funding of
the pension liability forward.
Is a grave mistake because we're
not doing it in a comprehensive
way your comment please and I
will conclude.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis
It is it is your opinion that
you're saying that we're not
require and it but the bill does
require that it it may not be
what you want in terms of
language in the bill but it says
that they must possess
experience relevant to the
financial position the aspects
of pension all investment fund
management.
Thank you gentle lady I'm gonna
make my point if I could in
conclusion and that is on page
three at the top of the page it
says one member is to be
elected.
For a term of four years by
members of the American
federation of teachers of New
Mexico.
And I don't believe the
qualification that follows I
would defer to.
perhaps a ruling of someone else
but I see that member elected.
As having not having the
qualifications that the
secretary of higher education or
his designate is bound to under
items a B. and C. A. being a
resident of New Mexico be
being a current employee of
higher education and three
possess the experience so what
I'm really worried that we are
adding one more member.
To the E. R. B. board who lacks
the qualification of possess
experience relevant to the
financial our food issue
responsibilities of pension
investment fund management and
that is my opinion and that is
why I will oppose the bill thank
you.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Stansbury.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I'm grateful for
you carrying this bill forward
today and I'm also glad to be
able to follow on some of the
last questions and especially
some of the questions about
qualifications so Mister speaker
and gentle lady my understanding
of this bill is that expanding
the board in adding these two
additional members is for the
express purpose of increasing
representation and fairness on
the board is that correct
generally these Mr speaker and
gentle lady you're correct.
And Mr speaker gentle lady some
of the questions that were just
asked related to qualifications
and as was previously stated the
two new members that are being
added are from the American
federation of teachers of New
Mexico and the secretary of
higher education and Mr speaker
gentle lady I think there were
some questions about
qualifications in the last set
of questions but Mr speaker and
gentle lady certainly with
respect to the secretary of
higher at this would be a person
who's highly qualified in this
arena and with respect to the
American federation of teachers
and these are educators who
serve in this role is that
correct Mr speaker and gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady
you're correct and so Mister
speaker gentle lady they are
highly qualified to be M. as
representing them educators and
teachers on this board is that
not correct Mr speaker gentle
lady up correct.
Thank you and Mister speaker
gentle lady I think the other
question that I want to ask is
about what is the benefit of
doing that so representation
fairness how does diversity and
boards like this help to improve
the performance and also the
confidence in these kinds of
funds.
Research has shown that have
having the expertise on pension
boards to execute to this jury
duty is crucial but creating a
balance on the board between
financial expertise.
All does is considered yes.
Governance practice.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I I completely agree
I whole heartedly support this
bill and I thank you very much
for bringing it forward I look
forward to voting for it tonight
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady there is for the
debate John Johnson and
Representative dot org.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentleman from
Chavis.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
More director point several of
my colleagues have have asked
about the medical board.
If I do my math right I see that
four out of the seven current
board members have to have
experience with the process
experience relevant to financial
or producer aspects of pension
and investment fund management.
At worst.
Only two of those because of the
treasure doesn't have that and
that's the secretary of
education.
Services.
Senator public education
service.
Then they can serve without
having those requirements so
tutor somewhere to the four
people the seven member board.
Wired to have that experience.
We're adding to positions so
those numbers go up to five of
the nine in the best case
scenario for possibly three out
of the money in the worst case
scenario have that experience
and I think.
This legislation.
Which is not the unlike some
other legislation that we look
at the session.
I think the real concern of this
body.
Has been an ought to be.
Who and what is the quality of
the people that is overseen.
These retirement accounts
because the amount of money that
is in those accounts and the
amount of money that they are
under water right now is
staggering.
And it would be why are.
Love you that we need to get.
Highly qualified people either
the state investment council or
if they want to create their own
board have highly qualified
individuals who oversee the
investment aspect you want to
board that does other things
that demonstrated end of a I
don't care but the investment
aspects have got to be attended
to sooner than later and simply
adding to positions to this
board without requiring.
Significant.
Financial or produce sherry
aspects of pension or investment
fund manager I thank you school
harder at and I think that we
have got to get our arms around
that issue.
And do so a media was so I
don't.
I really don't care how boards
made up but I do care that board
is investing funds I do care for
the people who are in charge of
the billions of dollars being
invested that they come to the
table with significant Bob this
casual experience significant
experience and there are people
in New Mexico who have served on
fortune five hundred boards
there are retired chief
operating officers and chief
executive officers and our state
that we could call on to to help
with this and I just think that.
Adding positions the maybe some
some desire of this group or
that group does not address.
The real problem with the
retirement accounts and the fact
that the gentleman from Lee
County brought out.
Fact that that some point if we
don't get the investment
percentages up.
We're going to be looking at the
taxpayers of supplement and as
the gentleman from Chavis
Roosevelt and and we pointed out
we may already be seeing that
this year taxpayers having to
put in some money to help sure
loosens up and so Mr speaker and
gentle lady hi I don't have any
questions board I'd just a
disappointed that we're seeing
legislation does this without
addressing their critical
problem but all these investment
council I'm not just picking on
the educational retirement
board.
There are there's also another
entity that is woefully short.
Of its commitment to its
retirees so Mister speaker
gentle lady thank you very much
for allowing me the opportunity
point these matters are.
General questions gentleman
remove your coach never do
selves seeing no objection it is
so ordered.
Some Java steady on a chair
representative council.
Thank you Mr speaker well the
Majority Leader guilt Mr speaker
I yield to the gentleman from
Chavis and although the
counties.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Are you tickle me while ago when
you picked up the phone your
members the.
TV show about you want to be a
millionaire.
Do.
Well your ally flights.
Gentlelady
What does that education
retirement board have to do with
collective bargaining.
There's nothing about collective
bargaining in this bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
what's the AFC.
American federation of teachers.
And what they do.
Representative educators.
And don't they also
bargain for the teachers and
their benefits and salaries Mr
speaker gentle lady.
I am a member.
That's why collective bargaining
was my question.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Think question but does running
and to provide benefit
retirement program pass it was
collective bargaining.
I don't know would you like to
tell me.
I think it has nothing to do
with that
And that's my whole point I
I'm.
Have an amendment Mr speaker and
gentle lady you're gonna like
it.
You sure about that.
I want to try really hard
because it's meant to be.
In the best interest and
Mr speaker I move house for men
number one to Senate bill three
oh three.
All right let's just make sure
to pass out.
Yes it's been passed out John
reed the tier two number.
Yes speaker Joe chin is up point
two two oh seven one seven point
one Madam explained the
amendment.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady
I think yes well do what
everybody.
One seven and eight you believe.
And I believe rightly so that
the A. F. T. and the in the a
well.
Should have representation on
the
On this more.
And and that's exactly what it
does in a nutshell it says that
that one member.
We'll both in the best interest
of both of those collective
bargaining so instead of having
to members on the board we will
instruct one to Representative
bells.
And in doing that we can have
more expertise on the on the
board for financial.
plan management.
The gentleman from.
You.
Is ready to this.
Thank you gentle lady the Manson
family
Is there debate on the amendment
the representative from
gentleman I'm sorry from Chavis
Lee and Roosevelt Representative
Anders.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from at eight yield I
would be happy Jr.
Gentleman.
My concern our server is
does your amendment require that
the.
Representative.
From these two organizations be
a New Mexico Senator.
Mr speaker and gentleman my
amendment requires that the
existing.
Representative Representative
built by getting units.
Thank you therefore you have no.
Qualification for this reduced
board now representing
one individual representing two
of the education unions here in
the state.
But they don't have to have
Yes experience rolled into the
manager position inspection
engine or yes fund management
nor do they have to be residents
of the state is that correct.
Background on again.
My amendment right would request
that the existing member
Representative both bargaining
units.
Thank you for that
Your amendment Sir would Mr
speaker would leave the
secretary of higher education or
district we are of the
secretaries that correct jump.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
My amendment again takes the
current.
Any a Representative and asked
them also to represent the AFC.
Thank you gentlemen
I have mixed feelings about your
amendments are Mr speaker and
and and on the one hand I hi.
I like the idea
gentleman of a.
Board game is equal in number is
our what we call that one
numbers are.
I like eighty rather than nine
and I believe gentleman I
learned earlier this session
that.
There is evidence that even the
number of board members can have
a fire.
Result in long term.
Performance of the pension fund.
But I'm not here tonight to
convince you of that I'm just
saying I like nine a.
Gentleman I am concerned that
somehow these two organizations
neither one can find a person
who.
Processes experience relevant to
the the nature of the issue
aspects of pension or investment
fund management so that concern.
Is with me and site consider
your amendment gentleman I
appreciate very much the debate.
Thank you.
There is further debate on
the amendment are there John
problem.
From late last year gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott
thank you Mr speaker will jump
Germans are the military
operatives.
The deal Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Sister to questions.
Chairman budget board comprised.
Representatives.
Barber bargaining units.
Recalls.
Choose.
The potential server for.
conflicts of interest arising
between.
Competing interests with regard
to current budget questions
current expenditures questions
to questions Richard.
The potential conflict of
interest for.
Was someone trying to
Representative.
Both sides of that argument.
Mr speaker and gentleman I did
I think it would be difficult.
for a person.
To
Completely Representative the.
The many questions that come out
of the bargaining unit.
and desires.
And and control that over the
responsibility of
Of the.
But the boards posted to
as you well know
Mr speaker and gentleman I
served three years as an outside
director on on a.
Large corporations.
And at times
I kind of saw this is the same
problem you are there to
represent the the well being of
those unitholders.
but at the same time having
spent.
A good portion of my life in
that company I also have the
other side that always wanted to
do things that were company
oriented so it is difficult yes
Sir and I think it it unless
it's structured.
It will be almost impossible for
them to do without leaning one
way or the other.
Mr speaker and gentleman how
does your amendment help to
alleviate thank you she doesn't
want result.
Go to alleviate as of late could
you explain well very simply it
would require that that one
person out of the eight
Representative those people are
most collective bargaining units
the NEA and the AFT
it would leave the board at
eight instead of nine and
I think it would allow for a
higher percentage.
Of.
Of the people that were more
inclined to vote.
For the solvency of the plan
which is in the employees best
interest but they would always
do that with out that.
weight on their shoulders of
being a bargaining unit
Representative as well.
Speaker German would you
consider Mr bargaining units the
I have to and the interest
to be pretty close where one's
ideas they should be able to
settle on a strategy with
respect to their vote small the
spurs money management issues.
Mr speaker and gentleman that I
thought they were I mean that
was my intent is to make sure
that the gentle lady from
Bernalillo hours ideas
were represented by the AFC
having
Eight seed and Representative
and representation on the board
but at the same time it led to
allow for the mass.
seven eighths of the board to be
maybe more distantly minded.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you.
Cheryl Walker good to me.
Is there further debate on the
amendment.
Representative Chavis and
Lincoln representative number
thank you Mr speaker what would
gentleman from Chavis and
Jarrell yield.
miss I'd be happy to yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
Without your amendment how would
we address the retirees of the
educational retirement system.
Being outnumbered by the people
who are currently represented on
the board that are currently
employed in continuing to to
have the funds contributed to
the our return.
Mr speaker at gentleman that if
I understand you correctly I
believe that those people every
one of them whether they
represent the AFC or any a or or
or whatever.
Every one of those people if
they're done their job they're
going to grow that.
I am.
They are going to increase that
silent since the solvency and in
doing that they are doing
but is in the best interest of
all the employees.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
current board make up allows for
one representative from the
retiree Association and one
member from one of the unions
that represents the current
employees of the school systems.
The bill as written goes into
affect there will be two
representatives from current
employees will be one
representative from the retirees
so without your amendment how do
we address the current retirees
as two issues that may put those
two in conflict with one another
as to the budget as to the
amount of money that's going to
be paid in that sector.
Well Mr speaker and so on
That that board.
That group of people is our have
a fiduciary responsibility to
act in those in that plan and
those employees best interest.
Well Mr speaker and gentleman is
there but insured unity through
the.
Maximization of the retiree
benefits or is it to the
maximization.
To the
Benefits of those currently
employed how how do you weigh
the those very expeditionary
obligations because you have two
groups of people as I see it.
One group of people are no
longer paying into the system
they are getting
are they are getting returns for
their lifetime service that that
they've already paid into yeah
the other group of people who
are continuing to pay into the
Fund.
are hoping that this fund stay
solvent long enough for them to
be on the other end taking of
their retirement funds out.
It seems to me that.
On a board such as that there
may be some some some given
state yes two issues that might
arise and if you have to
representatives from one and
only one from the other how does
that interplay of resolved
itself.
Mr speaker and and I think it
will be
more difficult.
And so Mister speaker and
gentleman I think your your
amendment cheap state.
Keeps the balance between the
retirees and the.
Currently employed teachers.
With one representative apiece.
And doesn't get into that
potential criticism that we
might face if we get it out of
balance again Mr speaker and
gentleman I I think
We really need need to tackle
financial aspects but with
respect to that aspect putting
it out of balance in my mind
because of some internal
problems thank you Mr speaker
thank you John further debate on
the amendment gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Chavis and
tomorrow Constancio.
Mr Bradley happy to yield to the
lady.
Thank you
Mr speaker and gentleman I was
wondering if you could tell me
how many.
Members.
Current educators make that the
NBA.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I do
not know the numbers at the AFP
or the in the.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman could you tell me
what school districts are
represented by the NEA.
As compared to the HSD.
Well Mr speaker and gentle lady
I know that the NEA has members
in my district and in many of
the district all over the state.
I believe and I may be wrong
at a at he is predominantly in
the Albuquerque area but please
correct me if I'm wrong.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I believe that you're
correct in that LFC is primarily
in some of the more urban areas
where as any a representative a
lot of educators in the more
rural parts of the state.
Mr speaker and gentleman with
that my question is do the needs
of our rural educators are they
the same as the needs of our
urban educators in terms of cost
of living planning for
retirement and those factors.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
You bring up the about eight
point.
But I don't know in my read of
the E. R. B. that it
differentiates
If it does if you would let me
know that at present.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and I don't know
specifically but as someone who
grew up in a rural community my
mother was a member of any any
any teacher and I know that
expenses and planning for
retirement we're significantly
different in rural Ohio as of
what to and educator trying to
make their way in Albuquerque
might be and so my concern that
Mr speaker and gentleman is that
there are significant
differences between the needs of
our different educators and.
is so I think that that is an
important consideration and how
we look at this.
Mr speaker and gentleman another
question.
Is
the maker of the E. R. B.
also includes other.
People from the education
profession is that correct.
Yes Mr speaker and gentle lady
but you bring up a important
point
Are there more members in the
NEA than they are eight he
currently.
That is.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
a good question I
I don't have the exact numbers I
could
up perhaps provide an estimate
for ask.
Perhaps the bill's sponsor.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I was
kidding the Majority Leader
about.
Are you someone of our lifelines
well mine just locked up behind
me and tell me that all of the
benefits of all of the teachers.
Across the state are uniform and
the they are treated equally.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman but.
For members current educators
were paying into the system
their needs are should be
represented.
To take into account their
situations and I think that's
that's my point we also have on
the E. R. B. E. R. a retired
educator and a university
professor and those are
different perspectives and so I
just wanted to highlight that I
think.
Educators are not a one size
fits all and they're not all cut
from the same cloth and so I
think that having this
differentiation is important
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you young lady
there is further debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative here.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Be happy to yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman how many teachers
approximately are they are
currently working in New Mexico.
Not very many our kids are still
out of school.
Mr speaker and gentleman there's
twenty five thousand teachers in
working really hard Mr speaker
and gentleman do you have to be
a member of the union to be
represented by the union.
I know you do.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Mr gentlemen so.
Also you have to be to be
eligible for E. R. B. benefit.
I don't believe that that Mr
Stewart and gentleman let's hang
on hang on hang on everybody did
a job that was just answer the
questions will get through the
okay the gentleman diversity
Chavis at a church lands that
question all right thank you.
Please.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe it's fifty five but
without regard to how old they
are.
Or how many there are.
Or whether they're working or
they're not working.
The purpose of this retirement
plan is to provide for their
retirement years.
And that is what the E. R. B. is
that the.
Estimate is between.
To provide.
The income levels.
They are do either through a
bargaining unit or from.
You know the school board that
they have that funding for their
retirement.
Mr chairman and gentlemen you
are so right and that's why I
stand in opposition to this
amendment I feel like if there
are two
bargaining units representing
more than twenty five thousand
teachers throughout the state
that we really need
representative from both as well
as the fact that the latest
research on boards are which was
done by Boston college's
retirement research center two
thousand nineteen so that when
you have a balance of tradition
very experts and stakeholders
you get the most robust result
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Then I yield back thank you
gentle lady is there for the
debate on the amendment yeah the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Eli thank you Mr
speaker is a gentleman from
Chavis Eddy and Otero you'll be
happy Sir thank you Mr speaker.
Gentleman in your opinion what
is the purpose of the are more.
The R. V. board is designed to
protect invest in monitor your
retirement savings of those
employees that put into that
point.
Mr speaker gentle along with
that is solvency of the fund a
big priority for this board.
Solvency should be probably one
of their most significant
responsibilities.
Mr speaker and gentleman and so
my question is if you have.
Say two or more.
Of these teachers unions when it
comes to the specific area of
retirement you think that their
interests are diverging.
I believe knowing.
Some of what I've heard that
it's possible but not probable.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
And so I'm wondering.
If you have said to teachers
unions represented by the same
person.
We're not talking about
individualized concerns it seems
to me that we are talking about
solvency of the fund over seeing
that Fund.
And.
All right well I think even the.
Of the legislature's the body
that sets
what the pay out of that form is
I don't think this board has
discretion on that even I think
it's more of oversight of the of
the managers of the fund.
And so it seems to me that.
There's not a conflict of
interest when it comes to.
one board member representing
more than one teachers you what
are your thoughts on that
general.
Mr Senator.
Would you repeat that Mr speaker
and gentleman I would be happy
to
so since we're talking about.
Oversight of funds and
management.
Of those funds and oversight of
the manager of those bonds and
not making calls it is decisions
about the amount of the funds
that are distributed each
retiree.
And the amount of each paycheck
that must be contributed by
those by the employees it seems
to me that the chances of there
being more political type issues
is lessened and so it seems that
it is possible that one
Representative.
Representative both teachers and
so I I would appreciate your
thoughts on up.
Well I believe without a doubt
the the
You know what if you go back and
look and in the.
Recent history I think that was
sent two thousand and nineteen
maybe it was eight I think it
was the thousand nineteen we
authorized a solvency board out
of the legislature to look at.
the solvency of the E. R. A. I
believe E. R. B. as well and
It was interesting to note that
those members
I I didn't see either one of
these of collective bargaining
units although there were others
I didn't see the one of these on
the solvency board.
Mr speaker gentle thank you and
not that you would have reason
to listen to my droll debate
with the generated underlined
Sanchez Bill but I did inquire
about this issue and if we
continue to great other teachers
unions within our state that
seems to me that they would need
to where presentations while.
and so do you think the
framework that you post here
would help alleviate that issue
of of continued to add positions
with future teachers
associations.
Yes Sir I do currently that fund
is
It is under quite a bit of
stress financially and I think
The people that you put on that
the expertise of those people
that are on it is very
important.
Thank you Mr speaker I have no
further questions.
John before we proceed with the
senator please I have a
conversation elsewhere we can
literally take notes appear to
speakers table to what you're
saying so it's distracting from
the debate appreciated is there
further debate on the amendment.
Yes Sir the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Crowder.
All right current I just jump
graphology Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
generate from not Chavis please
you.
A happy over my friend.
Thank you John and I apologize
if I repeat some of the
questions I thank you was
talking similar to what I want
to talk about but I was not able
to hear everything very well I
do want to go back to page two.
One seventeen and eighteen were
I think the primary portion of
your membership comes into play.
Where you headed and both
the national education
association and the federation
of teachers of New Mexico.
When I first looked at that I
began to wonder a gentleman Mr
speaker are there people that
are qualified to do this that
belong to both those
organizations.
And and I the more I listen the
more I thought about it does not
anticipate what does is that
correct.
Mr speaker John.
Not sure
Mr speaker and alone I have no
doubt that there are people
that are members of either one
of those that might be very
valuable board members okay but
thank you John Mr speaker as I
More more about it what it
actually I believe says is that
the members of both of those
associations.
Both the national education
association and the federation
of teachers.
Those members elect someone to
represent both of them
that could be someone that
doesn't belong to either one but
there are absolute expert and
they could they could elect
someone it's not a member of
each is that correct John
absolutely must be gradual.
Okay I I just want to make sure
that I understood what your
amendment did and didn't do and
so I appreciate your time thank
you John thank you Mr speaker.
There's further debate on the
name of the gentleman from San
Juan Representative mantra.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Chavis Eddy and
Otero use be happy of.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Once again I I think it's been
stated a couple of times.
But in the overall argument of
who serves on the board.
A retirement investment board.
the concept of what the board is
supposed to do I'm afraid of
getting lost in the make up the
political and
The make up of folks who have
maybe a specific point of you
being on board that is investing
dollars so Mister speaker and
and gentleman.
It appears to me that every
member who has money.
That will be coming to them yes
the dollars are there when they
retire.
Should be most concerned.
As to the qualifications and I I
I agree with the representative
from Chavis and some of his
comments earlier both of this
main sponsor and of you as to
qualifications I I think that is
the key
question here and we're getting
caught up in the fact of the
crew representative who.
Mr speaker and and and
gentleman.
I'm sure you're aware of my
years of service at a coal mine
here in New Mexico.
And the and I'm sure you're
aware maybe maybe not are you
aware of that I am going to be
the beneficiary of a defined
benefit plan Mr speaker John.
I wasn't but it doesn't surprise
me.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman I
have.
I have a retirement of that I'd
put nineteen years of service
into that I'm expecting to to
one day be able to at take a
budget from that plan and Mister
speaker and gentleman the only
thing I care about.
Is that that money is there that
when I.
get to the H..
Which unfortunately is coming up
quicker than you might think
that I can start to by that I
can apply to start taking my
retirement benefit I don't care.
Is investing the dollars Jessica
good at.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Have you ever read the book the
richest man in Babylon.
I have.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman the
richest man in Babylon is a book
that I make sure I have four
boys and make sure that they've
all read that so it's a terrible
on how to earn money how to save
money how to invest money and
how to take care of yourself in
time.
And Mr speaker and gentleman.
One of the parables in the in
that book.
Described.
A group of bricklayers to all
get together and they're seeing
a state save some money and they
seeing how this gentleman this
richest man in Babylon has taken
his money and has invested it.
And.
Continues to do this process of.
Saving money and then turning
around and investing a portion
of it and Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The parable of these requires is
that
The bricklayers get together and
they choose one of them.
To travel abroad.
By diamonds with their
investment income home.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
happens is the bricklayers
I'll just require who's chosen.
Goes abroad comes back with his
investment all of their
investment comes back to find
out that he had purchased
crystal at the price of
diamonds.
And the terrible there is don't
send a bricklayer to buy
diamonds.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
the problem.
If you notice Mr speaker and
gentleman the legislators
retirement fund.
Is fully funded.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
realize.
There's not just sitting or X.
legislators sitting on that
board Mr speaker and gentleman.
I think that's because we want
to make sure that when we retire
as legislators and we go to.
Take advantage of that
A retirement plan that is there
for us.
And Mr speaker and gentleman.
Does that does not seem prove to
you.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
happens every day and sure as I
mentioned earlier to my fans
late I sat on the board of a.
The company that was responsible
for.
a pipeline operation.
None of them are watching
tonight but there's very few of
know how to build a pipeline.
But they knew how to
structurally set up a company
and and make it make money and
that's what this board should
they don't need to be teachers
they need to know what teachers
do they need to know what
they're bargaining
units say that they are they
have earned you the bargaining
process and they need to make
sure that the actuarial plans in
that plan provide for every one
of those employees when they
retire whatever age they decide
they want to retire.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman to that point we have.
Generally what is referred to as
professional services.
Mr speaker and gentleman do you
have a banker that you deal.
I do Mr speaker and gentleman Mr
speaker and gentleman do you
have a.
A financial planner that we deal
with.
Mr speaker and gentleman I did.
Mr speaker and gentleman do you
have a CPA that works for you.
Mr speaker and gentleman I did.
So Mr speaker and gentleman what
about a lawyer is that something
is valuable to have sometimes.
Mr speaker and gentleman
sometimes are very valuable.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
the idea of paying for the
services.
People do that all the time what
is the reason for paying someone
who has expertise in the field.
Well my speaker and a lot of the
point you're trying to make is
the one of the right people on
the right job when you want the
right after we don't want
a financial person.
You know with nothing but
financial experience and
education the majority leader
does when she's not here but
because they're not trying to do
that and so you just need the
right people in the right jobs.
You Mr speaker and gentleman
that's really my point as a
person who is at some point in
my life going to be receiving
defined benefit plans from two
different funds.
all I care about Mr speaker and
gentleman is that the person
who's doing it is investing the
money prudently making good
decisions on my behalf they
don't have to have my same life
experience my same circumstances
as a matter of fact is they have
my same life experiences
circumstances they might not be
good investing money so Mister
speaker and gentleman I I guess
that's really what I'm gonna
suggest of this body it does not
make sense Mr speaker and
gentleman to send a brick layer
to five tons thank you Mr
speaker John.
These are for the debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none the gentle lady from
Dona Representative guidance.
Thank you Mr speaker I move to
table.
Are there is a motion to table
that is a roll call vote you are
a mocha yet both in the
affirmative and the settlement
will be tabled the negative
we've back on the bill roll call
us now all.
Thirty seconds to vote.
Or to call the remaining
members.
Representative Madrid.
But is now closed by vote of
forty yes.
Representative Madrid is yes.
By a vote of forty four in the
affirmative and twenty five the
negative the amendment is
tabled.
We're back on the Gail seeing no
further debate the gentle lady
to close.
Mr speaker.
Ladies and gentlemen of this
house of representatives.
Today.
I'm trying to understand.
Part of the discussion that went
on.
The idea that.
Valuable beyond my
comprehension.
Mr speaker.
That is minds are Paula Jones
gentleman I that is my mistake
the gentleman from Chavis Eddy
and Otero get out the for which
is amendment my mistake going
back to jail.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Can lady
I I appreciate the debate
tonight.
I would tell you that the.
I believe that the in in the the
teachers and New Mexico's best
interest the best thing this
body can do yes the but
qualified.
Competent.
financial management people on
this board so that it would not
be.
It would not continue to be
formally understanding.
That the processes for every
teachers retirement with the.
solidified with good financial
decisions I appreciate your
speaker and gentle lady
the debate and
I wish this from the very best.
All right let's try that again
seeing the debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo close
representatives that Mr speaker
back to my statement.
In closing Mister speaker and
ladies and gentlemen of the
house the idea that educators
are not by your bill is beyond
my comprehension as an educator.
Mr speaker and gentleman of the
house.
I get the impression.
Some sessions were made.
I thank you Mr speaker.
Ladies and gentlemen of this.
To.
In New Mexico.
That's what.
Well educated in the state that.
We.
I should be qualified to.
Yeah be bored thanks.
Speaker.
Educational you'll hear.
That.
Federation of teachers.
But.
That
has been the.
Iteration of teachers.
For.
This.
That.
What.
And that is.
This piece of legislation.
Additionally.
Fund management need.
No.
Rural know what.
That would be one.
These capabilities these
functions.
Act.
Some.
Because in New Mexico.
Educator that is being on the
water.
Please.
In this state.
All agency.
What
legislation.
Just one of the people.
We.
Read.
Thank you Mr speaker we are on
final passage of Senate bill
three oh three the vote is now
open.
Thirty seconds to the close the
electronic voting.
But the remaining member without
a record.
By a vote of forty three in the
affirmative twenty six more
negative.
Senate bill three oh three has
duly passed and stepped.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Chavis Lee
emotional Mr speaker could you
remind me whether or not you can
explain your vote on a floor
vote our gentleman you cannot
you cannot committee but not on
the floor thank you Mr speaker
thank them.
All right we're going to item
twenty six.
Senate bill three forty one is
the gentleman from Dona Ana
Representative small ready on
that bill.
Mr speaker I am can you give me
to that point please.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate bill three forty one on
final passage is been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bills.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
Mr speaker body Senate bill
three forty one amends the
community schools act to make
the fund the community schools
fund subject to appropriation by
us by the legislature Mr speaker
body instead of the Fund
continuing with appropriation
language allowing PED to access
any fund balance without
legislative appropriation with
that I stand for questions
seeing no debate the gentleman
close Mr speaker I move that
House Bill three forty one do
now pass we on final passage of
Senate bill three forty one the
vote is now open.
Thirty seconds the clothes
electronic portion.
But the remaining number.
Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid both
yes.
Road sixty eight near permanent
of and none of the negative
Senate bill three forty one IST
duly passed this house.
We're going to item number
thirty four Senate Bill.
Well I apologize I know I missed
one item number twenty eight
Senate bill twelve
Representative Baldonado are you
ready on that item thank you Mr
speaker we get to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
actually all action necessary
for placing Senate bills from
one final pass and taken in is
now subject to debate amendment
for substitution.
Let me repeat that Senate
Judiciary Committee substance
and percent of bills well as.
That all actions been taken is
now so debate amendment or
substitution gentleman out
explained thank you Mr speaker
Mr speaker Senate bill twelve
relates to notarial acts it's
presents up are are not realize
it modernizes things it gives
the ability to do
Electronic notary with seventeen
other states already do with
that speaker I'll stand for
questions.
There's no debate the gentleman
to close thank you Mr speaker I
move that the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill twelve could access on
final passage of Senate
Judiciary Judiciary Committee
ups the percent of bills well
the vote is now open.
Thirty six about.
What is now closed by a vote of
fifty seven in the affirmative
antenna negative Senate
judiciary judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
twelve has duly passed this
house.
The gentle lady from Dona Ana
ready on item number thirty
four.
Yes Mr speaker to that point.
The record reflect that all us
the I'm sure me try that again
let the record reflect that all
action necessary replacing
Senate bill two nineteen on
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain to their.
Thank you Mr speaker last year
we make some changes to the US
to some licensing allowing for
noncitizens to acquire and this
this bill the sensually just
expands on that and so with that
also for questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Dona Ana County
you.
Mr speaker and to the gentleman
from San Juan yes I will yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
can you go through specifically
of the page a new licensure is
we will be
allowing if this bill is passed
to
Receive a New Mexico license Mr
speaker generating.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
from San Juan so last year we
passed and the governor signed
of what was Senate bill one
thirty seven which was that was
it was of the induction in the
enforcement of.
agency rules
on various occupational
licensing statutes and so this
one specifically is related to
give me one second while I.
Look.
So Mister speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman it applies to
pawn brokers insurers and
investors bail bondsman employee
leasing contractors up Tom
interest certain medical
occupations physical therapists
collection agencies home
inspectors real estate brokers
and real estate appraisers and
trainers.
Thank you generally for that for
that answer Madam speaker and
gentle lady
Are we sure that every one of
these.
Occupations that if if the
person is not a citizen.
are we sure that that allowing
them to do so does not run afoul
of our.
United States law.
And or New Mexico law Mr speaker
and gentle lady for rules that
are propagated by boards in the
state.
Madam chair and gentlemen so New
Mexico has already done
significant changes to a lot of
these as I mentioned last year
through Senate bill one thirty
seven it expanded on it already
provided for a lot of that to
already begin for a lot of the
licensing to to actually take
place folks who who have and I
tend for example are considered
non citizen already can I
applied for the lottery
scholarship and and things like
that so this these this this
process is already pretty
pretty significant here in the
state of New Mexico this
strictly just enhances
what we've already begun to do.
Thank you Mr speaker Madam
speaker and gentle lady yeah I
understand the purpose is to
enhance and and allow more
license years but maybe I need
to be a little bit more specific
and you have a do you have an
expert that you are working with
each
gentlelady.
Yes.
Madam madam chair Mister the
gentleman.
Thank you I I have an experience
thank you the gentle lady
and madam speaker gentle lady
who can you give the name of the
expert.
Yes my expertise Diana thought
isn't she is with the New Mexico
immigrant Law Center.
Thank you Madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Well I'm asking about one
specific licensure that we're
talking about and that is real
estate brokers boasts qualifying
brokers and associate brokers
There are very specific rules.
In New Mexico as to what are
called a foreign investors in
particular obviously there have
there is the ability to purchase
a home
in.
In New Mexico if you're not a
legal citizen but the idea of
being able to sell property.
Or to be involved in the
transaction of the sale of
property from from a legal
standpoint I'm not sure that
that just by putting this into a
new section of law that it
doesn't wash out of current law
it's the sections called the
foreign investors section of the
real estate law and so I'm I'm
not sure
Madam speaker and gentle lady
I'm not questioning maybe some
of these others that that one I
know there's very stipe very
strict restrictions.
On that so I'm not sure Madam
speaker gentle lady is this will
not conflict with other law not
just New Mexico law but at
United States locked that it
does your expert having a
knowledge of that that you could
share with us thank you madam
speaker sure.
Eaker and gentleman so New
Mexico can make licenses
accessible regardless of
immigration status and so
federal law which is
which is I guess section eight
in the U. S. constitution allows
the state to make public
benefits accessible to
individuals unlawfully present.
Thank you
Madam speaker and and gentle
lady I understand that's a
general principle but federal
law.
Very specifically has rules
about the sell an investment of
property in the United States is
not the same as purchasing a
home page well we know that
you can do but for the idea of
somebody who is making
transactions who is not a United
States citizen I believe that
your or that this bill Senator
Ortiz apenas Bill.
Maybe has not taken that into
account here
Madam speaker and gentle lady
it's it has nothing to do as to
the general principle you cited
but to the very specific set of
federal law that's in existence
as to who can who can sell
property and how they can do it
I and I don't believe just by.
changing it here in a New Mexico
statute that that it will
overcome that federal law they
can you can you respond to that
generating.
Thank you madam chair and
gentlemen as as far as we know
all through the U. S.
constitution federal law gives
the state the choice to pass
this type of law it's it's and
so states like ours are allowed
to to pass legislation like
this.
Thank you madam madam speaker
and gentle lady I I understand
that in general principle but
when there is something very
specific and federal law about.
Foreign transactions.
I believe this would fall under
that that I hope that that
that once again I can't talk
about I know we have doctors
teachers we have other
occupations but I think just as
I'm sure this is gonna move on
out of here
gentlelady but I think that
needs to be investigated because
I believe before we go down that
road issuing licenses we need to
make sure gentle lady that we're
not breaking
United States law with this
specific provision in this bill
thank you madam speaker the
general.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam speaker.
Will the gentle lady from Dona
yield.
I'm madam chair gentleman from
my my brother the representative
of my home of my birth place I
will yield to you.
Thank you Representative
Representative I got just a few
questions on your bill
and I'm not sure you'll be able
to necessarily find the answer
to the first one which is I was
curious how many total
occupational licenses times.
Are there today in the state of
New Mexico do we do we know all.
What that grand grand total.
I assume of a couple of hundred
I I'm I don't have any idea if
you don't do you have an idea
Madam G. R. speaker.
Thank you madam chair madam
speaker and gentleman let me
brief real quickly with my
experts this bill specifically
addresses fifteen occupational
licenses and so I'm I'm assuming
there's there's probably
hundreds but let me just confirm
real quickly with my my expert.
Your speaker Representative
gentlemen we don't have a total
capital last year's bill address
ninety percent licenses
ninety percent of the licenses
but we don't have a total amount
for that.
Thank you thank you and up a
gentle lady Madam speaker when
we talk about Senate bill one
twenty four do we remember Madam
how many how many licenses did
we.
Make this change for last year
or whenever Senate bill one
twenty forecast.
Thank you madam.
The percent of the regulatory
barriers so we're talking about
dentists doctors those types of
licenses by insurers this year
we're covering a work where
we're just gonna cover it the
fifteen on this bill
specifically and and those are
occupational licenses that fall
under those statutory statutory
barriers that we didn't address
last year and so I name those
earlier but I can certainly
repeat those if if if you'd
like.
Is the only thing that Senate
bill two nineteen is changing
your state citizenship.
Requirement that exist today
that will not exist if we pass
this bill is that correct.
Speaker and gentleman so what
we're doing with this
legislation is that we're moving
reporter removing the
requirement of someone needing
to be a citizen and instead
replacing that with as an
alternative which is and and I
ten number and I can number is
something that noncitizens use
to pay their taxes.
Thank you thank you for that
answer and then
in short of wrapping up we're
not changing.
Madam speaker Representative
we're not changing any other.
Madam speaker.
Gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Cannot be.
Privilege.
Thank you madam speaker.
You know me Cheryl.
We have further debate the
gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Dona Ana please
yeah.
Madam speaker gentleman from the
county I will yield thank you
generally didn't just to kinda
lines of questioning the.
We understand that I think what
we're doing is New Mexico is
kind of pulling away from
perhaps the other states and and
becoming a little more you need.
On page eleven of your bill the
gentle lady I see were you're
striking one of the
qualifications is is a citizen
of the United States and has
taken out.
Is first naturalization papers.
Then on page twelve the strike
through is in compliance with
the United States Immigration
law that's being removed.
In on page fifteen it's striking
out.
Provide proof of legal
authorization to reside and seek
employment in the United States
for its.
Territories.
On page twenty were striking yes
citizen of the United States.
Page twenty one your striking
and a legal resident of the
United States so as I go through
your bill I see that we're
continually striving anything
related to the immigration laws
or being a resident living in
the United States our.
Which in my mind the madam
speaker gentle lady is going to
make you New Mexico somewhat
unique.
So don't worry my question is
are all the other states during
this as well.
Or how many how many of them are
striking through all the
connections to the United
States.
Madam speaker and gentleman so
there's a number of states
actually who have done this and
so
Some of the states that have
that are included in this are
are states like Illinois New
York California and Nevada and
Florida.
All of those stricken of the
ties to the United States and
the losses that correct
generally more strict.
Madam speaker gentleman I can
confirm briefly with my expert
on that but I also wanted to
know and maybe I wasn't clear
earlier during the the early
part of the questioning but
I think we because of the
uniqueness as you mentioned of
our state and and many of the
the folks who are attempting to
access these licensure is where
most of the most of the people
that were were trying to address
are are those
our our young people who live in
this and who live in this
country and so who don't have
citizenship yet but are either
legal permanent residents or are
non citizens but yet have access
to that I can number those are
the individuals who would be
able that that's the reason why
a lot of that language has been
struck but let me also confer
with my experts to.
Thank you madam speaker thank
delivery ticket on.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
chair madam speaker and
gentleman so I I think what my
expert has really to me is that
so there's thirteen other states
that have have done this and it
is very much in line with
federal law which has allowed
those other thirteen states to
have to be able to do that and
so and and so that has to do
with the federal law which I
mentioned earlier section eight
of the US constitution and again
it's in line with the thirteen
states who already passed this
legislation we're striking this
language specifically because
it's related to immigration
status and and it allows us to
do and to do this by making up
so because of the amount of
investment that we have made in
young people here in New Mexico
particularly non citizens who
have made who have also access
to the lottery ten states to in
state tuition of things like
that we feel this legislation is
part of that building on that
momentum to make sure that the
investments that we're making
here in the state of New Mexico
to not only just noncitizen
children and and and youth but
all children here in New Mexico
because there's there's so many
different benefits to this is
that it's a long lasting
investment and it and based on
what we've seen in other states
and what what they've been able
to do in line with federal law
has is very much in alignment
with what we're trying to do
here.
Thank you for clarifying agility
and and the.
Madam speaker I appreciate that
very much my my other line of
questioning curiosity is coming
off one of the analysis where it
talks about the different
license types affected.
Since on this analysis physical
therapist but it doesn't mention
occupational therapist or speech
therapist and normally those
three are are kind of tied
together we are often taught the
same colleges don't teach all
three so I wonder gentle lady
does this include occupational
therapists and speech therapist
or only physical therapist for
can you help clarify the ability
and then speak.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman give me just a couple
a couple minutes to account for
a to talk with my expert.
Okay thank you Mr madam speaker
and gentlemen so last year when
we passed and when we passed
Senate bill one thirty seven and
it was signed by the governor
all the the occupational and
speech therapy that you're
you're talking about was
included in
was included in that because
they were considered regulatory
barriers so this year with this
with this clean up we want to be
able to include physical
therapists because it was it
wasn't it was left out of of of
that last year even though those
other two were already included.
Thank you John thank you madam
speaker I also didn't notice
like contractors plumbers
electricians those type things
it has optometric spend it
doesn't have some of the other
Classifications in the medical
field so gentle lady madam
speaker I assume that everything
I'm not saying.
Was probably in the bill last
year and I don't have access to
that front of you so that why
I'm saying I'm partial list now
instead of the forwards.
Madam speaker gentleman yes I I
would I would say that's correct
as I mentioned last year ninety
percent of of of a lack of
licensure as were were impacted
and covered through the
legislation that was passed and
signed into law this one
specifically addresses the
fifteen occupational licensees
that we're not addressed in
those regulatory barriers but
instead these these are covering
only the statutory ones okay
thank you provided and and my my
final question is I know that
New Mexico construction licenses
are unique they're they're
different than Texas centers on
others we use different cultures
than they do so does your you're
a bill or the other bill.
We address contractors plumbers
electricians the construction
trade licenses.
Madam speaker Mister speaker
July to.
Madam speaker just give me one
second and I can confirm with my
expert on that.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentlemen so yes so last year on
Senate bill one thirty seven it
did cover a lot of those
those
those occupations and so now
what happens is that if the
noncitizen that's outside of
these fifteen occupational
licensees can get their
licensure and and and and get to
work.
Thank you Mr speaker delighted I
guess my last where I thought
there was one last question but
there's ask another under.
There are some countries Jordy
the that United States is not
supposed to be doing business
with and and so we don't look at
immigration status how do we
know if we're aligned.
in from countries that are not
supposed to be in our country.
How do we what's the.
Check and balance on that Mr
speaker gentle and.
And madam madam chair Madam
speaker gentleman
I would love to entertain a lot
of immigration law discussion
because it's it's really my
passion but I will say that it
outside of the V. it's really
outside of the purview of of
this legislation and I am not
necessarily prepared to have to
talk about that and neither is
our my experts.
Thank you generally that it
would be kind of one of those
open subjects that I think at
some point we would have to
consider when we open up the law
like we're we're doing with this
bill so I I appreciate very much
your responses Jordan thank you
Mr speaker your back.
before we go on
just as a personal favor I I I
stand when our evening
legislative bingo you can ask
please why this bill did not go
to appropriations.
Mr speaker I apologize I have
half a dozen analysis but I
don't have the FY are leading
from the risk Mr speaker you're
at the gate next is this
renovated Jennifer Bernalillo
Santa Fe Torrance and Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
tell lady does the gentle lady
he'll.
I'm miss madam Mr speaker and
gentleman from all those
counties I will yield.
Mr speaker telling this is an
occupational licensing bill.
Madam Mr speaker gentleman yes
this is this is one of those
bills.
Mr speaker tell lady this is
bill have anything to do with
the buying and sip and sail
purchase and sale of real
property.
then and then Mr chair gentlemen
no.
Mr speaker gentle lady are you
familiar with perked up.
Mr speaker and gentleman I am
not.
Mr speaker gentle lady for which
is what I think the gentleman
from San Juan was trying to
reference is the foreign
investment in real property tax
act.
And it is in fact a tax act it's
a way for the feds to make sure
they get their cut if a foreign
national sells real property in
the United States.
It does not restrict foreign
ownership of real property in
any way and it certainly doesn't
have any impact on occupational
license.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
jelly.
Here is for the right the
Johnson Dona Ana grant and this
year.
Thank you Mr speaker with thank.
Lady please you.
Madam speaker Mr speaker
gentleman yes I will yield thank
you Mr speaker gentle lady I
just have a question so how does
this.
prospects are and I
requirements.
Mattis Mr speaker gentle man
give me one second I'll come
I'll I'll I'll talk to my
experts about that.
Thank you madam speaker Mr
speaker gentlemen so right now
the way that it works out is
that I. nines are very
traditional in terms of
relationship so we don't
generally I. nines are at it
they work mostly for traditional
employees where an employer
seeks to hire worker under that
relationship the employer has to
be the house to comply with an
I. nine recommended requirement
but when it comes to other
things like
for example young people who
qualify for daca they have they
can they can.
The they they are allowed to
work in in in in the country but
under federal law now you don't
even non citizens who can't even
non citizens are allowed to
start to start a small business
and also be independent
contractors so
there's there's some
complexities and all of that but
under federal law as if you are
a small business owner or a
contractor you can you can under
federal law and then the I.
nines are mostly for those
traditional employment
opportunities.
Speaker gentle lady up.
That is a concern a major
concern I want to remind
everyone there's a ten thousand
dollar fine if you don't have
that on file
Every employer is required to
have that some of these people
are going to work at that then I
can all start doing business
hello definitely work with
someone else homeland security
literally was going through
southwest New Mexico going to
employers I person also Google
they're going from employer to
employer looking to to satisfy
make sure that those up and eyes
were file and it is a ten
thousand dollar fine and I think
that's a big.
Concern with that I I know what
you're trying to do an on I mean
up I'm a fan of I'm a first one
of immigrant family but this is
gonna be very confusing to
employers.
And I mean I would be but maybe
was overlooked but I can assure
you it's a ten thousand dollar
fine
from homeland security who comes
in and checks you for nine nine
is a requirement.
How Mr speaker gentle lady how
we can address that that's
confusing to of course I mean
some of these people are not not
all every single person's gonna
have a job so how are we going
to ensure that the employer is
not going to be fined ten
thousand dollars.
I'm Mr Mr speaker and gentleman
so.
I I think that.
There's there's only a fine for
businesses that do either fights
it's not
the US justice department
forbids employers from asking
immigration status status or
nationality status so outside of
that related to what we're
trying to accomplish here in
this bill I mean as I mentioned
in my previous comments that is
a complete that's outside of the
purview of this legislation.
Mr speaker gentle lady I will
strongly up
Disagree with me.
that is not you you when they
come in you have to have it on
file when when security doesn't
state.
It's a requirement under there
are other requirements you have
to have a form of ID you have to
have other documents connected
to that and I think we're.
Getting ahead of that I know of
gentleman that was I find five
million dollars in our area for
doing such things now it wasn't
to this capacitor will
professional in in the form of
professional are.
Occupation they don't care
homeland security does not care
about that
I think I mean I know what
you're doing and I'm I mean I
believe that every person should
be.
Allowed to work in levy every
person should be allowed to take
care of family but I also.
I can assure you that this is a
big complication with federal
and state regulations and I.
I'm sorry to tell you but that
that is true so I mean if we
pass this legislation I have no
idea how we're gonna
Have a.
Protect employers that I keep I
can assure you I mean are you
tell me that every single person
Mr speaker gentle lady is going
to have their own business.
Madam Mister chair Mister chair
Mister speaker and gentlemen so
many of these individuals will
be working independently so
there are current provisions
that allow for example daca
recipients who really this
legislation is very much who
were trying to and by doc I mean
folks who dreamers especially
who are on deferred who have
deferred status is that
many of them already complete.
The the I. nine so
I think that is an important
thing to note and that most
people do that that's that's
really a.
A fundamental piece of of why
we're doing this.
Mr speaker gentle lady how many
people I mean would you say have
completed the signing north
because again it's a it's a
verification of citizenship I
don't know if you look at the
you know and and and I'm not I'm
sorry I'm not trying to put you
on the spot I I understand
because I always want to help
someone Mr speaker gentle lady
and I I I strongly.
Support working it's just I I I
live in an area one so close to
the border I run into this issue
all the time and so it's
something that we literally do
an in house audit and then it's
audited by our our our CPA and
payroll
Search to make sure every person
has on file including myself so
I am
At June estimate how many people
have already had this I night or
what were you getting that
information Mr speaker gentle
and.
Mr speaker and gentlemen so New
Mexico is not a state that
requires you verify so I and I
need to be I need to be very
clear about that employers need
to comply with I. nine
requirements and an employer
that does not accurately keep
these records thank you will be
fine during an inspection but it
could be for other reasons on
related to making these licenses
available this bill is necessary
because as the law currently
stands in New Mexico there are
many individuals with employment
authorization under different
statuses like daca like bow of
the violence against women's act
TV sex etcetera that would not
be able to get their licenses
regardless of meeting all other
requirements and so this is been
a legislation that has been
thought through and and like you
I also represent the second
largest city in the state right
next to the U. S. Mexico border
and I very much and and and I
for me to address this issue
this is the way to address it in
a way that I believe it's it's
the right way to do it
and it's actually legal for
employers to require citizenship
or LP a legal permanent resident
status when hiring so that
that's the national origin
discrimination the employer can
only verify whether the person
has employment authorization.
On this the.
I'm sorry I just a I think
that's concerning to me only
because I mean New Mexico may.
and that's what I do is I'm not
getting straight process that.
I'm just looking at the
documents are required Mr
speaker gentle lady are for both
the vanity and US passport used
cartons I get a passport on
believe on last year legal
services John and we're getting
a fair bit of leeway with your
questions that there's we're not
in this bill discussing.
Work requirements we're not
discussing immigration status
we're not discussing federal
immigration law the home
security department we're
talking about what requirements
the state of New Mexico requires
of people twenty for
professional license that you're
going on the way drugs evening
on questions pretty far afield
from the top of this bill so
generously please keep your
questions can I the topic at
hand which is the requirements
the state of New Mexico goes up
you will see a professional
license we appreciate thank you
Mr speaker gentle yet I think
I've made my point and and and I
appreciate and sorry that I got
off subject I just thought that
was a.
The problem was with the
legislation I thought I'd bring
it up thank you Mr speaker
gentle say twelve eight gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that Senate bill two nineteen do
now pass.
We are final passage of Senate
bill two nineteen the vote is
now open.
Representative to close.
Representative close five or
forty five internet of twenty
three million Senegal to
nineteen has passed the house.
Next with that item thirty six
German from San Juan are you
ready on that I don't.
Thank you Mr speaker could you
give me to the point that the
record reflect election
necessary proposing house joint
resolution thirteen on final
passage is been taken gentleman
to explain.
Thank you Mr speaker house joint
resolutions thirteen.
Ask the body to send to New
Mexico the voting public the
concept of switching our sixty
day and and thirty day
respectively respective.
Legislative sessions each year
two to forty five days and to
remove the restriction on what
bills can be entered during that
thirty day
what is now a thirty day session
Mr speaker there are a couple
other provisions in this however
I if I could Mr speaker I would
like to allow my co sponsor
Representative Ely to to speak I
believe he has a poor substitute
at this time Mr speaker.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval.
Mr speaker order Johnson someone
yield.
I guess Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I do have a house for
substitute for House joint
resolution thirteen that we've
given to the clerk and on choir
rates been passed out.
Germany has been passed out
eating is on the website.
Inject into the floor
substitute.
Speaker of the settlement
provides a number first it's two
two zero eight zero nine point
two.
So what this for subsidy does
that just slightly different is
there's a sixty day session our
one year the are for each
regular session I I sensed it be
in the house for substitute each
regular session Legislature
chubby gonna end with twelve
noon on the third Tuesday of
January every regular season
legislature convening during odd
numbered years shall not exceed
sixty days and arms off your of
the forty five days but the same
provisions on that limiting the
Are the it does forty five day
session will call the governor
and with that Mr speaker are we
move house for substitute for
house joint resolution thirteen.
Okay we'll go to the gentleman
from San Juan is this a friendly
substitute.
Yes Mr speaker this is a
friendly substitute.
Okay is there discussion on the
substitute.
Is there objection to it.
Hearing on house for senator
house joint resolution thirteen
is adopted.
Okay we're up now on debate of
the substitute.
John which is San Juan there is
debate would you like to the
comments long we go to Baker
members yes thank you Mr speaker
and and body the.
The forty five forty five day
amendment or joint resolution
Hey Matt mixed reviews Mr
speaker and generally the idea
of of trying to realize the two
here is the two legislative
cycles for the two years
legislative cycle was received
but there was some discussion Mr
speaker as to whether or not
forty five days each year was
enough to be able to get to work
on that we need to do
that Mr speaker I there were
several variations that were
presented
one of them being a a sixty day
session each year Mr speaker
after talking to several members
including yourself
there is a bit of a concern on
the sixty day session during
Alexion here as to
provisions that must must be
taken.
During the election cycle for
For getting our signatures and
getting into the clerk in on
filing date and there were also
Mr speaker concerns from members
who work and are away from work
that are sixty days Tuesday's in
two years in a row might be just
a little too much or that maybe
some members who are you have to
be away from work and and as you
know this costs us to be here
most most of the folks across
New Mexico don't realize that
we're not paid and so we're here
entre diem and folks are
generally every day that we're
here yes they have a business
back in your home district are
not able to do that work and so
Mister speaker and body what we
did was a bit of a compromise
for lack of a better word to
trying to accommodate.
eight sessions that were long
enough to be able to get things
accomplished however not so long
as to make it more difficult for
people who have to be away from
their businesses back home
thank you miss Peru give me a
chance to explain the reasoning
behind the sixty and forty five
days.
I'm very interested maybe
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe twice and once you.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
and gentleman this gentleman
yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle from Santo.
Thank you Mr speaker German so
heard this bill just couple days
ago and Judiciary
I I appreciate the change from
forty five forty five to sixty
forty five.
I think that's a step in the
right direction
but the.
To me it's just not big enough
that.
Mr Chairman the forty five day
session would be done by now.
and even in the sixty day
session even this bill this
resolutions using.
Mr speaker John yeah.
It's a long way from the finish
line.
I think.
I just as I explained in house
to ensure L. repeat some of that
for the benefit of the members
yeah I was gonna be interesting
this year especially over the
house side where we limited the
number of bills in we skipped
the morning four sessions and we
skipped a lot of the ceremonial
activities and in time devoted
to them.
they really.
You know it's the clock.
It was really interesting to see
if we got our work done.
In you know here it is where
we've got four full days left in
the session yeah we're still
scrambling to get our work done.
so you know I think a number of
things need to happen I think
yeah absolutely the legislature
the the legislature forced me to
be paid.
I think we should look at
reforms.
To streamline our process.
I think we should look at more
Comedy between the chambers.
I I personally thought the the
bill restrictions this year was
effective that it forced members
to prioritize their bills and I
sort of felt that
We have built Mr chairman I mean
I thought was a good thing.
I just I just don't think we get
it done in forty five days I
think it's a little odd.
Inferring it you know we
increased one session to sixty
days but not the other
I realize the burden that
depends on the legislators
believe me I realize that it's
very personal to me.
There's something to be said for
a consistent process like sixty
days every year.
We can just like season has a
pretty standard number of teens
every year of periods and like
contests have a pre standard
number of minutes you really
very.
And.
To go to the voters and ask for
their approval Mr speaker John
into to expand this is is a big
step right we don't do that all
the time.
because it's it's a lot of work
and I just think that the
messaging of saying well we
really need sixty days one year
but we can get the work done
forty five days next year.
Doesn't it doesn't well.
Because if we could get the work
done in forty five days then
both the sessions should be
forty five days.
If we can get the work done in
forty five days level the
session should be sixty days.
And I fall into the latter camp
Mr chairman so
We comes to.
Take a good hard look at how we
do our work I am I am all in in
in that building I appreciate
you bringing this resolution.
But I I don't think the forty
five the session is enough time
especially when we take off the
germane this requirement they
were all able to introduce bills
which I think is great.
I think we need sixty days sixty
days plus reform so that's a
good starting point so Mister
speaker John thank you I I
genuinely appreciate.
This resolution
but I'm not ready to support it
at sixty forty five thank you Mr
speaker thank you Joe.
Here is for the right Johnson
San Juan Representative
stripper.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from San Juan please
yield.
It yes I yield to senior
statesman from Salem county
thank you gentlemen
I think when I first saw this it
was a forty five forty five day
schedule is that right.
Yes someone Mr speaker and
gentleman yes what we brought on
the floor tonight was forty five
forty five but the added that
the substitute that was
presented.
By Representative Ely one of the
co sponsors and takes it to
sixty forty five and Mr speaker
and gentleman is really trying
to accommodate as many people as
possible I expect think ever see
just as many
responses from folks that saying
forty five forty five it is is
right let's split the work up in
the two years the student evenly
going get it done forty five
days each each session
that folks who Mr speaker and
gentleman the same folks are
probably away from their
businesses are away from their
families and not letting you
know that not not sleeping in
their own beds here in Santa Fe
they're away from their their
their kids or grandchildren so
folks who generally are not not
living here Mr speaker and
gentleman
for the most part where the one
suggesting that forty five forty
five was the right suggestion
or the right a division of time
and Mr speaker and gentleman
however I did receive the equal
number of folks to believe that
a sixty sixty that is as as the
representative from
from Santa Fe just.
Total body that in his mind
that.
Forty five days is not enough
and we need to do it take take
take longer time during that
second year but Mr speaker and
gentleman it was a.
Offered by my co sponsor who by
the way is not returning our
after this next step after
this term is over in part
because it's it's set at
difficulty being away from
business being away from of all
those who who are.
Have businesses that home for.
Away from work have to make some
sort of accommodations that are
difficult and so that was a
suggestion by by to co sponsor
and so trying to accommodate as
many people as possible and and
in reality I think that's a the
very the very idea of compromise
is to try and accommodate as
many people as possible and and
each of your concern so.
So now we are looking at a sixty
forty five day.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
When I first saw this I thought
was a good idea because you to
all of this is this for they do
a forty five forty five and a
and as we all know you jars you
know leases nation and somebody
positive categories were as we
don't I mean they they they have
a number one business friendly
state and and and so I was kind
of excited about the forty five
forty five and I was hoping that
we would kind of pattern our
processes after the after you
toss model because and I've been
doing this for years again it
was a total of ninety days
I'm asking are.
Thank you ninety days we have
sixty guardian there forty five
forty five cellphones your good
idea.
the Utah model bit anyway the
sixty four forty five discount
is been real hard words so I
appreciate your rationing and
and the compromises when into
this and and I yield.
From Bernalillo thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman so I'm
really torn on this but I'm
sitting here thinking about how
many I mean and we probably all
are in the same boat thinking
about how many good things we
could have done for New Mexico
that are sitting somewhere
stranded I'm and this is the
sixty day session we've got four
days left I mean I I have for
bills that would be really good
for New Mexico that are stranded
in a Senate committee and so
even even as as someone said
before Mr speaker and gentleman
even cutting out all of the
ceremonial stuff that really
does eat up a lot of our time
we're still not able to get
through bills that I think about
a forty five day session that's
wide open that anyone can
introduce anything I just I I
see a lot of.
Wasted time essentially I mean
not that not that introducing a
bill that doesn't get past this
necessarily a waste of time.
But sometimes it feels that way
particularly to advocate so.
I and there was Mr speaker and
gentleman I talked of how you
taught those things Utah
Legislators have staff I think
that's that's a big part of our
problem here is that we don't
have staff except during the
session and trying to trying to
get everything done in such a
short amount of time it's just
gonna lead to
I appreciate the additional
fifteen days and I appreciate
the the not limiting it to
budget and and issues on the
call but I just I think it's I
think we need to take bigger
steps than that thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Agency for the debate the
gentleman from Chavis and you
know terrible Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
gentleman we don't our test site
yield to the minority floor
leader.
A gentleman I I appreciate your
your.
Amendment I A. R. I appreciate
the conversation.
But coming.
I have a little different idea
that might expedited.
And
I think part of the problem is
there's too many of us here.
And
if you cut this body down in the
past.
And reduced the Senate by I
don't know.
Certain number.
And again those remaining
people.
Staff and facilities.
You might see
Bills move through here much
for one coordinated in more in
the business lack so I don't
think necessarily adding.
Days.
A process that.
This kind of hamstrung right now
and we don't have enough office
space you got the Senate that
offices one
individual you know in an
office.
Just some peace and quiet that
can work over here were boxed up
to a time especially in this
virtual world it's a it's a pain
but I think the body this think
about.
Is that really the right number
you know forty might be a better
number.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that nation I did that
a couple years ago they had a
much larger a delegation
and they I believe they reduce
their their delegates
what I'm might be misquoting
here from forty two I'm pretty
sure those are down to twenty
six and in part
That helps a little bit that you
have folks who are now having to
represent more than one.
Chapter house there so they're a
little bit more sensitive to
maybe a little bit wider areas
and not just their community Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Just the idea of us
there there's another.
Of house joint resolutions
moving forward us asking the
public to consider paying
legislators instead of paying a
per diem Mr speaker and
gentleman one of the things that
I see I I think forty five days
would accomplish.
What we're trying to do what
we're doing here yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman that.
That.
If that does go to the voters
and maybe they do pass at.
I think the idea of a
professional legislature I think
those interim committees would
be a little bit more.
On target a little bit more
specific I think it would be
really considered an extension
of what we're doing here I think
if we're doing it that way I
think of I think maybe even
legislation could be drafted a
little earlier if we're if we're
really a year round professional
legislature's that does happen
through
Loaders decide to do that Mr
speaker and and gentleman.
The idea that we're looking at a
commission of the the ethics
commission to potentially look
at paying legislators.
Right now with thirty day
session that legislators who are
not members of the governor's
party can't introduce
legislation unless the governor
does allows them to really that
that second session that thirty
day session it is essentially Mr
speaker and gentleman a special
session for the governor
controls everything.
And and Mr speaker and gentleman
from the standpoint of the
separation of powers that's a
real problem.
I I think if we can.
Take back a little bit of of
of our actual list already as
legislators I think that's a
good thing I think we see a
little bit of that even during
this session.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
it's been talk that we.
Are still scrambling here at the
end of the speaker and gentleman
house pretty much finished its
work.
About a week ago with house
bill's the reason this one so
late is I didn't introduce it at
the beginning of I introduce
this joint resolution.
About two weeks ago.
and I did it because because we
are looking Mr speaker and
gentleman at us be shaped to
potentially pay legislators as
as if it were a a full time job
and just because we're not in
this building.
Passing trying to pass
legislation doesn't mean I'm not
a legislator full time.
but but your point Mr earlier
point Mr speaker and gentleman
the idea that that.
Is this the right number.
Other other in New Mexico we
seeing other bodies decide that
they're a delegation was a
little bit too big and they did
reduce I I'm not sure yeah that
is that's not a question is
being asked.
Thank you for your time I I
I have been thinking about that
I apologize I haven't said
anything to you about it but
You know if we took our numbers
from thirty to forty five
thousand representation and
straighten that up and again
those people that were
remaining.
offices provided help.
I think you would find that the
if you all know this body can do
a lot when they want to.
And we just got to get down
enough to where we have a team
that works there and I think
adding more to that no more cuts
in the gate and that's it
necessarily mean better.
Mr speaker and and let's see I
think that is correct
as a matter of fact I think the
real reason that we're having
trouble this session is not
because this body has been
efficient and getting its work
done
but the other body on the of the
other chamber on the other side
of this building has introduced
double the amount of legislation
forty members have introduced
double the amount of legislation
has been introduced by us forty
two members on that side have
done double the legislation than
than what
seventy members in this building
have done Mr speaker and
gentleman just briefly to your
other two comments as far as.
office space and staffing
that staffing has been brought
up by a couple of folks this
evening during this debate that
is something as well if if if
the voters decided to to paid
legislators I think it's gonna
be important to have staff and
that means office space is going
to be even more at a premium but
to that point Mr speaker and
gentleman I do serve on
the
Commission that the the
Mr speaker are are.
And I serve on the state
buildings Commission and there
are buildings that are being
Lad and I guess what I
understand right
The when when these new
buildings are built I think the
secretary of state's office
maybe moved out of the north
complexes that happens I think.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
the that that office space is
going to be made available to
legislators in particular it's
house members that are doubling
up in office space so that could
and and that answers that was
come.
Is several years away but I I
think that could be coming
but Mr speaker and Ben jealous
if if that's the direction we're
going.
I think it's important first of
all that we've got that we don't
have a thirty day session that
is essentially
the governor session and both
are members of both in.
Of the Republican Party in of
the Democratic Party has had a
governor's who are of the
opposite party and have had to
live through that session where
they can't introduced
legislation less the governor
that gives them a message and Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
exactly how it's hello a special
session was called by the
governor is
any legislation that was
introduced is only deemed
germane by the governor or
potentially rules committee if
they want to say that it's
germane for that session so once
again I think if the move is for
us to be.
Eight our own.
Branch of government rather than
dictated by the governor I think
we have to do something to
To
Make it to work where no
legislator is locked out of the
process during any year.
Well I appreciate appreciate
your time I just think that
whatever we do we should be
focused on.
that the output what we do has
more value I have to get it
among the caucuses you all of
that work paid about what we're
worse right now
and I say that with tongue in
cheek everybody works hard but
we gotta change our processes
the point that we produce a
better product thank you.
Representative is this for the
debate the gentle lady from Rio
Arriba Santa Fe and Taos.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentleman from San Juan
you.
Yes ideals the time generally.
I'm.
I.
Really kind of supported the
idea yeah I mean I'm glad we're
having this conversation on the
house floor although I I I
really think this whole concept
needs to be expanded and and
then I you know I've only been
here this is my third year in
New I used to think really that
that this whole process you know
not being paid not having staff
not being able to kind of have a
have a good team that we're we
could analyze legislation
carefully where they interim
committees would be really
focused I used to think it was
unfair to the legislators I now
think it's really unfair to the
citizens of New Mexico I don't
think we have a process that
that really works as well as it
needs to work and and and I
think the reason that we're are
behind in a lot of legislation
is that we don't have the time
the staff or a legislature
that's legislature that's that's
capable of delivering a product
to the people and I would agree
that we need to have more time
in a legislative session I think
I think I don't know the answers
to sixty day sessions I think we
need staff that that knows how
to help us knows how to that we
can have that works
to refine and research and
define it legislation that works
for a citizens and I think
legislators need to be paid I'll
just say that this is a you know
I'm a working class girl I gotta
tell you so you can take the
girl of the working class but
you can not think that working
class out of the girl and I just
this is the only job that I had
to raise money to get in them
not and insert for free so I I
think I think all of these
problems I I'm glad we're having
this conversation because I
really do think that we need to
work as a bipartisan group to
build a set of policies and a
plan.
And for a legislature that we
all of us think will will work
better and I can hear people
across both sides of the aisles
I agree on a lot of things so I
I won't support this because I
think it should encompass a lot
more than what we're doing here
today a kind gentleman but I do
want to thank you for bringing
this up and I join with all of
my colleagues on both sides of
the aisles and saying let's
let's develop this idea further
and see what we can do to make
ourselves
better and I will join with
anybody in that effort so I
think you kind gentlemen I thank
you Mr speaker I yield my time
Mr speaker can I have just a
second to respond a senior for
the debate Jonah close thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
for that
you know there has been several
suggestions that members right
to me that to maybe to expand
this the problem is.
To do things like.
Considering pay in this
legislation for staff or other
things first off if we address
Hey that if I dress that in this
legislation in this house joint
resolution that would be
a lot of growing could not put
those two items together in in
one
resolution that's going to go to
the public for their vote so in
reality what I'm thinking is we
are already looking at setting
the our resolution to the public
to consider paying us.
but.
Without.
Yes I'm not sure they should
consider paying us because Mr
speaker and gentleman at every
other year
nearly half of each chamber has
members that are not able to
introduce legislation on behalf
of their members and on behalf
of their constituents back home
and Mr speaker and and gentleman
and members of the body.
Trying to accommodate the
different.
Backgrounds different areas that
we all come from there are folks
who have very different
considerations.
And the idea that we expanded
beyond ninety days that we serve
at the beginning of of in in two
years some folks may not be able
to come back and some folks may
not be able to serve because
being away from their
businesses however the the idea
that maybe we need to do
something a little more is been
addressed in the substitute and
Mr speaker and members
I think this is a compromise.
And.
It is something that.
We would allow the voters to
make a decision on Mr speaker
and members I think if we go
from a sixty thirty two of sixty
sixty I'm not sure the voters
would support that I think that
many folks think that we are.
The fewer days that that we are
here in Santa Fe the less damage
we can do and that so Mr speaker
and and members whatever we put
before the before the voters has
to be that they have to vote
yes.
And so I and I'm worried that if
we go beyond this that the
answer from from many of owners
across New Mexico will be now so
I I ask the body to pass this on
to the the Senate and let's see
what they do with it thank you
Mr speaker.
And I'm.
That
I move house for substitute for
house joint resolution thirty we
are on final passage of the
house floor substitute for house
joint resolution thirteen the
vote is now open.
Representative closer to forty
five any I'm sorry that.
The clerk to call them without a
recorded vote Representative
Lundstrom.
Representative clothes mentor
forty five in the affirmative
twenty one of the negative house
floor substitutes restaurant
resolution thirteen has passed
the house.
Okay last item number thirty
nine.
The generationally and are you
ready on.
Senate bill one twelve.
Thank you Mr speaker yes can you
take me to that point.
The record reflect election this
is sherry from the Senate bill
one twelve as amended on final
passage is taken the gentlelady
to explain.
Thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
one twelve creates a sustainable
economy task force and charged
with creating a long term
economic plan to diversify and
sustain our economy as well as
implementing a study by the
department of workforce
solutions and ensuring that
there are community tribal
industry seats on the task force
and with that I stand for
questions.
This debate the gentleman from
Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker religion
ladies don't mind you know.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes I
will yield.
Yes this legislation creates.
Two bodies warms Task Force.
Composed.
We look forward to major
sectors.
And then the second I'm Advisory
Council.
Consists of.
One.
Representative true.
From disproportionately.
To communities through.
Sustainable economic.
Representatives one person was
from the oil industry.
And then representatives from.
Tribal communities.
Where to start if I could
please.
With disproportionately affected
communities.
And would like you to.
Name one form right.
And what.
Because the disproportionally.
She works.
Thank you Mr speaker gentlemen
so the reason that the
legislation incorporates
individuals
from disproportionate
disproportionately impacted
communities those are
communities that we have
identified over the course of
the last few years and by we I
mean the the the the the the
coalition of folks that I've
been working with on this issue
so back in two thousand and
nineteen
when
we were working on the Energy
transitioned Act we were
simultaneously also trying to
gather more data on how
any sort of transition related
to energy issues what directly
affect communities on the front
what what we call in the fine
print from my communities and so
many of those include workers so
specifically in in your area for
example would be
workers who work in the oil and
gas industry as you might know
and I mentioned I I was born and
raised in in the in the in the
southeastern part of the state a
lot of my family still lives in
that area and is is employed by
or indirectly employed
depends on their livelihood from
the oil and gas industry so when
I'm when we're talking about
disproportionately impacted we
need communities who are either
a racially economically or
Social we act as socially
impacted by
a lot of times these industry
and so we want to make sure that
we're talking about any sort of
transition that that they are at
the table and and providing some
insight on what that means to
them.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
this would be a disproportionate
impact as a consequence of for
example policy researchers.
The energy transition arches
that.
I think you start with.
Madam chair Representative of
gentlemen so we need
disproportionately impacted by
Industries that have been around
in the state of New Mexico for a
very long time so
especially when it comes to
extractive industries because of
our heavy reliance on them we we
are I have seen just from my own
experiences as as far as being
in the serving in the
legislature that there has been
a lot of generational impact to
that and so that is what I mean
by by that.
Mr speaker gentle lady let me
ask again can you name one of
these communities.
Madam speaker gentlemen I mean
there's a number of communities
is there one specifically that
you'd like me to address.
Mr speaker gentle lady just pick
one and then.
Madam speaker gentleman's so if
we're talking about
disproportionately impacted
communities are one that I
wouldn't that I would
discuss right now is is a we're
talking about
state communities out in our
teacher like are there which is
where I grew up it would be I'm
sorry I would be the folks like
my nephews who are are actually
directly impacted
who worked in the oil fields
themselves and have of all the
tile income streams due to the
industry.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Plus Senator Tallman Ortiz use
disproportionately.
Could you describe now for me
exactly what what Colin's
disproportionate affectation in
order to ensure.
Madam speaker I Mr speaker
gentleman so
Can you clarify your question I
don't I don't think I really
understand what you're what
you're asking.
Mr speaker gentle lady I guess
what I'm getting at is the to
communities that are going to be
disproportionately constructed
the call is disproportional G.
is gonna be the the policies.
What the cadence of this council
and transport.
So.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
would appear.
We are calls.
The problem we're trying to
solve.
Is.
Reserve.
Reasonable.
Madam speaker Mr speaker
gentlemen I I disagree.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
One.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
it's I mean it's pretty clear
that our philosophies.
Very much different terms of the
future of transition here in the
state of New Mexico
I am looking at this issue from
a task force perspective to
address one eight industry has
historically done to communities
in terms of the fluctuation in
both revenues and also economic
development opportunities
so for me this task force I see
it as an opportunity I see it as
a mechanism to address the
future of the state of New
Mexico when it comes to
diversification and
sustainability I also see it as
looking beyond just energy jobs
I look at this as providing
those who are on the front lines
of these of these employment
that of the the communities who
are part of this
that would be part of this
effort to be able to help us
reimagine something different
that is unlike what we've ever
seen before.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
the objective of this task force
and council would be to
transition.
The New Mexico economy
completely away from that
magnificent industry that has
provided so much for the story
in terms something else is.
Madam speaker Mr speaker
gentlemen the task force is
specifically to address
how we transition away from
industries that have been around
here in the state and in this
case in your case the way that
you've described it is oil and
gas but that doesn't it doesn't
mean that this is something that
happens overnight I think
everybody who was involved in
this process who has been
involved in this process myself
who like I mentioned the
majority of my family is
employed by these industries we
have no intention of at least I
don't have any intention of
ending this industry overnight
this is something that we
believe that I believe is is
gradual it's something that has
to happen but it has to happen
when you have people who are
impacted at the center of that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Glaringly obvious question.
A courage and that what I would
just higher scores.
The charge.
With.
The petroleum industry rather
than supplementing.
The petroleum industry with
changes.
Efforts to economically
diversified.
One.
True.
Rather than work from a process
of taking away one industry to
try to establish Mobil one one
oil and gas industry course
while we use those dollars.
To generate economic
development.
Is.
Search course of action.
Madam speaker I Mr speaker
gentlemen I appreciate you
saying that because the task
force does include folks from
industry and so that was the
intentionality behind the
creation of this task forces
that in order to move forward in
looking towards the future those
are some of the people that need
to be part of the conversation
as well as the other folks that
I mentioned.
Mr speaker and gentle lady over
and over again in this
legislation we were to replace
revenue.
And transition away.
In rural areas for care to
supplant the oil and gas revenue
that's being generated for the
citizens and the state with
something else.
Just plain reading of the
language of the bill do you not
agree.
Madams Mr speaker gentlemen as I
mentioned we with the task force
includes industry would be part
of the conversation.
Mr speaker and gentle lady one
the industry representatives.
On the.
On the council.
Total numbers.
So.
Yeah we're trying to create.
Districts another very obvious
question number encouraging just
one this council does not
include.
People that actually provides
the jobs in this miracle no one.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are
included on this Advisory
Council why is that.
Mr speaker gentlemen I think one
of the things that is important
for folks to understand and and
and hopefully this is something
that I can articulate that you
might be able to understand is
that.
This administration and
administrations before the
before this one have always had
very friendly relationships with
the industry I don't think
anybody has ever had any
there's instead I I think that
is pretty clear
nobody is going to nobody saying
anything about getting rid of
oil and gas or any any other
industry other than just redo it
reducing our reliance and so
that is what this task force is
is it is attempting to do.
Mr speaker gentle lady it is the
public policy of this blog.
To be carbon free.
By the year twenty to.
That's already established so
we.
What is Corman Shuri.
Main to do Mr speaker and gentle
and what does that term mean to
you and what would be the
impacts on the petroleum
industry in the event of public
policy to successfully execute.
Mr speaker gentlemen a carbon
free means carbon free and I
think what we are trying to do
this body anyway is to address
that issue in a long term time
with the long term timeline
which is in fact with this task
force in is is is is trying to
it to do as well.
Okay so Mister speaker and
gentle lady we are in fact.
Trying to eliminate carbon to
restore in New Mexico which
implies.
Do
we administrative thus the need
for the transition is not thank
you.
Mr speaker and gentleman so what
we're to yeah so what we're
talking about transitioning away
from the industry the the hope
is that by transitioning away we
can supplement the income and
the revenues that are coming
into the state that are not that
are beyond just industries that
we relied on for so long.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
What.
Chair to do we have choose.
With the transition.
What we're transitioning away
from.
Is three billion dollars of
state revenue and a hundred and
thirty four thousand jobs are we
transitioning toward greater
economies is part of the
objective.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
is a number of of
corporations particularly those
in in in the oil industry that
have committed to their own
carbon neutral commitment so we
are in line or at least trying
to be in line with many of those
that are on the industry side as
well as those that I mentioned
in on our frontline communities
who have very high expectations
of us trying to address this
issue of supplementing our our
economy and our revenues.
Mr speaker and gentle lady to
set up I see that there are.
We're going to be trying to
implement some recommendations.
There were contained in the New
Mexico clean energy workforce
development started that's one
of the objectives that we hope
to achieve with this task force
counselors are not correct.
Mr speaker gentlemen yes so one
of the one of the the the
outcomes that we hope will come
out of this task forces that
there will be implementation of
that work study.
Mr speaker gentle lady are you
aware of the number of green
jobs.
There were projected to be
available in the of Santa the
wind and solar Regis gets called
to more potential in the state.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
have that exact number at the
moment and just so that the rest
of the.
Also understands that part of
this Task Force isn't strictly
speak to green jobs it or Energy
jobs we're looking to diversify
our economy beyond
just energy.
Yes Mr speaker and gentle lady
this clean energy workforce
development started deals almost
exclusively with great jobs and
I have the report in front of me
would you like me to tell you
how many jobs are predicted to
home from wind and solar.
In the report that's referenced
in your legislation.
Mr speaker gentleman sure.
Eight thousand five hundred Mr
speaker gentle lady that's going
to cover the cost.
It's going to cost of the number
that I just mentioned a few
moments ago of a hundred and
thirty four thousand jobs Mr
speaker and gentle lady
Australia's state work in any
other industry.
Slide.
Or on the horizon.
Is is is the ability to step up.
To displace the will be last
opportunity do you have any
insights there that you can find
somebody.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman can you repeat the
last two giving you can you can
you
sorry I missed the part about
giving you some insight on on
what.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Shares from the numbers for or
in this report we're about a
hundred and twenty thousand jobs
short of being able to identify
any replacement for the
petroleum industry can you
provide any insight as to
industry that you have
identified.
Could be part of the solution.
Economic disaster.
Mr speaker gentleman
no I mean I I I can't give you
specifics right now and that's
really why this task force is
being created because we do
believe that while the industry
has provided for the state it's
that we are we're all we're also
very heavily reliant on it and
so in order to really expand on
what we can do for our
communities when it comes to
economic development and
revenues we have to look at
other opportunities and that's
why the sustainable topic
economic task force exists we
wanted to exist.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
submit that we need to look for
those opportunities in addition
to.
In addition to.
The revenues and economic
activity generated lots of
control in the district not in
lieu of.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I do have an amendment.
And the.
True to numbers point to choose
zero.
Seven.
Point one.
And I would like to move house
for members.
Number one to Senate bill one
twelve for discourage words.
The gentleman is new the
amenities give us to to number
has passed out is on the website
gentleman to explain you
mentioned.
Mr speaker the member person
played just one program.
And I can read the whole story
lines are dentists are ways to
use broad based tax cuts and
deregulation to promote a more
diverse.
New Mexico economy create
sustainable and long term
economic growth.
And provide for higher paying
jobs and then remember
succeeding programs accordingly
let's on page four between lines
seven and eight.
We will go to the sponsor
generated from Jenny and that
are you able to see in order.
Mr speaker yes I'm reading
through the amendment right now
is it a permanent Mr speaker
gentleman no it is not a
friendly amendment.
Thank is there debate on the
amendment Johnson Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from wake county yield
will yield to the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
Mr speaker and gentleman it.
When this bill came before us
and one of the methods.
I too was concerned about what
this task force was going to a
properties particularly
considering spike up but it
looks to me like.
What you have the added in your
amendment.
What more.
Fully define some of the things
that this task force should be
looking at to accomplish the
stated goals of this legislation
is that how you would see your
amendment.
Mr speaker and gentleman
correctional Ludwig the reason
for it yes it would appear that
states Representative Nibert
Representative that are our
neighbors as others through the
south and southeast or with
these policies I don't want to
miss programs seem to be doing a
lot better than our state.
So let's take a lesson from some
folks would appear to be doing
it right.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Looking at every.
Including I think we all want to
more diverse and vibrant economy
but looking at the impact of
state policies.
Which tax policy the one
regulatory policy be to other
things same go hand in hand with
the baby achieving the very
goals of this task force is.
It is demanded on looking at
academic cheating under this
legislation so I think you're
your amendment to study those
signs and to.
To have the goal of creating
sustainable and long term
economic growth falls hand and
hand with the very things that
are are set forth in this
legislation.
Yeah and I think it is
complementary to the legislation
that's before us that I'm quite
surprised that this is not a
program management Mr speaker
and gentleman
I look at the make up of the
task force and it looked to me
like it was skewed.
In a direction.
That would not be able to
accomplish
maybe the goals of the task
force and so having this
additional items we're going to
look at I think with.
Create more focused look would
you agree with that statement Mr
speaker and gentleman.
From chambers the only thing
that will pull New Mexico out of
which forty ninth or fiftieth
place among the states of this
great country.
The only thing that will pull us
out of that the last one to our
jobs.
And the only way to jobs are
going to occur is it businesses
are willing to re locate store
building rides here and public
policy has a significant impact.
Mr speaker and gentleman and the
other thing that this jobs
provide opportunity.
Committee for the children who
go through our school system
opportunities for the children
who graduated from our high
school's graduates of our
colleges and.
This is our home that creates
opportunities for those folks to
have a bright future in our
state and too many of them are
having to leave our state to
provide opportunities elsewhere
maybe in some of the state's
bureau referencing earlier so
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman for bringing this
ammendment I will support.
Thank you the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Strickler
thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from Lake County
employees here
will yield to restrain gentleman
from San Juan thank you
gentlemen
Gentleman do not serve on the on
the tax committee and we know
how important it is for our
state complete with our
surrounding neighbors and and
tax reform is a big part of that
would you agree with that the
gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman I absolutely.
And it seems like the last last
several years we've we've kind
of gone the wrong direction on
that we raise taxes and we
continue to raise taxes and we
continue bay and out liar of
from our neighbors is is that
your understanding gentleman Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman off
all.
Facets of tax policy we do have
a few policies that order
graciously Brad and do need to
be addressed in this mainly
income tax are both corporate
and personal income tax we've
got some bills on the on the
docket that will make you stand
out liar also are gross receipts
tax of good of of of services
pushes and non competitive
advantage is is our live
gentleman Mister speaker.
Mr speaker jump from San Juan
you are correct and then
regulation is so important to
have fair and regional
regulations
basically it is an important
component for businesses and
industries to to locate in our
state and it seems like we're
kind of going the wrong
direction more what what are
your thoughts on that Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Speaker and gentleman course our
country we're district that is
just a few miles from the border
which we frequently compare
ourselves with the regulatory
environment in that state and
almost without exception it is
friendlier place to do business
four miles east of were I will
send it is we're on.
Thank you for that answer Mr
speaker and gentleman and and I
I live in the four corners area
we border Colorado Utah and
Arizona and Utah is always the
the leader in terms of business
development and economic
prosperity they have a very
sound tax policy and there are
there handicap the gentleman and
Mr speaker seventy percent
seventy six percent of our lands
on by the federal government so
they have you know.
Twenty four percent is privately
held so they're they're able to
do remarkable work in in that
state and that's that's one of
our our not only are leaders in
our rates on our neighboring
states but one of the leaders in
the country and it just seems
like this task force should
consider all of you know our
neighboring states and their
best practices would you.
I believe here then that would
do that is is that Jack is am I
reading this right gentleman Mr
speaker and gentleman I believe
you are reading it correctly in
the last eight months and was
acting.
And with you know New Mexico
this is Mr struggling.
Mr speaker and gentleman are
gross wages is an imac
our surrounding states are
growing at a fast clip ten
percent or more of their their
projected income is much higher
than ours I believe Colorado
which is the leader in our peer
group they're number eleven.
They have a lot of high tech
jobs and in a they seem to be
doing quite well they have a
diversified economy down New
Mexico gentleman
you know I have heard a lot of
the panel discussions from the
New Mexico State University are
doctor page who's a well known
economist and he he he has
testified many times before the
revenue stabilization committee
and our state is heavily
dependent on oil and gas and
that's not necessarily a bad
thing we're also a resented Mr
speaker and gentleman of with
the military installations that
we have in our state three
or four stations to national
labs there white sands missile
range of Lee Kirton airforce
base also has a land so you know
those are kind of our two big
industry what else what else do
we have in New Mexico
Besides those two major insurers
that keep us going.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
about it.
Well we we also Mr Chairman Mr
speaker jail we also have a
pretty pretty rich agricultural
community and and we're blessed
with the a lot of irrigation and
are of good farming we have one
point three million cast in our
state ninety thousand sheep our
state and we've got wonderful
dairy industry in the southeast
part of state so that that kind
of helps is to and yeah we have
we have tourism and and other
things but what is dragging us
down a gentleman a thank you
mentioned Mr speaker and
gentleman you mentioned there
were fifty of them and education
our performance well what about
our crime situation how are how
we look in their.
Mr speaker and gentleman you can
go down the list
of places.
Places the district does not
want to be right.
Call
in a number of issues you will
find us near the bottom of those
next.
And gentleman your your simple
amendment would probably address
some of those issues are
education reform tax reform.
A crime crime the
fighting crime
in a issues pretty.
Pretty pretty comprehensive.
Do what you think this would
cover some of that those issues
chairman.
Mr chairman John what's yours
this ammendment.
Help to make the story more
business friendly developing
more good paying jobs everything
else falls into place Mr Mr
speaker and gentleman and and
that this that's the dilemma
this approach without show
broadening the base if you will
of expanding the scope which we
simply corrie doctor page yeah
you know replacing all gases is
darn near they say it's really
difficult issues pre regular
industry just like replacing all
the military bases and our two
national labs but you you just
can't find high enough value on
those those two industries and
we're lucky to have
we do need to diversify our
economy and I think I think the
sustainable dishes sustainable
economy task force I think it
John misses the mark without the
broader broadening the scope of
the study without these items
that the the the Mr speaker and
gentleman
We're working on a network out
of the off track a little bit
what what do you what do you
think about that gentleman.
Mr speaker Joe one hour much
reports or to state to of
saying.
Of business leaders.
And captains of.
Areas industries that might be
perspective included as members
of the task force.
And I would agree Mr speaker and
gentleman what without
you know I I don't know if we
have agriculture in this in this
group or not at I didn't I don't
I'm not sure of the thirteen
membership our agricultural is
included I'll have to ask
sponsor you know when we finish
here but all in all it took for
this this task force very
effective Mansell I think your
manager it is necessary
should percentage of pre Senator
amendment so thank you Mr
speaker and and thank you.
Gentleman from late.
Is there for you right on the
amendment the generals and San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker.
This general from the county you
will yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I notice in your
In your amendment a couple of
terms and that is sustainable.
Long term in high paying job.
That's a little bit short Hansel
your last sentence there in the
bill but
Mr speaker and gentleman
this bill looks to add on page
three.
The last the last sentence in
page three.
Of the bill says the at.
To replace jobs that rely on
extraction development and
natural resources
and so Mr speaker and gentleman.
Those jobs are the.
If we're going to replace.
replace that industry with a new
industry.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
That's what we're looking to do
is not just a not just replace
the source.
Mr speaker and gentleman to to
the point of your.
Amendment we're looking to make
sure that we create sustainable
long term.
High paying jobs that correct Mr
speaker Jim.
Mr speaker and gentleman one of
my great difficulties with
legislation as written.
As always talks about.
Is destroyed or replacing jobs
that have been destroyed by
public polls I think.
Advocacy for a much more
restrictive public policy.
Would be to add to.
Judicial jobs after only triple
that to.
These histories or contributing
so much to recall right to the.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Without legislation.
Like the one that's in front of
us like PTA that's been passed.
A year ago with other measures
that we've moved
Would be in your opinion.
What the current high paying
long term high employment by the
way high employment level.
Jobs in the extractive
industries.
Would they be replaced with
renewable jobs.
By themselves without help
without.
US intervening in a certain way
with public policy and putting
restrictions on the existing
industries and putting subsidies
forward.
For the renewable industry
workers what those jobs go away
naturally on their own without
public policy intervention such
as bill that's before us today
Mr speaker and gentleman I do
believe.
Public policy is made recent
significant contribution.
To some of the system.
What we call high road jobs.
Going one.
And.
And that is with.
And let me emphasize without any
coherent plan any coherent.
Opportunity on the horizon to
replace nothing has been
identified that even comes
close.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that's I guess that's
the point that I'm I'm making
with with your amendment.
Is we're experiencing this and
and in my hometown was workers
that I had worked with
for years thirty two years.
jobs are being done away with
us.
And it's interesting I actually
had a number of of this body
state that those jobs are going
way solely based on economics.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
that's just not the case.
Public policy has played the
role in reducing and eliminating
about two thousand jobs in San
Juan County they're not all gone
yet but they are disappearing we
just heard that maybe the final
death knell could have been
placed on that on those jobs at
the San Juan mind San Juan
generating station.
Now Mr speaker and gentleman
Those jobs can be replaced.
And.
And I and that is something
working very hard to do.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The specific source of of the
generation of that that is going
back in that.
Into the into San Juan County
into in what looks like there
there's one project I believe
it's it's going forward for sure
another one that is likely to go
forward to us solar solar farms
so those are the generating.
Our.
Stations.
I'm gonna replace about half of
the output of what the San Juan
generating station has.
Has been putting that has a
place but Mr speaker and
gentleman the the jobs are a
literal tickets after
construction construction
there's gonna be a lot of jobs
we want those jobs and San Juan
county order like construction
jobs.
Project by project there there
but when when the project is
completed there's no real long
term job search you and they are
high paying.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
it's literally.
Fifty one.
And numbers.
And so I am I like the language
that you put in here because we
have to identify.
The replacement sustainable long
term jobs that are high rate.
And
I I think that's a goal for us
to to to achieve.
And I and I think Mr speaker
John I think the reluctance to
allow your amendment to be
friendly I think Mr speaker and
gentleman is a tacit admission
to the fact that.
They know full well that.
The jobs that are gonna replace
and.
May be sustainable maybe long
term but there are so few
account.
As to the idea of so many New
Mexicans reported in this
industry.
That will just go away and but
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I think the reason that your
languages is good here I think
it challenges that very line in
here on page three.
That to replace jobs that rely
on the extraction development of
natural resources.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
believe we can have both one of
the things Mr speaker and
gentleman that I that is is in
other states is being champions.
That is being championed as a
renewable source even though
it's not renewable.
Is the idea of carbon capture
and that is that technologies
here that technology is ready to
go for dollars already been
proven and smaller plants.
But even as we shut down here
China and in India or expanding
like crazy and that that
technology could really
revolutionize the world Mr
speaker and gentleman.
I think there is something that
maybe we can all agree on.
And that is synthetics.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Everything that we have here on
our desks on our tables I've got
I've got a water bottle here
Mister speaker John and I have a
spray bottle here I have a cell
phone I have a computer whiz
components I have.
Power cords Mr speaker have a
telephone.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What is the source.
What is the stock Mr speaker and
gentleman for all of these
things that by the way all of my
ability of kids want to.
What is that made of Mr speaker
and gentleman and welcome we
produce in here in New Mexico
John is if I may let me draw the
body's attention back to what
we're debating which is the
amendment which talks about
using broad based tax cuts
deregulation to promote economic
diversification there's been a
lot of conversation about the
oil and gas industry I think
that maybe you know appropriates
debate on the bill but we are
getting cast are sealed from the
amendment which doesn't mention.
Any of those cases we could keep
you know keep it to those topics
in New Mexico might be might be
good for everybody Mr speaker I
am pointing specifically to the
amendment about the sustainable
long term and high paying jobs
Mr speaker and gentleman and
that's that's the point that I'm
trying to make so are John
could you answer my question.
Mr speaker and gentleman in one
word.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I think if if I would
love to have this language of
your amendment.
Accepted by this body because I
think that is the goal Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Sustainable long term economic
growth and high paying jobs and
I've been Mr speaker and
gentleman I support the goal of
your amendment that would add to
the overall bill.
The focused attention.
To New Mexico's economy to the
long term sustainable high
paying jobs that New Mexicans so
desperately need need so Mister
speaker and gentleman.
I do plan supporting argument.
The gentleman from Chavis and
units are.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
gentleman yield will you to more
margarine phone service in
rural.
Thank you Sir I I just stand in
support of your amendment and
I'd like to bring up a couple of
things
Was reference to your items to
on identify ways to.
Brought to use broad based tax
cuts and deregulation you and I
share Grande
Who is an attorney and our
teacher.
Who has Representative when I
was working you Representative
make.
All of the time and
One time we were having a
conversation that your
amendment.
Brought back.
And we were arguing a point in
New Mexico.
And I had just done almost the
same thing in Texas and
And he he termination damage New
Mexico ever.
Get the chance to get it done
right.
You got to make more regulatory
actions of statute.
And not of.
Rural.
That swings at the elms and
hides.
Of.
Political powers.
Or
A new secretary.
So I I would strongly
urge the body to remember that
to look at it
As the online no.
Right it's just.
It's awfully frustrating for all
of us who have had the
experience of working in other
states to compared to what we
have to live through in our
home.
And our home is bought we all
want to protect.
Our children lived here.
Our grandchildren were here.
And and I think identifying.
Ways to expand what we have what
we are been blessed by god.
To to utilize.
Hi
I believe it is and so
Well intended and will do us
well.
Mr speaker and and John.
Have you seen.
Our regulatory.
Oversight in industry in general
not just the one you and I have
enjoyed all and gas but in
industry in general.
Do you think the Epsom tides of
regulations swinging was no
governors in New.
New secretaries is beneficial to
our long term well being of the
New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Travis.
To Boeing or.
General Motors were yes.
Rael strict regulation is
regulatory certainty.
If they know the rules.
And no they're not going to
change they're easier to comply.
And.
The last four.
Right.
Is incredibly important to job
creators.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
couldn't agree with you more I I
a of I think it's a market we
have missed for a long time.
Mr speaker and and
And and gentleman.
The the broad based tax.
I am.
That.
You mentioned.
As one that this body and in
particular Representative Harper
has championed.
For.
Eight years that I know of.
For seven years that I know of.
in it makes perfect sense and
every.
Industry leader every a column
that I know every book that I
have read.
Tells me that that twenty AM.
Works.
I have the.
Opportunity to do business and
other states like Nevada.
You are.
Washington.
And.
Being able to take in the
industry and to one of those.
Communities.
Developing jobs.
They.
Thank they are they welcome you
yeah.
And
and they don't care.
What industry are they want you
to be responsible they want you
to pay your taxes they want you
to follow rules.
And the and it works so.
Your amendment.
Yes.
Yes I believe.
Good policy in the state.
Yes ma'am last in almost every
category.
For decades almost a century.
To stay
That that these plans that have.
proven much fruit for many
should be ignored and we have a
better way to do it yes is just
a little bit too much for me I
look forward to supporting your
amendment I think it's common
sense it's good public policy
and it'll work given the
opportunity thank you.
These are for the debate on the
amendment gentlelady from going
into.
Generally cintanya.
Mr speaker I move to table.
The generator's motion is to
table the amendment.
Yes the amendment will be tabled
or no we will be back on debate
of its.
The vote is now open.
No it is not too close.
The critical members are
recorded on.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Garrett.
Representative it up.
Representative added up both yes
Representative solicitors thirty
eight internet twenty I need to
do more as table Germany service
for.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
obviously.
Disappointed.
Concern that originally which is
currently a gesture ask for that
house rules thank you.
Sorry Mr speaker of those terms
work down.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
have great concerns.
That a plain reading of this
legislation.
Leads me to believe that it is
an attack.
Perhaps long term returns but
nonetheless mentor requests on
the rules.
Version of this bill in our
energy committee.
The state public policies that
will be educated for buzzer Task
Force.
And they are.
Council.
Those policies.
Will make us poor.
And all this was represented.
In.
Committee meeting.
All of
will bring us into compliance.
With
Paris climate accords.
It's going to cost you all.
We can already see that the
current.
With energy transition.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
One of those Rep Jane Harman
reminders that are going to lose
their jobs open four corners.
What.
Take is our goal.
So the kitchen table have a
couple costly and sorry to hear
was once.
I lost my job too.
We're gonna be okay.
We're now going to be in full
compliance.
With the Paris climate accords.
General lighting not one with
that Mr speaker gentle lady I.
Next generation Chavis and
Lincoln FOR to questions.
Thank you Mr speaker all have.
Think about which of the top two
will it gentle lady from Dona
Ana County yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes I
will yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady
If I look at the purpose of this
task force.
It appears to me correct me if
I'm wrong but it appears to me
that the job of the task force
is to try to figure out a way.
To.
Replace the jobs are that will
be losing as a result of the
movement away from from
extraction the carbon resources.
And secondly to
diversifying our state's economy
right now my on track with with
those.
observations.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
the latter is more accurate the
task force is really working on
a long term economic plan to
diversify our economy so it's
it's not working so yeah that's
that's what it's it's set to do.
What Mr speaker with respect and
gentle lady with respect to the
former observation point you go
section two paragraphs C. one
Hey of the bill Representative
talks about the addition of new
jobs statewide to replace jobs
that rely on the extraction or
development of natural resources
and I'm assuming.
Based on just the sheer numbers.
The jobs that you're really
trying to replace are those
dealing with possible fuel
whether that be the calm waters
of the Representative from Lee
County was just talking about
for the oil and gas jobs you are
the northwest in the southeast
parts of the state
and so that's where I've got the
the former comment and then the
Representative be deals with the
latter
so so based on that the.
I guess we would you agree with
by observation or you still even
more for the latter than the
former.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman
The reason that I said that is
because one of the the reason
that we have the task force is
that based on what we've seen
historically with jobs being
lost a lot of the effort that
we're trying to accomplish is to
address those job losses that
are a result of just the wall
tile Kanemi that comes with some
of these industries.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
So we're creating a task force
and actually this legislation
does two things it's not just
one task forces creating that's
creating a task force composed
of largely secretaries of
government agencies.
And then we have what's called
the
sustainable.
Economy Advisory Council.
And that's a second group of
people who are
Appointed according to this
legislation and I'm getting that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
So we have
a task force of of secretaries
of government agencies other
facts out and correctly there's
thirteen of those individuals it
would that be an accurate
statement.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
And how many people would be
appointed to the sustainable
economic Advisory Council.
Mr speaker gentlemen there's
quite a few and the reason that
we did that and
and this is the this is what I
believe strengthen the
legislation is that
because there have been a number
of evolutions since it came to
the house is that it
incorporated an Advisory Council
that was representative of
communities
that we felt were important to
help the task force to provide
some insight on what was
happening on the ground those
Those that number of people who
are part of the Task Force would
include a number let me count in
real quickly.
Fourteen fourteen.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Senator fourteen members of the
sustainable.
Economy Advisory Council.
So we have twenty seven people
who comprise this overall
passports they were not.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
Of those twenty seven
individuals.
How many people on this Advisory
Council would be from.
An organization that actually
would create these jobs and
create the diversity of the
state's tax based which are the
goals of this legislation.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe this was part of a
conversation that we had in
committee a couple days ago and
I mean I think you and I would
disagree on the number of of
people I believe that everyone
that is being considered for
this task force and for the
Advisory Council have a lot of
insight on what that looks like
which is why we are creating a
task force because
while industry and other folks
have been a part of a lot of the
revenue and economic development
in the state in order to
diversify we really need to
bring in additional folks to
that to really look at what
we're trying to accomplish so
again we might disagree on the
number I believe that all the
people who are part of this task
force specifically the Advisory
Council is what's going to
really enhance our ability to
look forward on on what that
sustainable economy is.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
can't speculate on what.
You're intending to do all I can
read is what's on the paper and
and what I read on the paper is
the job of this bill is to.
Find policies to find new jobs.
And to diversify the state's tax
base to replace the revenues
generated from the natural
resources extraction sector.
Which is primarily oil and gas
there's some other extracting.
Extractive industries in New
Mexico but their contribution to
the overall state budget is is
not nearly as right so we're
primarily talking about that and
then the third thing would be
long term economic growth.
So are there other things that
you're intending to do that's
not Representative in this
purpose state.
Mr speaker gentleman can you
can you sorry can you clarify
your question.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
believe Judy on.
I'm reading what's on the paper
in you indicated there may be
some other things that you're
trying to accomplish so I'm just
trying to figure out what those
other things are.
Mr speaker gentlemen there's
three things that are expected
are expected from this task
force and it's pretty clear and
that is that the task force is
is it will have the
responsibility to look at two
quick to work on roadmap on how
we diversify an economy that's
sustainable by utilizing the
workforce development study that
has been that was just done this
past year while ensuring that
all the communities that have
been listed and who
Representative the the council
in the task force are part of
that and so
that we're we we were very clear
about not making it prescriptive
because we feel that the task
force has to have liberty in
terms of what roadmap they come
up with.
But the legislation.
Because Wall.
It's specifically directs.
Specifically directs this task
force to do.
Essential eight three three
eight that.
I think are are critically
important to the state.
Thanks.
Apparently here and I agree on
because it's it's black or white
all on page seven of the
amendment and contacts version
of the bill.
That is to.
Add new jobs statewide to
replace jobs that rely on the
construction or development of
natural resources.
Diversifying the state's tax
base to replace revenue
generated from natural resource
extraction.
And to have a long term economic
growth.
We don't have to belabor the
point but basically what we're
saying is we have to replace
forty percent of the state
budget.
Probably act replaces the
hundred thirty four thousand
jobs of the Representative from
Lee County was talking about
which may be even brighter if
you look at other extractive
industries and.
We have to figure out a way to
put those people work just a
state even.
That's not economic growth
that's sustained even.
They're charged with figured out
how to have long term economic
growth which means.
Replacing all the jobs that we
lost.
And.
Having some economic growth on
top of that.
So that's what a monumental
terms and and the the bar that
you said in this legislation is
quite hard.
And so my question
Madam speaker gentle ideas.
The task force that's going to
accomplish.
This monumental task.
Billions of dollars of state.
Tax revenue.
Hundred thirty four thousand
plus jobs of the Representative
from Lee County talked about
and.
Creating long term growth.
You're gonna deal with the.
The task force that's composed
of thirteen.
Administrative secretaries of
state government and fourteen
people on the sustainable.
Sustainable.
Economic Advisory Council.
When I look at the make up of
that Advisory Council.
I see one person that who is
specifically designated for one
representative from industries
and business sectors involved in
achieving or that may be
affected by the goals of the
sustainable economy energy for
the economy task force.
That's one person.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady we talked about
paragraph three up above that
said to representatives of
organizations with experience
and sustainable economic
development planning and
workforce development.
And our discretion talked about
who were these people.
And the answer your expert Dave
were well I may be from the
corporate sector I may be from
non governmental organizations
they may be from nonprofits so
I'll give you the benefit of the
doubt let's say.
Both of those representatives
are from the business sector
people that create jobs people
that employed.
Workers.
So that's three three out of
twenty seven people come from.
The private sector that create
the jobs that we're trying to
replace that create the tax base
but we're trying to replace and
create a long term economic
goals that you set and years.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
Yeah yeah I I am.
The CEO of a corporation and I
task.
My team with coming up with a
plan to grow by corporations
grow my business organization.
I can assure you I'm not one to
select.
Thirteen members of state
government.
And.
Hello out of fourteen members
that are not job creators.
And so these lofty goals.
I will submit to you madam
speaker and gentle lady these
lofty goals that you have set as
a goal for this task force.
I do not believe that you have
created a task force that is
capable of achieving the very
stated goals that are
annunciator in this piece of
legislation.
And so.
I think we really need to look
critically.
What we're really doing here.
And that's why I asked you if
there's other goals goals and
more and and our I am just at a
loss as to whether or not this
legislation contains the.
Very directives.
That we need to replace.
Forty percent of the state
budget.
The budget that are school
teachers are our children rely
upon.
The budget that.
Allows us to engage in all the
programs that we set forth in
this body.
And replace.
The workers that are going to
lose their jobs because of the
policies of this body is an
acting.
And create even more jobs so
that we can have a long term
sustainable economy.
For those reasons Madam speaker
and gentle lady.
I am certain.
But this legislation is not the
vehicle.
That we should put in place.
To waste such laudable and lofty
goals and what that Madam
speaker I will yield for.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan County
Representative Strickler thank
you madam speaker will gentle
lady from Dona Ana County police
here.
Madam speaker gentleman yes I
will yield thank you gentle
lady.
General idea and
You know I'm.
I'm kicking messing around
understand what we're trying to
do and and I know that the way
to cut to the core of the matter
ET.
you need to sit around the table
with a job re locators and and
they'll tell you exactly.
What they're looking for the
right locate their companies to
to a new location.
I also do a lot of time at the
those are the folks that that do
this for a living and I I I
guess you have one of the
members is the year economic
development department is is
that right gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentleman yes.
Well that that.
The cabinet
Officers going to be critical.
for this effort to to to work
and
because he he he or she I don't
know who are director is that
they they know what works and
and and what it what it's going
to boil down to gentle lady and
the Madam speaker and so we're
gonna have to we're gonna have
to do tax reform we're gonna
have to education reform we're
gonna have to do regulatory
reform we're gonna have to look
at the best practices of our
neighboring states and and
gentle lady I know you're from
all guests archery and and are
living in San Juan and.
We're big on gas community the
call money power plants and so
work out of an energy are
County up there and what Texas
more taxes was overly dependent
on on all and gas are in their
in their
in their history and the last
last thirty years they've
diversified they have no income
tax they have.
Great job opportunities and
growth and companies are moving
in there like crazy and and
that's a good
good good place to start she
what their down line yeah
Tesla's movement and Austin
oracle's moving in Austin and
people are flooding into Texas
and and we're just not getting
that kind of growth and the
reason I think Texas is doing so
well as they have a very
as as a gentleman from Hey John
was were saying they have a very
reasonable regulatory reaching
them
protocol and and it's it's it's
really helping them grow
up in Colorado but Madam speaker
gentle lady the high tech is
really taken off of there and
then you toss just growing like
gangbusters our state Georgie
dollars more classes going
Townsend in the country and and
we're just not having that kind
of.
Activity in our state is is
because we're stuck we're doing
the same things over and over
again gentle lady and then
they're not they're not they're
not successful we are poor
education we have a high crime
we were not friendly to business
and industry if we diversify our
economy like you would like all
these factors are going to come
out I mean they've already been
study over and over again I've
heard.
Many presentations and the
interim committees.
And I know exactly what we need
you know like they'll tell you
exactly what we needed to.
Gentlelady in and madam speaker
and so
is far as the only gas industry
application to be here to stay
and I'll tell you why gentle
lady
if we decide that we don't want
to use a lot of oil and gas here
in our state all I guess is an
export commodity it's our it's
got a worldwide demand will
exported to
to other countries well explore
natural gas to other countries
but in the form of liquefied
natural gas so I think that
means she's gonna be here
starting with got we got a great
resource Madam speaker gentle
lady would probably got a
hundred year supply oil and gas
in southeast New Mexico one
of maybe six year supply and in
the San Juan so
those those are those are
assets.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
And the hi I'm.
We're trying to do.
I think we're gonna come back to
the same answers that we pardon
committee after committee and
it's up to this body to to to
make the tough decisions and not
raise taxes and and not
increased regulations and to
make businesses more welcome
here including wind solar yeah
that's a great new ensure madam
speaker gentle lady
you know they run you know there
the when land is rarely a
promising up and coming a
resource for us and it in the
the state percent of New and the
developed and the.
And I don't really have a
question gentle lady I just I
just.
just wonder if this is the right
approach and and madam speaker
gentle lady have appreciates our
you come in for committee we had
a good discussion and thank you
for your patience.
Thank you John.
The gentleman from Lee County
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair Justin
gentle lady from Dunn and the
young.
Madam speaker gentle and yes I
will yield.
Thank you
Madam chair do you know what the
chemical equation H. C. F. C..
Is.
madam speaker gentleman not at
the top of my head so feel free
to tell me.
Sure gentle lady to turn around
and look.
That's the refrigerant runs that
refrigerator behind you.
You know what's in eight CSC
well I'm sure.
Madam speaker gentleman now.
Hydro chloro fluorocarbons.
Madam chair do you know what
that's a by product of.
Madam speaker gentleman nope.
Madam chair gentle lady that's a
by product the very industries
that we continue the tech have
attacked this entire session.
And madam chair gentle lady.
I I don't think I can be is all
quiet as my.
The legislature's from.
Chavis and Lincoln.
The counting chair okay on.
Recanting Sandoval County.
With the way that they they've
gone some of the spill madam
chair no waiting on.
The disasters impacts of this
bill could have on on our state.
And I just madam chair
gentlelady.
I would I would echo one of the
things the the gentleman from
San Juan said.
We have states next to us the
morning have a.
How to strategically diversify
their economies.
Madam chair and I don't think we
need a thirteen member and a
fourteen member.
Cancel and passports madam chair
gentle lady to walk next door.
To the east of us knock on some
doors in Austin and around that
state and say okay.
So how did you
did you get out of the
your total reliance on the oil
and gas.
Sure the governor of the bank of
all call of taxable phone make
calls to the other governor and
say Hey what you helps out shows
how to get this done without
destroying the people that have
continued to see this the state
for almost a century.
Madam chair gentle lady.
I challenge you.
Thank you continue forward with
this what this bill will not
pass a pass tonight.
That we start thinking on some
simplistic terms my dad used to
call it the kiss Act keep it
simple and there's another word
at the end of the line and say
it.
It's just not that hard.
It's just not that hard and take
twenty seven high rate people.
To get this done.
Thanks one phone call.
And in an effort.
Madam chair gentle lady I feel
that.
There is no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you all for the the
conversation on this legislation
I just want to just share really
briefly that the work to get
here to this legislation has
been led by communities on the
ground who have put in a lot of
effort to be part of this
conversation it be part of this
table there have been decades
upon decades where we have had
people making decisions for a
lot of the communities around
the state that have really not
been aligned with the many
families that live in these in
these areas and so what this
task force is doing is just
allowing these communities to be
part of a conversation to make
sure that what our economy looks
like in the next generation is
one that is really centered on
the very people that it's going
to impact on the day to day and
so I urge you all to support
this legislation not because it
is it is
I urge you all to support this
legislation because it's a task
force that is simply that
allowing people to come up with
ideas on how we move forward and
how we diversify our economy
that is more sustainable and
making sure that our communities
are at the center of that so
with that I move that Senate
bill one twelve as amended twice
do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill one twelve and twice
amended the vote is now open.
Forty five seconds remaining.
That is an up close.
Electronic portion of the vote
is now closed what part all the
members without reported that
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes.
Representative part of a yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
both yes Representative
Matthews.
Representative Matthews both
yes.
Representative for hardy for our
of.
Representative Ferrary notes
yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Point I am I'm forty in the
affirmative and twenty five in
the negative Senate bill one
twelve is twice amended has duly
passed the house.
Gentlelady from ninety at.
Thank you Mr speaker we got
announcements and miscellaneous
business actually the gentle
lady from Dona Ana.
If we go to and introduction of
legislation very objections or
to read.
House memorial thirty three
introduced by Representative
Roger Montoya in memorial
Iglesias The New Mexico
Legislative Council to create a
legislative interim rural
opportunity committee house
memorial thirty right.
Just thirty three having been
read twice by title is for the
local government land grants and
cultural affairs.
Generated from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
I move to go home.
Secretary.
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Hearing objections order.
First we need to.
Has taxation revenue can
substitute for House I'm sorry
House Bill three oh eight.
Zijin Airtel house bill three oh
eight two two zero two number is
two two zero eight three two
point one.
House Bill three await the tier
two numbers two two zero eight
three two point one.
Is removed from the rules
committee printed and referred
to the taxation and revenue
committee house bill three
await.
Again the two oh two numbers two
two zero eight thirty two point
one Representative rules
committee printed and referred
to the taxation and revenue
committee.
Okay other announcements the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker there will
be a major democratic caucus
meeting tomorrow at three PM we
will send out the zoom
information and agenda.
Members take note the gentleman
from Cibola and McKinley
Representative ocal thank you Mr
speaker here are a labor of
veterans and military affairs
committee will meet tomorrow at
eleven thirty at eleven thirty
everybody see you Monday at
members take note the gentleman
from Diana Representative small.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
your house appropriations and
finance committee will meet
tomorrow at eleven thirty AM
thank you Mr speaker members say
no the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Thank you as the non speakers to
mama speaker the tall dark and
handsome and lovely and pooped
and sleepy local government land
grants and cultural affairs
committee will meet promptly
tomorrow Tuesday morning at nine
AM.
I'm not one minute before not
one minute after so members and
presenters be there or be
sponge Bob square pants.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
and Sandoval chairman you lie Mr
speaker your rules committee
will be meeting Sunday at nine
o'clock.
Representative no.
Gentlelady from Diana
Representative Rubio.
Thank you Mr speaker house
transportation will be meeting
tomorrow at eight thirty four of
presentation from secretary
Santa which should be very very
interesting so I'm I invite
everyone to attend.
This is chairman Chasey or vice
chairwoman Cadena we students
Judiciary tomorrow.
The meeting eleven thirty.
House Judiciary Committee
meeting will meet at eleven
thirty AM tomorrow the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson.
Mr speaker the consumer of
public affairs committee will
meet at eleven thirty tomorrow
and I will follow Representative
Rubio and say come on it's going
to be very exciting to bills
come and join us thank you Mr
speaker members say no the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Stansbury.
Thank you Mr speaker here House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee will meet
Brighton early at eight AM
tomorrow.
Member state note.
Energy committee meeting at
eight AM.
Are there any further
announcements.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until four PM
tomorrow afternoon.
Thank you as a technician want
to thank everyone for the day's
work at the Senate tomorrow's on
the floor eleven in the back of
the store in the evening to take
up their third reading calendar
as well need to our pay
attention so that we can be in
thanks zoom multiple places all
at the same time.
We busy day tomorrow generous
