Present.
She is excused AM here.
Okay. Do I have a motion to
approve the agenda? So move
second without objection. It is
so ordered.
Do I have a motion to approve
the minutes from our last
meeting, so move second and
without objection that is
approved. Um what we're here to
do today, Madam Governor is
before you know, sort of at the
beginning of every election
cycle, we are required to notify
the public and potential
candidates and parties.
Who may be interested of the
costs to conduct
Not an automatic recount or or
processes that is required by
law, but a discretionary recount
impoundment of the ballots or
voting machine recheck because
after an election process if
they if a candidate or an
interested party chooses to
conduct one of these processes
Ah, Discretionary Lee. They will
have to front the cost, Madam
Governor, So that is why we need
to notify the public and this
body will approve these costs.
Um The main point to note is
that as opposed to how we've
done it in the past, we have
adjusted these costs to be
reflective of the cost per day.
To conduct these processes and,
um, if there are any questions,
I'm happy to have our state
election Director Mandy V. Hill,
uh, speak to those cost per day.
And so may I ask a question,
Madam Chair.
But home means Madam governor
assume I'm now recognize as the
cost per day. Is it gone up? And
is it
Closer to C P I or general
inflation that we've seen around
the state and country, but we
really needed elections now with
voting convenience centers, so
unfortunately when I last
election costal bra
And
What? What is the increase now?
In the what? Well, what I will
say, Madam Governor is that in
some ways Actually, the cost is
going down. Okay, because at the
at the precinct by precinct cost
we were, um, you know for for
for a large jurisdiction we were
looking at probably, you know.
I mean statewide, it could have
been half a million a million
dollars. For like a legislative
district. It was something in
the realm of like 30 or $40,000.
Now that we are doing it sort of
by the day and depending on how
quickly you can process can get
through, it could be
substantially less. That was
what I was most interested in.
Um, because and using the
technology, Hmm.
And the ships in how we do
voting and conduct voting. I
thought that might be the case
where you have answered my
question. Both of you. Thank
you.
Alright. Um with that, then, um,
if there are no other questions,
Um, do I?
Have emotion to approve the cost
determination for recheck,
recount and impound event for
the selection site, move second
and without objection that
passes and um, unless there is
further business before this
board, I would love to see moved
to adjourn a motion to adjourn,
So move second and we are
adjourned. Thank you, Madam
Governor.
Thank you Appreciate you. I
might have something for you to
say.
Double check.
Yeah, the minutes, right?
