OK?
Uh, good morning. Um, this is
Thursday, April 25th 2024. And
this is the meeting of the state
canvassing board. We are kicking
off at 11:23 A.m.. I'm Secretary
of State. Maggie Toulouse.
Oliver. I'm calling the meeting
to order. Um, could we please
have a roll call? Good morning
chair. David Thompson. As I
said, already, Maggie to lose
all of her secretary of State,
Uh, Governor, Michelle hungers
is excused from today's meeting.
Um, can I have a motion to
approve today's agenda?
Chair I would move to approve
the agenda is published, all
right, and with no objection
that is approved.
Um, can I have a motion to
approve the meeting? Minutes for
March 26th of the meeting
minutes of March 20 without
objection That's approved, um,
onto the business. For today. We
need to certify the, um
automatic recounts for our 2024
municipal officers Election
which occurred in March of this
year, We had two automatic
recounts resulting from that
election. Uh and and again,
These are, uh, places where we
need. Um, we have multiple
counties, uh, involved so first
the town of Bern.
Um, the outcome? Uh, from the,
uh, municipal officer election
recount in that race was, uh
Philip Valverde 333 votes and
James Baca 324 votes.
And the village of Cuba. Monica
Olivas with 49 votes and Tanya M
Sanchez with 46 votes. Uh I will
note there were no changes in
the results or the outcome
pursuant to, um the recount And
so with that, Are there any
questions? No questions. Sure.
Ok. Um do I have a motion to
certify these recount results?
Sure, I would move to C 2024
minutes for
OK without objection. Oh, go
ahead, Berli and Cuba. Would you
like them separate that? I think
that's fine. And with that
objection. Those are approved
and certified. Um, we have some
documents to sign. I believe.
OK, um, And with that we are
adjourned.
