That
All right. Uh, can I have a
motion for approval of our
agenda, please?
The move manager All all all
those in favor. I
OK, Uh, if you hopefully had a
chance to look over the minutes
from our last meeting, do I have
a motion to approve the minutes
from our April 25th 2020? Is
there a second?
I. I
See next on the agenda. Um,
we're going to first and
foremost certify the 2024
primary election results. Um,
There are a few data points to
go over with my fellow word of
canvas members, So I just want
to make you aware, um
That these data are contained,
Uh, within your binders, Um
Our total registered voters. 8
million
15,862 so that those are the
eligible Democrats, Republicans
and libertarians. Uh, total
turnout was 231,947 or eight
just under 23% turnout.
Uh, absentee turnout was 32,007
14 or 14%.
Early voting turnout was 87, 7,
73 or 37.8.
Uh, election day. Uh, by far,
folks just waited till Election
day this year, 100 and 10,728%.
We did have some hand tallies
and provisional votes of a total
of 732 and a total of 7304
voters participated in same day
voter registration during early
for the first time.
Or updated a voter registration
while they were voting. Uh, so
those are the data points we're
always required to give at these
meetings.
Um, you have any questions about
the data and the binders? Uh,
any particular races? Um,
Otherwise, we're just gonna go
ahead and and move to certify
them. I have no questions. OK?
Do I have to certify the 2020
2024 primary election results?
Move, Madam chair.
Oh, second, All right. All those
in favor
All right, so we have certified
the 2024 primary election and
before you gentleman LA will ask
you to sign off on these
certificates for us, Um, the
next item on the agenda, as you
are all aware is once we certify
the primary, then we, um, if we
have any, uh, races within the
automatic recount parameters we
have to then go ahead and order
those automatic recount results
And then we will convene again
to some. And so the
Is that we are going to order a
recount for our UM, state
representative District, 43 for
Libertarian Party nominees.
And those are comprised of
precincts in Los Alamos,
Sandoval and Santa Fe.
There will be a recount for
Valencia County treasurer for
Republican nominees and that,
uh, is just one county and then
the recount for Guadalupe County
Commissioner Guadalupe District
34 Democratic, uh, for the
Democratic nominee.
The recount for San Juan County
Commissioner San Juan District
three Republican Party nominees.
Uh and that is the sum total of
our recounts. Uh, for this, uh,
election, and so if there are
not any questions
I saw Move, Madam chair.
Second, All right. And all those
in favor, Please say I all
right, Um, that, uh, is the
The majority of our business, Um
Can we schedule or we already
working to schedule? I'm looking
at my stuff our next
Leading to certify the automatic
recounts. OK, so we're taking
care of that already, All right?
Um, with that? Do I have a
motion to adjourn?
So move my chair all second. All
right. And with that we are
