Is the state canvassing board
meeting and do I have a motion
to call the meeting to order so
moved my second all those in
favor say aye hi that motion is
affirmed I now we're gonna do a
roll call and ask for assistance
to do the official roll call.
Governor Lujan Grisham present.
Kerry Toulouse Oliver present
and just a state is excused.
All right thank you and next
item on the agenda is approval
of the agenda it's item number
three do I have a motion to
approve the agenda with the
purple I second all those in
favor say aye aye the approval
of the agenda is done or item
number four which is approval of
the minutes which we know we
have in the packet because I've
read that title to start the
meeting clearly we have access
to that do I have a motion to
approve the minutes I move
approval I second all those in
favor say aye hi the minutes of
November twenty ninth the state
canvassing board minutes are
approved we're on that item of
business which causes us to have
the meeting this morning which
is the certification of the
twenty twenty two general
election recount results and I'm
gonna ask the secretary of state
madam secretary to go through
items a and B. the two recounts
thank you madam governor as you
mentioned at our last meeting we
order to recounts
pertaining to our automatic
recount statute a state
representative district thirty
two and state representative
district thirty eight the
recount began on December fifth
for district thirty two and
December eighth for district
sixty eight counties completed
associated tasks and we're all
complete by the end of the day
and December ninth there were
importantly no changes in the
outcome of the contest from our
original certification in
Bernalillo county there was a
difference of three votes of
three bills increase in total up
for the winning candidate but
the final outcome remained the
same and if you have any other
questions I'm happy to answer
those I do not and again I think
it it should not go without
saying the professionalism and
the accuracy and of the
incredible access that New
Mexico voters continue to have
and I think we leave the country
quite frankly in safe and secure
work what.
Tions so congratulations on this
work and thank you very much for
your expediency and effective
efforts thank you madam governor
I will note that in all the
years we've been conducting
automatic recounts in the state
since two thousand eight we
still have never had an outcome
change as the result of a
recount so that does attest to
the accuracy thank you madam
governor it does indeed do I
have a motion to approve the
certifications I SO I second all
those in favor say aye hi the
certification of the the general
election recount results for
district thirty two and
districts are just sixty eight
are in fact approved the next
item on the agenda is the German
of the state canvassing board
meeting for the automatic
recounts to I have a motion to
adjourn the meeting I move we
adjourn I second all those in
favor hi hi the meeting is
adjourned thank.
