Can we please? Uh
Well, I am calling the meeting
to order. Can we please have
roll call?
Governor Luhan Grisham is
excused Secretary to loose
Oliver present Do I have a
motion to approve today's
agenda second and without
objection that is approved. Do I
have a motion to approve the
meeting minutes from March? 11th
2024 2nd without objection that
is approved, Uh, the main item
of business today for the state
canvassing board is the
certification of 2022. Excuse
me, I think municipal officer
election results for the city of
Espanola in the city of
Rio Rancho because they are
multi county.
Um, districts and so, um, Madam.
Chief justice, of course, before
you as always, you have the
results. Um we had very low
turnout for these elections and
for all of our municipal officer
elections. This is why we have
our regular local election where
we have almost all
municipalities and other non C a
lot better turnout in those we
just had one set of elections
And perhaps we will in the
future. Um, Madam Chief Justice.
Um, do you have any questions?
Do not I reviewed the material.
Okay. Do I hear a motion to
certify those results? Okay.
Second without objection. Those
results for the city of Espanola
and the city of Rio Rancho, are,
uh
Certified. We also have some
automatic recounts flowing from
the municipal officer. Election.
Um, do we have any questions
about those? Okay? Alright, So,
yes, they were very close again
When you have very few people
voting, you often have very
close election outcomes. Do I
have a motion to order those
automatic recounts salute second
and without objection. Those are
ordered
Um, we need to schedule a next
meeting to certify those
automatic recount results, and
I'm looking to staff
For a date. Do we have? Oh,
On Thursday. April 4th. Is that
what I'm saying? Okay, so we're
going to just let let the
scheduling teams handle that?
And of course, we'll put out
the, um
Appropriate notice per state law
before that happens, Do I have a
