What legal okay so you guys will
that's right with with all of
you to please take a moment and
I ma'am
there have only father lord
thank you so much for the day
thank you for the opportunity
that we have to serve the state
of New Mexico in this in this
committee be with all of which
as we're here and making dishes
over the course of this section
we know that we can count on you
to be with us and help us lord
and we ask for you to do that in
Jesus name I pray amen.
She.
In order the Senate rule of
cultural affairs committee.
And.
All the agenda.
The.
Just you know just another
committee.
The rules of the.
Yes.
Senator Griggs here.
Senator Sanchez here Senator
Shendo
Senator only up.
Senator Williams is gives you
could let me know that he
wouldn't join us that senator
Millwood be another bill to join
us okay.
In this particular case Senator
Pinto get.
For president wants to.
No.
I think what we should do.
Is item number bill yes new to
the committee yes so we'll.
Voted engine options in this.
The staff to get this done on
the side Senator Sanchez Senator
yeah Josh was sentenced
representing Cibola McKinley as
a coral and Valencia County.
Here today.
We would like to if you have any
reservations District all yes
the reservations are required
represent a small part of let up
all the goon Act money
a small part in Canley and I
have assumed the on the far west
side of the New Mexico and
Arizona.
Thank you senator Senator K..
Thank you madam chair Ron Griggs
I represent currently yes Dona
Ana eighty and and Tero
challenges of southern part of
Tero question part eighty and
just a little bit of of Dona Ana
of that that that that will
change of redistricting I will
not have any questions Dona Ana
I have
tribal reservations in my
district but I'm very close to
the to the Mescalero reservation
and tearaway and we can get.
Show up look forward to the
committee the chair has a as an
enjoyable time last year and I
think we can we can do some good
thank you madam chair thank you
in addition to.
Thank you madam chair the.
Members of the committee staff
of the state senator Benny
Shendo.
Representative district twenty
two.
which encompasses of portions of
five counties Bernalillo county
Rio Arriba San Juan and the
Santa Fe counties.
Within those districts I have
The pueblos of go to do.
Santo Domingo safely be sent at
a.
See a blue.
Of portions of the good over by
Total hardly.
And then I also have a the of
restoration of the prefetching
nation and then twenty now we'll
chapters in the committee San
Juan and several counties.
Closest city Rachel from the
Cuba.
And the current coach the late
and all those little.
Rancherias and this.
The districts and
If I want my district it may
take me.
Let.
What about if you.
Have you have to talk.
Well as fast as they used to
the thank you get the.
The joy this Committee I've been
on it ever since I Senator.
The lecture will point in the.
Committee members of the.
Thank you thank you senator
Shendo and senator Munoz to join
us.
And.
Senator Shannon Pinto high
representative the killing
district three in Sierra County
the two counties I only have one
reservation in my district and
Navajo.
Very very large portion of it is
my district and base by.
So I'm glad you could join us
here in to read a little bit of
history about the committee here
thank you to much committee
secretary for joining us would
like to introduce.
Yes good morning everyone my
name's Rebecca Martinez and this
is my third year serving as
committee secretary for the
Senate in the in rural and
cultural affairs committee.
We wanted to do so if they can
to disincentive called at I'm
David Rubin felt all that zero
operator for us in rural and
cultural affairs committee and I
have to work with everybody and
last year to have signed by the
fact that it also work with as
an education right and Senate
rules.
see
the report Republican Miner
analyst with.
Do is work for eighteen years or
all three at home and without
due to this committee that
passed for three years in Jordan
very much look forward to
hearing.
Being in the committee have.
Thank you all surely Baca and on
the former state that.
Our public regulation
commissioner I and I from the
Georgia office for.
For more hard to believe that
it's practically Senator Shendo.
Also director of the departure
one hand of her grandfather in
one piece
your morals and I'm doing Indian
Affairs as well as Sierra.
Hi my name is Christine Elliott.
Hi.
From the little waters County
which is two miles south of St
Paul and I am the committee.
There's.
These.
So what's your nose is.
My name's of our from the New
Mexico and I will start an arms
of attended on the floor and
also working and helping us
initiative in the.
So back and forth.
Thank you and have a yes yes one
to our yes plans under which
this time with the senator you
press relations office work with
response from okay thank you
thank you for joining us and I
don't know if we have any
questions or right the stars and
production due on ask each
other.
Thank you just over a little bit
about
the list safety status.
Yes.
Been communicated yeah I now I'm
hoping for a chance to read
Senator Shendo Senator pintos
that letter dated yesterday so
welcome I provided a
this historical perspective on
the committee since its
inception back in nineteen
eighty two and I just briefly
mentioned all the major
legislation that has been
implemented as a result of the
set the Indian Affairs Committee
units had many different names
over the years it was even
abolished for a few short years
and then reinstated back in that
eighty five eighty six and then
also with that there were two
documents one was that
memorandum issued
Regarding the
with legislation let legislative
action they vaccination and
testing policy and then we also
included the New Mexico GOP
policies for prevention and
control of the COVID nineteen
and have they're both very
lengthy documents but its the
the marching orders that we've
all received and travel by by in
this community.
Although our meeting today
started at ten we hope start our
meetings at nine once we start
to considering the legislation
coming to our committee
you know if you ever need
anything you can always reach me
I've got my email address and my
extension number as well as I've
provided a small table of each
member's our extension as well
as the names of your secretaries
and that their extensions.
moving forward last year I sent
well the agendas ahead of time
I plan to get to your the
analysis on the bills that were
considering twenty four hours in
advance of our committee
meetings and they and any other
documentation in support
presentations people we might
hear
we have a lot of fact handouts
last year and I will provide
those electronically
at what is the wish of the
committee the committee do you
also want to receive hard copy
when you come to the room or is
the electronic copy before the
meeting sufficient just anybody
have any feelings about that.
say for instance we have a
presentation from Lee are one of
the agencies the O. H. and they
oftentimes St lots of handouts
not only power point
presentations for to follow
along while they're making the
presentations or other
collateral materials
about services available so so
generally they send that we will
try to make it available to put
on the screen while the
presentations coming off point
going on and then
I will also send it to
electronically but my question
is is she do you want also want
hard copy in front of you while
the presentations happen with
the two.
I'm kind of old fashioned in
that regard it's kind of nice to
have it because even if it's
there or there it's spacious
north still so we.
You know friendly tell me yes
but we could have that we have
to build book that you were used
to to I think those things would
would make it easier if we're if
we're going through the
legislature not a problem will
make all of the documents
available and that yes the bills
we're ready to go with the bill
looks starting at our next
meeting.
Today
doesn't appear that we have any
zoom in action but we were all
ready to go for public
participation
maybe you could describe needs
and what you do in other
committees in terms of letting
other public participants coming
into the meeting is
just protocols if you follow
that things are set up and.
Slightly differently than they
were last year I think there may
be some variation across
committees of course and by the
way and that we've been doing it
so I everything's a weapon our
format rather than as soon
meetings so there's a little bit
more control in terms as
Public participation.
eight
everyone into groups as it
happens that meeting there are
panelists within the meeting
that have full control over
their audio and the visual and
and so if any of your this
committee members choose to
expand that virtually if they
also that interacts that way
they'll to turn the camera on
and off and just the kind of act
well and members of the public
are caps as attendees said a
vacancy and they could hear
everything that they don't have
audio or video privileges
themselves and so how we
dominator how we did it
yesterday Senate rules are very
the committee is discussing a
state R. eight as a state of
lands to public comment in the
committee room first then went
to the house of Commons on zoom
and a time these are able to use
a little raise their hand button
which I think everybody here
that used to last year and and
so it I can see who wants to
speak for the for the bell and
then the as I I need that kind
of one by one and so they only
have the.
This is speaking and then you
hear them through to the census
and in a row and be able to
it's.
They are the public comment that
way.
Will be shared on.
You're you're special yes there
yes on that screen and if it had
members of public are caps yes
staff attendees you'll see their
name on the screen or in the
profile picture to have a
that you wouldn't necessarily
see there videography.
Okay have bait I right yes we
have a special presentation like
we did a few times last year I
would provide the stable the
panelists the option be able to
see them on the on the screen it
I used to share screen functions
in part as a power point up
there stated follow along on the
screen as well as that on paper
in front of the two.
Okay what it would be possible
to adjusted a little bit it's
it's a little far that support
for committee for yeah okay so.
Thank you so the committee can
also you yes
okay that we just get a
reversible some.
We can have a committee meeting
the.
With that.
I have one is the time the same
as last year they get more time
less time like the present one
being with the ranking member I
think we were depending how many
bills we have the people getting
on Jim if as far as a time limit
and I think since I'm not K.
Senator Shendo with the pre is
that it takes a whole minute to
introduce herself.
The same is true the in the
time.
Thank you the doctor featured in
this is Jerry from busy I mean
the comfortable yes this is the
yes.
And madam chair unity good job
with that last year the over so
I I I don't see any any issue
show you just you know run as
you see fit to to allow the
individuals proper amount of
time thank you and.
Senator Shendo in his committee
have a.
Hardy was usually usually one
one more start out with two.
It comes out of one.
In any which is very people.
What they had with with that
little bit what it was a hard
time understanding how long one
minute one.
And a lot of the.
And and I don't know what have
you decided on in years about
the sometimes when you when it
with that voice over would come
in and she'd say you have twenty
seconds
are all within seconds what so I
ended she was as problem you.
This is.
So we were twenty seconds at
least we can.
So you have a of the of the of
the issue here.
Thank.
Yes this is Louis if we set the.
The W. two one have a list of
the panelists will be the
legislature our our.
Zoom in as well as the expert
witnesses or is that
Representative yeah it's the
phones yeah a state have also
expert witness is Sanchez if
they're joining remotely would
be in that category as well so
they built the be seen.
Mayor pro at all the public is.
you'll.
Good ones it can control but
you'll let them and if anybody
wants to weigh in.
In a bill that says one time
that you would I would be able
to that I'd be able to let them
in I know there are a few files
in this committee last year
where there were representatives
from different state agencies
that that may have had more.
Less of a part time position
anymore tax so it is our mission
to be able to offer to the
committee Rep Adam so I'd be
able to bring someone like that
into the participants that
panelists group
state is committed by the state.
They have more of a a free
conversations on.
Thanks.
It goes in that sense to if you
as legislators know what
particular person anticipate
that wants to participate on a
particular bill and we can get
that information little bit
early so that we can make sure
their online have access or
where they are going to way and
so they don't get stuck in
public comment.
Track of any of the questions we
committee members.
Now the.
If we have I think a lot of it
was in the letters for is
explaining the Act occupancy in
the there's participation in
person participation just but
has to be a tier two.
And just to keep everybody safe.
Welcome you all to the Indian.
Cultural and cultural affairs
committee and we will have a.
Probably a full committee
meeting on that status are this
coming Thursday conflicts stay
up with them some of the bills
thirty day session says.
This is only my second budget
session but I can't even recall
the first budget.
Reduce the volume.
President two thousand many
sessions I mean that in an age
when in different that
yeah so in some sense to the W.
I feel like it's my first budget
session again with different
rules and stuff so.
That is correct yes yes at four
Thursday we have to bills Senate
bill thirty nine and Senate bill
ninety seven we have two more
read out.
On the floor yesterday
Senate bill one forty one and
one forty nine they haven't been
loaded into the model yet but I
suspect they will be be ready to
go with those ones on next to
the state we also have a Senate
bill twenty three with that sort
of cheesy Pinos bill that we
heard last year and it's still
in committees committee so right
now we don't have a lot to.
Do the best we can with all
those.
The legislation has Senator the
have a rural amendments
amendments for for bands or
try to stick to twenty four
because we're still doing the
this is staff.
Patient by do and.
In that sense to but first
consideration for the thirty day
session is if some bills get
moved click on Friday eighteen
to the committee we might really
trying to push to see if we have
a lot of the agenda to make sure
we're utilizing the whole time
when we meet this because it's
very short session so I don't
expect to have some bills on the
agenda that aren't there but I
think just and it might be you
might see some revised object
this
is adding one bill that policies
this this time to insure a need
to move things along yes and now
is trying to make sure to check
in with great for the to tag on
to that I already have four
movements to finish bill of.
And I.
Questions you have any questions
from our staff needs in the well
first meeting organizational
meeting and there are no more
questions have a motion the
motion
to table.
Secretary
