Thanks committee chair members
are committee members of the
Senate and into rural and
culture Affairs Committee this
morning my name is Virginia
Yazzie I am the current elect
for the magistrates court is we
can the county been elected
since twenty eighteen I am
native American novel I come
from the Navajo tribe my plans
are she is known for using buses
for the bison of the xin'an
river for.
Cool
Did you all sentencing on Monday
evening or no mention I come
here before the this morning
again to again.
inform you as issues again we
are having in McKinley county as
you all are well aware of the
county line between the two
native American tribes now have
Navajo Nation being the largest
tribe fans of these have a
little again of course of also
of course there's on the state
line was the Gallup again we
come here
informing you of the issues we
are having with R. D. W. I. drug
court treatment program it is an
alternative treatment said that
same program the program
identifies the benefits to have
a high need for treatment and
also focuses on defendants who
are convicted of their second
and third
driving while intoxicated
offenses or driving while under
the influence of drug offenses I
get our objective and the drug
treatment program is to provide
healthier thank you morning
communities to I promoting
public safety reducing the W. I.
recidivism and decreasing
criminal activity related to
substance abuse and addiction.
For addiction as possible then
it successfully through
mediation behavior therapy and
support services again we we
all all due process requirements
to provide support tailored to
assist individuals challenge
what tests substance abuse of
the defendant can be an active
and productive member of
McKinley County again at this
moment is the best heartening to
see our communities all suffer
by the lack of resources and
treatment centers and providers
in McKinley county
Again there we would lack of
treatment again there is a high
rise in drug and alcohol
addictions in our community and
the presentations that we again
present this morning is
dedicated to the community of
McKinley County session are
native American.
Communities again
but we want to voice our
concerns because it they boys
are there concerns back in
twenty twenty one when the we
conducted a community for they
confessed that a community for
many forum requesting that we
the leadership of McKinley
County come together and the
community Webster concerns about
the high rise of crimes in the
in Andy to realign the can the
county and I believe it's very
important that we address this
issue with local leaders and
state leaders at this moment
again I'm going to allow
missional Franklin who is the I.
three minutes.
Coordinator for McKinley County
to introduce our set herself and
conduct a presentation we have
this morning district.
That they have been in station
on Franklin chef
I am of the truck constructivism
of the returning to water plants
I am born for the no math class
my maternal grandparents are the
table fan and my paternal
grandparents are the weavers yet
plan this is how a knowledge of
my tribe and my culture under my
grandmother and my family as
long I just wanted to introduce
a plan that went I'm originally
from to hatch in New Mexico
which is part McKinley County I
am residing in Gallup New Mexico
and I currently as judge Yazzie
had said I am
the W. I. drug court program
coordinator I have been
introduced this program in
December of twenty nineteen and
have learned a lot of work
program is the slides that we
have provided for you today give
you a lot of background
information of what the drug for
it is focuses what more what our
goals are and how we're going to
move forward in trying to help
people realize recovery so first
I'd like to extend my
appreciation to Senator for
allowing us this moment
opportunity to introduce our
program also state some of our
challenges and concerns we have
with in Gallup
in our community and to try to
get this program set up so how
how we came to this point and
how we came to our this
opportunity is based off of that
the end of our funding for for
treatment for the the organisers
and regionally given by the New
Mexico department of
transportation and that was
awarded from July twenty
nineteen to the end of June on
June thirtieth twenty twenty
two.
And the reason why we were
breaking it to the committee is
that we have had many challenges
in trying to jump start the
program I have we have given you
a timely and I just want to go
over the time line a little bit
before.
So.
Receive the funding and July of
twenty nineteen at the time that
I arrived at the with the
programs there was a hundred
cases that are in C. H. which is
our hope with you can we can
hospital and they had an
extended program that deal fell
substance use the.
Intensive outpatient program and
at that time there were
discussions of how we were going
forward because because they're
program was basically a
residential setting be would
potentially be introducing the
IOP program into the community
so within that time frame we
were doing a lot of New Mexico
associations about how it how it
was going to develop what type
of services would be provided
and how they would be working
which in McKinley county
support.
In the in the in the month of
March of twenty twenty
we did have a change in
administration with the fact
that there was also COVID that
became a significant impact of
of services in our community I'm
ciation section down services
due to comment they release
people to go home at that time
and
Once that happened that I would
P. program the the negotiations
and the talks kind of sees at
that moment because they said
well we can't really accept it
except any clients we can't move
forward until we know you know
what the what the outcome is
going to be.
So in March of twenty twenty
they did have a change in
administration and when that
happened we had a whole new
group of individuals that we
have to work to train them about
what drug for last to train them
about what was needed and how we
move forward in many of the
twenty twenty the CEO of our
seats left and at that point
there was a lot of a discussion
about whether or not the program
would continue that the with
wellsprings program with R. C.
H. eventually they ended up
letting go of that program and
any type of contract
negotiations we're having B.
C.'s so that left the W. I. drug
court program no no choices are
opportunity in seeking a
treatment provider so at that
point we were lucky to have been
in contact with of one of the
individuals who are part of our
and see who was looking to
establish for phone program and
develop the IOP program so that
we have some hope moving
forward.
So the challenges that she had
with getting a Medicaid
certification what's that once
that happens she got the
challenges of her own and trying
to establish that in McKinley
county
one of those challenges were as
trying to develop a program to
do you waste your analysis right
now we only have one location
that as that which is McKinley
County tensions and just and so
she said we can't provide that
service because it's not
something that we we we can
offer so then we started
negotiations with the with the
county to do the other drug
testing we try to move forward
with treatment on the side what
eventually happened was they
were not able to achieve their
certification and they informed
us we can't serve your program
we can't find the I. P. services
because of that the the evidence
based treatment that you need we
which we still have to develop
that.
And so when we were in the band
associations of the county and
trying to develop the the drug
testing services we learned at
that time that the also provided
IP service so we transitioned
again to meet with that team if
they could find I. P. services
for us and that opened the door
to the conversation but what we
learned at that point.
Was that they were the only
provider in Gallup McKinley
county in Gallup and the
surrounding areas as judge Judy
said everybody that is in the
surrounding rural community the
reservation they all utilize the
same services in the city of
Gallup so when we have only one
provider that has to substance
abuse counselors one mental
health counselor that is not
enough
they have support to provide
services to the entire community
so we had just a CYFD utilizing
their services we have a better
families in their services we
had the port system you think
using their services and then we
also have
inpatient treatment four corners
the talks they were also
referring their clients there
and that program now is at Max
capacity.
So the other issue we had or the
other concerns we had with that
program is that they were not
Medicaid they were not billing
Medicaid for the services they
also run off of a grant
contract.
So utilizing that
it it it basically is not enough
support to provide services to
the general population ask to
our our drug court our drug
court is anticipating to start
with thirty individuals are
matrix's thirty people
so once we started talking to
them about the type of
treatments that we needed the
type of
support we need for the
individuals they came back and
told us we can't provide that
support that's a lot of support
that you're asking and it's
something that we cannot do so
we went back to square one.
in twenty twenty two
They informed us in actually
December of twenty twenty one
that would not be able to move
for the with the services are
the contract.
So inject on January twenty
first twenty twenty two we re
issued another RFP a request for
proposal to see if there was a
treatment provider that will
provide the services that we
need that was published in the
Gallup independent as well as a
couple of
advertisements in Santa Fe and
in other Albuquerque journal as
well
to date we haven't received any
feedback
we that the contract closed at
the proposal time closes
February twenty first and we
still haven't received any
feedback so the challenge that
we face in McKinley county is
that there is not a complex that
can provide that type of therapy
intensive outpatient therapy or
any type of outpatient therapy
participate we can help with the
different things that that they
do very program needs so I did
hand out of the McKinley County
you know we had report that
tells
What amount was for a contract
that is sixty thousand per year
and that would was awarded for
three that would be awarded for
three years so the challenges
that a lot of people face to
start and I a few programs they
have to be Medicaid certified so
there are standards that are
developed by the NABC P. and
those standards are that there
should be Medicaid certification
there should be evidence based
treatments that you
simultaneously tree an
individual both for their
substance use as well as a co
occurring disorder and the
reason being that is that
sometimes if a person has a co
occurring disorder
that is kind of the reason why
they start using substances in
the first place so that the
philosophy behind that as you
have to treat the person
simultaneously for both of their
diagnosis is in order to see a
better success in recovery.
The other problem that we have
as we have on we don't have a
lot of them mental health
profession professionals in our
area that can provide that
treatment we do have I. H. as in
our areas I. H. S. is also at
capacity they only have a lot of
the individuals that are focused
for providing child of
children's treatment children's
therapeutic services there are
limited in the adult therapies
that they provide and the
waiting time to get into that
program is about a year to two
years just to get an assessment
and then once that happens they
have to look at the case look to
see if they can take on new
clients so.
The challenges are facing to get
district forced our data is
significant and a lot of the the
problems and challenges we're
facing has to do with the
resources the limited resources
we have in our county and that's
why we wanted to bring our
concerns to the Senate today I
did find a as a slide show but
because I wanted to let you know
you know what what specific
challenges we were facing what
the drug court is how it works
why it works and white
successful.
So.
In saying that we did find you
some statistics and what of what
the rates are in regard to
saving funds rather than
incarcerating people
hello how impactful the drug
court has been in in the success
rate to lower recidivism.
And how much it costs to
actually find their so the
philosophy behind the DWI drug
court is the fact that.
When a person is incarcerated
they go through more trauma they
go through more challenges and
when that happens when they're
the least that tendency for them
to go back to a life of crime is
higher whereas with drug court
for treatment you're actually
identifying the reasons why the
individual is is taking on a
life of crime what traumas are
affecting them going back to
actually see the individual and
and know that they're they think
courage and that they need help
and that you can change their
their pattern of behavior in
providing providing positive
support providing therapeutic
intervention providing
medication assisted therapy and
also to make sure that you know
that they have a support system
in place teaching them not only
about therapy but teaching them
that they have a place in
society that they can get jobs
that they can get homes of their
own that they can the successful
they can be great parents so the
whole philosophy this behind the
drug treatment court is the fact
that we're treating the person
as a whole and not just P. fits
into pieces
so in our community that there's
a lack of housing and the lack
of support in regards to how we
can continue on to making the
trip for success
So that the slide this is what
makes the faithful and that they
remain in long enough to be
successful the average national
completion rate for two is
nearly sixty percent which is
two thirds higher than
appropriations for more than by
the right appropriations with
substance use disorder so US
sixty five percent of people
graduates entry.
And their tendency to
reciprocate is
Less than two times the amount
that it would be if somebody was
just incarcerated and released
from from from jail
Right now in New Mexico there
are forty six active drug for
there's twenty five hundred
nationwide and my concern about
this is that.
In the state of New Mexico a lot
of priority has been put towards
providing drug courts in various
communities.
And when we look at the
statistics and the the slide
that you guys received last week
or earlier this week.
It paints a picture that a lot
of communities that do have the
drug courts are successful but
our numbers in McKinley county
are the top three in the top
three of the highest in the W.
I. they're the top three and the
mystic violence related
substance use and they're the
highest seven times nationally
and in in effect the substance
use disorder and so when we
think about those numbers I
wonder why we don't have a
treatment facility in McKinley
county we have treatment quarter
point all over the state but we
don't have one in our community
and the reason why we don't have
one in our community if there is
a lot again a lack of resources
and support to get this started
it would be great to see a
facility that's dedicated to
intensive outpatient therapy
because that is the greatest
need we have in our community to
change the primary to change the
D. W. I. rates that we have in
our county and to actually
address the the challenges that
we we face on a daily basis.
So in this light that says
something about you that is a
slight for.
It gives you some statistics
about about New Mexico New
Mexico had the highest drug
overdose rate in the US and New
Mexico's drug over there for his
part a act report at thirty four
deaths per hundred thousand
population and in twenty
nineteen it was reported at
forty one percent higher than
the US rate which is twenty one
point six deaths per one
thousand two out of three deaths
in New Mexico involved opioids
prescription opioids heroin and
fentanyl and the reason I
include this is because when we
talk about few W. I. port it's
easy to assume that it's it's
all related to alcohol abuse but
in reality intoxicated driving
or driving under the influence
includes drug use in McKinley
county are rates and NMFA use as
well as spend dollars increasing
alarmingly increasing in our
area we see a lot of people come
to port for that reason and
that's why I decided that it
would be important to include
this in our presentation.
So when we put it in context one
New Mexicans died from a drug
overdose every fourteen hours in
New Mexico.
Then all of all deaths that's
rates are more than seven
percent than seven times the
national average of I had said
earlier earlier young people are
the most risk for impaired
driving driver's age twenty one
to twenty four account for
twenty percent twenty seven
percent of all fatal alcohol
impaired crashes followed
closely by twenty five thirty
fifth and thirty for thirty four
year olds at twenty five
percent.
More specifically Rio Arriba
county and the county counties
have the highest rate of alcohol
related death was reported by
the state right and more than
three times the national rate
McKinley County has a hundred
and forty five cents average per
hundred thousand population
which is the highest in the
state of the ten counties with
the highest number of also
motivated crashes in twenty
nineteen the highest alcohol
involved crash rate per hundred
million vehicles travel suffered
in Bernalillo and Travis county
the High Street for ten thousand
residents occurred in Macon
county and San Juan.
Of the twenty cities with the
highest number of alcohol
involved crashes size of the
hole in their treasury we're in
Gallup New Mexico.
The range of all fund fall
fashions were among the highest
in the past ten years in the
past five years the number of
alcohol related fatal crashes as
estimated for forty percent of
all fatal crashes the previous
five years.
Alcohol involved crashes
declined can we County two one
forty six the lowest level in
five years but that was probably
contributed to comment and the
shut down of a lot of
facilities.
The number of fatalities of
alcohol involved crashes rose
two years in a row to a hundred
and seventy five which is the
highest number in the past ten
years the right I'll call
involved teen drivers in crashes
rose to twenty two per ten
thousand licensed drivers and
crashes the rate of young
drivers and alcohol involved
crashes rose three years in a
row to thirty seven for ten
thousand.
A lot of the of people that
we're seeing come across for our
young adults and this is
concerning because it changed
the course of their lives it
affects their ability to get
funding for further education it
affects their ability to to get
a job it affects their ability
to be active members and their
families so what we want to do
is spread this awareness and
showed people that we can County
does Tate D. W. I. seriously and
that we're not just putting a
band aid on the problem but
we're actually addressing the
main reasons why people are
struggling with substance use.
So when we talk about the goals
of the treatment where we want
to provide support we want to
provide education I want to
provide opportunities for
employment opportunities for
housing to teach about sex that
financial stability to encourage
family reunification to reduce
foster care placements and to
deliver drug free babies are.
To establish the drive for an
accounting is very well thought
out and it is something that we
have a great need for and and we
did include the challenges are
County faces and all and and I
know you have to prep review
those challenges that we face
because while I think that Dr
for as a whole.
You may wonder why we ask for
lack of teachers you may wonder
why we ask for lack of housing.
It's because all of these things
create a person of a person's
ability an opportunity to become
successful in their life.
What is most important every
individual needs is their basic
needs met which is a home food
to eat.
Stability.
When you have a person who
doesn't have stability there
their ability to become
successful in their life is
severely decreased so when we
think about trying to provide
support services to an
individual even in drug for we
have to look at all of the
pieces that will help this
person to recover if we for
example if we send that person
back to their home we're trauma
occurred or we send a person
back to the home where they have
an unhealthy lifestyle because
there's a multi family unit five
families living in the home.
The impact that that person will
have our recovery is a lot more
challenging percent so drug
court really tries to
incorporate an independent type
of philosophy where you get your
own apartment you get your own
home you raise your family you
change the cycle.
So when we identify these
challenges we're seeing that
these are a lot of things that
contribute to to how the drug
court is going to move and how
successful in the future.
So what we need is based on a
lack of resources that are the
only can County for us this and
the Senate Indian affairs
committee to recognize that our
county is in serious need of
buildings programs special
projects and resources that can
benefit the population and it
just substance use had on
McKinley County is in dire need
of a treatment facility or
rehabilitation center the
statistics alone show us that
McKinley County is constantly
and consistently in the highest
percentage range regarding
substance use D. W. I. N. D. W.
I. fatalities it would be in the
community's best interest to
establish a treatment facility
that can provide rehabilitation
and R. I. T. services and a
location where there is ongoing
treatment counseling services
and opportunities for continued
education and or employability
skills a location where families
can also receive services that
help them understand their
family's journey toward recovery
as well as a location where a
peer support recovery program
program can be implemented.
The cost of living in McKinley
county as well as the cost of
lack of housing is also the
concern the need to increase
housing development and
apartments to meet public demand
increase wages and employers to
fairly compensate their
employees we need programs and
recreational facilities for
youth to do care them from a
life of crime programs are
places that encourage positive
social engagement need to revamp
and constriction struck
broadband internet services the
current structure does not meet
the demands of the population
the reason why I included that
is because.
For drug court one of the things
that we're really facing right
now is if a person is involved
in drug court and we have
comment stipulations are we have
being we were not allowed to
gather in a in a small location
or in person a lot of the people
resort to help to telehealth
when we think about telehealth
we don't have a good broadband
in our in our location are in
our area where this person can
do check ins where they can
receive treatment via internet
services or they can have of a
way to connect to the outside
world so we do need that
infrastructure in our family as
well.
The following information that
was included in your packet are
just basic information that we
have regarding how to treat
report just to just give you
some insight and education that
faced questions there's a
there's space plans and gives
you an outline of an example of
how it treatment court functions
how long treatment port is
usually fourteen to eighteen
months
and just what what happens in
those various stages just a so
that you can get at some
education I have advised line of
why treatment point of
successful and fly how we would
be delivering those treatment
services.
That concludes my presentation
and question I mean you're
you're but you over at the
scene.
We have the
of the public with you for the
future
We have our.
Okay four years of a judicial
district.
Madam chair members committee
thanks for representation should
allocate does it this really
where as we've been working
introduce yourself I yes Sir
well the nap on the court
executive officer with the jury
trouble W. or executive officer
officer the limited San Juan
McKinley County so we have the
with six core of K. three
District Court locations three
matching for locations.
And a lot of information
attention elsewhere we've been
political levers for a long time
and treatment courts we have a
number in San Juan County
unfortunately many New in the
cabin the CEO for almost twenty
four years assuming my last year
but we've been trying for many
years to get programs we've
we've got program started and
sadly does that sentences
citizens became a county
committee services desperately
would have shut down over
programs well it just it just
tears me apart because I think
with you know good people good
intentions but we just won't
have the services and so get any
support acts hundred jobs you
know earlier than maybe after
the sessions we can get together
this is brainstorm as well you
know.
We have the foundation in place
we have some have the excellent
staff here with Channell
and we is if we keep this
program will not succeed if we
do not have treatment so we have
I think the foundation in place
and there's no question the
comment was a major setback we
were ready to get off the ground
and and this call I hard and so
you can get the treatment
providers and I racked my brain
you know if this is our our he
even if we have to do it
temporarily are we get some
tricky riders from Albuquerque
officially Farm sent elsewhere
even if we had to pay for them
to come in a couple days a week
and right now we're just really
frankly desperate I really know
other way to describe it and
that we needed we have yes hello
this is a dream for riders we
have a resources so.
the the initial start of money
was actually the national track
traffic safety bureau so that
the that federal funds and state
that's fit for fiscal year ends
in September and rob Mitchell
could make here today he's
statewide drug work coordinator
and is also very big believers
this program we have state
funding to continue to pay for
Sen Alice of the treatment costs
but.
You know so I was very concerned
you know we don't have the funds
president of clients.
Funds go away our program goes
way I don't want to know the
program have to shut the doors
of the county county it's just
it's we also says the need is
there and so I think we all need
to work together committee which
we can your support is greatly
appreciated the fact the answer
to that is excellent I think
it's it helps us in terms of the
speed is also job so I stand for
questions as well but I I know
we have the foundation place is
given treatment provider and I
am in the camp by a lot and I'm
very gracious of in the county
but this is a need for the
second third because these folks
clearly it's not just the first
time that you know has.
That'd be W. wired drugs this is
a recurring problems shells
points all the other
foundational issues family
related issues that that they
needed assistance with and
there's often secretary thirds
we need you know we need to get
this problem assortment for
significant problem fixing noted
the district for ten cycle just
repeats itself so we can get
this
taking care of all of these get
some treatment you know and I
don't mean I'm thirty right away
it we're ready today to take
take on clients and we've been
anxious and ready and so over
this R. P. I'm trying to be
costly after the stick we have
had as much success of this
point with having three
providers so if anybody has any
ideas or suggestions would be
glad to meet with this offline
as well thank you for your time
today thank you thank you
to get to this yeah.
Thank you have any questions
from the community members or
any of the audience about it.
If.
The question of of the yes yes
one of you guys
One of the things.
Challenging the to the one she
been convicted of the W. R.
have.
Good for pretty much what it is.
In the city of Alamogordo city
on board doesn't have.
Good bye section you know the
native people around town so
people can yeah I have this
issue has to.
Hi they have to something.
Is is it ever consider and you
know on the on the reservation
relationships or fall over.
what could in the state what
could they be allowed to do
wiped out.
motorcycle.
Forward.
Of shown we're delighted they
put at risk potentially if they
drank.
Is there are several meals or
for someone you know which
have we ever even give those
sort of things consideration on
whether to madam chair and
presenters what could be
available to someone the cares
of the actual that is a real
challenge and I don't I don't
know what that rate insurers if
the reform
but that's what we do people we
should shame can't can't drive
trying to get to work have you
have you do some of those.
And are there are options being
looked into and from what
probably charge you guys have to
that.
Madam chair Senator great
thank you for that questions are
of them and inside Gallup within
the city of Gallup course we
have transaction within the
Gallup area and
At one point there was a program
where they actually provided
free free bus passes for
individuals to attend court
sessions or again find tickets
britischen to get on the bus and
come to court now in the rural
areas again we do have a Navajo
transit system employees but it
only
I believe it only runs to the
Navajo Nation and when the rock
and it does pick up individuals
in the craft point and the twin
lakes area where they're able to
get on board and traveled to
interrupt.
For employment only but as far
as transit for their
The finish coming into court we
don't have the system forever
and place and after this
meetings this today we're going
to be meeting with the Navajo
Nation president tomorrow and we
can discuss that with him as
well and I I appreciate you
bringing up that point and
that's something that we need to
take into consideration as well.
Thank you for any other
questions from committee
members.
We do have a couple.
If the drug court hardly are not
met.
Place option who's gonna be that
individuals will have to be
penalized in the matter of
incarceration.
And in that sense I don't think
Gallup either it does have the
capacity in their jail to of
course right people at the and
even a higher rate because we
talk about individuals and with
COVID.
Happening and the limits on
staff that we are looking it
it's basically a crisis right
now
without it
or if it's not meant that off
the same thing.
As far as the
I think the time lane just very
very horrendous right now and
What we we can do with this
limited time but I would like to
know you guys are here the rest
of today we are.
Okay so I think there's a couple
people I'd like to to have you
with because I think we're also
in this
Crime initiative with what's
happening in Bernalillo county
but also telling that some of
that can spill over not just in
our area it'll spill over into
the urban areas to and our
border towns not just in the
Gallup alone but in the San Juan
County area.
This San Juan County area.
Is my section is that the county
is very supportive or is it the
city that's very support got
their last two
Have those.
madam chair members of the
committee a great question the
there are you know just
population base their inherently
more treatment providers I think
that we can we can to support of
I I think there county Kate when
we met last week with the county
us on the web we continue
partnership with them they said
their capacity is what we pay
you know because I have they
don't have there are monsters.
I that local providers and
community so we will have a we
give you the resources so that
we can take some of our clients
and they said no although we're
still trying to negotiate that
San Juan County assistance they
have more resources when it
comes to trade riders and so
they're supportive but it's it's
really the local training
providers we have a similar
program or magistrate court in
in Farmington.
Of the some of this at this is
modeled after and so really just
boils down to order by that's
why I mentioned the possibility
thus far we have had a true
Russian Farmington expressing
interest maybe there is so busy
as well we have had those
conversations with them but
there's just more providers
although issue have San Juan
County St Stockdale farms on
Albuquerque and we have
limitations as well PMS you to
be the biggest provider in
in San Juan County we utilize
and we have we have a couple
others they're just they're just
a few more treatment providers
that have more staff but there
they lose good people the time
as well and it's it's really
difficult especially on the
mental health side of things
which is huge additional
assessed on so yes no one would
answer they they it is a little
bit more.
Sprycel support just more
services and and San Juan
County.
And in that sense to I know they
have a San Juan to San Juan
college there.
Is there any collaboration or
some kind of program that to
hire it as far as going doctors
careers in this
that there is trying to get I
willing to to this.
Madam chair representative it I
think there's been some
discussions like you know
certainly San Juan college
general but a locally
Galliformes you know three staff
wants to do that now with you
know you're in Gallup.
madam chair.
so I believe there is a program
that has just recently started
called the lead program and I
know that they are in in
discussions right now and trying
to promote more
I guess encouragement for people
to go into the field of mental
health and to provide that
resource but then again you also
have a lack of supervision for a
person to get Sir there
licensure I am currently and
then my master's degree program
as a licensed mental health
counselor and I am having I've
had the most difficult time
trying to find somebody to
revise my practicum to somebody
take me under their wing to
provide me the services and the
hours to go for to finish my
graduate degree so many in
researching that I know first
hand how how difficult it is in
my County it's almost as if you
have to go someplace else to get
that
with regard to the county
building support of I believe if
they had the resources they also
would be more supportive so the
DWI program that we're talking
about right now right now
they're situated in a very tiny
building and they are currently
sharing offices with the
ceremonial Association the
people that are that are
planning for that the Indian
ceremonial every year in this
they have they utilize about
three offices and that little
building the Dante
for the old sheriff's office you
city folk and they only have one
through
allocated to the mental health
professionals which is why the
man that that the professionals
have to alternate these they
only have one office in there
for mental health counseling so
one person comes in on Monday
Wednesday and the other person
comes in on Tuesdays and
Thursdays so that building is
not sold the for the W. I.
programs but I don't know if
they're sharing costs.
Yes or if there is not a
building in town but that's what
you're really looking at when
you're look when we talk about
the tobacco program can County
that's where they're located
situated and trying to do their
their program out of but R. it's
it the city or county are they
building a new court or some
kinda to do jail are asking us
for.
No yes it is mentioned so madam
chair at some point there that
discuss I don't they're supposed
to do it tension center yeah
crossed county is in need of
this attention by the match
record now and it's it's not in
good shape so please yeah
because that's where four
corners detoxes right now this
is not adequate enough okay the
move them to the behavioral
health I hope that or the old
behavioral health but that
building is been in existence
for our
of the people that are.
Yeah.
The nature of.
Source of the
the couple of is there a
particular denture bill forces
for educational purposes only or
is it a particular building.
Food food is important this
Madam opponent because if you
will I think that's where we're
in this this is why we're in
this discussion because it
sounds like there's if nothing
gets done within by the end of
this month we'll see it a big
explosion in Gallup with
incarcerations yes with the W.
I. first time offenders because
there is there's no treatment
for them to go into effect in
and of being the ultimate.
Your question is in the hospital
to or any of the legislation
going to movies or anything is
there funding to support I think
that that's why I was asking
about the.
If so then operating this.
Chair Senators action of the
answers now we act we actually
have funding for colleges for
funding of course there's
another on a separate bill we
don't have any additional assets
we have in house bill two this
was more of a presentation today
terms of trying to figure out
what the next steps are and
maybe that's what we can partner
in the future yes of what
Senator Pinto eluded to is that
this R. P. is going out to do
the end of February.
Providers ready let the same
thing we've been for a couple
years we have state funding the
federal funding is in September
the state funding will kick in
that's one to continue to fund
should now as of other funding
services so that the majority of
the costs are already built in
with our individual budget
within eleven additional
district match records
but we don't get the training
for other
and that's what they've been
looking for a bill or something
next year because I think I
don't know what the hell is a
long time but I will be here
longer I fell but I do think.
Madam chair
so we can make an awful lot of
money and I think that you know
if they can establish a business
making the county get Medicaid
certified all those things we
can count is still trying to
come through and start bringing
in some folks think that.
That they need the demand is
there right into the community I
think some have a very private
and very successful practice
making part of this too is this
having that discussion to expand
that search so they can get the
RFP or get some help maybe the
O. H. and
behavioral health for that
surcharge into some and will use
their then.
You were hoping all this time it
would get mad.
And now you're just down to the
point where we're hitting a
deadline day Max discussed.
Hello.
Their manager my suggestion
would be to have this
conversation during an armed.
try to map out something so that
thanks sixty day session we've
got something concrete that
hopefully the community affairs
group recommend of so that we
know we're kind of moving in
seven direction because right
now I think the most of these
are happening in the world you
will pardon me for ten days left
in the.
So this is thank you yes madam
chair
in response to your question
about four corners to tax you
and I know that either practice
as other side conversation with
regard to that and their
interest in that whole
wellsprings building yes I
believe that it's just in talks
right now because there is also
the possibility that the nation
was also interested in that
building and which is why we
were wanting to also talk to
them to to verify if what
they're what information you
were given is accurate
and in the in in if that is a
possibility for them that might
be something we would consider
because we were also reaching
out to them and maybe have some
mental health providers from
nation possibly start and I hope
you to you know that that's a
hopeful discussion we can have
but coming to the table today
our our intent is to try to get
more support or even like care
services maybe even legislation
because in our contract we can
definitely state that we can
change providers here any your
basis
but for now we're really just
trying to find the support we
need and the past three years we
actually have been working very
hard it's just we come so far
and then the treatment providers
as we can.
Can't do this so we have been
working with people up to this
point and bringing it to the
Senate's attention this is not
like like we're doing at the
last minute that we basically
have been really working
diligently to try to get some
help support and madam chairs
just speak with Senator Shendo
was alluding to I think that's
the outlook take that approach
because I think it's the state
it's it's a multi disciplinary
issue a problem I think we need
to have legislature's office
look at sport the this is this
committee I think we can the
county speed table possibly the
city and the Navajo Nation I
think in order to get to judge
other strategies try to arrange
a meeting through I believe you
said that certificate of I think
that's why we're here today and
so we thank you for the time but
I think that sometime after the
session so we can develop a more
detailed plans and then other
approach I I agree sixty day
session because.
The tobacco product pro problem
thank you again is not going
away and I think there's plenty
of folks who could benefit and I
think if we can get more
collaborative
longer term approach I would
with with with the courts would
absolutely wanted to table
because we we would like to be
active participants in that
because we we can get this open
successful running there's
plenty of the programs that we
could certainly add to McKinley
County from of drug or
therapeutic standpoint both for
adults and juveniles that we
simply don't have right now
thank you.
Madam chair representative I
would like to address the issue
regarding the device the
statistics that we see again
just for your information that I
think you know may have recorded
your slide if not you can yeah
you can of course take the one I
have this morning but right now
just looking at the statistics
from the staff point back in
twenty twenty one course we had
three hundred sixty eight due to
rely fences
again the four age range from
twenty five to forty five we had
three hundred sixteen and of
course there
also by the number of fences are
located again for just first
offense either by one hundred
and seventy six four seven four
second offense you know the
audience seventy four and then
third offense was forty three
individuals and for for defense
due to the lives of seven and
then from the age ranges from
eighteen to twenty four again
for first offense again it goes
to thirty five second offense
well actually a second offense I
and again third offense was to.
Four so the total if you
calculate all of it for twenty
twenty one it was at the three
hundred and sixty more for you
to be alive fences for twenty
twenty to the first week here in
February we are ready at two
hundred and forty seven the W.
I. K. M. can I count and that
speaks for itself we have an
issue we need to address this
issue that is very important if
we don't it's just a rotating
door for these individuals that
come to of course.
And it is frustrating to see
and.
it does bother me deeply because
again it's it's and the native
Americans who are suffering
because of the lack of treatment
get NCI diss self that mission
from the southeast Department
fourteen thousand seven hundred
seventy seven back in twenty
eighteen for twenty twenty one
two thousand six hundred thirty
three so again that doesn't
include McKinley County
sheriff's office of one hundred
three detainees and New Mexico
state police sent five to the
NCI detox center and how they
how those individuals that you
can see they're probably just
lying on the floor there
discussion.
On cold concrete for it bothers
me and bothers me that we have
not address this issue it's been
an ongoing issue and.
We need to do something about it
we need to start taking action
to help the people here and
McKinley County again the high
rising crime into the to the
lodge itself.
Thank you I appreciate that miss
madam chair for thank you
Senator.
And I'm sorry I missed that part
of this but seems right off hand
out can't go wrong with a quote
by coach Vince Lombardi.
Well the wrong.
Hello.
Sorry.
in all seriousness you know I
don't know how many times for
years we talk about treatments
that part incarceration that
just sounds so great I mean
that's bipartisan it thank you
like I would agree with that you
know treatment instead of
incarceration but we don't have
the programs you know and this
is one more example of that and
so by all means this is
important and I just that's a
frustration I boards had like
that sounds great but where the
programs so this is a strong
word I look forward to working
on an intern thank you thank you
thank you Senator thank you for
your presentation try to get a
bill
for their but if we to meeting a
couple other people today with
the.
I think you know where my office
is that.
Thank you and we're going to
move on to our next item on the.
Thank you.
Well.
For for.
Okay so.
Raul.
This is.
Okay.
Here.
Okay okay.
Okay just where those that are
in the room they're going to
give you look at.
Of the agenda health we're gonna
start house bill eight.
Amended and HB fifteen amended
rolled over.
To our next meeting.
So
McQueen I don't know who else is
a.
Just him right this is.
the complicated policy on our
contact I'm here.
Possibility.
The.
Both are students and I are are
also eight Senate sponsors but
for some reason it didn't show
okay we are.
So.
A text but anyway okay yeah.
In the property
for.
And.
This is.
Also have a expert witness okay
good artifice of present hero is
on soon okay.
Related to that are okay if you
could please admit that he's
with the health care okay great.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee I am here in
front of you to present house
bill eight it is so essentially
what this bill does is created
the land grant we're Senators
assistance fund.
and.
Madam chair what I would do just
so that
I don't go on to see if I could
just allow expert witness to
present so researchers at the.
If you representative to some of
the background please.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Lopez again my name is Arti to
archer the time of the program
manager for the next Langer
Council and what this bill
essentially does is provide a
revenue stream for Land Grant
communities that our political
subdivisions of the state many
of our communities Strobel with
just meeting some of the basic
requirements that they have is
government entities as well as
providing services for their
community members
all language communities are
provide services for not just
the errors of the of the land
grant but often times are the
only sort of local government in
in the rural area and so they
provide services like community
centers senior meal sites.
as well as natural resources
management for the common lands
that still manage which has a
the overall benefits for the
community Mexico's poll I and
many of these land grants have a
renewable energy revenue streams
the the what the revenue that
that you have usually most of
them were below ten thousand
well below ten thousand in terms
of the annual budgets and often
times they have to research to
donations or big sales or yard
sales to try to just keep the
lights on in their community
centers on what this bill will
allow its four step some
stability for those commuters to
be able to invest in those
services as well as continue to
improve on the needs of the
community and the way it does
that is by taking a small
percentage of the annual gross
receipts tax revenue.
collected by the state and
placed into a fund that gets
distribute distributed to on the
line that communities that have
been pre qualified and
qualification we have to have
met the reporting requirements
for the state audit act as well
as than getting filtered through
by the New Mexico Langat Council
and checking to ensure that the
panelists are.
Fireman's under the chapter
forty nine of the statute that
deals with longer committees
and with that of madam chair I
will stand for questions.
Thank you for doula.
You have any closing remarks
and.
thank you madam chair members of
the committee the land grants
struggle they don't have a
regular source of funds so this
little bit of funding as much as
fifty thousand cases would
really help them achieve some
purposes for example when
somebody is applying for ICAP
they need to have a shovel ready
projects many times they don't
even know what that means they
need engineering plans they need
some planning and design and
construction so this little bit
of money to help them with many
different things in terms of
ministration an organisation and
we hope you will support thank
you thank you senator do we have
anybody in the audience to speak
and support for.
We have anybody in opposition.
Do we have anybody on the line
yes your number of people online
at first is been just as happy
as.
Madam chair and members one of
the can you hear me yes.
I would like to thank everyone
who has worked so hard to bring
a bill forward my name is that
I'm an addict to the thank you
and so we land grants and that
the former Land Grant president
I can attest to the difficulty
of attempting to meet the
requirements of being a
political subdivisions of the
state but having no recurring
revenue to pay for the basic
needs of our day to day
operation.
Annual dues and renting out our
building for meetings and
private party barely allow it to
reinvest that money into paying
the utility bills.
Our building is a hive for our
community where we have an
exercise room a large meeting
space and an office
Representative satellite
internet so anyone in our
community can attend but
meetings and doctors
appointment.
And during the COVID and the
user able to connect to the
online learning platforms from
our community building I'm
mission is to serve and improve
the quality of life for all
residents of our community not
just our land grant heirs in
rural New Mexico well off family
and we all need to be there for
one another and I respectfully
ask you to support this
important bill it will serve as
a lifeline by Land Grant
communities throughout the state
of New Mexico I thank you for
your time I thank you for your
service to our state and may god
bless you all.
Next one of us invested as.
Yes good morning madam chair all
members of the committee can you
hear me yes.
But for us it over more good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Bonnie
foster was kiss and the
president of some foreign land
grants.
Thank you for giving me the
opportunity to address this
committee.
On house bill eight.
And members of the south our
land grants strongly support the
hostility.
The land Grammer says system
funding from helpful to also
operational cost will land
grants and other expenses in
organizations a guarantee
revenue stream will help us
become more effective and
efficient so political units of
the state of New Mexico having a
state appropriations for label
us to manage and develop future
plans to reach short and long
term project objectives it would
also mean that we will be able
to serve our communities better
a good example how this
assistance fund could be helpful
to some problem Ryan grant is
the last two years have been
working with the communities and
romping yes where are you on the
fire would project in copper
mountain here's a pic please
engine trouble one of the
biggest challenges to manage
this project project the main
coming up with the revenue to
pay the liability insurance
required by the state another
associate administrative
expenses on the project.
Also you Mr expenses have been
coming out of personal pockets
of highly dedicated more members
all our board members are
volunteers we use our own
resources and time to make this
type of community projects
successful madam chair and
members of the committee
guaranteed revenue stream is
much what she needed and import
or land grants will appreciate
your support for hospital late
subject to your questions thank
you for your time.
Next VS state of political.
Hello.
The state.
Can you hear yes hello
yeah this is stated the law.
Now yes.
Okay.
In the state of Oaxaca I am the
president of the more sandals
hello.
How many online grant.
up we support it house bill
eight because it is it will
provide
a lot of a
liability insurances and.
Some of the properties that we
acquired right now all we have.
We have to lease out of place
where we can have our meeting we
have a we we we travelled vast
amounts of money to get to
meetings and what have you we do
all of our fundraising the
sandals Raffles fund raising of
different sorts of voluntary
money comes from donations
throughout my life
the older people in the fifties
are of our ancestors our elders
who are more water will work to
used to take money out of their
pensions they received from from
their services and this hi the
amount of money that they that
they used was to try to tell the
story that we have right now
we're at the point where we're
we have the story we're telling
it right now but we need we need
we need more help and the
guaranteed Revenue Service will
help us tremendously and we urge
you and I'm IBM and granted
please support the House Bill
eight thank you for everything
that you've done for us.
You have a struggle thank you.
Thank you that letters Martinez.
That.
The morning madam chair can you
hear me yes.
Of the morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Linda Martinez I am president
us all looking to come in and
grant said which is headquarters
in Google building which is near
dina what extent dollars of oil
Regina yeah this and particle to
New Mexico the Palermo we have a
budget of less than six thousand
dollars it is very hard madam
chair for us to juggle a party
for commissions a from internet
to like to propane which is like
the cost is a hundred six
hundred and.
Ten dollars to fill propane
tanks this past month.
And I and plus our liability
insurance for buildings and
we're project with with the with
the you know our our.
in a very active weather revenue
have SS six thousand we have
lots of needs in our communities
for our areas and not and on
this page also service our
commissioners services all these
by the association is yes I
guess in our communities for
their meetings there's other
requests for our buildings are
are the building right now is
being remodeled and plus we are
also the
in charge of the physical agent
for that bit of the Bensinger
for doing the audit stuff on
that projects so we stand strong
support hospital eight madam
chair and members of the
committee and I called for you
for support in passing this
legislation thank you.
It next we have Germany does
have just.
Okay good I'm here.
This is great speaking out.
Yes.
Your Joe now yes.
Madam chair person Madam
chairman members of the
committee my name all the this I
am the president we're sending a
land grant I'm gonna keep my
calm early we and all those
other people who want to speak
and the I know that ground that
setting a land grant located in
San Miguel County about twenty
three miles from that they that
a like twenty five our land
grant what's important in and
member twenty six seventeen
ninety four regularly had that
three hundred and thousand acres
now we have about five thousand
acres we lost over three
thousand three hundred thousand
acres in to bring court decision
no as a lot of U. S. B. Santa.
In our land grant there are
seventeen in communities along
the banks of the river.
on north we have a Senate seat
all Northam all the way down to
the south to accept the call.
Some of the bigger community
include that sample said one it
up yes ma'am our population in
that area at this point.
In the census through twenty
twenty twenty senses is roughly
eighteen hundred sixty three.
Our our land grant is lucky
enough all a twenty four year
old building thirty five hundred
square feet
and it's a located in the center
of town center it Representative
night right now we are building
provide meals for the elderly we
lease the building to the city
of us at four thousand dollars a
month.
the city that they ask is the
fiscal agent for the agency and
making that provides senior.
Yep.
Can you hear me.
Yes the doctor and.
My still on yes can you wrap up
here.
Madam revenue yes please.
Okay okay we would I and capital
outlay funding for that who I
keep in the building we have
fifty thousand for the issue we
had eighteen hundred for the or
that we use or
Septic system we do paper
probably death and the Landen
Bates after taxes and
More revenue but statements or
of the house bill eight hundred
feet continue to provide
services for its use in New
Mexico in our area I thank you
very much for your time.
Thank you.
and it looks like we're out of
time for public comment that we
also support indicated for
hundred eighty S. Martinez.
Thank you thank you may think of
you have any questions from
committee members Senator oh now
thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator for bringing this
for CENIC you know one of the
highlights of my experiences
Land Grant Committee and system
remarkable it's almost not fair
committee.
I'm not sure.
But but it's
I just have a question how much
is this little bit of money to
to ask.
Madam chair and senator right
now there is a two million
dollars appropriation house bill
two if this were to be
distributed to twenty four land
grants it would be about eighty
thousand dollars minus
administrative costs but if
there were thirty five land
grants that would be about fifty
seven thousand dollars so any
amount would help since they
don't have a regular source of
income except local do some on
their own landowners thank you
madam chair and is a recurring.
This was sent us services
representative.
Bill.
I have hello.
It shall revert.
So it is a recurring that it
shall revert okay and then
madam chair who decides where
these funds go with the twenty
five or I guess the estimates
very how many actual Land Grant
Committee.
There are that is except this
is.
The representative first of all
of the land there is a land
grant council that the state of
New Mexico has
Appointed and authorized and
they are administratively
attached to the University of
New Mexico the now they hope to
be attached to DFA for the
parties purposes in order to be
recognized as of officials land
grants the attorney general's
office has to confirm that they
have met all the tenants of
statute and having of.
that actually inheritance of the
land that they have a legally
elected board
and that they have Sen elections
it etcetera etcetera so the AG
has to certify the so that's why
I said right now we have twenty
four.
Legally certified land grants
but it could go up to as many as
thirty five in our state if they
complied there are some land
grants might be giving too much
information but Madam chair
Senator there are some Land
Grant to choose not to go the
legal route because that there
is more reporting to the state.
Okay.
Thank you senator Senator
secretary.
How many total land grants madam
chair Senator how many total
land grants to do state would be
receiving of this money right
now according to the FIR is and
other tax reports there are
twenty four legally recognized
land grants in our state and
there could be madam chair to
thirty five.
Senate madam chair and senator
it would be distributed equally
you said that this recurring
money out according to one get
more funds bigger or smaller.
And madam chair that is correct
it is based upon the population
and the board of directors once
they are legally recognized
tests are done by the population
of the land grants so some
language but see the amounts are
never going to be large it's
never going to go over that top
amount of money that I'm talking
about because the fund is capped
madam chair so it's not going to
ever be in the hundreds of
thousands of the millions but
they would divide the madam
chair center there would be by
the I do I just want yes six of
two million divided by four that
is based upon the population and
I have a copy of the State
respect thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair that's I
have someone grants and money I
just want to report back to
them.
and madam chair center have the
so how they apply for this or
it'll automatically come to them
or.
So
Madam chair if this Senator if
this fund actually is approved
into statute the land grant
council would have the
opportunity to advised DFA to
appropriate money to individual
interests.
Thank you thank you madam.
So.
Sir just a follow.
Council when they have the
ability to determine how much
money each Land Grant County is
that just edged in stone it's
just doesn't involve any kind of
judgment as to which land grants
or perhaps better
certainly not deserving of the
money it's just like what what
nonsense so thank you for the
questions madam chair Senator
it's based upon formula it's
based on the number of people
living in that land grants
that's legally recognized so we
have some line grants that might
have less than fifty people and
we have some land grants that
will have several hundred people
and that's why the amount of
money might shift.
Thank you thank you
Those are terms would you like
to.
Give input or.
You madam chair thank you just
to to work with little bit of
clarification on how that works
the way that it's currently
legislation works is the the
fund is is distributed equally
among the land grants but the
portion of the land grants
received is is getting based on
their app and Revenue in
accordance with what the report
to the to the state honors
office so we have a system of
reporting an auditor's office if
you make less than ten thousand
you do a certification to make
the best of fifty new
certification on.
If you make above that we do
different levels of supporting
and so the the way that the bill
is structured it's tier to those
different tiers and so with a
land grant has higher revenue
bill receive less from the fund
if those land grants that have
smaller revenue will receive
full distribution from the fund
and then the any money left
balance left fund at the end of
the year it will revert to the
general fund and because it's
tied to ge gross receipts taxes
what should we do with the
economy
so each line grant the way that
we deterred language be
determined as eligible is the
first have to be clear on that
state auditors as being
submitting all the required
reporting to them.
That list will then come to the
council and the council have to
check through to ensure that
everything the director has
complied with all the other
requirements structure
requirements under forty nine
and and that sort of the the
list of who receives in a given
I'm so that in the Lancaster
senior make functionally
depending on whether I like it
has been all the obligations
under the statutes and and
reporting to the are in the
graveyard Act.
Thank you Mr the other
questions.
Of the whites are more comments
than they are from all of us
about land grants because when
you talk about the termination
of a material or government
that access or having the
ability to invest or again
funding has to really buy in
from the initial community and
to my understanding with the
land grants to
that some of the services are
voluntarily that community
members as far as burial but
they don't charge for a
disinterment so are.
Kind of like how the cemetery
would to have a basic
cost just to have the person the
very that and that there are
also other things within the
community that are provided by
community members.
And.
I'm not sure when the state that
there.
Some people contribute to the
fund of who is actually
contributing just owner or
you know all those site there
but I do understand to there are
some economic factors that don't
allow or not allow but that are
very.
Type in some of those areas as
far as having access and I think
there's very few economic
development.
Entities and some of those areas
to restrict restrictions on that
so I see it kind of like a
reservation you really.
State to get so these buildings
the committee has to buy it but
thank you senator for bringing
the support of the chair will
entertain a motion from the
committee.
You would would you ask
these
by senator Munoz happen object.
Tell us Senator you have the
past thank you very much.
Representative McQueen thank you
thank you for all those in the
this.
If she meant it will be rolled
over in the
To Thursday and we'll see what
we will see it committees of the
two by the one thirty five if we
will add that to the agenda I'm
