so unless there's any other
announcements on the front end
and yield any other members of
those any other announcements
senators any announcements.
Mr president the rules committee
to whom has been referred Senate
resolution one has had it under
consideration report same with
respectfully submitted Daniel A.
Ivey Soto chairman Senator this
auto would move adoption
committee for and as we have a
motion to adopt the committee
report.
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass respect respectfully
submitted George manos chairman
sentiment us move adoption the
committee report we have a
announcements and miscellaneous
line that order business senator
Wirth I thank you Mr president
having eleven fifty nine am I
move we adjourn until twelve or
one PM
No objection.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
legislation ideal first to
Senator Ivey Soto percent
resolution number one and then
to center when yours for House
Bill number one around that
Senate resolution as Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate resolution number one.
on final passage has been taken
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
for Senate resolution number one
so there are two changes of note
here one thank you thanks to
to which is actually the virus
from which somebody gets a COVID
nineteen and so we made that
correction and then on page two
an individual who's tested
positive for sars cove to in the
past fourteen days who's been
fully vaccinated against severe
close contact with individuals
test positive for source code to
the last four to fourteen days
and has not been fully
vaccinated
recognizing that many people are
vaccinated and that changes the
protocols that we would be using
under the circumstances with
that Mr this president be happy
to stand for questions thank you
yield Senator so the deal is
present we have to.
Thank you Mr president senator I
I want to bring to light
something that I think has been
lot of these diseases and in
fact if you look at the CDC's
website with regard to measles
is says if you've had measles
and recovered then.
cells that are fighting the good
fight Y. A. R. my T. cells Mr
president and senator not
considered at the level as a
president Senator portal so it
if this were a measles policy I
think that point will be well
taken however one of things for
example that we're seeing with
to deal with the immunity boost
natural menopause that somebody
may get from contracting
Corona virus disease to those
intensity of of the virus that
for at least a particular
variant of the virus so.
So at this point the the the
a convalescing and isolation
somewhere in the city of Santa
Fe the the standard them is the
standard of vaccination in order
COVID fabricated or or just like
any vaccine that isn't the being
introduced to the actual virus
but you bring up a good point I
do we still acts like
vaccinated individuals are like
Superman that they don't have to
be tested regularly when they
can still pass of the this is
want people passing on the virus
unintentionally so why do we
why do we not require a time
period for a yes I see that it
says you just have to have a
need to look more at the
scientific data as to when these
tests occur.
Senator Ivey Soto I thank you
very much Mr president and
center portal I listen
that's one of the reasons why.
Even though
I think I think a fair number of
people on this floor are
vaccinated even though severely
reduced.
you know D. A. I've been jab
three times.
possible and assisting Senator
Moores to develop his vacation
has a retirement place somewhere
in the Bahamas by getting tested
what what these rules to as
establish the minimum standards
and the minimum standards than
remains in place that we all are
in close contact with somebody
and I've by the very much
appreciate people not getting
into close contact with anybody
between the one o'clock session
the four o'clock session so we
under the circumstances.
Senator so Mister president
senator if if vaccinated people
can still pass it amongst
themselves with a better policy
because I think they're still
this misconception that that you
know the vaccine works in a
traditional way where it it does
help with the symptoms and
creating two classes of people
are ignoring natural immunity
but we would take it serious and
say that if if somebody was in
close contact that regardless of
vaccination status because you
senator Senator so the agency
president and Senator Pirtle
certainly I think that would go
along in the best praxis
category again we're sitting
here the minimum requirements
functioning of the the doors of
the capital was to be closed.
First on a pandemic.
The the all the committee
hearings would would require
everybody to participate
cost several of us to have
severe bruising but those are
scope to
during the previous sessions and
so so it's a balancing act
trying to make sure that we're
Senator and thank you Mr
president senator I think it's
it's not best practices but you
know I'll digress you know I
participate you know we would
allow people to participate
through zoom who have not been
vaccinated or have natural
immunity such as myself
if we if we truly cared about
change you know I think is is an
interesting at best you know if
we truly care about the health
of this body we would understand
that vaccinated people can still
as though when vaccinated people
think that they're invincible
which they're not you know if
this still can be passed along
so we have to understand that as
people and so until we do that
president all you.
Further debate with senator
smitteez followed by Senator
Steinborn Senators maintenance.
Thank you Mr president with the
bill sponsor Connelly yield
important for us all to hear
And one of which I I think the
the greatest
harm that's being done by this
cost to our health care system.
and it's not even a specific
critique of this rule
necessarily it's a critique of
anytime we're treating these
groups differently.
I'm not going to yes the
vaccination status my going
there chart but they're going to
get treatment and get treated
like an equal human being and so
I think that's where the book
classes of people differently
within the health care system.
It causes distrust.
And this is actually been
studied so people in Denmark in
Europe and some other groups
unvaccinated have lost trust in
our health care system a lot of
atrocities that have happened to
various racial groups and ethnic
groups and health care same
Hey remember when we were
discriminated against or treated
on on fairly and so the the
creating this tribalistic
classes of people is going to
losing trust and they're going
to be for generations most
likely less likely to seek out
care.
We are going to be finding that
And we're off our like I said
we're already finding mistrust
in the in the exited I guarantee
you guarantee we're gonna have
studies next they're gonna be
saying the vaccinated especially
Okay so this doesn't come
without a cost is not just about
this capital about the
perpetuation of this type of an
attitude toward people in health
one of the reasons that I I
can't support this.
Mr president members of bottoms
gonna read a quote from a study
that was put out by jointly by
load between vaccinated and
unvaccinated comma a symptomatic
answers about groups when
infected with sars COVID to
dispel Mr president is the
vaccines prevent infection okay
so the vaccine is not a force
field okay it's not going to.
this gets conflated with
becoming a COVID case let me
explain this so if you're one of
these people that believes that
being vaccinated reduces your
another one among hospitalized
patients but that actually
doesn't what they're measuring
and when they say they're
conclusion that you know we had
three times as many people that
were on the exit gate cases now
of a hundred vaccinated people
thank you study them in any
other a group of a hundred
unvaccinated people he said okay
go live your life for months
we're gonna come back we're
gonna test everybody well at
unvaccinated group yes policy
aha thought that that's it
that's it the vaccine works no
that is measuring exposure to
the virus okay that's measuring
hundred percent okay it does not
protect people from quote
unquote getting infected okay so
is not a force field does not
prevent you from being exposed
okay.
Senator Pirtle actually already
mentioned this about the false
sense of security when we give
security we did this in New
Mexico we've been here before
right with the masking thing
when was it let's see my kids
run swimming so that was
probably in the summer I was
walking around and you know we
again we had some science me
said oh yeah.
You know the that's a people
spread as much they can get just
as much so let's just have a
mask on everybody right so we we
here we're still stuck treating
people despair Lee not based on
any you know sound science I've
seen and so once again have a I
have a problem with that.
it to be that we are in a post
enlightenment era meeting we're
not really looking at data right
we're we're governing and
setting policies by feelings
but this other agency that the
vaccine is it going to stop the
spread of the disease and then
we once again get these
disparate policies between the
infection for COVID nineteen and
this is very these countries
like Singapore that have very
high vaccination rates but then
you see you see the you see the
disease sweeping through much
on I'd say the far anti vaccine
I would would point to those
countries and say although the
vaccine doesn't work no no that
is not about the vaccine not
working it's that we're asking
it to do something that he was
can decrease your risk of severe
disease hospitalization and
death by getting the vaccine
okay gives your immune system a
jumpstart against the spike
protein.
highly vaccinated countries the
the the the disease spreads
through but once again you
cannot claim the vaccine doesn't
work you can be quick with it
one of the biggest problems of
public health in our country
right now with our partisanship
we have fox news point
California whenever the virus
roll through there and saying oh
whenever they're having a bad
month and so look how bad
they're doing that's not how we
do public health we do public
health over longer periods of
time for the long run in the big
lives not lower the committees
risk it does not stop the spread
it does not make you less
infectious when you have it we
know that we have the viral load
counts and everything already
they're equal among the two
Really frustrating so in closing
Mister president we have to stop
this this tribalistic mentality
we have to stop creating classes
of people and treating people
Hopefully with the guidance of
your primary care physician or
some other doctor that has
established a.
Relationship with you and make
it an individual level decision.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president
So I just I looked up when I saw
this rule change I looked up the
gonna read this for everybody
for your benefit because the
rule doesn't really speak to
that the rule says if you're
vaccinating you come in contact
with somebody who just COVID you
that you get tested within five
to seven days.
And so Senator portals point
about.
He's not here but his point
about Education period right
got a negative test doesn't
really mean anything because it
takes time for to show up in
your system to where you're
truly infectious to other people
Earlier than that may not be a
true yes a lot longer than that
may also not be a true test of
when you were infectious Saral
doesn't specify that it just
says you have to get tested I
close on a my own editorial
comment about science and and
and distrust in science I think
it's personally one of the
saddest things I've seen come
civilization put us on the moon
helped us defeat all kinds of
bad things.
What we have now lost in this
country alone almost eight
hundred thousand people to a
estimated a new study thirty
million people worldwide.
And the fact that we have.
That we have perpetuated
somebody mess about COVID even
being real let alone whether you
Who weren't espousing science
it's keeps coming even though my
colleague and I may not agree
it's good that he's talking
about science he's talking about
data
pandemic it's not over.
So.
I I it's good to see I think
evolution even in this chamber
wearing masks dealing with
Thank you Mr president because.
Any further debate centers.
I
see no further debate.
the debate for those who engaged
in and I want to thank Senator
smitteez for not engaging in the
debate as he said at the
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate actually pause
here real quick and just check
with the president whether Wirth
we're still on a roll call for
everything.
substitute for Senate resolution
number one do not pass and ask
for roll call vote centers where
voting to your seats please.
now senator Byrd senator Byrd
now Senator Campos Senator
Campos yes senator Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senator to
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs no Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator
proprio.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator sure no Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
By a vote of twenty eight in the
affirmative twelve in the
negative Senate rules committee
This is continues to be an
important issue that we all
continue to struggle with and
encourage each member to
practice as many best practices
and to stay safe as much as
Thank you Mr present ask masks
and the Senate the record show
that all action for placing
House Bill one as amended with
emergency calls on final passage
hundred fourteen thousand one
hundred dollars from provided
cash balances for the special
session three hundred twenty two
thousand for the house three
appropriates three hundred fifty
thousand for the house and three
hundred fifty thousand for the
Senate for us staff.
And with that Mr president will
See no debate cinnamon us to
close on the bill thank you Mr
president I move that that house
bill one at as amended with
except for those voting negative
by roll call the roll call where
we are on a roll call vote still
everyone to your seats please.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris Senator Moores
yes senator one your.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator by the.
Senator Stewart is a yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle passes Senator
Senator Sanchez no senator
smitteez.
Senator Schmidt is now senators
so the Lopez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
I'd Mr president Saddam
restricted are like to change my
vote yes.
You Senator Burt.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Thirty six for.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative for the negative
house bill one as amended with
emergency clause has passed the
Senate senator Munoz thank you
Mr president thank you members
of body those that voted yes
the brand that you want to
explain your vote a yes was
present the reason I voted no is
because there is confusion as I
was looking at the bill itself
is running through bills so that
we know what's happened it it
was in the FIR that I did
finally find it but I've second
and
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business senator
Wirth thank you Mr president so
that's it for today just to give
which will give the Senate rules
committee time in the morning to
to work and then I've asked that
The other committees not meet in
introduced tomorrow and so
committees will not meet
tomorrow afternoon to allow
members to work on those maps
about the floor will be in at
one o'clock.
tomorrow morning at nine AM to
review Senate bill number one
the congressional map
rules committee than any
legislators RT former
legislators would like to
comment and then after that
we'll go to those members of the
general public in the room and
Senate Judiciary Committee which
we discussed meeting tomorrow
afternoon will not me too often
then but we may in an unusual
time meet the following morning
so it's still early heads up Mr
president thank you.
Thanks Anderson on this any
further announcements Senators
centerman us thank you Mr
president we're looking strong
that house bill two incentive
and get a good handle on house
bill two is it as it comes over
so Senate finance members will
text you are will posted online
we'll let you know but if the
Say no further announcements
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president the unanimous consent
of Senate stand recessed into
one o'clock tomorrow afternoon
