Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Hermio.
Senator my nose Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator sure.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Well Senators please report to
the chamber we're lacking a
quorum.
Senator so the chamber we're
still lacking a quorum.
You now have a quorum Mister
Special director and author mind
body health sciences LLC
anticipate.
Please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to me that
today by Senator Hickey.
Doctor but if you can please on
mute.
On your phone.
Okay now all right very good I'm
so delighted to be here.
Good morning everyone.
moment into the sanctuary of our
hearts.
Now let's pray.
Thank you for this new day.
As the long pandemic winter
germinate in the hearts of all
people in this great state of
New Mexico and in these United
States of America.
wisdom and love inform your
actions.
Many grapes bonus be a bomb for
the inevitable obstacles and
frustrations.
and your loved ones with the
filament that comes from your
dedicated servers.
And so it is.
and to the Republic for which it
stands one nation under god
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
data in those systems Senators
them automatic yell at a public
get a percent up on and not see
of New Mexico and the sea is
simple a perfect friendship man
United coach.
Once again senators would like
to welcome you back.
miscellaneous in that order
business Senator Wirth I thank
you Mr president
So I will.
Yield to Senator Lopez when
she's ready but any other
Senator rand that order business
announcements miscellaneous all
you'll to Senator Lopez followed
by Senator Kernan Senator Lopez
a good morning Mr president and
just a short unanimous consent
to ask for allowance of camber's
do wish she would just take
minutes and look at what I'm
holding in my hand and
especially for our new members
because we've talked a lot to
sure need to make sure we've got
all and gas the Permian
strategic partnership is a group
of about twenty energy leaders
in the Permian basin in for
care housing safe roads down in
our area they've been great
contributors and partners and
they have put together this
booklet I know I I know that
learn about each other this is
an opportunity for you to really
learn about oil and gas in New
Mexico and Texas by the way so
please take a minute don't just
throw the trash look at it
industry are matched by a high
paying jobs in renewable energy
wind farms in our part of the
state we have or and gas in the
Permian we have wind we have
to look at this thank you thank
you for announced.
Senator we do have further
announcements Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr president today
from women's history month I
want to commemorate the
honorable Mary Kuhn Walters the
for awhile and the Veterans
Affairs office in Michigan
shortly there after she decided
to attend law school in New
Mexico and she was the only
female graduate of the
university of New Mexico School
while also raising a family for
judicial work for the state
included becoming the first
president of the New Mexico
women's political caucus the
first female district judge in
New Mexico a member of the New
honorable Pamela Beaminster who
is the first what first what
female Chief Justice of the New
Mexico Supreme Court and judge
Martha Vazquez who is the first
Mr president Senator Duhigg.
Further announces Senators.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I'd like
filling up the DS we're so proud
of them it's a long road to be
nationally board certified it's
really like getting your PhD.
They're not with us this year
deaf for their first national
board certified teacher we rank
eleventh nationally in the
percentage of these teachers in
our workforce it's now it's six
certified this year so we have
one thousand three hundred
twenty two teachers that have
gained that status since
nineteen ninety five many of
them teach in title one schools
Board certified and I just want
to make a big shout out to those
new teachers and renewed and
hope the next year we can have
them back thank you Mr president
thank you for that recognition
Michelinie.
Senator Pirtle and famous for
that was just so nobody said in
my see before we get started I
do apologize about that
unanimous consent to make an
announcement see no objection
And you know a lot of the the
new members.
What legislators at the time to
deal with those phone calls that
you know crying not knowing what
they were going to do how they
were gonna take care of their
employees.
What the future was gonna look
like and you know if you could
go back in time and someone with
year from now we'll still have
restaurants that are fifty
percent closed that bowling
alleys are still one hundred
percent closed trampoline parks
hundred percent close movie
look at our district and and
decide.
What kind of this service that
we're giving our our people
within our district and are we
fighting hard enough for those
calendar for I don't know.
Probably back whatever those
dashes on my.
Checklist over there were about
halfway across.
And I think we're doing a real
long hard look at that thank you
Mr president.
Any further announcements
Senators.
Thank you Mr president so just
to give everyone a sense of what
we have today there are six
confirmations that will do at
gets a chance to look at those
and what we're gonna do we we
will do two sessions today.
this morning on third reading
we're going to start.
Hickey center TV Pino at center
for the.
And then see where we go after
that.
so with that Mr president
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in gross copies of
Senate bill two twenty two and
Senate bill three forty one have
from the house has been
received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in engrossed copies of
Senate bill twenty.
session in return same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
the journal show the message
from the house has been
received.
four and Senate bill two eighty
one and return same here with
respectfully submitted Senator
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four as amended by the
Senate and further amended by
the house and Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
house the gentle reflect that
the message from the house has
been received.
Mr president your finance
committee to home has been
referred house bill six as
amended has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
Senator have a motion to that
the committee part.
I see no objections the
committee report has been
adopted.
And Mister president you're
Judiciary Committee to whom has
of the Senate respectfully
submitted senator Pete Campos
senator Kerry Hamblen and
senator cliff R. Pirtle co
chairman.
Senator Hamblen Mr president I
move the adoption of the
and I'd like to announce to the
members of the body of the
officers of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
bill one forty as amended.
of legislation first up is
Senator souls item number
fifteen house Education
Committee subsea for House Bill
participating be ism to have
your microphones on mute and
when you speak to have your
cameras and microphones turned
on Senator souls Mr president I
On final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
see no objections Senator souls
would not be accurate this next
year transportation budget is
typically done based on the
prior year ridership we had very
different ridership this last
it hold harmless districts and
puts the.
The transportation budget based
on twenty twenty rather than on
the this most recent years so
that that we're holding
districts harmless for this one
here.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
present with sponsor field
center souls to yield Mister
president yes.
So it was president
Intersil's Mr president center
brand I don't know.
Senator Brandt.
contracts were paid in full and
then they didn't have a place to
pay.
how do we know if they use the
money correctly this year.
that were unexpended went just
reverted back in or not still
sitting in the district
somewhere and this is looking
forward to this next year that
the money for transportation is
Senator this presents enter
Brandt the already the schools
will be fully opens Billy
getting April fifth.
Senator Mr president and and
Senator Brandt is nobody ever
knows for sure that's based on
what the counts are all of the
prior year and so this is not
if we have come in and next year
we have twenty percent less
students in our schools.
Intersil's.
Mr president and and Senator
caring so much about the.
that issue and you and I have
tried to work on that issue for
several years.
but my concern is and I'm
probably gonna support the bill.
that have decided to go
completely different direction
with educating their children
due to
You know the governor's orders
of shutting down schools which
is really what this comes from.
to make any adjustments or we
just come back next year and we
look at this and see if this was
the right thing to do or not
Thank you Mr president the
Senator appreciate that
The.
I yield for anyone else who
Etcetera so do you Mr president
yes.
This presents center I
appreciate this
currently on the in the school
board and we've got a small
district and I understand that
Miss president center and I know
you're in larger district in Los
crucis do you know what kind of
savings.
Your district can transportation
correct Mr presence yes.
I don't know specifically for
the Los crucis district I'm not
part of that administration.
get those numbers for our
district more was not able to
just hadn't had pre prep time
for this bill but
Mr president center I just my
presents a center sells Mr
president and Center day goes
then you see if I can find I
think there was some information
here that the transportation
budget is going to go down this
reason for the question actually
our fuel bills going up with all
we're doing in the state
I'm just wondering if we need to
reconsider that in an increase
cost a whole we maybe people
have upcoming so with that all
yield I just wanted to bring
that to you your thought process
to see if we could be
Say no further debate Senator
souls to close on the bill thank
you Mr president I move that
house Education Committee
substitute for House Bill three
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator so run this yes Senator
savant is yes Senator Diamond.
ma'am Senator Gallegos yes
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator had a meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator manos senator Munoz yes
senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
senator do should be no.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Smith yes.
Thirty six.
Center souls thank you Mr
president and thank you members
of the Senate and the schools
and districts are going to be up
and running with the
transportation buses going
Thank you Mr president fellow
senators I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that all action for placing
House Bill to sixty nine as
Seeing no objection Senator
Hickey if you're go ahead
explain what the bill does.
Yes this is a very simple bill
the health information exchange
now called synchronous and the
and nine electronic Mexico
medical records act be made so
that we are consistent with the
health insurance portability and
to clinical information on
patients that they're seeing at
that time and that is the
essence of the act Mr chairman I
stand for questions thank you
to close on the bill.
Mr president I move that the
Senate
Do now pass and ask unanimous
misc unanimous consent that the
Senate
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg.
Senator yes Senator Gallegos
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Hickey Senator Hickey just
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivy
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal Senator
senator Morris.
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman as senator
Wirth.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Griggs.
You have already voted.
So it's thirty six.
Who.
house bill two sixty nine as
amended has passed the Senate
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr president and
fellow members of the Senate for
passing this actually very
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show all action
for placing house bill one
eighty nine on final passage is
been taken and it is now subject
we passed the law that created a
program whereby the law students
at the university of New Mexico
School of Law.
Could be eligible for a.
as an acequia Land Grant or
Cologna.
And they had to commit to
working for them for two years
in that bill we put a maximum
creates a way for that salary to
be adjusted would make sure that
the the governance commission
that governs this program would
not be able to go above the
positions demands thank you Mr
president.
Senator debating house bill one
eighty nine anyone wishing to
debate.
Do now pass and as for roll call
vote.
Senator Stewart voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
the live here.
Senator serve on this yes
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Senator need to be now.
Senator Wirth isn't passing from
Senator Pirtle passes.
Senator probe.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator community as senators of
the Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator shared now Senator
Shendo.
Senator Steinborn as Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
The needs.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative a in the negative
Committee substitute for House
Bill to thirty five.
Center for the
thank you very much Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
or substitution seeing no
objection.
Etcetera but it explained the
bill I thank you very much Mr
president House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
to be had to be done and
increases the duties of the
superintendent of insurance
during certain states of
emergency only and links them up
with with those with an
emergency that may be happening
followed by Senator gave us
Senator Kernan thank you very
much Mr president and just a
quick question of the sponsor
will yield center by the wheels
that allow the superintendent to
do center for them Mr president
what that does is it simply just
allows the superintendent to
ensure that citizens have access
to insurance and healthcare and
Thank you Mr president I think
our superintendent has done an
outstanding job during this time
and and certainly the areas that
he's touched on and and make
sure of the certainly that has
been good for for the citizens
statute now which is of concern
to many of us with regard to the
fact that the legislature's
basically not involved in the
we we didn't realize at that
point it's something like this
could go on for such a long
period of time I voted for the
bill but it's probably one of
the worst decisions I've ever
always be in that position and
one thing we've learned from
this past year is that the
legislators in this state should
have the ability to participate
in major decision making and
Premiums and you talk about what
insurance companies can or
cannot or should pay for these
are things that we all need to
that we did in two thousand
three and certainly recognizing
what a great superintendent we
have now you just don't know
twenty years from now ten years
to take a long look at and so
with that are that's all I have
thank you Senator Kernan before
you'll to Senator Gallegos
Senator but they would like to
turn the funds doing a
phenomenal job during such a
large piece legislation thank
you unanimous consent to our.
Seeing no objection.
Thomas present center I did not
hear this in my committee but I
was just wondering curious part
of my adult my discussion is
this bill do to change what
would just constitute.
Center for them I thank you Mr
president it it's simply just
that allows the superintendent
insurance to have is to ensure
that all citizens have access to
insurance and health care and
know we we had some bad
shortages but those are most
often staffing
but I'm just trying to envision
if we were to passes what would
place not knowing health the the
severity or the length or what
have you and then to simply
links it completely up with just
the time of the emergency.
Our fear was the over running of
the hospitals in in our area not
every room was filled those that
during the pandemic I just don't
understand why we would need
this now going forward because I
think they did a
an extraordinary job for what we
Thank you Mr present with the
bill sponsor you'll please
etcetera but it E. health I
guess Mr present I will thank
you very much center thing Mr
expires there still held.
To certain conditions and I was
wondering why that languages in
there if if they have kind of a
low.
This insurance says yeah we're
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you Mr president just in
case you were to get an out of
all folks have insurance and
health care that they need.
Thank you Mr president in center
yeah that's exactly I was
getting at is is perhaps an out
of state insurer.
certificate has expired you're
gonna remain subject to the
provisions of the insurance
code.
So it could you give an example
of.
What what are the what's the
problem that we're fixing your
their will or what what what
exactly are we are we trying to
do by by forcing them to remain
subject even though they don't
have an active certificate.
that is it basically states that
if your an insurance company
doing business in New Mexico
detected here to New Mexico
insurance code.
so on the paper bill it's it's
page seven I mean this has
nothing to do with with a an
emergency this is at all times.
state insurer is wanted to part
ways first for some reason and
they on purpose allow their
certificate to expire.
our insurance code.
No I like the part it says but
they're not authorized to
transact insurance business that
makes perfect sense if your
certificate has expired why are
could give an example perhaps
but
from an insurance company's
perspective from insurers
perspective.
It would seem to me that if they
allow their certificate to
Center for them thank you Mr
president I'm just gonna also
rely on my neighbor here to the
to the I think the north but
yeah I mean it would really
wouldn't matter at that point Mr
if they allow the certificate to
expiring that whole sentence
should be struck I like the
second sentence in this
paragraph you know if the
like a grace period you know
like Hey.
Your certificate expired you
have a little gap there but
within three months you he
reinstated it so that nothing
changes we're we're gonna help
the the people that are being
How I would take that but I just
the the languages concern to me
it's is it suspect to me that
someone doesn't have a
certificate if the insurer
inadvertently allowed their
gonna re apply you know give us
a three month grace period then
yes I feel like they should
remain subject to the provisions
of the insurance code.
they would still remain subject
so I I think some clarification
language should be put in there
I'll move on to the next section
be subject to are states
insurance code even if you're
not doing business here.
This presents center I'll move
on to all all kind of go back to
The O. S. I can take all actions
necessary to mainframe to
maintain affordable access.
So Mister presents under.
that's a fair paraphrase.
Senator thank you Mr president
Senator well that would be
within the bounds of what the
policy already read as in rural
for an insurance company because
of that I just wouldn't happen.
Thank you Mr president center in
a yeah I I I agree with you I
think be out of character
past decades with with this
office arguing what is statutory
allowed in a and and what's not
and so my my concern is same
with center currency this pretty
To maintain whatever you feel is
affordable so if they're doing a
good job that that's good and I
think that's that's really the
debate with the emergency powers
I think one of the biggest
debate Senator is.
And of anybody even my friends
that I lied even people that I
believe to have integrity and
good character.
And immediately.
elected to be of governor or
Senator or who or whatever.
I would immediately encouraging
when we do actually make me my
And ask you questions how are
you doing have you.
Have you done anything that you
think goes against you know your
exact concern is we could
statutorily allow someone to do
something that's out of
character for them.
But in reality we don't know
character.
When we realize finally that
gosh we have.
Hey I can take all actions
necessary.
And so I I think that's more of
a philosophical.
objection to this bill our
concern with this bill senator
like that it's it's concerning
to me.
I do appreciate Mr president
some of the.
some of the cleanup language
here but
To another government entity.
And I've seen this in the
legislature we're and I don't
know who came with this bill I'm
assuming to us I.
all the ones I've seen from in
just all of I'm not going to
single out any other offices but
they come in and you read the
we're gonna let one person make
that decision or just a small
group of two or three people
make that decision that's
concerning me it's an overall
pattern I've seen in New Mexico
dispersed power dispersed power
back to people back to the
ordinary citizens in New Mexico
impact to local counties
again center if if someone does
something quote on quote out of
character if we are statutorily
allowing that now it's a concern
that we would enable someone to
but a few sections just seem
concerning to me thank you for
the debate appreciated thank you
Mr president Senator Cervantes
Senator to subpoena.
somebody who can make sure that
the insurance companies don't
take advantage of the citizens
buying insurance that's what
this is about it it it it.
commissioner with some authority
to be able to rein them in so
all of the all of these changes
I think are are simply ways of
making clear that we do want to
so I I think these are solid
changes the thing about the
three month the.
Period during which the
insurance commissioner retain
some authority over the
Any further debate with Senator
Griggs.
Thank you Mr president with the
You made the the statement that
this bill would provide for
access to insurance and health
care of the issue Mr president
delivery of health care and
healthcare insurance would
continue even an emergency for
the period of the emergency.
and I would urge I asked the
question and I was assured that
Mr president Senator can you
have can you go to the house
committee substitute ensure me
what I was saying earlier when I
introduce the peace legislation
was that the health care
insurance would be a guaranteed
if you will during the period of
the emergency and that this the
superintendent turns would have
in committees and you get
different things coming down I
didn't see the committee show up
stated that it would remove so
Mister president senator future
me that it was I will take your
word for and thank you Mr
president and and it was
originally on page three of the
original bill the substitute
Thank you Mr president thank
center Senator Griggs any
further debate Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president so.
Senate bill seventy four was
introduced to the floor here
which which again just simply
would give the legislator state
in the health orders and the way
put it back into people's hands
that's what it would propose to
do.
This actually goes the opposite
direction this goes a direction.
a minor it is brought into this
powerful.
Now we've heard a couple people
speak on this Mr president and
you know I just keep going back
necessary to ensure access to
insurance that's everything.
There's no limit on that.
And then it lists a laundry list
of things we can do grace period
until now so let's just look at
this in the frame.
In the framework of the health
orders that we just came
through.
You can suspend insurance
premiums.
You can ask the insurance
company to refund premiums.
So they have to give it back.
Whatever they've taken a
premiums.
Waving with deductible so if
you're you've had the benefit
for a long time of of of really
low health insurance payment.
Because you've chosen a high
deductible which is a choice we
but now this allows the OSI to
come in and say you don't have
to worry about that anymore
we're take the deductibles way.
Temporary postponement
even for non payment so you can
not pay Mr president and under
this they could come in and.
Postpone your cancellation or
non renewal.
Some going through this.
Basically.
The OSI can step in in regards
themselves have made with each
other.
No I understand that.
Things.
During the pandemic have been
hard.
once again seating more power.
Granting it to a bureaucrat.
To exercise over part over
private industry.
Now we want to go into
particular agencies we already
have the executive exercising
the health order now we want to
go into the agencies and under
it on any department that is is
under the executive we can make
Mr present this argument about
transportation.
just this is a really slippery
slope when we go down this
route.
Because we're using the health
order now almost spider webbing
to this bill because of that
because we have to at some point
draw a line in the sand where.
This body maintains its power
and stops giving its authority
that's what we're doing here
we're giving our job we once
again Mr president.
Our job is to decide for the
people to protect the people to
maintain the power in the hands
of the people.
of this would be that we're
sitting at home getting a
paycheck.
with with no power for the
people to exercise in this
chamber because we've given it
look at but what we're given way
and who were given it to thank
you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Baca we do
have a floor amendment.
The reader to read.
Senator Brandt to moving explain
imminent is present I move
Senate foreman number one
dissident Judiciary House
of the body this ammendment of
on page three line fifteen.
Adds in a limitation on the
authority.
So it says provided that the
from the governor's original
invocation of the state of
emergency so the situation we're
in today.
it would have started and go a
I was wonder if the sponsor
would ask is expert witness if
this is a friendly.
Senator before we we go to that
that we are debate as senator
Senator Brandt we do see this
amendment is on friendly it's
it's strikes one of the key
provisions of the substitute
first of all second of the the
that associate to links the
Eighty days here you know we
we've just literally saw a
period where this emergency was
not one hundred eighty days it
was twice that and so this
Says we're debating.
Sentiment for member number one
anyone else wishing to debate.
Seen Senator I guess.
Mr center I was just trying to
find out and and I appreciate
your bill trying to give a
little limitation to the dates.
Of the
Timeline would be restricted to
us or Mr presence center do you
think that in that amount of
time we would have a path
forward during the two
departments.
we can we can see that that
we've had opportunities as a
legislature.
to deal with this emergency of
superintendent of insurance to
make these kind of of actions
but we didn't even bring that up
to this chamber.
my concern is and and honestly I
In any way that that the cease
that within the guidelines of
this legislature which is pretty
broad.
and this just limits it to six
so it just I think that this is
pretty open I think it's pretty
broad and I think the hundred
eighty days gives us plenty of
time to figure out what we need
He said I see in this is this
extends further than what I
think the legislature has the
authority to come into the
conversation is that correct Mr
presentation.
for in the determination of the
a path forward in the in the
pandemic and I would see that
this would at least give them a
Sandoval we were invited to come
and participate in discussion
because I I did not recall ever
being invited in discussion is
that correct Mr presentation
and we still haven't been
invited to the table to discuss
what's happening currently.
we've had two special sessions
were a regular session now we
have a bill that passed on to
committees that's come to the
and so let's be really honest
here I think the majority of us
agree.
That what is in the law
But they didn't think about
saying this is thirty days and
it can't be extended.
I mean I can't go back and re
mines but I'm guessing that was
their intention.
situation if he needs longer or
if it's thank they need longer
to extend that they can come
back to the legislature.
in and say yes or say no we
think that that's not necessary.
and I I think this is of really
good compromise
legislature have a voice in the
process and and we're not
included in that so I will stand
for your amendment I think that
legislature and I see this is a
trying to govern some of that
back so that we can actually be
part of the discussion with that
all yield Mister president thank
you.
thank you very much senator
So I I've I've heard that this
is an from them I'm just want to
ask a couple questions if we get
to the point of maybe a friendly
compromise and see what your
you I heard that you had a
concern about the hundred eighty
day being kind of hard wired
into the amendment would be to
Kept it as such authority shall
extend through the cleared
period and for sixty days
thereafter.
Okay and we just scratched the
say well I I think it's still
necessary.
and that could last well beyond
even the governor's declared
emergency but.
Could could could we find middle
ground here in just strike the
determines that it's still
necessary to we just cut it out
and and keep it at the sixty
days after the.
The governor's declared
emergency period with that work
for you Senator.
very interesting but what I will
say is that we don't even know
exactly what this was and we
have a real life example we can
rely on here and we didn't
really know exactly what this
was really an for for a good
reason I I just I can't can't
support that either okay thank
you Mr president center just one
more question on this as it
pertains the amendment it is I
just wanna make sure I
understand your intent here and
I mean.
For the rest of his or her term.
They just say it's still
necessary to respond to this
emergency then the emergency
could have been you know the
years prior and now we're gonna
allow the superintendent to
still say that well we're you
know it's been two years we're
not under state emergency but I
still think it's necessary to
Center for the thank you Mr
president thank you senator and
Dr Schmidt is no Mr president on
I think that's also very
interesting I respect that that
analysis what I will say that's
the whole reason we create the
and and and programs etcetera so
I I fully you know expect that
superintendent whoever it may be
to to act in the best interest
of of the state and the
this gentle at the gentleman
would like to restate its
question thank you and yes sorry
I mumbled a bit Mr president
center I guess what I'm asking
is
The way that I read the bill as
Under statute and that that is a
possibility and I just want to
know if that's your your intent
or if you'd be open to putting
Thank you Mr president you know
they get and the reason that the
substitute of the original bill
on the substitute morphed into
what it did was just to ensure
that the superintendent of
this amendment I hope there's
some way to
address the the issue there the
concerns brought by Senator
Brandt that you know I just when
we give increase authority I
believe it's a good idea
maybe I should just one more
question and sorry to so that
was the last was my last one but
can you tell me about the
hearing what what kind of a
hearing.
Thank you Mr president I'm
conferring with my experts.
Thank you center thing Mr.
Thank you Mr president.
whole outline of what these
hearings consist of goes all the
way over to
really the bottom of page six so
we can talk about those Mr
president if you'd like.
perhaps a middle ground would be
to put some specifications on
what kind of a hearing that
would be maybe not maybe not
put a little more specificity on
the type of hearing that will
occur
make it a little tighter make it
so we we can't just staff the
hearing with people that are
even the potential for for an
indefinite amount of of
increased authority and and
maybe that's what would be a
middle ground so I'm just
throwing that out there for the
body as an idea of on page
accountability of some kind but
I will read that section Senator
and listen to the rest of the
day thank you.
Thanks committee any further
just the body to consider you
know even even with this
ammendment it's a tough pill to
swallow.
But I would support with this
event put on there.
legislature.
We set the laws that gives him
the authority to do or him or
the authority.
To do what they're allowed to do
We're not learning from our past
mistakes.
This body made a mistake in two
thousand three.
Michael Sanchez was correct.
So now what we're gonna do is
we're going to come back and
give all our authority.
To the surgery of Insurance.
eighty days if you need it
longer than that we can come
back together we've done it a
million times.
Where we come in for one or two
We can do that we don't need to
continue to see our forty so
that I move Senate floor
amendment number one to house.
Senator is we're voting on hot
senator member number one to
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty five.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos no Senator from
the lawyer.
Senator Cervantes.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg now Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gallegos
yes Senator Gonzalez no Senator
Gonzales now Senator Griggs
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes senator
Hermio.
Senator Hermio no Senator
Kernan.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator my nose now senator
Neville.
Senator by the amount Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto now Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
maybe is yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
No Senator Sedillo Lopez now
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Steinborn no Senator Steinborn
no Senator Stewart Senator
Stewart now Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman now senator
Wirth.
Senator.
On the line here.
Senator Candelaria yes.
The vote.
I know.
By a vote of seventeen in the
affirmative twenty for the
Anyone wishing to debate on the
bill Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president and.
The.
Well a little bit disappointed.
I will take the authority away
from this chamber.
And the legislative body.
The all of us have agreed on all
of us most of us have agreed.
Was a mistake.
To not see the authority of the
entire legislature not just this
chamber with the other chamber.
Which is what we're doing with
this section of this bill.
Si no further debate senator
voted to close on the bill.
Thank you very much Mr president
thank you for the spirited and
inform the debate I really
appreciate that again the office
of the superintendent of
insurance was created.
state of emergency for the
state's only and I think you
know that that was very good
information so with that Mr
president I do move that House
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
Senator to run this.
Yes Senator Cervantes yes
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan now Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator sure no Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth this Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Ingle.
Mr president.
Senate office Mr president
By a vote of twenty one of the
affirmative fifteen the negative
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
first piece legislation going on
to the governor's desk.
House Bill three oh three so
ideal Senator Ingle Pridham
thirty six.
Senator is we're going to house
bill three oh three Senator
Ingle thank you Mr president
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
See no objections Senegal
explained about.
Present this is a bill that I
substantial value from
manufacturer wholesaler to
entice a real or retailer to
purchase the product the tallest
building which.
CNN center and go to close.
Thank you Mr president was
president of that house bill
three oh three do now pass and
ask for a roll call the Senate
Senator Barbara yes Senator
brand.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
is yes Senator Diamond Senator
Diamond yes Senator Duhigg
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator that goes yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator on your Spidey senses
work on our.
Senator Ortiz B. now Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator
Stewart a.
Senator for the A. S. Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator Sweetser yes Senators
committees.
Senator Schmidt is now senators
Senator souls.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator soprano yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Representative cooks picture I
just was curious if I shave my
head with outlook that young.
No.
Yes not.
Senator right.
and he could hear what Senator
Diamond.
Seeing no objection Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
unanimous consent to go to that
number ten senators to fan X. so
I would yield to Senate
concurrence counter number six
which is Senate finance
committee sub two percent bill
that the Senate concur with with
help with the house on
amendments for have Senate bill
three seventy seven.
Thank you senator feel explain
and the amendments process we
did ours earlier Senate over to
the house the house did there's
and we added a few things we
have the U. I. fund unemployment
of our house members adds we
headed broadband appropriation
here too and tribal education
and
That's pretty close will stand
for questions Mister president.
for the sponsor if you deal.
Yes Senator the.
The money we added into the
Mr president center in our
budget we accounted for the
money in in house bill two this
is the language to make the
transfer into the fund the six
hundred million we have not
money eventually Mr president
Senator currently we the state
you live fund that we borrow
from the federal government as
about two hundred ninety million
federal government sends their
six hundred million the one
point six billion that we're
getting it six hundred million
of that will go into the U. I.
fund.
the money we the two hundred
ninety million three hundred
million that we put in we'll go
to rate the federal government
the deficit that we owe them
And and so when we did that
we're paying back the federal
government by law we have to and
then when the federal money
comes in we're gonna replenish
the U. I. fund with federal
considered to be full a full
unemployment insurance fund I
thought it was four hundred
million but it's more obviously
Mr president and hovers between
four hundred and six hundred
million we did it a couple years
million dollar range and I think
there's a federal statute that
we have to keep so much in there
and at a certain time so this is
Mister president senator this is
just a little extra cushion in
recurrence of the unemployment
problem.
This presents center yes the the
six hundred million coming for
the feds will replenish the fund
and we have to pay back what we
borrow from the federal
government thank you that's very
medically yeah this is you did
any of the Senate could change
any of our allocations get
changed this presents center we
did not nobody changed anybody's
allocations there was a fix I
think that we had to make and I
I I think it was made over
there.
about if the house and removed
any the Senate language in there
I just like to point out to
center Muno subs the legislative
administration and send us any
money it comes from the
taxpayers in fact comes from our
from our taxpayers for our
children.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I I just
have a question of clarification
from from the from the sponsor.
Did I understand you to say that
we can use the federal money
that's coming in to back fill
our our budget is that I I
apologize I thought that's what
the federal language you can
take the federal money in place
then you you I fund but you
cannot use that money that
should they're giving you
currently now to pay back your
And that does not to our
transaction it is Mr president
how is that not back filling
back filling I I'm I just I'm
not understanding that.
have to take general fund money
and pay that back to the federal
government.
Now that the federal government
sent just a one point six
billion we're saying six hundred
million of that will go into the
Mr presence enter no the we
graduated in in house bill two
and you see the language in this
deficit and under federal law on
the deficit we have to pay that
back out of our general fund
balance.
So what we're doing here is
paying that back and now the new
we won't all the federal
government any money.
So Mr president's.
this back felt back field issue.
Present center the benefits of
what happened during the COVID
when that happened the U. I.
fund went into the negative and
we borrowed money from the
federal government.
To hold you I fund so we can
make those payments.
coming we are taking six hundred
million of that putting in the
U. I. Fund in section eighteen
that is where we are paying the
subsection of be.
If a determination by both the
secretary of finance and the
administration and the secretary
of workforce solutions is made
to the state is available to
forgive or to repay any
outstanding federal unemployment
loans pursuant to forty two USC
section thirteen twenty one
federal unemployment loans in
fiscal year twenty twenty two.
I'm understanding that read that
we could use federal funds to
repair it am I wrong.
repay a federal loan you have to
use general funds to repay that
loan.
That's why the languages there
because we owe them two hundred
So is is the answer we don't
know whether whether the federal
funds can be used to backfill is
In order to authorize these
funds so with the assumption is
that there may or may not be
federal funds available.
pay it back and we have the
money to pay back its budgeted
to pay it back to the federal
government and we take in under
the new law the six hundred
million that is coming.
government is going to authorize
with regard to this fund so I
appreciate that explanation
that's very helpful thank you.
Any further debate on the
concurrence.
and go to senator Morris COVID
you know he is correct that's
why by the end includes a
signature on the stimulus checks
like the previous president did
so they even know they're coming
from the federal government and
House amendments to Senate bill
three seventy seven.
Senator wanted a place seven
unanimous consent.
And I ask for a nanosecond
See no objections the Senate has
occurred to the house amendment
sentiment us thank you Mr
president members money.
Senator Wirth.
Senator sells.
Thank you Mr president I move
that the.
what is it the trying to read
Center if you can explain to me
the reason for your motion.
Thank you Mr president there are
two or three amendments that
were put on in house commerce
the interest rate cap from
thirty six percent to ninety
nine percent for what would
amount to the majority of the
small loans that are made in New
not concur to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill six the six as amended all
go to Senator Kernan first and
Senator Pirtle Senator Kernan
thank you Mr president and at
interesting that a group of
women legislators in the house
came up with this I guess is
change and it was really
fascinating to hear their
should concur with the changes
made in the house.
Senator.
you know what was outlined in in
this amendments in the house is
exactly some of the points that
loans that you need to have a
higher APR and so I think this
finds that middle ground Mr
president members of the body
that alleviates a lot of the
concerns that I had while
I guess is what was stated
earlier or when we debated the
first time but I think this is
the compromise that really
understanding of that fact that
these loans are necessary for
for some people in the state and
they really do help them.
And so you know with the
where it is Mr president so I
would hope that the body would
concur with these sentiments
think centre pirtle centre gave
us Mr president I also stand
with the concurrence of the.
People Miner the state that did
were able I
was not as dedicated as sent
current last night to hear the
house debate on it I know people
in my area support the changes
I see no further debate Senator
souls thank you Mr president I
move that concurrence calendar
item number nine Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
which way to vote because I'm
confused.
Senator.
If we vote yes does that mean
that we do not concur.
Furthermore as about as good as
the same question so my
understanding is if we vote it's
a double negative so we both
know we work and senator Seoul's
SO Senator SO that will explain
how that will goes to make sure
as we have other Caruthers
concurrence discussed that a
come up that all members will be
clear Senator I saw the thank
you very much I miss president
As to whether we should concur
or not.
But this but the question is
always stated in the positive.
Should we concur.
recommendation from the Sanchez.
Think centre this auto Senator
Brandt.
the rest of the session so with
that.
There's been a motion to to be
made as far as the concurrence
and the sponsor requested that
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Duhigg now Senator
Gallegos yes ma'am Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gonzalez no
Senator Gonzales no Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ivey Soto Senator Ivey
Soto no Senator how to meal.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
So Senator Pinto no Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator pope no Senator
Sedillo Lopez no Senator Sedillo
Lopez now Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stewart noted Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman no senator Wirth
Senator Wirth now Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Fifteen.
By a vote of fifteen in the
and I'll have the president pro
tem first of all before we have
a vote to be explained to
appoint a conference committee
whole go together with the house
to heck and senator Gregg
Schmedes.
Thank you senator so Senator
Kernan to explain about thank
you Mr president this I was just
going to suggest that you might
like to to to be part of that
that really is going to be
interesting thank you very much
thanks Senator Kernan for the
public's notification her
watching via web stream that
Senator Ivy Soto sentiment us
and thank you Mr president that
will be a good conference
committee to watch we may want
to stop the Florida justice for
the entertainment factor but but
able to get these loans anywhere
else thank you Mr president
Senator so the yes they were Mr
president just a note to the
body on procedure.
So it's not definite that will
go to conference committee
to say yeah we didn't feel as
strongly about those amendments
and then they fall away and the
bill is done if they do not
recede that's when they appoint
their conferees and goes to
up being X. kicked off the
Senate or house for thank you
for that for the question
Senator and about question
because we are in in a COVID
environment we want to keep the
debate same here in the Senate
does you see whenever we've had
built that house members have
been part of it's only when that
house members bill was on the
floor that there are in the
This only if there are any bills
on the floor thank you thank you
senator Morris.
Senator Wirth.
Further we have a house member
what we've been doing is
basically allowing one house
member on the decide in one
house member on the our side so
there could be two members that
are here but we do reach a point
and where.
been we did invoke that one on
each side rule earlier which
cause a little bit of heartburn
on the other side but I do think
because of the COVID situation
and as we kind of going to the
last.
Forty six forty four hours.
okay with that provided it's one
member at a time so in other
words just just the thing about
it is having a member on the
floor if it's one on each side
and and otherwise that just up
off the floor and visit with
last forty four hours there
might end up being one or two so
long as we're respectful about
it and and now that we all
understand that's how we're
gonna do it moving forward I I I
around it we're not going to
congregate in ten or more and so
I think we'll we'll do a great
job with that thank you center
with Representative Catherine
about brown on one issue just
wondering if it's proverbial or
per person Senator Wirth Mr
president I I can't speak to
related to bill it's fine to
have a member come in and visit
on something I just just as long
as done kind of one of the time
and and you guys have have that
we have that
president Senator since you have
the.
leadership on the other side of
the chamber there is that
something you could negotiate
because we're there for one
purpose and got escorted off by
you're there for a bill that
you're involved with on the
other side I'm hearing that's
kind of that's what they're
doing I think that's similar on
our case really it's is if
members over here lobbying all
their bills and and I think
that's the same thing on the
other side so that's that's
really the intent Senator
Gallegos misprision concern
thank you for that and now it's
and discuss issues that come up
with our bill but with that I
yield thank you Mr president
things that are gonna go Senator
Schmedes Mr with the for loop
yeah Mr president I think it's
one per side and that's what
we've been doing and this
chamber leading in and again I
think for you know for
There can be some of the some
flexibility which is all keep
communicating about this I I
think the idea what we're trying
to not have happened and and
this is this is consistent with
prior sessions is you know
there's there's often a line of
house members that are all over
other reason is it's not just
about sponsorship of the
amendments to like one of us may
have run amendment on a bill and
then going over there that's why
I was over there the other day
Hey do should we try to run
something similar should we try
to address that issue that is
still lingering and so that that
I'm glad to hear you say that
because I think that's going to
have some clarity I would really
appreciate that because I can
attest to the fact that I was
not allowed on the house floor
just a day or two ago and you
president Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president I'm happy to do
that and I do think some of the
frustration was they don't have
the members on the floor the
same way we do and so then they
I'm happy to let the speaker was
good he was standing here when
I heard this discussion as well
so we'll make it work.
Senator and thank you Mr
can go into a room that's much
smaller to have a meeting and
that's actually less safe then
then meeting out here this Madam
member per side this is a a big
chamber so if Senator Ingle
talking to somebody I'm talking
to somebody we don't have to be
disrespectful like like the
health of the senators were
disrespected on the house side
that you know Los Alamos lab
kind of did an analysis right up
front with social distancing and
kind of we're right at the limit
compliance and work work forty
forty four forty five have our.
The countdown clock
to the ends let's just let's all
that we continue to keep our eye
on the goal and to focus on the
legislation that's in front of
us and so I want to thank the
body for that discussion and the
clarity Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president so next on the
eighty four centers to fanning
Senator that thank you Mr
president I move that the Senate
can Kerr and house amendments to
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
body of the amendments and two
house committees cleaned up
typos punctuation and a few
incorrect statements such as
putting in the energy transition
non subscribing customers it
clarified the role of the PRC
and overseeing and regulating
subscriber organizations it
changed subscribers to include
universities it change the
statewide program capacity cap
for the initial three years of
the program to alleviate the
start up pressure on the PRC and
negotiating with the utilities
el Paso Electric excel and PNM
and also help which is the
nonprofit the deals with low
Working group on community solar
then worked in with one of the
utilities in putting out the
amendments so the utilities can
megawatts per year to only two
hundred megawatts over the three
year period so for that I would
stand for questions.
Senate can cover it with the
house amendments to Senate
ticket tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four as amended and ask
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd
senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Diamond Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores so Senator Moores
no Senator mono.
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator
Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
songes Senator songes no
Senators ladies.
Senator committees now Senator
so they're Lopez.
Senator cells yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
is Senator Stewart.
In two days
Senator bounces we can please
mute your microphone.
Senator Woods no.
Senator so they're Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes.
Senator Shendo.
By a vote of twenty five
informative twelve in the
negative the Senate has
confirmed concurred with the
changes to health to Senate tax
president unanimous consent we
go that our business committee
reports on that order of
business committee reports the
reader to read.
Mr president your health and
Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino chairman
Senator anticipate a Mr
president I move the adoption of
the committee report centers as
a motion to that the committee
report.
an ideal Senator manuals Senator
yes thank you Mr presently have
a few built in and Senate
finance I'd like to release
house bill ninety eight which is
Representative Martinez's bill
there but it's a clean bill for
taxation revenue so I'd like to
release that bill.
I see no objections.
manager reporting bill the
bill's been amended it's a
coupon bill for when you go to
the pharmacy now that they can
track the coupons and I like
trees house bill one twenty
nine.
Any questions.
Woods has election bill Senate
bill forty eight I'd like to
release that bill from Senate
finance.
Second give us the number once
again please Senate bill forty
Senator Morris Mr
president so with senator was
revealed Senator Woods detailed.
This press our address them.
That's fine Mr president I have
of legislation do one additional
item in this.
Afternoon morning afternoon
session item number forty seven
which is house Education
Committee substitute for House
Candelaria for item forty seven
Senator Candelaria Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the rules have been suspended
has been taken and that it is
now subject to debate amendment
or to substitution.
I see no objections Senate
unanimous consent of the Senate
that I be permitted an expert
witness on the floor that would
be the honorable until you know
my my asters chairman of the
Representative into the chamber.
Senator Candelaria.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the Senate.
and the structure of the
proposed constitutional
amendment now before the body I
want to take a moment to
recognize the tremendous
To the contributions to that
effort that has been made by
current members of the house
including the sponsor behind me.
But also before I begin Mr
When I came to the Senate Mr
chairman.
Unlike the.
The the the the primrose path
And during the Great Recession
New Mexico as I'll explain later
consistently prot.
Education spending.
increases now and no tax
increases ever made serious cuts
to public education.
It was at that time and senator
Michael Sanchez and others began
ending value of the land grant
permanent fund.
Dedicated to early childhood
education.
For our youngest children at the
beginning stages of their
development.
Despite the significant cuts
that were made to K. twelve
education.
During the Great Recession.
money to invest in early
childhood education.
Such that the fiscal picture
before us today is much
different than the one that
first faced a state when this
We now have an entire cabinet
level agency dedicated to early
childhood education.
The conversation about quality
and about outcomes for our
many ways to ensure that more
funding was available for early
childhood education he was not
thanks for it in fact he was
attacked for it and maybe a
villain.
So Mister president at the end
of this road as we complete our
negotiation in our deliberation
as a legislature on this
And more power to determine how
they wish to invest their
dollars.
Of the five year rolling average
of the land grant permanent fund
by one point two five percent
annually.
All of that additional
distribution.
million dollars.
Of the additional one point two
five percent distribution Mr
president and the did the point
four percent of that forty
percent.
And to extend the school year.
I was present I mentioned
earlier that I would revisit.
The recent history of education
scenario with sixty percent for
early education forty percent
for K. twelve education.
In the year two thousand and
important to know Mister
president that in the budget but
before not encourage all to pull
it out if you could look at on
your screens.
We report.
quote on quote book tour
accounted for general fund
revenue a significant portion of
that was is it is today not real
appropriated two point five five
billion.
Now let's fast forward ten years
later.
Ten years later in two thousand
and eighteen.
discussion debate today about.
Hundred million dollars is no
laughing matter but.
Let's address the context of
what that hundred million
dollars is actually worth in
real time.
In this legislature had simply
kept pace with inflation.
Inflationary rate between two
thousand and eighteen two
thousand and eighteen was
The state money we did the year
before we should have been
spending two point nine six
billion.
What does that mean.
The dollars just don't value the
same over time and we never talk
about.
And during that time Mr
president.
We were in pacing in my view
resources to succeed.
Now I run my own business Mr
president and that is not a
recipe for business success.
this legislative session
appropriates three point three
eight billion dollars.
Now let's compare that number to
the two point two five two point
five five billion of two
thousand and eight.
Meaning that if we had just kept
place with inflation we should
have been spending one point
three point one one billion
dollars at main.
It means that in real dollars
dollar increase in investment
since two thousand and eight in
K. twelve education and every
of this teachers and school
important step forward.
Two hundred seventy million is
important step in the right
direction.
It's also important to note
Mister president.
I believe the governor is to be
commended for her moon shot
because water moonshot did was
president let's be reminded that
at this point there's only been
one to.
The quarter school years for our
it's hard to expect dynamic
change in one.
Twenty was COVID so we are one
or two years in two.
This amendment is no longer the
early childhood amendment.
Only.
This ammendment.
funds of their own money.
Into the children of New Mexico
at every stage of their
development.
that the games we see an early
childhood can be sustained
through kindergarten.
Through the no man's land of
middle school and high school.
But only if we invest.
And only Mr president if we have
the funds available to extend
the school year extends cool
days to address for the learning
the power over this issue leaves
the round house and goes into
the living rooms of every New
Mexican.
Shall they invest.
But it's not kid ourselves is
not easy to raise taxes.
We have a.
Which is already told us in the
legislature you are
unconstitutionally under funding
K. twelve education.
Your unconstitutionally
suspending an unequal system.
they must be invested in and
cared for every step in their
development.
Thanks for to this debate Mr
president.
But more importantly I look
forward to a discussion today
Mister president after nine ten
twelve long years of discussion.
I look forward today for finally
That our children.
The children my family hopes to
have.
Are worse.
joint resolution one I was the
sponsor of the amendment Mister
president so I would be able to
Senator Campos at this time
thank you Senator Campos thank
Concepts were developed.
And we're talked about to bring
about.
A full fledged.
Educational platform.
many of those positions.
Where we've been.
Last a lot of the good areas.
The thoughts have continued to.
Talking about the land grant
permanent fund.
How those resources through
interest.
So many of our essential
governor governmental services
here in New Mexico.
discussions in regard to that.
There's so much more that we're
going to get into today during
this debate.
But about forty years ago.
I was hired.
As a migrant.
And to those of you who have
family or friends.
Anton Chico or know of the
community.
You know that over the years.
By selling laughter.
Post this.
Raising cattle.
Working on numbers.
They haven't been able to do so
because the essentials in their
livelihood.
We're gonna be first and
foremost.
I'm a migrant counselor into
those of you who aren't too sure
what a migrant counselor is.
In those days.
school again because of the
essentials.
And so while they were away
usually in the spring time.
When they would come back.
It was out of necessity.
And so within that in working
with them.
With so many of these young
people.
And my answer to each and
everyone of them.
Was to understand your life.
To be able to provide for your
family.
How to take care of.
Cattle.
How to do all these things.
It took a long time.
two and maybe three generations.
And today this is for
generations later.
And people who I talked.
When you started to talk about.
To have good nutrition.
To ensure that we are going to
have strong social skills.
And so now all these generations
later.
These young people have branched
out.
Their children's children.
I didn't have an office.
And I use my own vehicle.
And as any of you travel through
Delia dialectical at the door.
I could go on with a number of
communities that were there.
And part of my responsibility.
It was visiting with the father
and the mother of the brothers
the sisters the aunts the
uncles.
Yes I wear blue.
Because we subway loss.
To make sure they were making a
living that there is
sustainability.
If they would encourage each
other in again I always go back
to the fact.
the confidence of families.
Helping to reiterate the fact
that education.
Is very important.
And within that these families.
Want to sure what all that meant
for him because they had to put
food on the table.
Is that one's one of these young
persons.
Made it through.
Kindergarten.
Because of their aspiration
because of who they wanted to
become.
They opened up.
Good businesses.
Through grants through
scholarships.
In Chile through loans.
Is the result of all of us.
Thank you know ways to put
together the resources in a
sustainable way.
adolescents as they're dealing
with.
Their middle school years.
Years sometimes of.
Not being too sure what's ahead
of them.
These resources if this
particular joint resolution is
passed in the voters decide that
this is the way to go.
Today alone we have about four
hundred million dollars worth of
need.
And so this isn't going to be an
opportunity for us just to say.
In essence what's going to
happen is we're gradually going
to roll out the resources risk
and take that because it's going
to take planning.
We're gonna roll out the
resources because it's gonna
projections show that will have
the need for forty five hundred.
People trained in education.
Not only to help provide if you
And those are going to be good
paying jobs.
And as this continues to parlay
what do you think is going to
occur.
New Mexico then is going to
who have been fortunate to
secure an education.
Oftentimes to hard work.
Working for less than minimum
wage.
This gives us all the way up.
I hand up an opportunity for us
to move forward.
To apply the resources that we
do have available.
Today we talk about twenty two
billion.
And within that.
But again it's not just about
the financial piece.
It's about what every child
deserves.
As they move forward they have a
purpose.
To ensure that their families.
We'll have a bright future.
The use of our great minds for
innovation.
The use of our hearts for love
With the skilled labor force.
Marketing New Mexico.
As the opportunity so that as we
We educated our young people.
From the time that they're able
to listen and to learn and to
have that aspiration.
educational system.
But you know what she has.
She has a drive because she
wants to learn.
But where does all that come
from.
Yes today with those resources
that we do have available.
But can you imagine the number
of students.
Regardless of the corner New
Mexico where you live.
What you'll find is that once
this system.
In four decades with for
generations.
What I have seen.
Has been health.
Prosperity.
To take care of their
communities to take care of
their families.
And most importantly to take
care of each other.
Because within that yes we've
had it hard.
Yes maybe we've had to take
loans out in order to become
educated.
But as people before us with
their vision have done.
And now the essential piece.
Is ripe and ready for us to move
forward.
To educate our young people.
And to move forward.
And to be go become at the top
of the good lists.
we are today.
The New Mexicans.
Thank you very much Mr president
members of the New Mexico state
sent and with that Mr president
one to house Education Committee
substitute for House joint
resolution one as amended
amendment sponsored by Senator
explained what the amendment as
so Mr president this is a very
simple amendment all it does is
put a sunset on this.
number one thank you Mr
president thank you a very
simple amendment requires a very
simple response it is an
unfriendly amendment it is an
Any amount of time.
To know that thank you.
Sen as we're debating senator
member number one Senator
Gallegos.
Mr center I'm just trying to
figure out.
And I understand your we're
trying to set up a date.
Protect and and the.
governor we restart Education.
Absolutely Senator Mister
president absolutely one
legislature cannot bind another.
This presents center I like your
idea I think the.
board for quite a few years and
and I see it as a political
football image present center I
would hope that this would give
us an actual point to come back
and look at it see the value to
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator to close thank
you Mr president so this is a a
It does stop but if it's working
we can do this again and if it's
working I think the opposition
to this would be almost none.
Education Committee substitute
for House street resolution one
as amended and ask for roll call
vote centers where voting on
Senate floor member number one.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos now senator
Candelaria Senator Candelaria no
Senator serve on this
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales now
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ivey Soto no senator had
a meal.
Senator Hermio no Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
Senator pope.
Senator prognose Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez now Senator
songes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no Senator
share Senator sure yes Senator
Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stewart now senator
Clemente.
Senator Tallman no senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house Education Committee
substitute for House joint
resolution one amendment
amendment number one to house
Education Committee substitute
for House joint resolution one
as amended.
Senator seen objection if you
know maybe maybe that was just
too soon maybe what we need is a
several election cycles to go
through here let's see how its
work in over eight years.
Well I understand the stop start
portion of this I think this
helps run a lot longer and
certainly there's nothing that
give us some time that if it is
not working.
Then we can repeal it.
We're sunset.
And I I I use some examples here
distribution from the permanent
fund.
And the at that time.
It was to take out five point we
were at four point seven at the
more years and then down to five
which is where we are now so we
built in that sunset to see what
happened.
And that was important.
It just helps to see how this is
going to work and if it works
great we can redo it if it
doesn't work then let's not.
Now stand for questions thanks
Senator we are debating Center
for member number one Senator
worse that's starting stopping
is not the sort of policy we
want to take when it comes to
our children I think that's the
sort of investment policy I take
on the Facebook ads that I run
our commitment is sustained and
for that reason I oppose the
amendment thank you centers
we're still debating Center for
member number one anyone else
wishing to debate.
to make a motion to the the
rules been called everybody
voted the same way.
But we have new people here so
Mister president.
folks are Senators tier C.
please we're voting on Senate
floor member number one.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca yes senator Brent.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos now senator
Candelaria.
Senator Duhigg Now Senator guy
goes.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez no Senator controllers
now Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs.
Hemphill no Senator Hemphill now
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez no Senator McKenna
no Senator McKenna now Senator
Moores.
Senator Morris yes senator one
of.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
for the year.
Senator Stewart and Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto.
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez no senator
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
There.
Senator souls Senator souls no
Senator Stefanics Senator
Senator domino senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
twenty for the negative Senate
floor member number one has
failed to pass the Senate
Senator.
One more time in a women's
president we do have another
and I I really wish we would put
more sunsets more New Mexico
sunsets especially now that
we're in daylight saving time
and we were off the floor
yesterday and we actually got to
substitute for House joint
resolution one as amended
amendment sponsored by senator
William E. Scherer Senator to
move in a statement Mr president
amendment as so Mister president
this one actually goes back to
the original bill if you look at
the original bill it says one
percent.
Not one point two five percent
So well it also changes the
distribution to thirty five
percent so go to public schools
and sixty five percent sixty
five percent and supposed to
sixty percent we'll go to early
unfriendly amendment I think we
in this chamber recognize and I
think the people of New Mexico
recognize this year challenge we
percent of the five year rolling
average of the land grant
permanent fund.
that only increases actual
distributions by a full
billion six hundred and twenty
four million two hundred and ten
thousand eight hundred and
thirty seven dollars.
The five year rolling average
The the distribution based upon
the current distribution in the
constitution was set at sixty
nine million seven hundred seven
hundred thousand was distributed
actual real time distribution
from the land grant permanent
fund would only be four point
six percent far below the five
percent threshold of doom we've
Anyone with the right.
See none Senator to close.
Gosh Mr president my friends are
resolution one percent says it
right on there.
One percent is what originally
the proponents of this thought
was enough money.
Is what is make sense to us if
we want to do this.
The more we withdraw Mr
president.
And the more you withdraw from
that permanent fund the less.
Compound interest works for us.
In this permanent fund was set
COVID schools which we now call
public schools.
The whole idea was that this
would growing growing growing
growing grow until through
compound interest.
We harm that power of compound
interest.
Each time we do that.
Somewhere in the future.
We're actually harming children.
Actually.
I see us to day.
Fifty million dollars a year
that we could be using.
For early childhood education
today.
But when we did what we did.
In two thousand five.
And here we are saying we need
more money for early childhood
education.
But when we did this in two
thousand five.
We took a lot of money out of
the permanent fund then and
nothing changed.
Now we want to take out a little
bit more.
When we get back to the bill
itself Mr president.
We'll talk more about this.
What are the children ten twelve
twenty years ago from now.
Going to be missing.
Because we degraded.
You too great the fund even more
so with that Mr president I now
move.
Center for member number one to
house Education Committee
substitute for House to a
Senator Brandt.
Senator Burt senator Byrd yes
Senator Campos Senator Campos no
Senator Duhigg now Senator
Gallegos yes ma'am Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gonzalez no
Senator Gonzales now Senator
Griggs.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator on a meal Senator had a
meal now Senator Kernan.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz now senator
Neville.
Pinto no Senator Pinto no
Senator portal.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no Senator
Sedillo Lopez now Senator sure.
Senator share yes Senator
Shendo.
Stewart Senator Stewart noted
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman no senator Wirth
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator pope.
By a vote of fourteen in the
affirmative twenty six on the
negative senator member number
We are on the bill Senators and
over again with senator Neville
followed by Senator by the
Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman
of some kind and
On one side was the oil going in
and.
Some legislators are attempting
to turn the valve off with
we're at and that's a concern I
think a lot of us have is that
the long run on this situation
is we're looking at the.
Of.
disbelief or anything like that
I think we've got to get away
from fossil fuels and in the
next twenty or thirty years will
do that and.
One of the arguments for this
Then the permanent fund will not
grow it'll only grow by how much
profit there is above however
much we take out and that's
can't keep taking out more than
is going in the numbers are
under the current.
General situation it'll cost us
grow because oil's going in but
in the potential growth of the
fund of one and a quarter
percent takeout in round numbers
of it didn't and there's a lot
of variables around with the
interest rate will be in the
In twenty years that number
grows too so about eleven
billion dollars loss to the
fund.
The fund will grow and I grant
you that if oil and gas
continues to fuel it.
You will be taking out
Less money than.
You would have if you left alone
in somewhere in the twenty eight
that cost somewhere in the
vicinity of two billion dollars
for the fund as much smaller
back then.
And it cost us two billion
dollars at two million dollars
One thing that didn't happen is.
School ratings did not change we
were in forty eight forty ninth
in the nation.
And the math and reading scores.
nine in reading and math scores
didn't help a bit has that
amendment decided that are just
general fund and it really
wasn't necessarily going to
education it was tagged that way
but it went into the fund
divisions dollars in the fund
are into the general fund.
spend.
One other factor wanted to point
out.
New Mexico in dollars per
education better than most of
our peers.
What we don't do is we don't
education right I'm not an
educator I don't know how to do
that that's something that
somebody's got to figure out we
coming in twenty thirty forty
years down the road taking their
future way is not good
legislation.
And I don't have any specific
based on common sense this the
permanent fund is designed to be
just that permanent to where
were you it's an endowment to
use the earnings in the future
internees this will raise it
couple hundred million dollars.
Of.
And that's just that's money
that can be helpful.
But on the other hand it hurts
a center the subpoena Center for
the.
Thank you very much Mr president
I don't think I need to sponsor
to yield but I do want to to
thank them I want to thank
and I want to thank him for that
also want to thank
Representative Maestas his long
long years of attempting to get
this done what.
Representative masters for
getting us to this point I carry
this piece of legislation for
six years on successfully and
they were able to get this here
and I think that's a very
powerful statement to their
stick to witness.
humbly was able to sponsor that
in this body was only able to
get this moving forward for New
Mexico it's the right time Mr
president.
want to compliment the Sanchez
for getting this here and
getting us to this point.
And now that we have the
governance in place what a great
way to make sure that this money
is utilized the right way for
You know we talk about the
investment we talk about what
this is going to do to the
permanent fund when you take a
look at then you may have heard
this already I was actually
Dr James Heckman renowned
economists Pulitzer Prize with
winning economists from the
university of Chicago help us
understand that a thirteen
They were attempting to do with
these dollars.
You know Mr president I we're
making a major motion picture
here.
And we don't even have the
that thirteen percent return per
child per year for the rest that
child's life what a remarkable
phenomenal decision we're about
to make here.
Excited about it.
the brain is formed in those
first thirty six months another
phenomenal amazing thing that we
should be focused on when I talk
about us not having the rights
to the movie that's exactly what
I'm talking about.
to make sure that we're prepping
the child for that other fifty
percent of our state budget our
state spend.
And now we're gonna be able to
do that now we're gonna be able
to focus on that so we talk
succeed and that's will be doing
with this Mr president.
If we focus on early education
Mr president we see
significantly better reading
I'm ashamed of that number here
Mister president we've got to
turn the ship around if we bring
more graduates to the finish
line we see better the numbers
what we need to attract business
and industry to make sure that
our families have a job that
they get a regular salary that
they can put a roof over their
children's heads to the children
over the place and all the other
things that happen to us if we
make this investment now the LFC
a couple years ago did a study
for all of us and one of the
things they said if we focus on
Any number of the things that
are super important to turning
our state around this is a
decision Mr president I want to
get thank Representative Maestas
senator Candelaria for getting
we're all kind of scared of it.
But I have to tell you Mr
president it's just not working
for us the way we're doing it
now.
And so the definition of
insanity doing the same thing
over and over again expecting a
different result.
I talked about those grades Mr
president I would anticipate
that all the safeguards and
everything that these
individuals put into this piece
of legislation.
All those years ago over a
hundred years ago this fund was
set up for public education the
common school so that's exactly
where this money is going.
was this is not going to that's
intended purpose early education
is the intended purpose of this
fun Mr president.
K. through twelve and on the
sixteenth is the intended
purpose of this fund.
I will take that investment
every day of the week thirteen
percent return per child per
year for the rest of that
child's life I'll say it one
make but the time is now the
governance is in place now the
consistency across the continuum
is in place now we have all the
supports that we need now we
have the protections in the
that and I think this is one of
those decisions it's truly going
to move the state forward in a
really big way Mister president
urged the body to support this I
urge voters when you have an
opportunity to vote for this at
first thirty six months alive Mr
president are we truly going to
see the changes that we've
promised our children.
And then it's going to lead to
all those things that I spoke of
earlier I'm so excited this is a
Thank you Mr president and
I just like to make a few
comments in support of this bill
it's been said that
compound interest and we may be
losing several billion dollars
in value of the fund.
I would suggest that what we're
less but it's a geometric.
The increase that we're after
that is on multiple fronts we
will be seeing a reduced
All the problems the dropouts
faced all the problems that
those who were inadequately
prepared for of the finding the
kind of jobs that are going to
be available in the next
decades.
So that's one form of savings
that this will will of create.
But even more so the opportunity
This is the way you diversified
by preparing a workforce that
can attract in or they can
generate its own businesses.
I would suggest we tried it for
a what was it five years six
years.
And and you don't turn around
By doing something innovative
for five or six years.
You've got to make a commitment
to a all out assault on poverty
Have the problems that we have
to spend money remediating.
We have to have an all out
assault and that's what this
provides.
the determination that the that
the administration shows and
that we know this legislature's
gonna show when it passes this
this measure today The New
crucial resource and paying the
biggest dividends possible our
young people who will have a
future here won't be suffering
the diseases of despair who will
senator Munoz said about
thanking senators Smith and
Sanchez Jr and Michael Sanchez
could Hemphill well you'll to
first to senator Candelaria for
request Senator unanimous
consent of the Senate that all
members be allowed to remove
This is been a long journey for
this bill and I think I've been
here since its beginning maybe
not Senator Campos he's been
here longer than me and then
legislature's changed we moved
into the twenty first century.
we need to change the way we
educate our children.
And I did vote against this one
I'm really good with the bill.
Set the path forward.
for Children sets path for for
K. through twelve make sure that
which nonprofit can can apply in
how many how many people that
they can get hired this is money
for kids and better remain that
way.
because we are gonna appropriate
this money.
And that's the number one rule
when we do this.
Make sure the children get the
education they deserve there's
absorb it and let's do that.
This change a little bit and I
just want to thank the.
Sponsor and I wish the other
sponsors were here I try to get
Senators and Justin Committee
talked to him and and he's so
excited about this and he
appreciates the good
representatives in the Sanchez
during this in this monumental
day in New Mexico so thank you
sponsors for bringing this
legislation forward and all the
work that they've done over the
years on at and I just think
that it's important to remember
that after during the last
horrific trialed abuse cases
horrific child murders and it's
important to understand that
those cuts those budget cuts
poverty and trauma that that
kind those budget cuts because
so there's a tremendous amount
of brain development that occurs
in those first three years of
invest in generations to come we
will grow healthy brains and
those are children that will be
able to develop stronger since
self regulation skills stronger
to supporting this legislation.
Representative further debate
Senator Hickey followed by
Senator the Lopez and Senator
Kernan Senator Hickey thank you
that that passes it I have a
rhetorical question and and this
is actually one of the main
reasons that I ran for the
the parents and when that
happens.
There is going to be so many
fewer adverse childhood events.
have such an epidemic as we do
in the state so this bill is
absolutely when you peel it all
back till health back it is so
hoping that we don't do what
we've kind of done to primary
care state well you know it's
kind of an entry level whatever
it's not the early childhood
degrees that's how fundamentally
important this is so I hope that
as it gets implemented we put
together very dynamic
curriculums for the individuals
thank you Mr president and
fellow senators further debate
we have Senator Sedillo Lopez
thank you I to join the chorus
of thanking the sponsors for
Going to decrease the amount of
the funds in the future.
And because we're going to
because of the magic exactly has
my problem with that is has
Senator Padilla described at and
what we've been hearing about
over and over again is what are
our children our youngest
Education for our children is
actually is is priceless it's
something we need to do and the
way I think about these kinds of
investments as we can invest in
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president and and
of we've heard a lot of.
Very good testimony today and
certainly I stand here in
it prekindergarten of four year
old programs in for school
districts so I I stand here
saying that I support early
childhood in pre K. and I
at the LFC report on early
childhood
actually the legislature has
expanded services for early
childhood care and education
programs.
and thirty nine million in FY
twenty so if you take a look at
how much money we have spent on
early childhood I think it's
significant.
And to say that this legislature
report.
The LFC has noted that that we
are serving a significant number
of children in the early
childhood programs and that's
very appropriate.
So that was my first session
here and this opportunity to
increase the distribution from
the permanent fund was a
the sunset on it wasn't of a
five year sunset it was a twelve
year sunset.
And the money was supposed to go
for the many of the same thanks
for talking about today
And I guess for those of you who
were here I think you might
remember the term lockbox.
Nobody really knew where that
So that's my concern here today
and I guess I do have a question
for the sponsor if you would you
all please Mr president Senator
and a lot of the always with
pleasure to my dear friend
I don't know what those are can
you kind of run through have
that's going to be very helpful
to this particular resolution
thank you Mr mat Mr president
and Senator Kernan what the
distribute that increased
distribution.
between early childhood
education and K. twelve
The other amendment Mr
president.
provides two things first there
is a seventeen billion dollar
Falls below seventeen billion
when the S. I see it goes and
does its mathematics to
calculate the monthly
Is that the distribution for
early childhood after it is
approved by the voters it will
point about supplanting verses
supplementing education dollars.
and as I said at the beginning
and I welcome the question
We have one number general fund
we don't say for for for K.
twelve or for any of the
the permanent fund revenue of
that general fund amounts we
just caught all general fund so
Mister president and Senator
Kernan what I'm gonna
respectfully suggest LFC over
perhaps as other fund revenue
and breaking it out especially
Mr president I hear lolling loud
and clear the concern that if
these dollars are meant to
to their intended beneficiaries
and doing that good or do we
just ratchet down the general
fund over time and actually put
services over time so Mister
president what I what I submit
and and just how we report out
those numbers to this
legislature so that we all know
on a real time basis what are
the real general fund dollars
You Mr presentaci senator
Candelaria I I think that that
is helpful to be honest I I
don't know that it's over time
if we're all going to be able to
the produced oil and gas that.
Will be severed and and go into
that fund there is a real
possibility that we're going to
see less and less the funding go
additional revenue is going to
have to be used for the
different beneficiaries so if
that is segregated out separated
out.
additional of one point two five
percent is it too far one point
two or one point four.
Mr president one point two five
percent okay so we're going to
about giving tier races are we
going to take a portion of that
a percentage and dedicated each
year as we appropriate those
dollars to teacher racism and we
and every year going forward
we're always going to provide an
additional race for teachers.
Mr president and senator now and
that's a good question the way
that the amendment is structured
that distribution could be used
for specific enumerated purposes
then that would be as I
mentioned test for teacher
raises but also for extending
the school year or for
and that was critical language
for the Senate finance committee
to ensure that with respect both
to the increased distribution
for early childhood and with
appropriation Mr president so
thank you Mr president thank you
senator I think one thing we're
going to have to be really
State equalization formula an
equal so you're gonna have a lot
of extra money it's going to be
spent on at risk it's going to
careful about how those dollars
again be expended it'll be up to
the legislature to determine
that so that that is something
how we going to measure success
Of NET Casey reports to come out
every year and it involves a lot
of things other than just
educational issues but how are
And I will share Mr president I
I bring this forward and and and
at with the firm understanding.
that.
that each one of these dollars
are spent and directed at the
areas in our systems where we
know we will see returns and we
can meet children and families
will.
Whether or not our legislature
in future years will have the
political will to hold folks
accountable and I'll be the
first to say Mister president
of taxpayer money I believe that
firmly.
But for now.
We are embarking on this
investment strategy and it falls
Thank you Mr president thank you
I
know over the last so many years
as administrations change what
administration seems to have a
accountability and and testing
and obviously the the PED has
asked for waiver so that we
don't have to yes because we've
been in a pandemic and maybe
that's appropriate for this year
going to help and how we get to
know that for sure so you're
right it's going to be up to
this body and we can have the
courage and the determination to
hold teachers and school
potentially could end up in a
lock box again and we will never
know whether it's been spent
appropriately so I wish we had a
I wish we had a test.
whether this is working or not
because it is going to have an
impact it is going to have an
impact on this fund and I won't
be around many of us won't be
that I thank you very much I do
appreciate the hard work
everyone has put in this is just
part of the process we we have
differences on how to to reach
certain goals and and but I do
Gonzalez followed by Senator
Gallegos.
Then Senator share Senator metes
and Senator Griggs.
number of years that I have been
here.
Is when you have a legislation.
And you have that persistence
you know of not giving up.
you know myself and the late
senator Cisneros it took us ten
years to do eagle nests a state
could not be known a much more
of an economic development of
the ancient of circle the whole
thing being something that
everyone can enjoy that.
Cisneros myself it took us about
four five years to convince
everyone to make you an and
tiles a branch and that one went
in you know with a very strong
recites their.
So with that Mr chairman and the
the the I'm sorry Mr president
and members
I was one person that.
understanding the finance part
two No sorry investment.
And I have for quite a few years
you not support this and it's
done a paradigm shift and this
is what has done to my part that
I that I have changed you know
is one of them is that I think I
keep seeing is.
serving and conversations and
presentations to the LFC have
assured us that we would get
into that part to where we don't
start supplanting the losing
amendment K. mean that it does
have you know a very good
safeguard that if it goes to
seventeen billion at that time
The other part that really has
convinced me.
And the reason for this is.
If you want to make change.
don't have a parental program
parental involvement and what
this does is it brings that home
visiting part and parental
to the education part we need
that you know we really need
that really really strong.
The other part.
It is a on that percentage we're
And the lawsuit says to address
remedies to work with K. through
twelve you know on the Martinez
Yazzie so you know this has to
the different savings so if we
look at.
That's solid core.
Of parental training parental
surprised how much remediation
we offer at that level so that's
another you know big big savings
to everyone so a member so.
Accountability part.
Everyone is being challenge that
you know we have to be there you
know we have to see what this
dollars are going to do and what
of the reasons that as I
mentioned so thank you very
much.
Senator Gallegos.
This presents always good to
move up in line.
thank you very much and I just
want to say I really appreciate
everyone in this chamber I I
really
hear everybody's concerns about
our children
You know children are.
On my mind basically twenty four
seven because I have seven of
About about children about
children in New Mexico
live on make a few brief
comments
You know in in and once again
back to the Yazidi issue
You know just like to pose the
question what what what are they
gonna do I mean we're we're
elected and and held accountable
to our constituents.
built into our democracy.
it's not so that I have to
somehow listen to the judicial
branch and legislation
appropriate differently because
of what the judicial branch's
our constituents and that's you
know if if we if we allow a
different branch of government
to legislate.
And so I hope you will consider
that I just think it's slightly
dangerous precedent.
Because I do believe it
disenfranchises the voters.
Street or children I I heard
that in the house side in this
debate for this bill.
Many times now not as many as
some of you certainly
that supposedly came out of Wall
Street for our children the
that's what a trust fund is
about trust fund is about
investing money I'm not a
our public schools mainly
you know you know lower and
higher at who the beneficiaries
of this trust is.
And so it's it's not an either
or it's on either wall Streeter
and I I had I'm very glad that
Representative myiasis is here
I agree with I think ninety nine
percent of what he has said on
this topic over the past couple
So how can we agree ninety nine
percent Mr president and still
end up with a different vote
well and this is what I I would
like to very briefly discuss
Senator allotted deal yes Mr
president.
You very much Senator
what I'm I just want to make
sure I'm not miss hearing you
Okay we're not but if that's
were focused on a hundred years
from now.
The fund would be generating a
lot more money year over year.
is even though the fund a
hundred years from now would
would be generating less money.
It's it's the value of that
verses the value of the extra
times Mr president centers that.
Is that fair is that is that
kind of accurate of what what
you're saying that the the the
here in your opinion you the the
value of that up front
I've I fundamentally reject the
paradigm in the false
equivalency of of the simple
what I'm saying Mr president is
Thanks.
That's not true and that and
that's fundamental to this
debate Mr president's
fundamental today.
no longer available to be
accrued with compound interest.
So there is an opportunity cost
on those dollars.
But what I am saying Mr
president quite frankly the
natural and the patrimony of the
people of New Mexico.
We want to talk about.
You know we talk a lot in this
chamber Mr president about
thanking the oil and gas
industry.
What a respectful and gas
industry.
is owned by every New Mexican in
this room and across the state
it is our patrimony we get to
decide what happens with.
So Mister president short.
don't buy into this argument of
inter generational animosity.
The realities we face in our
state is this.
We.
K. twelve education throughout
the entire Martinez
administration fly.
Yes these dollars were left in
the fund today yes they would
grow that would compound in the
future they would generate
additional dollars for the
existing beneficiaries.
Speaking about is someone whose
family has been here since the
seventeen hundreds just last
about the address.
We get to decide for once
I think I agree with not only
nine nine percent what you just
said I agree with a hundred
percent of of what you just
said.
So I I guess I'm trying to find
the point where we just
disagree.
So I want to continue to try to
search here for some.
Common ground
I guess what I what I hear you
saying is.
think we we agree on is
there there seems to be this
idea that.
We are.
And and there seems to be this
this tension between those I
think that's maybe that's what
you're you're saying that's what
you don't buy into.
everything you just said miss
present center
Can we talk about evidence and I
I **** and sincerity because I
have try to look at some of the
specifically in at risk youth.
When they're young and they do
better.
And that benefit is much greater
than when you do the same
legislative finance committee
has done specific research into
that topic but I'm not versed
enough whether or not to confirm
the way you've Representative
those findings to the body I I
I've seen and you know I'm vote
for this to be disputed but the
evidence that I've seen is these
types of programs and then there
right fully focused for at risk
budget because they're basically
already that's already built in
to whatever situation they have
going on at home versus the at
risk kids a lot of the benefit
that what we would do with this
money would help those at risk
youth what what I am concerned
about is what I've seen is the
majority of the evidence shows
by the time they are in either
somewhere between first or
second grade or third grade
Does any of this
if in the longer term this
budget.
Would would potentially dwindle
for the at risk youth.
Mr presents under Schmidt is
that's exactly the same concern
because I had the same concern I
actually asked a specific
question as we were considering
this amendment in the Senate
finance committee.
And I asked what are those games
actually sustained and the
investments at every step in
their development.
If we invest in early childhood
and just send that child into
the world and say good luck kid
you know somehow we think we are
raced all those adverse
risk has quality early childhood
and then has access to evidence
based programs that this
extended learning time targeted
strategic an extensive
interventions then those gains
are sustained and that was a
fundamental I think Senator
but the reality is our data from
our kids in New Mexico says if
we invest in them early and
continue the sustained
investments those gains are
realized and sustained Mr
Do not engage in this sort of
start stop policy that has
defined right the the last
twenty years of our state's
experience the jury is in.
Senator I would say that all our
data from the LFC actually shows
that when paired with the kind
of investments that this
amendment
and the services this amendment
appreciate that and certainly
don't dispute the evidence
I I I I think it's also in in
this is we could probably have a
very long discussion on this and
conversation today so far and I
I this is to me this is about.
Does the government and do
government programs very well
responsibility at what point do
we say you know what.
I really believe it's the
parents job.
To read to their children every
day.
I think that's child abuse.
May not be more maybe in the
minutes left is a better term I
think that's neglectful.
So.
willing to reach your child or
you're doing this or that.
And that's why I really
appreciate what Senator Campos
had said when he shared his
You know certainly better stores
in mind but.
when I heard him say that this
is a hand up.
He wanted to be a hand up and
it's a hand up I'm I'm in all
the way.
And so if it's a hand up for a
child is gonna be a hand up for
mom and dad or for whatever
whoever is charged with that
child for whoever is.
And and that is that is my
concern.
Is
Are we supplanting that.
How do we make these programs
then I I truly believe that it's
the responsibility of of parents
once again I was raised by a
single mom I know I'm not saying
I'm a mom and a dad and three
kids I'm just saying that I use
can partner with with a public
school private school whoever or
they can do it themselves but
ultimately it's their
responsibility to raise that
And I know that it's it's not
we we we can't legislate.
Parents to love their children.
We can't make them do it.
that help and they do help.
But back to the generational
point senator.
We are now at a point where we
have seen.
is the failure of the what what
what's one of the definitions of
failure one of these programs
will if if we miss that
generation.
And that's failure to me that
that that's the dividing line
And then their kids are in the
same plight that they were and
I'll come in with this and this
is on us is a little.
you know I I picture these kids
but when we when we think about
what is our goal with this money
what's our goal with public
education.
What is our goal with early
childhood.
But my concern with where we're
going with our public education
is that some people are saying
it should be a value transfer.
Structure.
believe responsible parents are
oppressive to their own children
because they're teaching them
certain values.
And same similar articles out of
That's probably my biggest issue
with all this is do we see this
as a value transfer in and then
back to the center compas a
story now it so are are we going
to define success.
I think these are very deep
questions but I don't think
they're topics that the
government can take on they're
they're too deep there to basic
and empower parents to educate
their children to teach them
reading writing math history.
we cannot address I just truly
truly believe that.
So Mister president and and
etcetera I think the once again
everything you said I agree
with.
of what what should parents be
doing and what should public
institutions be doing we we
start to diverge and you know
that's okay that's okay I what I
environments we want them to get
a good education.
And that's enough for me in this
debate it's enough for me to
have that much common ground.
in the finance piece.
Senator as well as your co
sponsor from the house I have
great respect for thank you Mr
president.
About how.
Our previous governor.
Gutted.
Education graduated.
We went from two point two nine
three billion.
To two point six four five
Hundred and thirty six million.
Two three hundred and twelve
million.
Which is a hundred and twenty
using misinformation as far as
members go because numbers are a
little too easy to look up.
And I know was not the sponsor
every year of their three
binders full.
Or three books.
And that information's right
there so it's pretty easy to
find
increasing that funding over the
last.
ten twelve years.
We have increased it to the
competing against each other for
students because there's not
enough students to fill all the
slots.
And so I'm not really sure with
there may be some situations
where we can add.
you know do more quality.
And and with the sponsor yield
make sure that the early
childhood education that we're.
Doing in this bill are in this.
Resolution will ensure quality.
implicit and understanding and
our expectation that these
investments are made and quality
services but I think to your
question Senator is much like my
responses Senator Kernan asked
question of political will the
falls on this body right to
ensure hopefully a bi partisan
basis that these dollars are
invested responsibly and and I
understand my hesitancy when it
comes to quality and when it
comes to accountability.
Because what I see in the last
two years.
Yes.
that to a system today that has
no accountability we don't use
test scores we don't do anything
that's objective to make sure
I'm reluctant to believe.
That we're going to have the
political will because we have
not at least the last couple
years and so that's that's where
education without much
accountability there either and
so my concern is that we're
gonna put a bunch more money
into it maybe we need to maybe
we don't I don't know we already
have.
And I'll use for example Mr
president and senator a use for
example are are K. five plus.
Program.
To make sure that that program.
Is it is done with fidelity and
that's put on with the vality.
And there's a certain way that
the program has to be done for
it to work.
And every year we wanna loosen
those restrictions because
people don't like the
we're gonna put this money into
the system we're not gonna do
anything about quality.
And I mean if you give if there
was a way that we can guarantee
that we're going to actually
funding for early childhood
education and what we haven't
seen those results.
And so I don't know.
So that we will actually get the
results we want because I think
you and I are on the same page
when it comes to results we want
Be able to graduate.
This your Albuquerque public
That's a huge number that is not
accountability.
Being.
Held in our education system.
And so I think for me at least
Let's hold the schools
accountable for what we're
giving them today.
Before we add more to the pot.
Thank you Mr president thank you
conversations around the table
on the subject.
And we're good friends even
though we disagree on this one
issue thank you.
Thank you senator Angus.
Thank you Mr president and I lot
of my questions have already
been answered thank you thank
you senator Senator.
The tough and again senator
Candelaria to stand within like
four five times in a row.
Very confusing situation here.
Mr president.
I know that we've been told that
if we don't vote for this we
don't care about kids the
various stages of this whole
program.
But I would I would argue that's
It's not about education or the
value of education.
It's really about is this the
wisest path to take.
And I think that's where we
that's who Senators meetings
with us worst the divide I think
that's the divide.
We both want the same thing.
we could work together and find
the path and think about the
path.
And actually I think that these.
These things in the fence in the
We're gonna vote.
But it's not because we have a
fundamental different
fundamental difference in where
we want to go.
The enabling act which created
the land grant permanent fund.
I think unequivocally.
education started at age five.
Not zero.
And I also disagree with that.
Education for zero to five is
important.
What is that education.
on the floor and one one year
old pokes me in the eye.
Which is happened I don't know
dozens of times.
That's when you get them the
be a civilized person.
How to operate in society that's
one of those things that
happens.
We also talk about colors.
Even when they're little.
What should start when they're
very little I think Mr president
that the earlier you start with
those kind of things the better
The parent learns.
That kind of place slash
teaching I think is is.
But I know not everybody does
that with their children.
So.
Now here we are.
was Representative Madrid a of
you have this class to talk
about financial literacy.
In the power of compound
interest has got to be part of
that.
That saves twenty five dollars a
month for fifty years.
Makes a lot more I think it's
And that's for the future.
I know now that we're talking
what we've got twenty two
billion dollars we needed today.
compound interest that went
poof.
Yes we brought some money in.
And we used it.
I don't think what changed when
Any dollars it's not a vested
can't grow.
It's just that simple.
But in this particular case.
But they made a couple of.
Assumptions here.
The first assumption inflows
from oil and gas royalties.
and gas will continue to grow at
the pace that has been.
In yet right here on this floor.
And yet for this to grow we have
to assume oil and gas is going
to continue to put money in the
bank.
The president of the United
States.
Has declared.
Saying.
Nope you're not going to get the
same revenue.
We are going to cut it out.
Which is going to do that.
What we have seen.
With the stock market over time
is it does things like oil and
gas.
We had the Great Recession.
So we'll talk about.
You know it was the tax cuts
that.
The burned up the money and all
But the difference between this
year and two thousand five I
think we can see the Great
Recession right in front of us.
government will have three
trillion dollars.
All of that is going to be paid
back at some point and you know
how you pay back that kind of
deficit spending Mr president.
financial literacy knowledge at
all can see that coming.
Those are just some math things
We talked about here was because
we didn't put this money in some
kind of special spot.
We had a special spot putting we
chose not to put it in the.
appreciate that instead of just
giving it to the executive we
would be the appropriators as
provided by law all.
But you know what happens when
cannot bind the next
legislature.
So no matter what law we passed
today.
For the next session.
Or maybe they have different
priorities.
And so this money is just going
to go right into the general
fund pot well yes we'll say that
just won't give them any general
fund money.
Because they already have this
money.
So it won't be a growth or you
could be.
In fact we could change that
priority next year if we wanted
to.
One legislature cannot bind to
the next.
But here's the part that
troubles me the most.
And that's who's going to do
this.
Today.
That's who does this today
that's who does the work today
that's who actually is.
Playing with those children
there aren't at home.
I think we're going to be cut
out of this.
Those little businesses those
small New Mexico businesses.
Or about to be cut out of this
cannot be used to support
private schools.
But can be used for early
childhood programs.
By the public schools.
Similarly says notes early
childhood education services are
administered.
By the state.
They're taking care of children
in the neighborhood.
They know them all they know
their parents.
Said no this is public money
goes to public schools are
private providers.
They're completely cut out of
this.
They're doing the job today.
This is a cannot be done.
According to the Attorney
General according to the cabinet
secretary.
Has to go to the public schools.
efficiently doing this today.
Are going to be cut out.
I think that's a terrible plan
when I talk about the wisdom of
this the wisest road to go down
we cut out the private providers
when we take all of those.
Minority women say well we don't
need anymore by.
Spending money on education now
granted overall education versus
early childhood they're they're
different things but I just want
Spends about twenty four
thousand dollars per pupil.
Twenty four thousand dollars per
pupil.
So New York twenty four
Massachusetts seventeen New
Mexico ten.
In Utah seven.
What a brought this so that's
the that's the highest and the
species for states what's the
ranking of.
The last year we had ranking
Sir.
New York who spends the highest
dollar amount.
Thanks twelve.
There's not much difference
you're pretty close yes there's
the ranking in their but kids
that can read or do math at the
eighth grade fourth grade eighth
Seventeen thousand dollars per
student they ranked number one
in education.
And who ranks at the bottom.
New Mexico.
In fact Mr president we spend
more money than all of the
surrounding states.
Really we spend more money than
Utah.
We spend more money than
nine anymore we're fifty this
year.
So what because this is what
makes the difference it's not
money so what else could it be.
New Mexico is number one in
something.
Public assistance.
That's what we're number one at.
In the forty eight and public
assistance.
We spend ten thousand dollars.
Per student.
We're at the bottom.
and I try to figure this out I
try to study and try to get this
right and what I think Mr
president what it means.
If we're not playing with our
own kids.
we're not asking what color the
wall is.
We're not trying to teach him
numbers.
We're not shown letters.
For equity or whatever it is
we're pushing for.
We have created a reliance on
government in that goes all the
way back to early childhood our
That's what the problem here is.
This is not about money.
This is about families.
And I know that families that
That's what we ought to be
spending our money on.
That's what we ought to be
trying to figure out how to do
because if we did that.
If each one of us rolled around
on the floor.
With kids from zero to five.
And we had encounter fingers and
toes in our fingers and toes.
the difference between a P.
unity.
It's hard.
Probably the most difficult
things I've ever done with my
children grandchildren.
Want to get that.
No Mr president.
We want the same things.
There's no doubt my mind.
The difference is the path.
Are we gonna try to figure out
how to put more children with
parents.
Parents that are willing to roll
around in count.
Been read.
The private providers.
Those are the folks that are
best suited to do this right
after the parents.
And our Attorney General and our
secretary of early education
education.
Say this is their money not
And I believe that this is not
the wisest choice but I agree
with the goal thank you Mr
president.
You know I think in my nine
years here we've seen this piece
of legislation almost every year
and and we hear the arguments
for and against and.
You know I think the main issue
passionate and I don't disagree
with the idea of early childhood
education in fact over my nine
and members you know it's not
that we don't have enough money
for early childhood education.
It's about prioritization.
In money and time and things
So basically if you pass this
you're saying well with the
money that we already.
Receive we don't prioritize
child early childhood.
education but that's not what
this is about this is about
making a title in the goal has
always been from the beginning
it's just get into that
permanent fund just tap it.
Like a maple tree in the
that we can try to make those
that want to be fiscally
responsible look bad in the
newspaper.
And that's not the case because
you will find somebody more than
myself.
Very great points.
You cannot replace parents with
money.
Only loving.
Adults guardians can do that.
So we have this argument year
after year after year.
Do we make tough decisions sure
we do.
That's what we do here.
But more than ever the session
it seems like we're not allowed
believes more in in civil rights
liberty.
Then myself.
You won't find anybody that does
but just because you bring a
civil rights that's what the
news article says though.
And that's not fair to me it's
not fair to my district.
So when we talk about the
permanent fund.
I think if we if we really
wanted to get serious we could
find places where there's enough
we're gonna quit trying to set
each other up with titles.
In bills and do things just to
make somebody look bad for for
their belief.
Gun control.
Cannabis legalization.
Because it's very seldom and
it's growing stronger.
this body listening to the
farmers listening to the lawyers
listening to the nurses
listening to the social workers.
So that people feel like if they
vote against it they're going to
get blown up in the newspapers
or on television.
And Mister president the reason
Same exact bill I changed the
title to the food accessibility
Act.
Flies through committee.
All had changed was the name.
just say it just come out say we
wanted to permit fund.
We want to put the money and
then we want to spend it doled
out just say what you want to
do.
But if we're going to continue
financial experts have said
don't do it.
Then I don't know if the
legislative bodies legislative
body anymore.
fund and not having a a strong
fund for future generations.
That we're just going to do
things based upon title.
So with that Mr president I
Thank you very much Mr president
and
I would like to stand ins.
So what I say in gratefulness
that we are here today finally
Mr president members of the
And I'm grateful of course to
for senator Michael Sanchez.
For the work that he and
advocates had done of course and
it was under former governor
this body today Mister president
this goes to the voter.
We still have yet to reach out
to the public and they'll be
campaigns on both sides both in
So Mister president after the
initial measure was passed
voters agreed and we did have
Mr president once you make an
investment it's hard to take it
back the reason why I say that.
You know we've had downturns in
when I started here even twenty
years ago when you adjust for
inflation and all the other
numbers we still have a long way
to go Mr president members of
the Senate.
which I chair for a number of
years and we had mmhm.
Many a time at least a good
discussion but the vote was
never there to really get it out
of committee
investments all the same
arguments that we've heard today
Mister president.
But.
Representation matters.
I've seen it Mr president for
how we will be making a
difference to get this measure
office for and actually to the
people so that the people the
voters can finally make the
decision.
So Mister president I'd like to
think of course our our house
Sanchez
Representative Maestas Maestas
you know with the planning of
what we're going to do and how
we're going to do this and how
we're going to to really work on
behalf of arm our children.
And of course for senator
signed on over the years Mr
president is is is thank you.
But ultimately Mr president I
think for this is going to be
adding so much value is for our
Mr president not all of us have
an equal footing in life.
Not all of us have the access to
education.
business maybe but everything
costs money.
It was regards to health care
issues we still have a lot to
still work within our
a back of course in my years in
high school but in college or we
talk about massless hierarchy.
If you can't meet that basic
wrong of needs.
rank either forty ninth or
fiftieth in this country with
regards to support services for
children and families this is
going to make the difference.
Mr president.
To really be challenged in in
their thinking and how we can
support the families because
again Mr president not everybody
has the same access.
childhood programs back during
president Johnson's era some of
us are budget have benefited
from that and it made a
difference what this measure
will do if the voters approve it
to argue and to have emotional
days of testimony and the voting
and everything Mr president it
will be worth it.
And I know that
equitable opportunity to succeed
in life.
Because there is a difference in
equal and equity.
And I know that this is going to
happen I have a confidence in
Si no further debate Senator
pope.
Thank thank you Mr president I
And I just hope that
conversation continues because
we brought legislation forward
this year and we need to be
supporting and I hope that's
done in the future.
Struggling being raised by
single mom of five.
And meeting.
This investment this type of
it was financial resources.
And then when I got out of the
military use my GI bill that was
another invests.
And that's what got me here.
money and letting it grow
investing.
But this is about our present.
Generation we can still help our
future future generations.
Because most of us in here ran
on this.
And I also know that the people
known I'm confident that the
voters will support this as
well.
Invest in our community please.
Thank you Mr president.
We have further debate Senator
Griggs followed by Senator how
to mail Senator Griggs.
But it's not necessarily about
our kids.
This very day.
It's about our kids down the
road.
Mr president members of the body
I.
I had a
We sometimes use a friend most
of the time we we won't
necessarily really good friends.
His name was already done.
Senior.
In all three.
fund inflation.
To protect.
Future generations.
We have the ability.
Lots of things.
We see this as a simple way.
There are other wage.
And we can do those.
All right the old apple picker
from hi rules New Mexico.
To control the Senate finance
committee with pretty much an
iron hand back in the day.
Why Betty Jo to know that I'm
standing with all brief today.
And I will vote against this
particular.
and want to thank the bill's
sponsors for this as a former
educator I strongly believe that
our greatest investment is
investing in our children by
tapping into the permanent land
later pay off with higher high
school graduation rates and
fewer incarcerations.
Investing in our children and
laying a solid educational
in my district from Rio Arriba
Los Alamos and Santa Fe counties
who want to C. H. J. R. one
passed because they do they do
control of our future and it's
time for New Mexicans to invest
in our children thank you Mr
president.
Thanks and have a meal.
Senator Gallegos you on the list
Campos for some closing remarks
and then he'll be holding to me
and I'll be bringing us all
thank you Mr president Senator
Campos thank you Mr president
members of the Senate I want to
have when we work to ensure that
education for our children.
Is at the forefront of
everything that we do.
Just in closing I would like to
say.
and I yield to raise either.
Senator.
Check of Candelaria.
The legend Mr president as we
concept I want to leave this
with is we send this question to
the voters.
Pollock poverty is not a moral
failing.
Two more supports and to
economic stability.
But unfortunately don't fly.
Because we have an economic
and then we criticize them when
they ask for their government.
To do exactly what government is
meant to do.
inward of how we as an
institution and as a government
have failed them not how they
continue to fail us.
eight and two thousand eighteen.
Unfortunately the dollar in two
thousand and eighteen isn't
worth as much as it was in a
way.
And so what we do.
So Mister president the question
has been debated.
For years.
And that is the people of New
children of New Mexico are worth
the investment and with that Mr
president I ask that house
Education Committee substitute
roll call thank you Sierra that
if president for roll call
Senators tier seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
the lawyer.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Gallegos Senator Gallegos Now
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
hanami or yes Senator had a meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan now Senator
Lopez.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be no.
Yes Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator pro yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator committees.
Senator no Senator so they'll
office yes Senator severe Lopez
Stefanics Senator subreddits
test Senator Steinborn test
Senator Steinborn test Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Woods now Senator Pinto.
Yes and to explain my vote
Senator Pinto yes.
By a vote of twenty six and
affirmative.
Sixteen in the negative.
How's Education Committee
substitute for House doing
Really pains me to have to vote
against the.
The two of the legislature's on
the west side the they're both
very smart.
H. J. R. one the member David
Letterman Office started number
ten and work backwards number
ten I know of no.
Investment counselors no
thing to do is take money from
the permit for the hard thing to
do is ask the taxpayers to
billion dollars in the current
budget.
Hander we never eight we have
created a new early childhood
When I heard about the need to
spend more that this will fix
the problem.
The spending more money
if we had a plan however I
haven't heard.
One word well.
A plan.
Other than Senator Candelaria
going to spend more money if one
person is said to me.
You know we have a plan we're
done a lot of research.
Want to implement the quality
high.
If I believe is being directed
to high quality evidence based
programming in two thousand
seventeen I sponsor of.
An increase in the personal
administratively get geared up
for ninety million dollars you
we're gonna have to put half of
it to forty five million this to
us secondary education so.
expired will go to Senator Pinto
to explain about.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the body.
In some sense I'm kind of do pre
these facilities I hope their
problem programmatic of quality
that we're because we have no
infrastructure in that sense of
Quality with the quality and if
there's no place for them to
operate in that.
You can't hire workforce so the
have doubled which is become
problematic too because that
money that was allocated as to
be increased even more thank you
Mr president all.
Mr president and course members
of the Senate I again want to
thank each and everyone of you
thank you Senator Candelaria
this present well again I I
of New Mexico thank you very
much Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president's
unanimous consent we go to that
or business messages from the
priesthood and members of the
Senate I have this day signed
Senate bill thirty five as
amended enacted by the fifty
fifty provided for session two
thousand twenty one respectfully
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business messages
from the house run that order
business reader to read.
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the house in
open session in return same here
with respectfully submitted Lisa
M. Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
house bill forty one house bill
forty three is amended house
bill sixty seven house bill one
sixty eight house bill one
eighty five House Bill to twelve
two seventy one have been read
in full and signed by the
officers of the house in open
session in requests the
signatures of the officers of
the Senate.
The journal show the message
amended house bill sixty seven
house bill one sixty eight house
bill one eighty five House Bill
to twelve House Bill to twenty
four and how state government
elections and Indian Affairs
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
reports on that order of
business committee reports.
Mr president you rules committee
has had under consideration
Senate executive message number
Mexico college's college board
of regents for term commencing
upon confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
twenty six your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment
read all of the committee
reports that we go to them with
one motion and that the journal
reflected reflect they were
acted upon individually seeing
no objection the reader to read
New Mexico military institute
board of regents for term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring December thirty one two
thousand twenty six the
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this appointment.
is a member of the New Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired board of
regents for term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
twenty six your committee
appointment robin Holmes as a
member of the New Mexico school
for the blind and visually
impaired board of regents for
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
twenty six the committee
Maria Christina Montoya as a
member of the New Mexico
military institute board of
regents for term commencing upon
confirmation that expiring
December thirty one two thousand
twenty six the committee
is drugs as a student member of
the northern New Mexico college
board of regents for term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring December thirty one two
thousand twenty two your
committee recommends that the
appointment Gary Smethurst as a
member of the New Mexico school
for the blind and visually
impaired board of regents for
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
appointment Mary willow's is a
member of the New Mexico school
for the blind and visually
impaired board of regents for
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
Senator Lopez motion to adopt
the committee report we have a
motion to that the committee
for.
I see no objections the
committee part is been adopted
for House transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee substitute for House
Bill ten has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended respectfully
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all of the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually I
committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety one as amended do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted senator George K.
Munoz chairman Senator Collett
individually.
Mr president your Indian rural
and cultural affairs committee
to whom has been referred house
state government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to
Hotmail Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the three to be allowed to read
all of the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion and that the gentle
reflected that they were acted
substitute for House joint
resolution nine do pass
respectfully submitted Senator
Shannon D. Pinto co chair.
Senator Hemphill Mr president I
Mr president you Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill three fifty
two has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendations that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Center sapien would have done
and that we act on the with one
motion with the journal acta
reflect that they were act upon
individually.
No objection the reader to read
the report number two.
Report number three house bill
seventy five is amended to pass
as amended.
Report number four house bill
Report number C. X. house bill
one twenty five is amended do
pass number seven house bill one
twenty seven as amended do pass.
nine house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bill to twenty two do pass
respectfully submitted Senator
Joseph Cervantes chairman
Senator serve on this.
The Canadian border Medidata
journal show they're acted upon
individually.
Well.
What.
One.
Three seven.
The reader if.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too home has been
referred house bill sixty six as
amended do pass house bill
Is present how many reports was
that twelve twelve three point.
Thank you Mr president I move
upon individually.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that on our business
confirmations and ideal the
student regent to northern New
Mexico college board of regents
and I yield to senator Hotmail
Center item you.
Mr president pursuant to Senate
pada what is a student region to
northern New Mexico college
board of regents.
I see no objections center how
to me a feel explained the
conferee.
generation immigrant daca
student attending at northern
New Mexico college but she has
maintained an impressive four
point zero two GPA.
Mexico college as a student
Senate president.
Miss part of what this was
recently selected out of five
hundred sixty nationwide
applicants for the Georgetown
aims to help students who are
interested in medical studies
and are committed to advancing
opportunities for underserved
populations to bolster their
conducting literature research
on nationwide health care
disparities and to why she
successfully completed a
capstone project on undocumented
Laboratory foundations early
childhood program a program
designed to empower parents and
caregivers to be their child's
Mr president sends a very
powerful message to our
community and our state has a
daca student agency part of why
this is a tireless champion for
See no debate.
Center how to meet a close on
the confirmation I just of the
Senate do hereby confirm the
Senators we're voting on the
appointment.
To your seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator sure on this Senator
savant is yes Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg yes Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hemphill Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey just Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores Senator one knows.
Senator Neville.
Senator Stewart AS Senator Pinto
yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
yes Senator Stewart Senator
Stewart is Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator Baca.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sweetser yes.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator guy
it goes yes.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative on the negative the
twenty two has been duly
confirmed by the Senate center
how to meal thank you Mr
president and members of the
body if you can please help me
and congratulating Mahdia Evelyn
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president I hereby submit the
credentials of Ruben Archuleta
who has been appointed regents
Thank you Mr president.
Pursuant to Senate executive
message number eleven dated
northern New Mexico college
board of regions.
Senator go ahead and explain the
conferee.
Thank you Mr president and
members
college yes so twenty five years
experience in working with
healthcare field as a registered
radiologist.
And he has been served as of
president and vice president of
As work collaboratively with the
okay we give in Santa Clara
pueblos to develop new programs
strengthen it.
Yes so two beautiful children
and his wife and Mr president
and members with this it's a
great honor to percent Mr when
Mr president I just that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Reuben archer let
the as region to northern New
Mexico college board of regents
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Duhigg yes Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal Senator
Hermio yes Senator Kernan
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator to
subpoena Senator to subpoena yes
senator for the.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Shendo the test Senator
sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn.
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods Senator Woods yes Senator
Baca Senator Baca yes.
Thirty three thirty three in the
affirmative zero negative the
twenty six has been building
confirmed by the Senate Senator
Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president and
members if you can please help
me give a big welcome to Mr
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president I hereby submit the
credentials of Maria Christina
Montoya who has been appointed
pursuant to Senate executive
message number eleven dated
March fourth two thousand twenty
one I move that the Senate here
by do confirm the appointment of
Thank you Mr president members
of the body.
miss one Toyota earned her
associate's of arts with a
concentration in Spanish of New
special education teacher with
experience as.
Behavior support specialist and
teaching English as a second
language to students with
disabilities.
Sandoval County District Court
family support services and the
national Latino behavioral
health association.
Thank you Senator Brandt
senators we're debating.
Present I asked that the Senate
do hereby confirm the
appointment of Maria Christina
Montoya as a reason to the New
Mexico military institute board
of regents and ask for a roll
yes senator Byrd senator Byrd
yes Senator Campos Senator
Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senator
Cervantes yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gallegos
yes Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle Senator Ingle yes
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan Senator Kernan yes
Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Senator need to be now Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator for
the.
Senator Stewart AS Senator Pinto
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Stewart
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator Pirtle.
The turtle.
Montoya as a member of the New
Mexico military institute board
of regents chairman commented
upon confirmation and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty six has been delayed
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president I hereby submit the
credentials of merry willow's
who is been appointed regent to
Thank you thank you Mr
president.
pursuant to Senate executive
order number eleven dated
January fifteenth.
Twenty one I move that the
explained.
Thank you they're very pleased
to present the credentials of
the merry.
She has a very distinguished
career in educating as well as
advocating on behalf of blind
she was a two thousand two blind
educator of the year and from
the.
Award given by the national
federation of the blind and not
in nineteen ninety seven she was
of the California chapter of the
national federation for the
blind which is also president of
the national association of
blind educators.
And she's very excited about the
kids getting back to school on
April the six.
And the again I'm very pleased
Thomas.
Centers we're debating the
employment of merry willow's
anyone wishing to bait.
C. nine Sierra to close.
regents and I ask for a roll
call vote.
That is where voting the clerk
to call the roll.
Senator Baca
Senator serve on this Senator
savant is yes Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg yes Senator Duhigg give
Senator guide goes Senator
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey Senator Hickey yes
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores Senator monos.
Senator Neville.
yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman yes Senator Tallman yes
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
visually impaired board of
regents for term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty four has been doing
confirmed by the Senate Senator
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president I hereby submit the
credentials of Herald Helen
to Senate executive message
number sixteen dated March
fifteenth twenty twenty one I
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
explaining conferee thank you
very much Mr president Mr
Edmundson has been teaching in
New Mexico classrooms for the
past eighteen years and is
has the utmost pride anyone who
knows Mr Edmundson will tell you
that he's passionate about use
in education his personal motto
knowing that there is an adult.
The generally cares about them
and loves them it is eighteen
years of teaching his presented
as a mentor teacher department
head and has been part of it
Senator suka superintendent's
advisory councils he's a firm
believer in community service
within the community these
include work with Christmas
anonymous prostate cancer
awareness campaigns in the
nation wide community service
challenge.
he is married to Andrea
Edmundson who is the current
principal of Carlsbad
intermediate school they have
four children and with that Mr
C. noted bait Senator Kernan
close Mr president just at the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Herald Allen
admits and junior as a region to
the New Mexico military
Senator Baca Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Candelaria Senator serve
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Hermio Senator Hermio
yes Senator Kernan Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
senator to subpoena Senator to
subpoena yes senator for the.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
senator Sanchez Senator smitteez
Senator souls Senator sold yes
Senator Stefanics Senators
apprentice Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Senator Baca yes.
confirmation and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty six has been duly
confirmed by the Senate Senator
Kernan you Mr president if the
body would stand and
Senator Lopez I thank you Mr
president I hereby submit their
credentials of Catherine and
gray who has been re appointed
regent to the New Mexico school
Pursuant to the Senate executive
message number ten dated March
fourth twenty twenty one I move
board of regents thank this is a
reappointment thank you senator
go ahead and explain.
I'm I'm sorry she she trained
for in Alamogordo at the school
for the visually handicapped she
also mora she is certified as a
braille teacher by the library
of Congress and as a teacher for
the visually impaired and
visually impaired instructors
already served a term and has
been president of the board and
has done so well in that
capacity that she has been asked
to be reappointed as a regent
visually impaired board of
directors and I ask for a roll
call vote.
Senator we're gonna first going
debate the appointment of
Catherine and gray anyone
wishing to debate.
Catherine and gray as a region
to the New Mexico school for the
blind and visually impaired
board of regents and I ask for a
roll call vote senators we're
voting.
Senator Burt Senator Wirth DS
Senator Campos Senator Campos
yes senator Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senator
savant is yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs Senator Griggs yes
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator need to be now Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator for
the year.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto yes Senator Pinto yes
songes Senator songes yes
senator smitteez Senator she
maybe chair Senators of the
vote.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn is Senator Stewart
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator dole many as senator
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes.
Thank you senator Senator turtle
Senator.
Senator Pirtle yes.
At
seven.
By a vote.
Of thirty seven the affirmative
zero on the negative the
appointment of Catherine and
gray is a member of the New
Mexico school for the blind and
the New Mexico state Senate
Senator Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr president fellow
senators please join me in
standing to congratulate
Senator Lopez thank you very
much Mr president I hereby
submit their credentials of
Gerry
Smethurst who has been appointed
regents to New Mexico school for
letter number lessons dated
January fifteenth two thousand
twenty one I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Gary Smith Hurst
as regent to the New Mexico
members I am extremely honored
to nominate Gary for this that
you know he and his wife Jane
have adopted six children with
multiple disabilities over the
Gary as a supporter of his wife
Jan are supporters of the
children's miracle network for
you and and children's hospital
and importantly Gary has been
You know we see a lot of stuff
we see we we get a sense of an
energy and a household and I
will never forget knocking on
I think three severely disabled
kids that they were taken care
of and and the love and care in
that house just was overwhelming
and and and and really taken
with with this in this household
and that will I'll always
remember Gary I mean just that
moment
wife Jane so with that stand for
questions about the nomination
Senator debating.
See no debate Senator o'neill
physically and this is a
visually impaired US board of
regents and I ask for a roll
call vote senators we're voting
the clerk to call the roll.
yes Senator Campos Senator
Campos yes senator Candelaria
senators have on this Senator
serve on this yes Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzalez
geo Senator Griggs Senator
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill Senator Hemphill yes
Senator had a meal Senator
Hermio yes Senator Kernan
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator D. should be no.
Senator need to be no.
Senator to subpoena yes senator
Senator Bob.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Senator Coleman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
affirmative there on the
negative the appointment of Gary
Smith hers as a member of the
New Mexico school for the blind
and visually impaired border
regions for term commencing upon
can we stand and congratulate
Gary Smith hers on this well
deserved honor.
visually impaired board of
regents and I know you'll to
Senator Griggs Senate race.
Mr president pursuant to Senate
executive message number eleven
New Mexico school for the blind
and visually impaired board of
regents.
Go ahead senator and explain the
conferee.
Thank you Mr president I've
She's a dedicated and popular
public servant and is currently
serving her second go round as
the Otero county clerk she's
with disabilities and is
currently serving as the vice
president of the New Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired foundation
who would like to comment on
robin thank you so much Senator
Griggs centers we're debating
the appointment of Robert Holmes
senator Byrd.
Thank you Mr president in the
thank.
into the school for the visually
impaired and she has a lot of
friends out there on top of that
she will be an incredible asset
to that board and look forward
Say no further debate Senator
Griggs close.
Misprision I asked that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of robin Holmes as
regent to the New Mexico school
for the blind and visually
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator brand.
Senator Brandis senator Byrd
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg.
We lost her Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Monero's Senator
Neville.
Senator Stewart AS Senator Pinto
yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Stewart S. Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
for the blind and visually
impaired board of regents
for Turkmenistan upon
confirmation an expired December
thirty first twenty twenty six
has been confirmed by the New
board of regents for the New
Mexico school for the blind and
visually impaired.
Message from the house of
representatives.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has appointed the following
conferees.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that order
out a consent calendar for the
newer members
under rule eight dash four there
is a process on the consent
additional five minutes total
for debate so you're kind of on
a shot clock in at the big goes
over five minutes then basically
the bill comes off.
off so I'm handing these out
we'll post it online as well so
the public knows that these are
on are these are bills that
Senator Pirtle and Senator
at this time three bills house
bill seventy five that'll be
Senator Stewart house bill
twelve Senator Ivey Soto and
house bill twenty again Senator
Any further announcements see
none senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent the
Senate stand in recess until
eight o'clock.
See no objections the Senate
