Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Hermio.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
All he would just tear would.
There he is.
Here.
The brutal.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Woods.
You now have a quorum Mister
president.
Thank you senators will you
please rise.
The indications are given today
The pledge of allegiance and
Spanish to be led today by
Senator by the a and the salute
to Mexico flight to be led today
by Senator Moores.
Good morning everyone thank you
the eighth century Buddhist
saying to shut today about.
May all beings everywhere
plagued by sufferings of body
and mind obtain an ocean of
happiness and joy by virtue of
May the blind to see forms and
the deaf hear sounds a those
whose bodies are worn with toil
the restored on finding propose.
week with sorrow find joy.
May the forlorn provide hope
constant happiness and
prosperity.
elements whatever diseases there
are in the world may they never
occur again.
May the frightened cease to be
as long as sentence beings
remain until then may we assess
to dispel the mysteries of the
world and then.
today's Senate session all
you'll to senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president good
morning unanimous consent we go
to that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
run that order business
announcements and miscellaneous.
it's very nice to have a real
diversity of of religious
thought and invocations in the
morning so thank you for that
cameras on the floor and in the
gallery.
See no objections so ordered
thank you Mr president and then
Mr president members of the
Senate unanimous consent to
Senator.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president I yield
to other members for any
announcements and then I can
give us a sense of our day today
president would Senator Ingle
yield Senator Ingle.
Mr up president are you a kind
of hunger today Senator Ingle do
have some for the president to
you today.
Maybe a sandwich or something.
Sorry what was in that family
which.
Well I'm just observed it and it
seemed to have a life of its
own.
Senator Lopez Mr president
animus consent to excuse Senator
serve on this seeing no
objection so ordered.
Any further announcement
get to third reading today the
plan will just work our way down
the list and see how we do
starting with Center Hamlin has
item number one when we get
there
present unanimous consent we go
to that our business messages
from the house run that order of
Business message from the house
the reader to read.
Message from the house of
representatives.
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
the journal so that the message
from the house has been
received.
And Mister president I'm
by the house and house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill three twenty five as
amended by the house in requests
the concurrence of the Senate
I thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go about
our business committee reports
on that order of business
committee reports reiterate.
Mr president your finance
senator George K. Munoz
chairman.
Just Senator what Senator Lopez
motion to adopt the committee
unanimous consent we go that
order business third reading of
legislation and ideal to a very
energetic and fired up Senator
Hamblen.
placing the committee
substitution for Senate bill two
twenty nine on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
the Senate bill two twenty nine
with the committee substitution
that has had a number of
conversations about it we've had
a committee substitution is
addressed every issue in the
exports ninety seven percent of
our agricultural products and
spends six point five billion
dollars a year buying food from
out of state.
money flowing through the New
Mexico economy in our state
here's what the healthy food
financing act would do it would
bring new federal money into the
state since healthy food
that's a CDFI.
The HFA will create a healthy
food financing initiative with a
fund of low interest loans
forgivable loans and grants to
which is signed off on this one
or more of the CDFI is a food
access organization and
equitable food oriented
development advisory board and
all New Mexicans the freedom to
choose what we eat what to eat
what nourishes us and whether we
do so by buying those foods at
the grocery store or by drawing
executive director last me a
food center she's available to
me in assisting me by telephone
seeing no objection your expert
witness is approved thank you Mr
president.
Senator Hamblen any further
anticipate all the thank you Mr
president I would just like to
say that this bill as I as I
read it.
Would go a long way to healing
New Mexico produce food and we
are right now so thank you
Senator for bringing this
forward.
Thank you center this panel we
do have further debate will have
Senator Kernan followed by
this and and tax committee and I
think you work very hard to
prepare and get ready to move on
and you know I think about small
community that at one time I
keep it open and I think this is
a kind of bill that would help
them to have stayed in business
so now all they have to rely on
the store but they do still have
some groceries but certainly not
the fruits and vegetables and
healthy things that we need to
to have in those small community
so I do appreciate this and I
much thank you Senator Kernan
center how to meal.
Thank you Mr president I rise in
support of the bill the people
at the left side of one of our
northern communities does this
children in the state have
limited or inconsistent access
to nutritious food New Mexico's
children have the highest rate
of food insecurity in the United
and those that most need Senator
Hamblen thank you for bringing
this bill left and I stand in
support thank you Mr president
thank you senator how to mail.
We do have further debate.
deal for question or two Senate
how many of Mr president I do
yield.
does your bill includes
senior citizen center or.
Or where we can get the food off
of the the farm so to speak and
Mr president Senator Woods of
recording my expert wasn't
witness this is a little beyond
sure that that food is safe.
Thank you for that information
president and and senator.
I see that was absent from the
we do have plenty of of food
shortages you know from from
where I live.
Find low for bread.
It is a it is a problem and it
would be great if you know I I
had a bill on this morning that
talked about.
use in.
it's ninety miles between gas
stations.
it's a little tough to run out
of gas.
And.
You know there's there's not any
gas stations there's nothing
there some little towns that at
of you doing this it would help
my district colossal thank you
Mr president.
Senator Morris.
Thank you Mr president what does
fellow Donna county Senator
talked about the challenges
their cultural industry was
facing that is your are this
Senator so the Senator good
senator from Donna County US was
talking about how labor cost
well well intended we're driving
up the the production of crops
and on and counties pretty much
been driven out so now the
culture industry down there is
very mechanical lies the fifth
that's a word
you know for instance of the
and other things and the
testimony by the good senator
from Dona county so it is
because of all these laws and
regulations and and are
requirements that has driven the
production of food out of that
producing crops for exports are
to other countries so my
question is is this memorial
concert is in a more this is a
fruits and have forced them to
go to these cash crops of cotton
and pecans that we're exporting
of the State sort of producing
point five billion dollars a
year on buying food for our
state and so this actually this
bill addresses smaller
productions of this this allows
rural communities which is the
small farms as we know as a
result of the pandemic many
people in terms of access to
food also the good senator
what's talked about how far he
has to drive to get a loaf of
bread there are food deserts and
larger operations the the bigger
farms this is an opportunity for
smaller farms women of color
communities to be able to get
hubs so Senator Moores Mr
president that actually doesn't
address the larger concern and
complex conversation that
Senator Cervantes brought up the
some of the richest farmland in
New Mexico what I'm hearing this
is an interesting underlying
problems of labor cost
regulatory environmental cost
farms.
Or any form can't survive on
producing these kind of products
are correct Mr president this so
this is actually address of the
labor cost of what these are
communities and rural areas
rather than the big farming
productions must present our
service doesn't do anything look
on farms and other farms from
actually producing fruits and
vegetables at affordable price.
Mr president Senator Moores no
this is a financing act this is
So Mister president this bill is
subsidizing the creation of new
forms on.
When New Mexico is actually
driven farms out of business.
everything I can do the last
number of decades the drive
farms out of business.
That's what we do New Mexico.
and we're I'm from up in Rio
Arriba county.
As our chief clerk knows when I
was a young person going to my
grandparents farm.
river valley I can't do that
anymore Mr president is no way
to get the water in the
regulations and be able to
produce are anymore.
So I'll important that land
business.
Driven up the price of our labor
during the price of regulatory
compliance.
Our water is a huge problem as
we all know Mister president and
so now that we've driven all
Mexico for hundreds of years my
ancestors walked up from Mexico
in sixteen nineties Mr
president.
They left Mexico to come to
a couple had a cow out of
tradition up in the forest
before services pretty much shut
that down.
We shut down farming in the the
acequia is of northern New
Mexico.
difficult to hire people who do
the labor anymore.
The regulations are put them out
of business so people are are
from a nor New Mexico have hobby
farms at this point if they can
rescue them with a program in
some extra taxpayer money that's
what this kind of bills due to
really want this body think
about it.
Drive up labor costs drive up
My ancestors used to farm and
worked the lands can't do it
anymore.
I can't do more point president
but now we're gonna come back
people.
And they claim we did something
we into anything but correct
this problem Mr president.
I wish people would realize that
as we move forward.
Every time you do one of these
We do have for the debate we
have center Pirtle followed by
Senator Rodriguez Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president with the
board I think the language says.
Two members from low.
Income.
Too low income farmers is that
eliminate if I'm reading this
correctly the large farmers that
the intention was was to
eliminate Mr president Senator
know the beauty of farming is
everything your whole life
savings into that.
Then at the end of the year when
you go to sell it the soul for a
loss well let me low income.
them Mr president members of the
body have to work a job in town
just further farming hobby.
And so you know I think we we
have to be careful with the way
we put things in here I think
house work on some language that
that focuses on the size of the
farm and not not the income
because I I do believe that was
the intent.
somebody who was successful at
farming.
Without a subsidy without the
subsidy.
So isn't that the person Mr
president members of the body
You know and and I think it's
it's it's kind of interesting
that
We we want to say looking at at
not want to include the input of
those that have been successful.
You know it seems like we were
going to approach weight class
warfare.
homestead and have grown at the
end of thousands of acres and
pass it on more generations.
Those are the people that we
need to be listening to.
One that we've actually
purchased a couple of US farms
from him that when he came from
Mexico we he had nothing.
And started the working.
That we want on this board
helping us make these decisions
and so we have to be very
careful who we exclude because
just because he was successful
doesn't mean that he shouldn't
we all want healthy food
financing.
but we got to be careful on on
how we right this type of
legislation.
You know we look at how much
food is is shipped out of New
Mexico it's pretty easy to to
see that we have a robust dairy
industry.
thirty six gallons of milk
produced per person per month.
So of course we're gonna have to
shift some of that out because
you know the average person
getting farm fresh foods is you
know all the apples come off at
the same time every year.
So for apple farmer you know if
you can find farm fresh apples
Increase in help the small farms
there's the there's a Senate
bill.
Stuck in finance.
Senate bill one eighteen.
Those are the things that we
have to do.
This provides financing the
other removes unnecessary red
tape.
So to speak to what senator
Morris was talking about
You know there's there's a lot
of food produced you can take
that apple.
Turn it into apple butter in
this presents and I'm sure she
remember that the story about
And the shelf life of an apple
is only two weeks.
In turn it into apple butter now
that's something you can sell
your round is a small producer.
Small farmer with five acres
apple trees isn't capable of
doing that.
So I think with this.
But I would urge the body that
as we move forward we look we
look at some of those issues
that Senator Moores spoke about.
So I think you know actions
speak louder than words this is
a step in the right direction
but there's a lot of other ways
that we can do this without just
providing more government thank
you Mr president.
Senator yes Representative
chambers so open it up any
further debate.
I also would like to stand in
support of this bill we heard it
in the finance committee and you
know that in New Mexico we have
one out of four children hungry
bigger now it's one out of three
children.
Were hungry and more adults we
have made great strides with
our.
to be strategic and resourceful
we need to find ways to ensure
that when we cannot find the
food nutrition the agricultural
To grow their own food so that
they can make it better for
others who are hungry.
And and not only for themselves
but for others so so many in New
Seems to me that it would be.
Good to not pass this
legislation because we would be
imagine truly getting up in the
morning.
And not knowing where my next
meal would come from.
Even if it's a piece of toast
fruit whatever it may be.
For this family in general and.
Yet when I look at this whole
big picture I think of how easy
And so I applied Senator
Hemphill I'm I'm sorry Senator
my goodness I had went blank
over here for just a moment here
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Hamblen Senator
Rodriguez we have Senator Ingle
followed by Senator Steinborn in
center for the Senator Ingle.
Representative farm service
agency is the one that controls
as of basically for all farmers
have to register their farms
like that but there are programs
that are available through the
farm service agency on a on a
loan to minority folks to buy
land and grow things like you're
talking about and it's way more
land for that if you're I'm in
the minority group and it's
already there has been there for
many years and is well
publicized and there's always
committee Mr Pell's there's no
question the yield Senator
Hamblen centering on.
D. O. to Senator Hamblen
absolutely.
Senator Ingle I would bet
a good revise steak and
surrounded by broccoli for cut
broccoli grown locally that they
know about that and know about
these opportunities because what
capital that the small rural
farmers will be able to to use
so thank you Senator Ingle this
president for for bringing that
up.
Thank you senator further we
president you know I heard this
bill and Senate finance and this
is kind of different from
commercial farming in the sense
that this involves nonprofit
system falls community
I'm lucky that I'm from Dona Ana
County and I see the work of
groups like last to me at.
Bringing people on the farms and
kids and this is kind of a
definitely service under served
communities in our state hi
represent I represent hats I
know you can hear me to this
mass but I'm really lucky to
represent the northern part of
community create new
opportunities to to create you
know those kinds of enterprises
as this Act would envision so
you Senator Steinborn Senator by
the.
Thank you Mr president I don't
need the sponsor the you'll just
want to make a statement of full
support I.
I'm trying to find the the fault
it's gone literally around the
world about seventeen times it's
in thirty seven different
legislatures very very proud of
that work but one of the things
I constantly told the media as
they were asking about that bill
lunch and so I just want to make
sure that you know when we talk
about a piece of legislation
like this it's the start of
something it doesn't guarantee
that you absolutely have to do
one thing one way or the other
habits I wish I'd had healthier
eating habits along the way I
might look a little different
than I do today I struggle with
it every single day Mr president
is rising full support I want to
thank senator Graham I think
Thank you Mr president with
sponsor field center handling
yield Mister president yes I do
the guild thank you Mr president
thank you a senator for bringing
the bill you mentioned the
good all over the Brockley so
just you know that's and that's
just something that happens with
broccoli I've actually tried to
grow broccoli couple times in my
garden not very successfully
but.
Mr president Senator Brandt that
is a very good question because
I think you have to incorporate
other things like how much time
are you putting into cultivating
on that can I do to use whenever
I do try to grow vegetables and
just a point of note my wife is
a vegetarian and I am the
carnivore in the family so I
growing broccoli I have had
success on kale.
And collards and sell dreams and
Swiss chard and I use neem oil
to take care of the if it's.
kale when I make those who
process gonna of which I have
figured out playing around with
the figured out the recipe from
all of garden so if anyone wants
to know how to make super
to her
but yeah that one that one grows
really good here but broccoli is
just one of those things that it
did just you know to be nice and
that kind of stuff so but I was
wondering you know we're when
we're pushing the.
The minimum wage I think it's
very difficult for the farmers
because like you said there's so
much time and effort that goes
difficult thing so appreciate
you know what the bill is doing
I appreciate helping our farmers
in anyway possible
but they never seem to make it
past the church door to the
farmers market so because they
just get taken up in and
everyone makes peach jam and
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor please email to them in
the field Mr president be more
happy to yield Senator Diamond
thank you senator Hammond I know
that the traditional Agrusa are
divide within an industry and so
I thank you for that my
experience with this on water
conservation district is I
realize that there are millions
of federal dollars that are out
there that are not accessing
is to allow small and an up and
coming farmers to access those
federal dollars to meet those
match and leverage the funds is
that correct Senator Mr
here it says that these dollars
will be used for low and
moderate income communities how
many community Senator would
qualify for this program.
depends on how much capital that
these collective agencies can
raise there's an opportunity for
five million dollars in pipe
private public partnerships that
are very excited about this
opportunity as this fund really
opens the door for access to
many more funds it's this the
healthy food financing act has
couldn't pass up especially
given that several of my
colleagues here in the Senate
are bringing forth at different
bills to help young farmers and
to help support that so it's I
the spending and earlier today
and debate we heard reference to
the FSA farm service agency that
federal organization along with
an RCS and some other agencies
are found in every county and I
a little bit of a match and I
think this program can really
grow I want to commend you for
bringing this forward also
mentioned in here you actually
some of this money can be put
towards value added production
my expert on that.
like is Senator Pirtle talked
about apple butter of fresh
produce to make it last longer
chili powder processing that
honey that's where some of those
leverage my dollars with this in
Sierra County we we have some
the sonic of vinegar you know
small little niche markets
they're popping up and so those
farmers markets opportunities
this bill twice very quickly in
finance we kind of get right
down to the dollar amount and
finance about but but before
that also in committee and I
want to commend you on your
for bringing forward.
Thank you senator Simon any
further debate senators.
Senator Hotmail for a second
time Mr president just one last
life of the worklight and so
with this project Mr president
in Abbey to empowers the youth
to learn to grow their own food
now the bounty of this guard and
projects in northern New Mexico
can take their lead and I want
to thank you again for bringing
this thank you Mr president
Senator how to mail.
Si no further debate.
there's Helga Garcia who's the
executive director of the
agriculture what are working
chair of the New Mexico Food
Network culture Policy Council.
She says agriculture would has a
community driven model building
economic activity inside New
Mexico Christina all the bonding
who is from the PNM rural caucus
says that we have to do is yes
we support the healthy food
supporting farmers and value
added agriculture lastly from
Duane chili Yazzie who is a
Shiprock traditional farmer
cooperative member he says our
mission is to attain a condition
state who struggle to keep
enough food on the table the
indigenous peoples of New Mexico
who number ten percent of the
state population struggle with
poverty high unemployment health
assist substantially address
those life needs it will provide
a tremendous opportunity for the
state of New Mexico to help us
for help ourselves and we as
farmers have the natural
resources and capacity to feed
communities to have access to
funds that otherwise would not
be available to them it provides
opportunities for rural
communities to reach out for
federal dollars and then plus
I think we are going to see some
great movie and forward in terms
of helping feed the people of
New.
Mexico so Mister president I
move the committee substitution
twenty nine.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator to run this.
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
yes Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos yes.
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
Senator yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores senator Morris
yes senator one else.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator Sanchez Senator Sweetser
yes Senators committees.
Senator Stewart is now Senator
so they are open yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator sure this Senator
Tallman.
By a vote of twenty four in the
affirmative to the negative
To the negative Senate finance
committee substitute percent
ability twenty nine has passed
the Senate center have an.
Mr president thank you thank you
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president ask
unanimous consent that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill two ninety
despite what was just whispered
in my ear this is not a license
plate bills are read that again
not a license plate bill this is
not create a new license plate
plate for those who have severe
severe mobility issues handicap
symbols so right now the
handicap are placed with they
can get that license plate with
license plate so that handicap
symbol does not is not an option
to guess if you want a UNM
global license plate or to make
because apparently some of the
license plates partial plates
will not except that symbol so
MPD one of the flexibility just
create thank you Mr president
Alexander questions.
Thank you senator Morris.
Senator.
Mr president unanimous consent
of the Senate that the rules be
suspended and the record show.
This president I move that
Senate bill two ninety nine as
amended begin a do not pass the
Senate floor substitute for
Senate bill two ninety nine as
amended be adopted and place on
a very similar concept so if we
as we've passed sixty some odd
specially plates and in New
And so what this would do is
allow for a generic plate
similar to the yellow and red or
the turquoise and yellow or the
chili plate that we have and
The other important part of this
is that people could change
state one year they wanted to
have the.
That they were a veteran and
then the next year they wanted
president makes it more
efficient
the specialty plates it seems
like we get one every session if
not to but looking at doing a
state of me goes sixteen total
you know there was some earth
shattering legislation we pass
there's only sixteen plates a
blood donor twenty one child
only four people have a certain
Mexico tech collegiate plates a
retired firefighter twenty five
plates.
present and your manufacture
plate.
Interesting one they have one
and so this would just eliminate
this system that we've created
and have a more standard plate
substrate yield.
Senator you'll deal.
Mr president Senator Pirtle is
this what we colloquially
referred to as the CBN
amendment.
Of put his name on it and ran
with it some two years ago but
yes this was the sapien Pirtle
transportation but we have
passed this language out of the
body before.
Thank you Mr our president I was
thinking that might be Senator
sapiens maintenance.
doing here so it's hard for me
not to be hypocritical and
saying it's not on friendly but
I will leave that to the body of
as a public policy decision are
is something I have support in
those with severe mobility
issues have the opportunity to
have that symbol on those
plates.
Thank you senator Morris any
further debate.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
For substitute the the yield to
a couple quick questions center
part of the world Mr president I
yield.
So Mister president senator of
of of of what happens to all
those.
one just like my neighbor has
they would be able to get it
anymore is that the case for
would we we use up the supply in
the warehouse the the the the
The specifics of the bill so we
can just take action to have the
original bill not be accepted
and then we can get on to the
discussions of the floor
just made we would go back on
the Senator Moores Original Bill
that's correct senator we were
just getting to some of the
specifics of the floor
substitute without having
accepted the floor substitute.
substitute well I would just for
discussion purposes maybe you
could make the motion just for
discussion purposes and.
Senator you made the motion but
Senate floor substitute for
Senate bill two ninety nine as
amended to be adopted in place
on final passage subject to
debate amendment or substation
ask for unanimous consent Senate
is resting unanimous consent to
Center for substitute has been
accepted we're back on the floor
substitute Senator Ortiz cannot.
alive.
Senator has been a that's
correct.
Then then fine thank you Mr
president so so Senator Pirtle
somebody said there was a
warehouse full of these
specialty plates already out
there would we continue to issue
those and then have this other
paid for and that's one of the
issues and Miss present center I
appreciate you bringing that up
that all of those plates that I
mentioned
we have to buy a hundred of them
creating of those first hundred
which is what we're trying to
eliminate but if we do have the
original especially plate those
will be used up and then moving
in their.
them would not spend money that
they didn't need to spend I
doubt they would
but I believe it's left up to
the director.
that that I can support your
your full your for substance.
Thank you senator participate
of.
Any further debate.
think there's more than sixteen
in Farmington and I just want to
make that on the record there's
probably something like two
hundred so just a FYI I just
want to bring that the fact that
plates there Senator Pirtle and
any further debate.
Say no further debate Senator
Pirtle to close.
Mr president I move that Senate
alternatives mended be adopted
and I ask for a roll call vote.
Senator Stewart voting on Senate
floor serves to present a bill
to ninety nine.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator how to meal.
senator Morris.
Senator Munoz Senator monos.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator propias Senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Yes Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator good Garcia.
Thirty seven the firm is in the
negative Senate floor substitute
for Senate bill two ninety nine
And no one else there we have
senator Morris to close Senator
Pirtle thank you Mr president
and that was a blast.
this and it is no more debate
was president had to farm
passage.
Senator Lopez Mr president in
This present with the sponsor
yield Senator Moores deals.
I thank you Mr our president and
senator safe in yield for a
question
Any further debate senators.
Senator Griggs do I ask a
question.
Si no further debate center
I'm sorry that amendment was
taken off so do now pass.
Well how many options do I have
Mister president one option
requested.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator sure rob this Senator
Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator how to meal Senator had
a meal yes Senator Kernan
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez VS Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
senator do should be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator propia.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Of yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Then Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator dole money as senator
Wirth.
Senator Campos yes.
Thirty.
negative Senate floor substitute
for Senate bill two ninety nine
has passed the Senate Senator
Moores thank you Mr president of
the lost amigo thank you all.
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record shows that all
action for placing Senate bill
three twenty eight on final
passage has been taken in that
members Senate bill three twenty
eight us it removes the six year
limitation on water and
sanitation districts gross
receipts tax increment in post
And the this allows so a point
two five a quarter percent of
the gross receipts within
businesses that are reciting
the needs for larger business
you know puts a burden on this
water sanitation districts so it
has been very effective and it
has been very successful and
have always had a very strong.
is now and at the present time
we have counties of Dona Ana
County San Juan and tiles that
have this water sanitation
twenty eight anyone wishing to
debate.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president would sponsor yield
Senator Gonzales deals.
Mr president and the Senator I
believe that there is more of
the way of this was passed
This presents there you said
there were San Juan County tells
County in Dona ana county.
are they allowed to have
multiples within the same
allowed to have more than one of
these
Options in this just the same
County.
on the south part of the county.
So is present Senator what
happens if we don't pass this.
What happens to those tax
increments.
we did the legislation this last
time for you know all the
different elections to take
place now they have found it
water sanitation districts on
the operate on a very limited
you know haha amount of you know
it's what is collected you know
from all the users.
all the water sanitation
districts that has never been an
election that is being close by
or defeated it's always been a
very large majority that support
this.
Mr president Senator Brandt the
that is correct.
Mr president senator have a
little bit surprised by that
because I thought the Senator
expensive when we made that
change.
Hello Mr president and the.
I would like to ask of consent
to have a an expert witness
Senator Brandt to my expert
witness you know just the way
the the flow of the election
process and the percentage and
Thank you Mr president
Senator I appreciate that I
guess my concern is that we're
taking a tax that was.
last time or is it just so the
ones that are in place to they
just become.
Forever taxes when the voters
voted for six year tax.
say that so a grandfathered into
this but any new water
sanitation districts would have
to take it to the voters for
approval.
concerns me that are the the
voters in these districts voted.
For a six year tax.
tax are you willing to approve
that.
But taking it back in and us
taking out of their hands and
saying up it's going to be a
permanent tax that even though
thank you senator Senator Brandt
any further debate centers.
Si no further debate Senator
Gonzales to close on the bill.
very small mechanism that does
help this water sanitation
districts.
And you know it has been very
successful and
so with that Mr president I move
that Senate bill three twenty
eight.
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record shows that the role has
bill three twenty eight tier
seats the the clerk to call the
roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator sure around this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator do
should be no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Senator pro yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
senator senator Sanchez knows
Senator shared no Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics Senator
Stefanics yes.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
members of thank you thank you
very much we're moving on to the
next order on the calendar.
That's item number four Senate
bill three point a Senate bill
twenty three as amended center
On final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
seeing no objection center for
the explain the bill I thank you
charge a higher copay than
copays that are permitted for
primary care anywhere in the
state were brought kind of
tactic Services are concerned Mr
president there was one
a date on the bill and so
An effective date excuse me Mr
president so we did add that is
January first twenty twenty two
thank you Mr president.
legislation is very well
intended but right now you can
go online you can find prices
for the services posted in
advance therefore the consumers
posted were pulling away from
bring transparent and we're
bringing the services under
insurance.
And then they get to control
what to do.
anymore and so I I understand
we're doing here I understand
the intent is good but it it's
well as I said this is like
driving a car off a cliff and
can say this for this over here
seventy five Bucks this over
here is fifty Bucks I get to
decide but when we let the
insurance companies decide
nobody knows what they are and
brink and I I for me this is a
moral issue as well with
different sets of morals but I I
believe it is immoral to
continue to rob people every
respect for this legislation for
the sponsor I and I did hear
this in committee understands
very very well intended and I
very much appreciate that thank
you Mr president thanks industry
coming from the insurance world
I don't think this is gonna
drive premiums dramatically out
but people should be aware that
when you shifted from one place
it costs what it costs.
actually did this a year ago for
chiropractors as they give it
with.
Occasional therapy and physical
chiropractors acupuncturists
physical therapist so on and so
forth are not primary care.
Senator.
Thank you for your further
debate.
Our he was president Woodrow
PT's out of the specialist copay
into the primary care PEUC copay
Christmas present Senator.
Thank you.
I think was in same thing
different ways agency presents
under so right now what I
believe chiropractors will be
considered a special so if you
are Blue Cross blue shield or
Hickey yield.
Senator Hickey deals.
Yield to sound more
are on the back on this on my
chart does usually says us like
fifty dollars how much is it for
specialist usually and who who
who is considered a specialist
to some examples.
depending upon the plan of wind
plans have bronze gold and
silver.
Levels of it can very from.
As to how much it may be some
specialties because they are in
very short supply are able to
potentially get higher rates
from an insurance company in
Thank you Mr preservationists
ascena specials but if you go to
like a cardiologists or some
like that you're you're gonna
pay fifty to a hundred dollars
versus ten to twenty five
level again if you pay more in
premeditated lower in premium
and senator Morris if you pay
more in premium you're generally
paying less out of pocket in a
And I'm more question Senator G.
we've actually had to do this in
putting together your panels are
you just mentioned the how hard
it is to get a cardiologists
human action in state but
they're super specialists that
We all just or other other all
specialties.
Mr president and Senator Moores
those explanations so this
Senator agency presents under
Padilla is there anything in
this bill than that prevents
say again Americans numbers of
save current specials copay is
fifty dollars for currency a
nurse practitioner it's ten
the specialist would have been
for everyone including the nurse
practitioner center by the thank
you Mr president I now have an
excellent Nibert on on the floor
here Mister president want to
Information from expert witness
says center Moores of Senator
Stewart would like to have
Senator Hickey as expert witness
we can put that in front of the
body thank you Mr president in
us sent to allow Senator Hickey
allowed to wonderful with me and
my as an expert witness thank
you Mr wonderful X. for when the
senator Senator Hickey.
Do need a question repeated
prevent insurance companies from
raising their co pays to what
specials level now is to and set
of actually reducing costs for
copays actually raises a.
the primary care copay and if
the primary care co pay is fifty
dollars is the same as a
specialist the insurance company
generally they do not put him in
the exchange plans and and their
general plans but for a
particular insurance product
president secretary thank you
doctor ready
So with this so in your opinion
having particular panels with
this provide any incentive for a
insurance companies not to
include chiropractic care center
for the.
Thank you Mr president allow
allow my expert to respond to
insurance company of basically
has to provide basic services as
is outlined in the ACA and as is
further extended by the state
chiropractic services even a
bronze plan our required
sedition you nod your head up
and down yes defending realize I
think is present and I and I I
tend to agree with what's Dr on
the the two minutes of paper
cuts that we have done the
health care medicine New Mexico
over the years a request will
actually kill you if you call
yourself an on off and we're
business in the state in which
took a tour of health care for
some reason.
I guess it makes us feel good
like in acts like we actually
actually did something so what
we're doing really is driving up
Thank you Mr president I just
wanted to rise to support this
bill because it it views this
issue not from the perspective
of what's best for the insurance
but who because of the of the
incredibly high copays they
would be required to pay out our
table to and and.
They go for treatment and avoid
having later much more expensive
surgeries or other
hospitalizations required so I I
patients and potentially for the
good of the insurance I support
this measure.
Thank you senator anticipate any
further debate.
It's.
Thank you Mr president for the
sponsor yield and but it E.
health yes Mr president I will
yield Mister president does this
bill and then.
Representative respectfully
disagree on that
The bill pretty clearly amends.
The health care purchasing Act.
purchasing Act does a man the
benefit structure for state
employee plans.
And I applaud this Mr president
because I think
at this present time master
In the past I have sponsored
bills.
Myself that seek to amend
benefit plan structure two years
ago.
the potential increase our cost
shifting between different
categories.
And I tend to think that will
happen I I don't think that this
goes on and and and that's why I
was present I raise that.
Find that may happen up for in
the private market but I think
for us there's a real question
And I and I and I raise that
because I think we shouldn't be
cavalier about.
About imposing new costs on the
In the wrist Management Division
health plan budget meaning that
premiums are not covering the
cost of providing health
state is essentially
subsidizing the health care
benefits of local public bodies.
and there is a reckoning coming
unfortunately I think where we
are going to see health care
premiums for state employees
not been vetted by the Senate
finance committee.
and so the chairman is not here
I'm not going to make a motion
but we just as a matter of
With our M. D. with their budget
and these sort of changes to the
benefit plan really need to be
evaluated.
Legislative appropriators
because it's going to come with
Thank you Mr president and I
stand I rise to support this
bill Senate bill twenty three as
amended
do.
many individuals out of the
hospital have they've kept
people from having surgery and
in some areas of the state where
services it just so happens that
at the state under risk
management in group benefits of
under governor bill Richardson
plans so I think this would
equalize the playing field thank
you very much.
Thanks manage any for the debate
centers.
Center having to do it.
comments regarding power pack to
Care I feel that because of the
weak monthly adjustments that I
have the damage that I did to my
not having to rely on pain
medication or excessive use of
anti inflammatories or anything
like that and several years ago
chiropractors should be able to
be part of this so that they can
be continued considered as part
of preventive care and I feel
that this provides that
the a closed on the bill thank
you very much Mr president I
want to thank the body for the
questions in the comments I
thought it was all very good on
the bank my expert witness Dr
Martin Hickey Senator
think this is just a good move
for our state so with that Mr
president move that Senate bill
twenty three as amended do now
pass and I ask for a roll call
vote centers we're voting on
Senate bill twenty three as
Senator Baca.
Senator Bob Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Candelaria no senator
Sharon this.
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
DS Senator Duhigg.
Yes.
Now Senator Gonzalez.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Hermio Senator Hermio
yes Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator Moores snow Senator my
nose.
Senator Neville.
senator for the yes Senator
Stewart a test Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator Schmidt is no senators
to their Lopez yes Senator
severe lovers yes Senator share.
Senator share yes Senator
Shendo.
Yes Senator Steinborn S. Senator
Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Senator Woods no Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes senator Byrd.
Senate.
Thank you senator we're moving
on to the next order on the
calendar Mr president.
I apologize and ask you please
started I did herniated discs in
my back quite severely of had
weakness and certainly some pain
but I do want to note until
this last week I saw as
specialist and and back pain and
I will not have surgery and so I
want to compliment to the
physical therapists and
order of business on the
calendar we have item number
five Senate bill sixty one as
amended.
Senator T. Sabina.
to debate amendment or
substitution.
Say no objection Senator is
appended explained about the
thank you Mr president this bill
is an effort to at.
improving the access to health
care for rural New Mexicans it's
a bill that.
Creates the rural primary care
clinician program.
To recruit doctors or other
health care professionals and it
was amended in in the tax
committee to and no it was
amended in in general cultural
And then be able to to to assure
them that they they would be
able to.
This is a little different from
the other Representative the
loan repayment programs that are
available in that those
programs.
for the available dollars and
and this is one where they could
make some and in those dollars
frequently run out I I should
add that before everybody is
able to get to claim those loan
professionals that are able to
work in their particular clinic
and with that I'll stand for
questions thank you senator to
subpoena senators we're debating
Senate bill sixty one as amended
trying to line up an expert
witness in case I can't answer
Senator breads.
Line of questioning but once you
get your expert witness
connected Senator you can just
introduce who that expert
difficult questions so if we
wanna you know
Hi I'm reading resident senator
do you remember the show
northern exposure.
I'm sorry which show northern
I I do recall that there was
some program about a doctor in
Alaska.
Yes vaguely I I don't think I
president I yield Mister
president Sir did you watch
northern exposure I did in the
early years Mr president Senator
Brandt this presents internal if
you're like me I really enjoyed
days of of wanting to see a
moose walk through my my
hometown.
This presents a Senator yeah
after watching that show I I I
but the thank you for that and I
I do appreciate you being over
there tracking with me that was
that was pretty awesome so thank
you Mr president center and I
got to.
they did there where the doctor
was brought in to that area and
the the reason he was willing to
do that was to have his loans
repaid.
the the the primary care clinics
but it sounds like it was
exactly the same otherwise.
Mr president CERN if I remember
the show correct because I did
then they paid him by by giving
him a around money to live in a
place to live and by paying off
his loans and so I just kind of
wondering if that's what we're
talking about.
I think this is a brand new
program we're just we're just
starting this one it's it's it
differs from other Mr president
Senator bread differs from other
that and when I was just
wondering if you knew because I
know you've worked on these
types of legislations throughout
the years that I've known you
gonna ask my expert witness
that.
David Roddy from the primary
care association and he says yes
we've had loan repayment
programs in the state of for
about twenty years now and that
state once they get in place or
they just come until you know
they usually have a certain
number year contract and then
did they leave or how does that
work.
And and Mr president and Mr
ruddy and Senator Brandt Mr
Radhi reminds me that there was
after their three four five
years Representative they they
go back to wherever they came
from because they have other
reasons.
For live locating their.
serving that they get paid back
on their loan.
The commitment to Mr president's
Senator Brandt the commitment is
for two years.
But they're they're loan is
repaid in quarterly installments
Sir I appreciate that all
continue listen I know that
doctors committee probably has a
little bit more expertise in
Thank you Mr president and
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and
senator is I stand before you
today as a living example of
the the federal government into
the public health service I did
that in K. M. to Arizona it was
so people to stay.
Secondly I would like to point
out and not so and it go to Klay
at the university of New Mexico
College as well and the data
shows that residents as opposed
to medical students are about if
sixty percent chance of staying
in that area and that may be
whether without taking a loan
where is medical students only
about twenty five percent.
care shortage in the state the
report on health labour in New
Mexico documented and this was
there is a deficit in the state
of three hundred and sixty five
both rural and urban but in fact
when part time positions are
brought into it and there are
state so there is a shortage but
something like this bill will
help people go in state
particularly through the
gigantic gap that we do have in
primary care.
And with that I'd be happy
yields for any questions or
otherwise it is Mr president and
certainly support of this with
the sponsor yield for a few
questions please and RT subpoena
Mr president senator Chamisa be
glad to thank you very much
Mr president Senator Schmedes
yes you're right with there is
no appropriation in this bill
but we once we create the fund
it would be able to accept
Contract you know could it
becomes in a vehicle for for for
accepting money which would then
be available for this fund
hopefully in the future will
will be able to come up with
I know not exactly every state
agencies is gonna say Hey we've
got all this money sitting
around just waiting for a new
fund but what would they be able
to bit pull over the money into
Senator subpoena.
says he thinks that that this is
such a important issue that
there there is a possibility the
deal H. might put some money in
but the definitely this is
something that the federal
know I'm I'm glad to hear that I
I'm I'm glad we're we're
creating this and I I just yeah
of two years and I'd like I said
I'm not I'm not being critical I
just would would love to hear
more information and I don't
know what the data shows as far
most of these programs would
require a three year commitment
could you just tell me a little
bit of why we chose to in
instead of three which I think
B..
Thank you Mr president and and
from the clinics in the
communities he's worked with
over the last twenty years he
thinks that about forty to fifty
percent of the of the physicians
community an additional period.
Okay Mister president center I
don't see anything in in the
bill that precludes the
particular agreement I I think
they they could I I don't know
if that's true or not but it it
seems that way as the bills
written
on page five seven jumping
around the the organization and
I I think you alluded to that
this is for for clinics it says
in eligible organization shall
have nine months to recruit a
clinic or somewhere.
They are going to apply to the
D. O. H..
For this program and then they
will get the award.
be hard to find it's a you know
somebody that's fairly
the I don't know just someone
that's hard to find for that
community after the nine months
what what would happen after
that would it kind of go away or
what what happened there.
Mr Roddy thinks that it would be
easily negotiated if they
haven't been able to secure
let's say that you know of of
the specialist of some type of
they're really focusing on
with the D. O. H. to extend the
time period so the the that just
gives it a starting framework
they can't just sit on the money
into another make it available
to any other clinic they could
issue is is we're just starting
this but I'm hoping someday we
can maybe tweak this depending
on what the deal which is
experiences and we have a
standing balance in the fund
we will we'll send the award
I I I kind of what you know as
long as they meet the
eligibility so that would be
just another way to do it I
guess would be a little more
were to change it but I I also
Mr president center had a
question about the rural aspect
I mean I I see rural is in the.
The the the bill title really
not trying to be critical I just
want this to be a good bill and
the the condition is a health
care underserved area
which the way I read it it
care is not being provided and
some of our cities don't have
sufficient primary health care
so are are we just going to
leave that in the in the rules
are religiously I guess leaving
that up to the deal H. to define
some areas for example the south
valley of Albuquerque is an area
that's been included in the
federal designation of a of a of
a medically underserved area and
rural areas as you know yes and
Mr Mister president and center I
think that's something they
could keep track of at the end
of your bill there's going to be
a report generator we're gonna
there is a and I'm well I'm well
aware of that federal exit
designation because operate one
of those hospitals and you
wouldn't really consider it a
in a you know suburban area but
I I don't think that's a major
concern of mine I just I because
I think it's something we can
track it some of the delays can
and I think we can come back and
say okay where are these awards
going out and how have we done
and and do we need to tweak that
or not and I think as your bill
committee.
Do we have any further debate.
Thank you for a second time.
Thank you Mr president and
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and
primary care of void in this
state there is a bill that has
believe unanimously passed the
house house bill sixty seven
social work the care management
and so on the goes into creating
a team that
time the request for funding for
a program like this but this
part this bill sets the stage
for it and I'm hoping that it
details Senator smitteez and how
we would put this together thank
you very much Senator Ortiz Y.
is amended do now pass and ask
for a roll call vote senators
we're voting on Senate bill
sixty one as amended.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Yes Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator how to meal Senator how
economy are yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator probe
Senator propias Senator
Yes ma'am Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator share.
Representative Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Steinborn as Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes.
This is very have a we're gonna
go to Senate bill sixty one as
amended has passed the Senate
we're gonna Senator Ingle
explains vote.
Thank you Mr certainly support
this bill and I know it's it's
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino the thank
you Mr president and thank you
Senator Ingle for that that's a
source of funding for this
Thank you Mr president so Center
Ivey Soto I think is in the
house so we'll go at this point
item number seven which is my
bill I do know there is a call
on that bill so probably need to
chamber we can going to put that
on and then we'll call.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the record show all action for
placing Senate finance committee
substitute percent Bill Gates on
Senator Morris was present with
about five minutes my Google is
about to arrive and so give me
time I don't know I'm looking at
right here just around the block
Senator okay.
This press not just that the
call center be removed on.
You want to put that in motion
form.
M. S. R. Mr president I'd make a
motion to remove the call center
were on the call.
And then I yield to you Senator
Baca.
I was just going to object Mr
president okay.
I remove my objection.
Thank you senator.
consent to remove the call so we
need to go through the process
of actually with the people
voted for the call to remove the
call center and I believe
Senator goes did ask unanimous
I concur with removing call
center Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator Byrd.
Yes.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Pirtle not being in the
building.
Percent of our landing in the
chamber.
Mr president.
Center I'm feeling this may be
a.
A comfortable afternoon for us
in our seats unanimous consent
Senator Pirtle the you can care
in removing the call and Senate
finance committee so if they
were sent ability.
Image press I know nobody
we're back in the bill senator
Senator a fourth.
I thank you Mr president
Senate Bill Gates allows the
I. B. to adopt hazardous waste
rules more stringent than
federal law in each case thanks
to the amendment on Senate
finance there must be
provide consistent New Mexico
focused environmental oversight.
this is particularly important
to where federal regulations are
either nonexistent.
Are one of the things New Mexico
could accomplish with Senate
bill eight include regulations
of P. fonts which Apollo floral
out Valentine substances.
a real issue with those
impacting water.
So the just a Senate bill latest
put New Mexico in controlled
environmental protection rather
regulations should be the bass
line and not the ceiling and
federal law specifically given
the state's authority to develop
rules to deal with air and
Two Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill eight
amendment sponsored by senator
William E. Scherer Senator
share.
what the amendment as so Mister
president.
Well I think this is a pretty
simple amendment yes it's
several pages or with several
paragraphs long but really the
the gist of it it says
here so that a standard it was
unachievable couldn't be set.
And so one of the the concerns
here is that.
by the technology available
today thus completely destroying
whatever industry we wanted to
destroy.
And so that's all this amendment
does I think it's a very simple
Thank you Mr Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president and I
appreciate Senator share
For different reasons R. one and
perhaps most importantly would
undo the work that was done in
the Senate finance committee
Senator Candelaria actually put
guard rails that were requested
will require a a showing up
before the board moves forward a
couple specific things
the current law already requires
those considerations are weighed
against public interest
including public health and
social economic values as they
should be.
technologies and it's it's much
more first prescriptive than
current law and really will take
away the flexibility that's
needed to consider each unique
circumstance.
air loss at all so that's a new
term.
And the challenges that.
to be able to weigh the cost of
controls against the public
health implications and that's
the way that it's currently done
in what would be done if this
bill were to pass.
The standard as I understand it
would take away Senator
Candelaria is amendment that was
in the Senate finance committee
substitute and I just think that
was the amendment requests by
industry agreed to buy the
for those reasons with
respectfully oppose the
amendment.
You are for the debate on the
amendment Senator Candelaria
thank you Mr president and I
that would be undertaken by
either the state board or the
Albuquerque local board is also
governed by a larger body of
law.
when someone challenges a rural
and that's what I think is
really been the tension in this
bill is.
A good degree of fatalism.
Those that exist under current
law already accomplish I believe
what this amendment purports to
accomplish.
Both in this state and in other
states and.
One of the kind of key pieces of
administrative rulemaking is
they cannot be arbitrary or
put in place standards that
simply were not achievable or
that we're not feasible in any
way or impossible for would
result in too much cost to
industry or the consumer.
this amendment purports.
To create is a substantive right
so it's it's it's not necessary
For rulemaking would handle this
ammendment Senator Wirth said
what the amendment does is it
takes away an actual substantive
right protection that is in the
bill currently.
federal law it needs to provide
by substantial evidence which is
more than just fifty fifty.
There is a heightened
specific direction.
To review the rulemaking.
If the rulemaking was indeed
order as I think some fear in
The amendments in the bill
before you find the court the
jurisdiction and direction to
strike that kind of rule down
fly because it's not necessary
restates the law.
While at the same time removing
the actual substantive
protections that were placed in
the bill I must respectfully
Senator is riveting Center for
member number one anyone else
wishing debate.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president to stand
to rise up against this
board back in the time when we
up.
When we worked on I'm trying to
get rid of the Albuquerque up
brown cloud which was caused by
with particulate matter and so
we reduce those particulates by
simply requiring a construction
did no burn lights with regard
to what's does that
that used to now now they make
them so different but back then
wood stoves and fireplaces had a
seems really addressed to the
oil and gas industry and those
kinds of emissions well really
these local organizations are
dealing with unique and local
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator to close and
senator member number one of
thank you Mr president.
So I'm talking about this we
And so when I think about the
broader public interest.
I think we everybody everybody.
they're too many trucks on I.
forty and so now we're going to
give.
The the I. B. or Albuquerque the
ability.
whatever number on I. forty at
any given time.
What does that do to the broader
public interest of Commerce.
What is that due to the broader
And what's the cost of that.
It was also mentioned that.
Substantial evidence has to be
used.
The fear Mr president.
Is that substantial.
Is also subjective.
Broader public interest is
That the legislature has decided
not to court.
What what it what is it what we
can do because it's always been
a a problem of mine.
And I think we've got evidence
of that just this year.
Of how the courts have decided
year and in the past I
appreciate that there's rural
southern appreciate that most of
the time.
The courts follow those rules.
Substantial evidence
requirement.
I think can be manipulated.
To shut down anything.
We're going to set a standard
now because we found substantial
evidence.
Yeah we're gonna destroy that
industry.
that says the state of
California has determined that
this causes cancer.
It doesn't matter what you pick
up in the store there is that
warning label the state of
California.
Everything the state of
California has decided causes
cancer we are essentially.
Without this ammendment.
Allowing Our Environment
Everything potentially.
In my concern Mr president is if
it can be done it will be done.
As I said before I am in favor
of New Mexico.
As a as a state.
decisions that are detrimental
to the state.
Because what is public interest
as was talked about this public
interest only air.
Which may not be that important
Santa Fe was pretty darn
important Los crucis.
So that's what this ammendment
is about.
Over the state of New Mexico
outside the federal government.
But not to the point.
We have mining industry.
And some of that mining is just
sending gravel and what we do is
Santa gravel as we make rolls
out of.
By saying that what we have to
do has to be technologically
available.
I think makes a lot of sense.
I think it's it's the right
own water.
And we don't have to come back
later like we've done with some
other things in state.
Why did we give the governor
that much power.
but the cabinet secretaries work
at the will of the governor and
again this is not this governor
it's any governor in the future.
So with that Mr president.
vote senators we're voting on
Senate floor member number one
the Senate finance committee
says to to Senate bill eight to
the chamber please.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Gallegos
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez.
No Senator Gonzales now Senator
Griggs.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator had a meal no Senator
Kernan.
Moores Senator Moores yes
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
No Senator Pinto no Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pro.
Senator pro Now Senator
Rodriguez.
Sedillo Lopez no Senator Sedillo
Lopez no Senator sure.
Senator share yes Senator Shendo
Senator Shendo no Senator souls.
no Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman no senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator one knows yes.
Senator Munoz yes.
I apologize Senator so thank you
Mr president so these other
sixteen members here I ask
unanimous consent that all
sixteen of them be voted on at
Send the reader to read Senate
floor amendment.
Excuse me Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill eight amendment sponsored
Mr president members of the body
puts in an opt out so that
counties are rural counties that
if the the ivy puts more strict
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president
this is a an unfriendly
amendments again I think the
point of what we're doing here
travel to the actual area that
they're looking at
it allows the state to.
To an act those regulations and
Anyone else we have centers
committee.
Mr president I'm I'm I'm really
sorry about this speaking with
server keys commuter real quick.
the synopsis again of of them
and please I just I didn't quite
hear thank you Mr president
senator simply put it's an opt
cutter approach isn't working so
if we want to to really take
that issue and believe it and
run with it then we should allow
Hidalgo any of those counties
that they know best that they
have that option that if they
would prefer the federal.
Regulations than they can do
fall back to those and it puts
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Pirtle
I really like the concept
because we just have such a.
in the majority of the counties
in New Mexico being more more
conservative rural and then.
The population density is higher
there.
So I I like that idea
however I I would like to ask
Miss present center what about
the very nature of the entire
You know do do even I guess what
I'm asking is if if the states
start to get to preempt in the
states get to.
president you Senator for the
question that you know I think
the way that this is written it
allows home rule counties would
allow Bernalillo county to
create their own rules.
ensure that that everybody has
options
that they can just defer back to
the federal the federal
regulation and so I think this
allow the counties that are home
rule to have that same option.
Mr president.
Thank you Mr presence I I think
what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna
copy and paste your amendment
further debate on the amendment
etcetera participate now.
Thank you Mr president and with
the sponsor the amendment yield
to the question Senator Pirtle
the old agency present I would
You know Mr president I do not
know believe you had a bill a
few years ago that dealt with
drones that I think you know the
Mr president Mr president
Senator you've got a great
memory the that was a very minor
asterisk in the history of the
state Senate
county may may take a very
different attitude toward air
quality than than than where I
live and doesn't the doesn't the
regulations that that won't
affect everybody in surrounding
areas and possibly the entire
state.
Mr president that's why they can
how you would even argue that
point but it would just allow
the county some some flexibility
to make some decisions for
themselves they're not gonna be
you know having open meetings or
Thank you Mr president I I just
think good that it does create a
a possible dilemma that that
the.
My air quality would be
Any further debate on the
amendment.
Scene then Senator pernah close
on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president and I
polluters in the world and we
aren't allowed to of obviously
regulate them.
But yet we put policies in place
impossible to produce our energy
here at a much cleaner less
polluting of way.
Which then forces us to buy
things from China that were
produced in a very dirty way and
what we're doing a better job so
we should produce as much energy
produce as much as we can here
and if we continue to make
policies and and put in policies
that makes it impossible to
other nations are going to be
polluting at a higher rate than
we are.
So I would urge the body to
really look at this and say do
we respect the counties enough
to make the decisions for the
to worry about it up there
belina Bernalillo so I think
this is a a good compromise I
think this.
Mmhm is a bridge built between
eight as for unanimous consent.
Roll call.
Senator.
We are voting on Senate floor
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Campos now senator
Senator Gallegos is.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales now
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator hada meel.
Senator how to me no Senator
Kernan.
Senator Moores Senator Moores
yes senator one else.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
No Senator Pinto no Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator Popenoe Senator
Rodriguez.
they'll office.
No Senator Sedillo Lopez now
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
No imminent Senator Steinborn no
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Brandt yes.
Twenty one.
sixteen bridge builders in the
state Senate.
We are back on the bill Senators
anyone wishing debate on the
bill.
Senator Woods.
the sponsor to yield a but I do.
I had a long talk with the
secretaries candy.
The other day about the funds
And I don't know exactly how
it's measured but it was.
The federal government was
Nobody really knows what what
the health effects of this
year's.
And seventy parts is is way
And I just the secretary Kenny
what.
What he thought the state.
Should be.
Five to six.
And you see Mr president.
That's kind of disturbing.
But what's disturbing is we
really don't know.
We really don't know what that
might be the if the federal
Pretty tough it's pretty tough
standard to to get to.
And and what it will take a
Representative what it will
take.
Laws that are being presented
during this session.
You know I have a real worry
that we may have a.
Objection to the bill.
Is that we're not using you know
scientific data of any kind to
set the standard we're just
And I forget what bill it was it
it says well we're not going to
allow any of this.
In the standard well as we learn
I'm heard wells what Senator
Candelaria said.
Well if you can't medium wealth
or if it's impossible to meet
will then.
there's a settlement number if
there's a.
limit to the insurance.
What's the to Caesar to settle
instead of going to court.
So Mr president I appreciate the
time.
Thank you Center was we do have
further debate senator
Candelaria followed by Senator
Lopez Senator Candelaria.
support of this measure and as
I've mentioned before Mr
president members even in
committee for the bill is being
presented this is a an important
issue for the south valley of
there over the years Mr
president members of the Senate
we've had some leakage into the
water table we've had a lot of
issues that existed and still
drive from west side to the east
side you can certainly see
The issues that existence not
just from those who are burning
in our fire places but there are
issues about air quality
working with of course through
the I. B. which is of course who
knows the statewide entity but
that area as well as even going
down down to Mountain View to
neighborhood association we
worked with them we're grateful
that Secretary kini came to a
issues that exist so Mister
president this is it's not just
for Albuquerque but you come up
into the county of mora when we
look at hazardous waste for some
just recently this is an issue
Mr president that I I am very
hopeful that if this measure
passes and is signed we'll
continue to help our communities
to give them a voice and make
protected thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Senator Lopez any
further debate centers.
Senator Griggs followed by
Senator Baca then Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Griggs.
in secretary canny.
But I'm not sure the next
secretary all have the same
amount of confidential and show.
the Senator on them on page five
of the bill of lying to we talk
about a definition of I think
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president want to make sure
you're on the right you are you
on the substitute bench Mr
president and etcetera I may not
She page page
Then look like damning the right
place Senator of.
what we believe somebody believe
substantial evidence here's.
Thank you Mr president on Senate
you'd think of as a
preponderance of the evidence
which is just barely moving the
needle you know fifty one
percent of the preponderance
substantial evidence is an
so what we've done here is put
in an increased evidentiary
threshold that has to be met and
it's a term that's defined again
this is the language that was
requested as I understand it by
industry and senator Candelaria
I very much appreciate worked
with secretary Kenny
eloquently said from practicing
in this area it's just going to
put one more additional guard
rail.
doubt that the criminal it's not
clear and convincing that's
another civil but it is a
threshold is more than
preponderance I think that's the
key and it's it's a well defined
legal term.
Mr chair it is a defined term
well understood by our courts.
Thank you Mr president centered
and I I did look back at my mind
chicken scratching and it's it's
Starting on line twenty you know
we talk about more stringent
van then we talk about
substantial evidence and.
And there.
We talk about at least as
stringent.
So.
Yeah we don't necessarily help
ourselves but I am I'm.
You know potentially concerned
we we hurt ourselves are when we
when we don't do that.
five we say that a county or a
municipality meeting the
qualifications under for.
What what who is that is that
every city and county or or how
can that be determined.
So Mister our president and
dash to which is the definition
section.
And it defines a local
authority.
Are any of the following
political subdivisions of the
one a county that was a class a
County as of January first
nineteen eighty.
Chair Mister president center
we're talking about Albuquerque
and Bernalillo county Mr
president Senator Griggs correct
air board they have been
exerting that privacy.
For quite a while under this
provision but that's the only.
The only allowed county or
instance and in our as I read it
I could go back in and dig out
weather's Albuquerque or
Alamogordo that might be one of
their their shady show the the
the local body which would be
Albuquerque who who controls in
that instance Mr prevention.
Sedillo Lopez shaking her head
so they have joined together to
form a joint board to address
that issue I think that's the
one.
collaborative city County Board
just like I think is you know
and many we have them here city
county joint jurisdiction over
an area.
potentially Otero County could
set its own guidelines under the
air quality at.
So again and this goes I think
and expand this to Otero County
in Alamogordo then they could
but remember the local.
County commission or the local.
is built in by its very nature
so even if Senator Griggs were
to open this up I have a feeling
you're.
Local folks would not be too
but I think that.
It's it's an interesting
discussion to have about how
think about in a and address
show thank you Mr president
thank senator.
Thanks have a great to do it
further debate will Senator Baca
About.
The brown cloud over Albuquerque
Mr president and and how that
to the amendment we had earlier
you know and I thought that
amendment was a really good idea
because people need to take care
through local authority this
this bill seems to give a broad
expansion of that power over you
know many districts and yes I I
This is what's referred to in
the populace says red tape.
and this this bill represents
one more approach to that
should a contain whatever it is
they contain and threshold is
being raised to from no more
stringent to at least as
stringent as federal standards
rate upward and upward and
upward pushing to the top were
eventually there will be just a
kind of the theme of the session
can we what we can breve how we
have to how the companies have
to store their fluids what what
concentrations of error are
allowed even though you're in a
that their storage tank isn't
quite
up to snuff so they have to
undergo or undertake this
transformation to get to this
point it is least as stringent
single year where where is the
improvement where is it where it
has it has been economic that we
still rank last has it been as
elements of this state and our
health and that sort of thing
and I think that a you know
taking the steps further and
this is just one of many that
we'll see this year go through a
again you know you will
certainly see me opposing this
and and and any bill like it
because of this restriction on
freedom local freedom which
carries down to individual
in this direction thank you Mr
president.
Thanks Center walking we do have
Senator Gallegos followed by
Senator Kernan Senator Gallegos.
Mr president I'm grateful for
and and I kept thinking I'm on a
school board and we always like
to have local authority in.
Appreciate the center and the
drafter putting local authority
Hi the fact that is in
Albuquerque only bill that Mr
president so with the sponsor
healed up Senator Wirth thank
into discussions of this and and
I've got some information on the
chamber of commerce that they
they felt this is a significant
regulatory uncertainty for the
state and already has problems
And senator Wirth can you give
me some insight on why they
thought this would.
Build more uncertainty to our
bill I would argue that right
now we have extraordinary
regulatory uncertainty under the
current status quo namely we had
an administration that comes in
step in and maintain a level of
air and hazardous waste
oversight you know this bill is
about states rights it's about
exerting primacy which were
important for our state to be in
a position to protect our air
protect our water
you know the situation and
what this is about I mean the
federal government doesn't even
regulate in that area and so it
just there are times when the
Methane discussion is happening
under the existing law that does
allow not a discussion about the
together the collaborative
stakeholder process to regulate
ozone and I think that's the
model.
you can get to a place that that
will that will help our state
and that again the stakeholders
have the input to be able to
Floor leader I appreciate your
fear of the federal government
changing regulations but I think
addressing that just to
Albuquerque control I think the
smaller communities are having.
A problem trying to.
with so Mister president and
center with size of Albuquerque
yet a lot of different
opportunities for employment and
entertainment in this business
opportunities for our citizens.
But also on Mr president and.
Senator I'd use this question I
believe yesterday talking about
New Mexico rates Mr president
center in comparison the United
States in emissions.
leader I wish you would because
I'd ask question yesterday and
I've been trying to research
that in being the we've had
committee and floor session
today and unable to get very
that we're gonna save the world
or reducing emissions here in
New Mexico and I tend to believe
The New Mexico's a small player
in the global economy in and of
emissions and I'm just trying to
other and I'd love to see what
the answer that mathematical
question is discretion Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
unanimous consent to have two
experts Sandra Ely from the US
Seeing no objection.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president to just to be clear
Senator guy goes you like to
know where New Mexico are
percentage with respect to the
world or to the United States.
however it works out in in the
world also the site thanks for
Mister president.
issue is the ambient
concentrations of the ozone in a
particular area so the question
you're asking is not one that
concentration that warrants
regulation
and that's again what what's
currently being done and again I
want to I just want to stress
without that so that's that's
what we're doing.
Mr president in for leader I
appreciate you helping me with
my answer and and I've I've
looked and looked for an actual
need for it but I would think in
this amount of time that we've
had would be able to give
specifics on that but I guess my
in in your Bill what I liked
Sedillo Lopez referred to you
refer to others of referred to
the I don't remember ever seeing
a black clubs black Crowder ran
hobby or Carl's matter anywhere
in Southeast were we would be
penalized for the same
restrictions that Albuquerque's
gone through and and we get
quite a few bills Mr president.
and everything else in the rest
of the state has to.
Enter the dial of the we decide
in this chamber of because of
some issues in the Albuquerque
area I'm just wondering Mr
miles from the capital get home
image provision and senator
Wirth.
He sixty miles away so I would
think that it would be more
president so this is not an
Albuquerque only bill.
Certainly the Albuquerque
Bernalillo authority has exerted
primacy and I think it's Senator
this is a bill that will address
an issue in Clovis and Senator
Woods district with P. I just.
And something we can't regulate
the federal government has no
Not ceding our rights but US
exerting our rights it's about
states rights and giving
ourselves the ability to
determine.
ability to protect our citizens
to practice protect that
dairymen who lives over there
who lost all his teeth his dairy
you lost as callous and and
I I really believe the state
should be able in appropriate
circumstances just like they're
impacted be able to move forward
if in fact they meet the
threshold the higher threshold
that we now have a in the
substitute I believe the state
Albuquerque issues the only
local government that is a.
Of listed in this is C. L. creek
area so I I guess I would.
input on the or restrictions or
regulations but although on Mr
president and.
Senator Wirth Hey I had someone
clean air we're one of the
cleanest and I text back in the
US they said yes we're number
a sound like a really good place
to come to live.
Reason I'm just wondering how
we're gonna restrict that if we
address it and so again I think
it's a very specific issue.
Ending on the on the particular
area and that's the time when
I think I did ask my experts and
they responded they didn't have
those percentages.
I think we should that Mr
president and senator I know
students because of the water
and we had so I guess I'll go on
Mr president.
And senator agency presents
anyway I can ask a question of.
And go back to senator Wirth
with this I just a brief one
more brief question if I could
Senator Wirth.
I'm happy.
had negotiated for this do you
know if it's all industries or
fields just mocha.
So Mister president and Senator
sure it was my understanding
that.
The the guardrails that were
brought in Senate finance did
come from industry but again I
and collaboration
There was an agreement reached
with secretary Kenny.
Which I do think.
Provides the guardrails that
that I do have under could.
Understanding the new Moga did
in fact agree but the
independent producers were not
for the rest of the state and
limited reflect among the the
size for all industries and I
think we need Mr president and
and senator to table have all.
this presents an Senator Wirth I
know it's not your fault but the
change from the house to the
Senate my expectations are going
to be different and so far
committee thank you Mr president
and so will the sponsor please
Ruiloba Senator Wirth deal I'm
happy to so Mister president
and and so can you remind the
body or go ask your experts
The E. I. B.
Kernan I don't think I need to
ask the experts that has been
the statutory scheme in place in
New Mexico so we have not.
About methane using that ozone
exception to the stringency rule
which I think again I I think
there's a.
currently the reason we haven't
been doing is because the
statute has prevented that we've
been tied to the federal
standard thank you Mr president
just maybe this might.
matter around nineteen seventy
six and evidently those
statutory limitations were
adopted somewhere around
nineteen seventy seven and
changed to a more lists put a
put a limit on what the Avid is
able to do with regard to
federal regulations so that's
been in place for some time and
it was put there for purpose and
on page and I hope I'm on the
right when I have a point to the
Senate's finance committee
substitute is that correct.
Senator Wirth.
under C. line fourteen just
trying to figure out its says to
control emissions and I want to
I want to ask you a little bit
about.
industry I think that this of
course is the flaring issue and
a can you give me some other
examples of the missions that
are going to occur in Lee County
So Mister president senator and
I'm a check on my experts but
it's my understanding this
actually is existing law that
got to move from a different
section this is the this is the
of what that looks like just on
the ground just because I know
the the rules and regulations
are in place but just so that I
can visualize exactly what we're
gonna be talking about.
So Mister president I was
correct this is the existing law
discussed now it also could
involve some leaky tanks I'm
told and things of that nature
but again this is the existing
law that's in place so thank you
flaring is actually you just
can't do it without doing some
flaring initially and and I
understand the difference in the
continuation when you don't
for years you're you're probably
particular area likely County
I'm just going to lay it out so
that we know where this is
occurring and then it talks
about later on in line eighteen
where the ozone concentrations
things are on the ground in the
area specific to that particular
area but when you talk about a
concentration.
due to what is occurring
particularly in Lee County so so
we have no control over that and
so can you help me understand
when you talk about.
by any activity that's occurring
right there in Lee County how
are they going to differentiate
what is actually occurring in
Lee County due to the fact that
Mexico whether it's coming in
from Albuquerque don't know if
it would get that far or whether
it's coming in from Texas where
sometimes there is a little bit
concentration and determined
that that occurred as result of
activity in Lee County and
mismanagement or not paying
attention to a leaky pipe.
me find out exactly how they'd
make that determination.
Referred me to a line line so
the jurisdiction is focused on
the costs or contribution
specific because our
Are looking at the costs and the
contribution to make sure that.
That because our contribution
when factored in the modeling.
measuring the flow of Vokes and
and the the the the various
quality issues that are listed
Kernan I think that they're
they're following the currents
that statute which does require
them to look at the cost or or
the court what's contributing
And this would be a perfect
example of.
The existing regulatory process
which I would argue is is a
model for how this should be
beyond their what they weren't
able to shower because a
contribution and and and and the
modeling was challenged then I
think that that's exactly where
for them as well so they'll be
the ability to challenge that
because that is obviously
there's there's a determination
involved in that decision so
thank you Mr president thank you
should be able to tell us for
instance in Lee County currently
what what percent are we now
with regard to the
statute and they're doing this
regulation so just give me one
one second.
Senator Kernan.
So Mister president from my
expert Missy Lee from the air
quality division Environment
Department says in Lee County
were at a hundred and five
percent of the standard.
just curious I know over the
last few months there's been
quite a bit of activity in my
area
I I'm not quite sure how they're
state stay with it so CD or
other staff under energy and
minerals tell me what tools they
are using to make that
Qualities in high so they're
doing it themselves so Mister
president that that's what I'm
just curious about so if they're
not determining the source of
the admission but they just have
being sourced from activity in
the oil field or whether that is
activity that's coming from
another state or coming from
Mexico or even Albuquerque so
view of the concentration in the
area without really knowing
where that source of the mission
is coming from can she clarify
that for me.
So Mister president some of this
are actually the building at the
the.
Question is answered because
this is part of the current
and this is.
You know this is a key part of
that.
Of that rulemaking because I
think the thresholds that you
you in you highlighted there.
You know what what they're
thinking what their burden is
they have to show calls our
contribution in that area and so
me that.
Currently what they're doing and
and and I know there's some
activity going on I don't know
if they're they're flying over
the different sites in in to me
I think that I don't object to
is not healthy we'll fix it but
but this idea that that just the
the the quality of of the area
without identifying the source
very specific with regard to
that I want to look on the next
page well on page ten.
Or that applies to sources not
subject to the federal
regulations so they're going to
go above and beyond.
Not only puts in federal law.
just think this is even more
than just trying to be more
stringent than federal law.
They're expanding their
authority beyond that not just
with regard to rules and
about that is particularly
concerned that back in the
seventies when the abi
overstepped their authority the
courts ruled that they have done
that and we came back in chains
the board have significant
authority.
Without anyone saying you've
gone too far.
I want to make sure that you
the year one of the large
producers so whether you're one
of the independent.
And frankly it's very possible
that many of the independent
concerned that that we're
focusing in on again on an
industry.
That does so much for the state.
be able to come to be able to
We're gonna have many of these
companies moving to Texas or
simply shut down so with that I
how the abi does thank you very
much Mr president Senator Kernan
we are for the debate center
street is.
Thing is present with the center
it and then the initial
committee in its initial form.
I want to go back to where
Senator Kernan was going maybe a
little bit different angle and
what are they likely to do but
what does this bill allow them
statutorily to do.
And so the way that I read that
Senator is on on page seven.
contribute to ozone
concentrations so.
To meet the statutory definition
all we have to do is satisfy the
word contribute.
Mr president centers committee
so again this is the current law
this is the current law and this
is exactly the Santo current I
and it requires them to do.
Modeling.
To make that determination and
to determine that the threshold
You know subjectivity in that.
Again I think the.
When they put in place a photo
chemical modeling necessarily
would say it is you know you you
and I did have a really good
discussion about this bill kind
of on the earlier version I
actually think it's much
stronger now than it was when
you voted for it before because
regulations on something as
important as.
As ozone
is such that you really need to
have a stakeholder process
right now of going through that
modeling to get the buy in.
Thank you Mr president and and
etcetera and really where I'm
putting it here for the the
local board but you know it's
really that were contribute I
mean I the cost makes sense to
me like you're you're causing
we allowing them to do in
statute in the future that if if
someone would say well you're
contributing to ten percent of
this.
We have found through our our
Well we've now satisfied.
That word contribute in statute
yes they did contribute it's
right there on page seven line
Was there ever any talk about
you're contributing to the
majority you know to fifty
percent or greater or or to put
existing this is existing
statutory language that was
moved from a different section
so I really did not you know
have those discussions with the
department of environment
process that's happening and I
just.
You know I just say putting on
my.
You know my lawyer hat.
I I think that they're going to
need to show and and we're we're
take off your medical hat and
trial lawyer hat you know you'd
be making those arguments I mean
that's exactly what's going to
happen going to be discussed and
administration when it comes to
zone I just I want to stress
that the.
They've gone out of their way to
how to do it right because again
just coming in and.
You know I do and not being able
to show by substantial evidence
go through that process and this
is where you do get the the
lawyers involved in effect
intersection between law and
science.
Pieces of legislation this I
hope we're not just going to
create litigation so I hope of
the a B. can I realize that and
and doesn't you know as
respectful of of the state's the
reason why is I was trying to
figure this brown cloud stuff I
I do vaguely remember I don't
know
if this is one particular
instance but I as the debate was
twenty and both of those reports
showed that the ozone still of
this you know stuff was coming
Sandia foothills and in that
report it said that as they were
measuring it a S. storm shower
came in those levels dropped so
why am I mentioning all this
you know we have we have while
fire in fact and then
additionally in the June twenty
twenty cloud which I don't know
if this is the the infamous
brown cloud it was the harm it's
February March would would come
through part of sub Saharan
Africa and it's fine sand
particular matter it was a dry
brain doesn't come during that
time here and then for the rest
of your the other item eight to
nine months it rains almost
everyday it's pretty cool but
I'm just raising those points
to have their own their own
world view.
And the world view unfortunately
of scientists is now becoming
more and more relevant of what
their conclusions are going to
And then we're saying just
listen to the science so if you
only knew the facts if you only
got educated though that's just
misinformation Hutchison end up
at a road block
because.
I I I hope that the I. B. will
can't will can you know consider
those things of Hey that was in
the Senate currentpercent well
once again how are they going to
disagree on those numbers and
are they going to go to court is
the local jurisdiction gonna say
no it wasn't really our missions
doing in this but you know what
it's cause of that fire over
there it's because of this other
process and that's what I don't
want to happen but what I what I
hear you saying center is that
going to get penalized for that
is that correct center.
So Mr president let me just
check and make absolutely sure
before I make that
representation.
So Mister president and senator
communities
The modeling is specifically
the reasons you say so so yes
that is happening.
Miss presence enter thank you
very much for that answer and
thank you for the debate.
Wirth thank you Mr president
yes.
Senator Wirth.
We had legislation.
I guess it was last year that
to.
infraction the cases would would
be
File in the in that home County
is that is that correct.
Mr president Santo Domingo so
here that case and they
Representative that they do in
fact go to the area want that's
impacted so it's not that
they're not going to be sitting
in Santa Fe dealing with a
passed last year I think that
was yours the the thank thank
you is that.
Yeah my giving you proper credit
Sir.
Mr president you're giving me
just I want to just stress that
the model that's being used
right now with ozone does have
the stakeholders at the table
and I just think it's super
You have in charge of the
pin portion of all the people
that are that are involved in it
and that's always folks
generally speaking from this
Of what do you like it or not
and in Santa Fe on some things
and there are some of the rest
of the state and I know when we
were talking about doing when
Miguel County and he was nearly
lynched because those belong
down war it's ugly and where I
live that's where all the winter
hours for folks to be.
enforcement are sometimes a.
Or sometimes done differently
than they would be because it
doesn't affect anyone.
there this stage the ballot she
would be in trouble.
But yet sometimes those things
are forgotten when we passed
legislation so I just hope that
we always look at things in a
Thank you Santo Domingo.
Si no further debate.
Center were to close on the
bill.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senators to the chamber please.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd
senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Duhigg.
Senator guy goes no ma'am
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hickey Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivy
Soto.
Kernan.
Senator Kernan no Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator to
should be no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator share now Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods no.
the affirmative fifteen a
negative Senate finance
committee substitute percent
ability to has passed the Senate
Senator Wirth.
You Mr president thank you
ladies and gentlemen the Senate.
go back to item number six
Senator Ivey Soto on Senate bill
two eighty five.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much Mr president present ask
unanimous consent that the
record show that all options for
you very much Mr president was
president under existing law at
forty three dash one dash ten a
police officer may transport
someone from a marginal health
evaluation.
immersive mental health
evaluation districts about.
And consequently David police
officers and of going into
police officer mode because of
T. to transport the person
instead of the police officer.
And that's that thank you very
much I'll be happy to stand for
questions Senator Ivey Soto we
do have a debate on the bill we
suicide problem in our state
these folks are often times the
first ones to deal with very
complicated situation so any
just an understanding of of of
how these people are in need and
and and how bad outcomes can
happen if if not a proper
sensitivity is utilized this is
Thank you Mr president I rise in
strong support of this we're
you know it's good to see the
legislative body going ahead and
and letting the professionals do
We we need to support our police
officers and let them do their
job thank you Mr president
thank Senator Pirtle further
debate we have Senator Brandt.
The Sanchez deal for another
question.
This president I will although
that was another question the
sponsor yield for another
question.
This all the.
one question so if the law
enforcement officer.
Thanks the person needs to go
mental health he gets put in the
M. T. van on the way to the male
president and center Brandt
the officers not
a liable and and and actually
together and so what that means
is is that is that the
likelihood of that's sort of a
tragedy happening is significant
significantly diminished because
individual needing the transport
and and keeping that person
focused in terms of of of where
they're headed and what's going
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate Senator Ivy
Soto to close on the bill thank
you very much Mr president this
president I move that Senate
bill two eighty five
the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
No.
Senator Candelaria yes senator
to run this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
how to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator to to
be now.
Senator pope.
Senator pope yes Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
senator Sanchez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senate bill two eighty five has
passed the chamber.
Center I'm so the thank you very
much Mr president thank you
members of the chamber.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business announces
miscellaneous the route Senator
the the sob that came out with
this bill did not contain an
amendment that was done in
Senate Judiciary and so by
expanding this committee report
to Senator Woods at center
what's bill Senator Woods.
We've had this discussion and
and it was a.
On the motion.
See no debate seeing no
objection.
The committee part of expansion
Senator executive message number
fifteen.
Your president pro temper
Stewart and members of the
Senate.
In accordance with article four
section forty two of the New
Mexico university board of
regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
twenty six respectfully
submitted Michelle Lujan Grisham
consent we go to that order
business committee reports that
order of business committee
point reader to read.
Mr president your tax business
and transportation committee to
home has been referred house
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate agree to
be allowed to read all the
committee reports and we will.
And then with one motion that
the general secretary they were
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house consumer
and public affairs committee
substitute for house bill two oh
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman.
Senator Shendo I moved up to the
committee report centers we have
a motion to that the committee
report.
referred house joint resolution
twelve as amended has had it
under consideration and report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended and it's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
read all the committee reports
that they be acts upon in one
motion the journal reflect their
act fund individually
interjection is so ordered the
regional read.
And Mr president your rules
state investment council for
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring March
four two thousand twenty six
your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment.
Fortner as a member of the
university of New Mexico board
of regents for term commencing
upon confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
twenty six the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment.
Mexico as a student member of
the university of New Mexico
board of regents for term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring December thirty one two
thousand twenty two the
committee recommends that the
appointment William Holland pain
as a member of the university of
New Mexico board of regents for
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
Center I'm center Ivey Soto
please move adoption committee
report.
Say no objection it is so
ordered.
Committee reports are adopted
and let the record reflect that
referred house bill one sixty
three has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted senator William P.
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion at
the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually
interjection is so ordered the
reader will read house bill one
committee respectfully submitted
Senator William P. sold chairman
Senator pro.
Mr president I move adoption of
the committee report.
We have a motion to adopt the
individually the real read Mr
president your Judiciary
Committee too home has been
referred Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight do pass and that's
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Joseph Cervantes
chairman okay let's see what I'm
I'm sorry I ask unanimous
consent Senate agree to be
allowed to read all the
committee reports and we vote on
them with one motion journal
reflect they were act upon
individually that's fine Mr
Chairman really appreciate that
thank you there is only one
Majority Leader Senator Wirth
please thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
our business confirmations and
ideal to the chairman of Senate
you very much Mr president Mr
president I hereby submit to the
Senate the credentials of
William Holland Payne who's been
appointed as regent to the
thank you Mr president pursuant
to Senate executive message
number nine dated March fifth
twenty twenty one I move the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of William Holland
you Mr president and members
William Holland pain needs no
introduction in this chamber.
he was born as he was raised in
Albuquerque New and following
completion of undergraduate and
graduate degrees at the
university Mexico entered the
eleven seal team one.
The US Naval Academy the joint
chiefs of staff and naval
special warfare unit one
additionally the navy sent
active duty in nineteen eighty
six and he completed his J. D.
law degree at the university of
New Mexico school of law where
classmates of the universe in
New Mexico School of Law and was
a fellow editor of the New
Mexico natural resources journal
so and was actually a good
friend with bill Payne who way
relationships and so after law
school.
R. he basically was enacted
reserve career as a navy seal
promoted to rear admiral.
Of course he served in the
Senate first elected in nineteen
ninety six forty was ranking
meant member of the Judiciary
Committee a member of the Energy
council a commissioner of the
years he's married to Deborah
Payne a retired commander in the
US navy and retired Madam Sandia
national labs during his
Dr Paul Roth who we admire very
much testified bill Payne will
make an outstanding regent and
I'm happy to present him for
confirmation as a member as a
anyone who wishes of okay here
we go Senator Neville please Mr
president I stand in strong
support of this nomination as
you know senator Payne and I
of personal things together as
far as travel and going hunting
and you name it to great guy and
certainly we all know that he's
a tremendous
next we go to Senator Ingle
Senator Ingle please thank you
Mr president president are
certainly remember bill Payne
very well he and I sat together
down there on the floor and
she was a diplomatic career
basically for the bush
administration when all over the
world delivering things that
were pretty darn the.
wish you could elaborate on some
of because I'm sure they were
quite interesting but he was an
interesting man to have in the
Senate and was uncanny and his
the Senate but to Mexico as well
and still is thank you thank you
very much Senator Ingle next to
go to Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs please.
Senator Senator pain and I I
mean when I first got into the
Senate he was on Senate
judiciary and I had the
opportunity to to serve their
from from Senator pain and not
just and in on what he knew
about
You know the issues at hand but
individual and I will do a great
job as a a regent for.
For that university in
Albuquerque and I'm I'm
urge you to
Of supporting as well.
Thank you very much Senator
Griggs next we go to Senator
Lopez Senator Lopez please thank
you very much Mr president I
nominated and will be voted in
officially as of as of regent of
the board of there anyone M. he
and I came in the same class
regards to whatever bill we were
debating and I always
appreciated his perspective that
he brought we don't always vote
on the same issue the same way
in this body but Mr president I
do believe that
Senator pain will do a wonderful
job in taking care of our
University of New Mexico I know
believe Mr president and if I
may Mr president unanimous
consent to excuse Senators
Padilla.
Rodriguez and Stuart thank you
see no objection it is so
this nomination it's going to be
great for a.
For the regents Senator pain was
in the very first class I ever
an even harder time they were
extraordinary group of students
I'll never forget that first
class and Senator pain you could
great pleasure to serve on the
Senate with him and get to know
him in a whole different context
was a member of this body and he
told me I think it was called
the the gun surrender Act or
something at the time I was
it and I thought that was really
excellent advice and he was just
always like that very open with
advice and also very clear about
appreciated his honesty and his.
His integrity and I I miss him
because he you know it's fun to
president thank you very much
Senator Sedillo Lopez next we go
to Senator Hickey Senator Hickey
please.
Thank you Mr president and
fellow senators
twentieth district and it is my
complete privilege and I am
humbled to walk.
In his footsteps not so much.
after the election to
congratulate me and that five
minute conversation turned into
an hour and then it other times
long conversations and I will
place and I hope that I can
equal the measure of all that he
was able to accomplish in this
be in his place thank you thank
you very much Senator Hickey
next we go to Senator Woods
Senator Woods please thank you
Mr president I to stand in
with the men and the.
I learned quite a bit on how to
ask questions from him.
And he did teach me a little
something about diplomacy also.
And he to.
Go talk to the chairman of that
It's all about relationships.
It's not about party it's about
relationships.
Thank you Mr president thank you
very much Senator Woods anyone
else.
See no one else at this time I'm
going back to senator Peter
up yet again the serve in this
capacity is something we all
should appreciate and I just
want to thank the governor for
Wirth Senators we're getting
ready for roll call to your
chairs the clerk will call the
roll.
Senator Baca.
Candelaria Senator Candelaria
yes senator to run this.
Senator Diamond Senator Duhigg
Senator Duhigg gas Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator need to be now Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator
Padilla Senator Padilla yes
Senator Pinto.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator songes.
Senator Sanchez yes Senators
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative zero on the negative
the New Mexico state Senate has
confirmed the appointment of
Senator Wirth please thank you
Mr president I'm told senator
Payne is watching so let's all
give him a huge round of
applause.
Senator Pirtle please having
voted in the majority I move
that the Senate reconsider.
looking for you.
Thank you very much and thank
you all very much for that that
love and support that you
continue to go ahead and and
Jackie Jack Fortner who has been
appointed as a regent to the
university of New Mexico board
of regents and I yield to
senator Neville.
fourth twenty twenty one I move
that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
Jackie Jack Fortner as a region
to the university New Mexico
border regions thank you very
much senator please proceed to
he attended the the university
of New Mexico so he started out
early knowing about this
university.
He finished there with a degree
in political science then he
relations hearing officer
domestic violence commissioner
under the
eleven judicial court he went on
and excuse me politically he was
in ninety six and served for two
thousand and four.
he was chairman of a number of
times and chairman port pro tem
a number of times of the county
commission he went on later and
he was appointed to the board of
served on a number of committees
and boards at the university on
the region's and he's been
involved in the community in a
number of activities
Association local ward he's a U.
N. M. a letterman's association
awarded a as an honorary
letterman a graduate of
leadership San Juan he's a
in San Juan college foundation
board of San Juan United Way and
a list of number a number of
other I activities Jack is a
very active community member and
members of the Senate we're on
the confirmation of Jackie Jack
Lewis Fortner and I'm going to
senator Munoz center one yes
I'm sorry I can see over Senator
Burt.
Please proceed.
Mr president I rise supported
Jack Fortner I I've known for
quite awhile and and and
always tell you the truth and
always try to help you does have
some issues and and we got to
appointees and and stand up for
Center paying that they do have
those professors in the
classroom so I I write in
support of Jack Fortner and
that's it thank you thank you
very much Semenya's Mexico
to center for the Senator
Padilla please thank you very
notch detail oriented consistent
and and a very thoughtful
individual you know I I also
know that you know the various
president that it would be a
shame not to put him on this
board and so I I just and I also
want to echo what senator Munoz
that I did not stand up when
senator Payne was being
opus Senator the all of us
please.
Thank you Mr president I to
stand and stand strong support
of this nomination I had the
opportunity to meet to meet and
in a different context and every
time that I had interactions
with him I was so impressed
because he always put the
students first.
He also was very engaged with
meeting I always felt that he
asked great questions and again
put the students first and that
I think that coupled with his
senator rate he also is a Lobos
right through and through with
children having attended UNM and
I'm very happy to support this
nomination thank you.
afraid that that might cause
some no votes to happen so I'm
not gonna say that but I do I've
I've known Jack for a long time
here he's definitely a local
through and through I definitely
you very much that's great
anyone else.
All right see no one else ever
going to center in the bill to
close Senator Neville please
thank you Mr president Jack and
I have been friends for I guess
as a regent and I ask for a roll
call vote thank you very much
Santo senators were voting get
ready go to your chairs the
clerk will call the roll.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
serve on this.
Senator Diamond Senator Duhigg.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
how to meal Senator huh Amelio
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator well yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator songes.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator so yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes.
The NMAA consent to excuse
senator Gonzalez see no
objection is so ordered thank
you very much the clerk will
continue.
I.
Jackie Jack Lewis Fortner as a
member of the university of New
Mexico board of regents for term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring December thirty first
Fong getting co who's been
appointed as
a student who has been appointed
as a regent to the interest of
New Mexico board of regents and
on I yield to Senator Sedillo
dated March fourth twenty twenty
one I move that the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of Randy Fund came cold as a
student region to the University
Read the funding co was born to
in New Mexico New Mexico to a
family of first generation
immigrants his parents opened
one of the first Chinese
restaurants in Albuquerque and
district has soon as he was old
enough to help in the restaurant
he bussed tables and as soon as
he could drive you deliver take
out.
His remarkable parents taught
His father taught him the
importance of serving others he
is a graduate of Albuquerque
high school in two thousand
fourteen and the University of
New Mexico U. N. M. in two
the Chinese concentration has a
UNM present presidential scholar
he also met his wife at UNM and
they started medical school
together in two thousand
expected to graduate in twenty
twenty six.
His resume is incredible.
Senator Ivey Soto remarked to
the rules committee that of that
scholarship scholar in two
thousand seventeen.
He was a Chinese culture
language club president from
fall of two thousand sixteen to
spring of two thousand
seventeen.
He was a student publication
board representative.
He also enacted a dialogue and
policy revision of the UNM
carry on campus for for decades
he has published fourteen
publications many of them
involving skin cancer.
so we're going to debate on the
conferee first to center or DC
Pino and then we're going to
senator Morris center to see
Pino please thank you Mr
president and and
Not only is he obviously
brilliant because he's already
published a whole raft of
articles on on scientific topics
government came to the hearing
virtually and testified about
how closely they work with him
as did the graduate student
they're all very impressive but
this this is clearly a young man
who will be representing the
voice of the students and and
they will have access to him
really was impressed and I think
we have a great as the regent
who happens to be a student at
the university of New Mexico
thank you very much center at
you Mr president
The number of this medicine man
was truly impressive and I'm
glad through his work he has now
making us center incidents of
as we move forward a truly
remarkable young man he's also
qualified unlike the previous
two nominations that we had
those guys are qualified for the
a shining star New Mexico his
family is this institution in
the state his poise and dignity
during the come on confirmation
three of the confirmations tumor
right when when was dollar Mr
president I'm really proud to
C. one I don't see anyone else
and so we're gonna go and close
the centers for the office
please.
I would just remind Senator
confirm the appointment of Randy
phone came co has a student
region to the University of New
Mexico board of regents and I
ask for a roll call vote thank
you very much Senator centers
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes senator Tom yes
Senator Campos yes senator
yes senator gray goes Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator had a meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Sedillo Lopez VS Senator share
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Sierra.
Senator Tallman as senator Wirth
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Neville yes.
Randy phone game Mexico has been
confirmed as a student member of
the university of New Mexico
board of regents for term
commencing upon confirmation and
the body to to rise and give Mr
funding co I have.
appointed to the state
investment council and I yield
to senator Wirth to present this
country Senator Wirth please
proceed thank you Mr president
members pursuant to Senate
very much senator Wirth please
tell us a little bit about the
conferee thank you Mr president.
First this is an appointment by
the governor to the state
private investment and also
serves state government as we
know having worked with him he
understands the permanent funds
and understands the fiscal
funds based in New York and
London focused on investments in
private media and communications
he founded his own firm are
increased partners in two
thousand nine in New York and
years generating strong
financial returns for investors
and good outcomes for the
employees and customers of those
companies.
in January twenty nineteen our
in November to refocus on his
responsibilities with our
increase partners.
While serving in the governor's
office John worked with senators
of both sides both parties and
here.
By John also served as the
governor's point person for the
state investment council and
worked on strategy when he was
there has good relationships
appointing John Benjamin to the
position of state investment
council and I would yield.
Thank you very much senator
Wirth were on the debate of the
to senator Wirth to close
senator Wirth please thank you
Mr president and again I think
we all hello John being I'm and
huge thanks for again stepping
amendment thank you very much
senator Wirth senators to your
chairs and that's three need to
be in order to go and cast a
roll call vote the clerk will
call the roll.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes Senator
condominium.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs.
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator my nose.
subpoena Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator by the year Senator
Padilla yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
pope Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator shows yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
confirmed the appointment of
John F. being a man as a member
of the state investment council
for a term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring March
just give him a big thanks for
stepping up in this way.
Thank you very much senator
will be meeting beginning at
nine AM and we have
of a full Senate confirmations
work on thank you thank you very
much Senator Ivy Soto going back
to senator Wirth for the next
order of business thank you Mr
legislation the reader will
read.
Senate memorial twenty six
introduced by Representative by
Senator Robert Bobby J.
Gonzales.
A memorial requesting the public
education department.
And order in consultation with
the plaintiffs requesting the
public education department to
provide the legislature with an
annual report on the
implementation of the
Senate immoral twenty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and then sent to
the Senate Education Committee
treatment payment and other
activities House Bill two sixty
nine House Bill to sixty nine
hundred twice by title.
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill three.
Three twenty five.
this.
To the health and public affairs
committee.
House Bill to sixty nine the
acting the rural air service
enhancement act making
appropriation house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill three twenty five.
These new titles just a minute
just give me a second please the
bottom okay.
Let's get.
Taxpayers the tax business and
transportation committee.
The right all right.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
seventy six us to Judiciary
Committee substitute.
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee Mr president.
Over here Senator share please
proceed can you read the title
So House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
title is an act relating to
crime creating the crime of
targeted residential picketing.
All care residential pick all
right I I just I thought you
Okay seeing the no for the bills
to introduce we're going back to
senator Wirth senator Wirth
please thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
our business announcements and
until twelve or one PM.
I see no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee
projection it is so ordered
thank you very much senator
meet tomorrow and on Sunday will
be on the floor at five o'clock
PM to give committees the chance
during the day on both Saturday
going to Senator to see Pino and
we'll go from there Senator
o'neill thank you Mr president
your Judiciary Committee will
meet tonight at six PM so
Ortiz C. Pino.
Thank you Mr president for eight
I am the mention my committee I
wonder the judiciary of the
posted to an agenda or anything
The Senate health and public
affairs committee will meet at
five fifteen well as a five
thirty we have dinner ordered
for the members so we'll just
work straight through.
tonight to our so the Lopez
Hickey Campos.
By the
The pope guy a ghosts the famous
government center at the C. Pino
next we go to Senator McKenna
and then after that we're going
to Senator pope Center McKenna
please.
Thank you Mr president on the
you about pulled someone Esther
Martinez also known as coal
Esther from okay we need to.
Mexico Esther worked to develop
the publication of the first
villages.
She served as the bilingual
education program director and
teacher for the San Juan pueblo
day school from nineteen seventy
In twenty oh six Colchester was
presented the national heritage
fellow for folk and traditional
Call Esther was tragically
killed by a drunk driver well
returning to New Mexico.
December twenty oh six which
authorizes the administration of
native Americans to expand
funding to include language
immersion projects.
But also in the other and the
reconstruction of other table
language projects and languages
language projects around the
world.
they occurred at our house and
non bath or at UNM.
Understand by this time Mr
president Mexico Esther had to
hours without hesitation she
said yes.
So in fact she has ensured.
Okay well remains a living
language.
history thank you Senator
Hamblen for helping to organize
today's presentation condo will
have.
that before I go to center
Popenoe okay all right so again
thank you very much Senator
McKenna and to each and everyone
of you for your attention
regarding that great tribute as
we move along we're still
Mr president we will not be
meeting this week in the Senate
for Senate Education Committee
but we will meet Monday at eight
thirty AM and we have about
eight house bill's thank you
very much senator Paul for going
to consider and we'll be doing a
series of considering are a
series of confirmations we will
not be meeting on Sunday morning
that way people can.
thank you Mr president sent
Senator Hemphill as the rookie
on Senate finance and she wants
to have dinner Senate finance
will not meet tonight
we will meet tomorrow morning
two is getting wrapped up we are
complete all the languages done
all the numbers are there were
correct and as we move forward
I'm gonna try to get you guys
the spreadsheets that I talked
dollars in federal money Chavis
county will get twelve point
three
McKinley County thirteen point
eight Sandoval County twenty
million.
I shoot a few cities here real
quickly so you know how much you
each year cities are going to
get in and looking for
Albuquerque Bernalillo
tells river.
I'm looking for some immigrants
but they're here and I'll get
you the spreadsheet that just
tells you how much federal money
we're gonna have a New Mexico
oil if the executive order still
remains in place.
so we will meet tomorrow
afternoon at one and Senate
finance we got quite a few bills
to roll through before we get to
the floor we have some big ones
know what amendments we're gonna
be looking at and Senate finance
form so that enjoy your even
everyone thank you very much
center when you know sensitive
and you'll see did refer to
to be sardines a little Tabasco
and maybe a slice of lime on for
a sec Senator Williams.
Mr president I can tell you it's
not going to be solid.
transportation committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning at nine
o'clock so we have a hearty
breakfast because we got a long
agenda so we'll try and work due
time yet but the.
Thank you very much Senator
Shendo are going now to Senator
share for shining moment Senator
sure please thank you Mr
president I know everybody's it
but Mr president I I.
My failure to actually look
through the fence I I'm really
kind of embarrassed that I
didn't look through that I all I
building has always been so
beautiful and so well kept the
landscaping is always been
impeccable.
But I think there's some weird
barrier out there some kind of
need at least open up a little
bit of that fence that are not
allowed to talk about so that we
can deal with the landscaping
inside because it's just a shame
that such a building beautiful
you'll took to to Center moon
you'll see if I can okay Senator
sure you gave up floor you're
going out to Center when yes
we're going to center and yes
please thank you Mr president
and everything Senator Williams
Mr president Senator have you
seen the headless horseman
around the fence Center share.
Mr president I've been looking
drive the Seminoles thank you Mr
president thank you both for
decided to go and cut it short.
Anyone else.
On the Senator Pirtle center
Center if you it's a standard
license plate for were the
purposes we don't need it
anymore we have set out today Mr
president I ask unanimous
So ordered what senator Wirth I
saw your your your head just go
down there and I said that was
the signal we just had to make
sure that that that occurred so
item on the table unanimous
because that we go that our
business messages from the house
see no objection it is so
ordered were on that order of
Business messages from the house
the reader will read Mr
certificate of correction has
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the house in
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the Senate respectfully
The senator for New York.
And I would like to announce
that the officers of the Senate
have signed an open session
house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
Senator Wirth for the next order
of business please thank you Mr
president unanimous because that
we go that order business
committee report seeing no
as amended has had the merger
consideration and reports that
same have been duly enrolled in
the gross prepare Torrez signing
by the officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
adopted and like to announce
that the offices of the Senate
have signed an open session
Senate bill fifty two and Senate
bill one twenty two as amended.
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
business see no announcements or
miscellaneous business going
back to our Majority Leader
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent that
members of the Senate we will
stand in recess for
approximately twenty four hours
thank you all very much have a
safe evening.
