Senator Duhigg.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator.
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator committees.
Senator souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Please stand for the invocation
to be given this morning I
reference.
By Senator Kernan.
In Spanish to be led by Senator
Campos and the salute to New
Mexico flag to be led by Senator
of the whole state of New Mexico
as we enter into a time of
prayer I'd like to also invite
us to keep in our hearts and
prayers Senator bay right Ben
this time in which you devote so
much time to the welfare of the
state.
Let us be together in a time of
prayer let us pray.
Thank you also lord.
Reason to us your spirit of
peace.
That comes our fears and
anxieties.
Reason to us your breath of hope
You who are the pivot point of
our lives.
Know that your love in life for
the center of our lives.
That no matter what direction we
are called.
These women and men.
Serving in the Senate and the.
Post send all of the staff.
Give abundantly of their time
Be with their families.
Be with their communities that
they also serve.
With all your people in the
find our way your way of love.
A justice of mercy.
And of hope.
We pray this.
of the United States of America.
Good morning everyone Senator
Peter Wirth thank you madam
president good morning as well
Wirth thank you madam president
thank you
To leave the Reverend Arnold we
very much appreciate you being
here appreciate your your words
revenue are also mentioned are
are US senator and I just like
everyone just to stand for a
moment and let's keep keep all
those families in our prayers
for the special people.
how fragile you know life can be
and so it is good to take
moments and just really think
about things like that and
appreciate your words very much
perspective so couple of
announcements
the Blue Cross blue shield van
will be outside the east side of
the capitol dispensing flu shots
announcement Center o'neill will
be mentioning a certificate of
recognition for survivors of
suicide and I don't have any
other events are yield other
Thank you very much Mr majority
floor leader and madam president
unanimous consent to allow
cameras on the floor only.
Seeing no objection we will
allow cameras on the floor and
Seeing no objection we will do
that any other announcements
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president and members of the
just the kids wanted to express
their appreciation to us for our
hard work appears to greatly
appreciate their thoughtfulness
president so what we're gonna do
today items number one through
five on the calendar we might.
Go a little beyond that will to
see how we're doing we've got a
so this would be the time for
Senator o'neill and I think
Senator Pinto also had some
certificate she presented on
Friday and she just wants to
reference those ideal to first
survivors of suicide and this is
a solemn way to start the week
but for the for the newer
members this has been a
tradition of the Senate since
day on behalf of his constituent
Marc Anthony Baca and so it it
come to know suicide.
It's really really tough and we
have a real problem and in New
Mexico I believe we're at the
funding for suicide prevention
that hopefully we can can really
support strongly it affects a
lot of us the thing is here's
them that there is a future
beyond the pain that that that
that they're going through and I
know that that's a hard one I
mean it's maybe easier for some
of us to see well well this is
think people when they when they
do that desperate Act.
You know they're they're not I
just can't get the on the moment
philosophies against it and it's
by a.
Jennifer hacked and.
In this book she again and again
for what she does is in a really
in some way back with the Greeks
and so forth as a the ultimate
act of heroism but it's
you know it's a fascinating book
but I love it I think she was
again and again she gets back to
I mean the whole book is about
statewide why should we stay and
and her argument really hinges
How can we ask ourselves to stay
for someone else and our own
futures is talking about trying
to convince someone not to kill
real person who you really know
as well as a concept pointing
towards all the others who
existence matters even in the
abstract put another way
existence the other to meet the
other is to have an idea of
infinity you know it's just.
stuff but but basically I think
a lot about this stuff I just
some have been close to
families.
Who have been devastated by this
you know it's it's the survivors
I just think it's very important
for us as legislators to keep
this really front and center
whether it's with legislation
funding you know it's just
something that we really need to
to our role as policy makers and
with that I yield to others who
might have thoughts on this
important issue.
recognition that Senator o'neill
has brought to the floor with
regard to this and I think
especially now all of us need to
remember that the young people
and three in my community that
that they continue to go through
but I do thank you so much and
and we just need to remember
that there is always hope things
are getting better things will
be better so grateful for that
for your your bill last session
on on this issue very good
discussion there for anyone
who's interested Miss World
Health Organization has a
suicidal ideation or suicidal
activities not not showing those
types of of images or
that they they mimic you they
copied you
and and the World Health
Organization goes through that
in a very scientific methodical
way it's been of a concern to me
not not just that but other
other resources to so for anyone
that is interested look up those
resources New World Health
Organization I'm happy to
provide them to you thank you
people.
And with LGBTQ youth being four
times more likely to seriously
consider suicide to make a plan
occurs improves our ability to
serve and advocate for LGBTQ
youth this is why representation
matters and why people need to
see people like them increase in
attempts suicide every forty
five seconds in the United
States.
So if you are considering.
Please reach out to people who
care for you.
Because you are valued.
You are loved.
We need you here thank you madam
Couple of just short remarks a
first of all want to go and
thank Senator o'neill for
bringing this forward but.
Two things if you're kind to one
another and you respect one
trauma might just think twice
and then reach back to you and
it means then that with what you
are providing that definitely
Senator pope.
Thank you madam president thank
you Santo ni O. for bringing
this forward.
Really everywhere.
And I think the key to this is
having this discussion.
And letting those know that.
in the military you know the Air
Force we have women and.
You deployed you have your
battle buddies and you have
these discussions you might not
someone's life.
On the outside they might be
successful.
They might look like everything
is going right in the world.
But that might not be the case.
Tragically take her own life and
it looked like she had
everything going great and our
life self I would just ask those
of listening that don't be
ashamed to ask for help don't be
Let me just mention that our
pastor for today telephone
Arnold is a founding member of
the national action alliance for
suicide prevention sponsored by
Senator o'neill.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you madam president if I
could also say a few words
Has as chosen of this particular
path
And it is hard we'd go through
We talk about suicide.
Is the other senators have
mentioned it's always important
for us to do an outreach select
with others and especially our
young people
I know that
I have come across young people
who say that they're sad and I I
that it's okay to talk to
someone.
even if it's a counselor which
we need many more counselors
madam president as you know in
our schools to work with our
young people but I I know it
people at the earliest stage to
talk to somebody and it's not
embarrassing there's nothing
wrong sharing what your feelings
are.
so I just wanted to mention that
madam president because I've
seen it and I've heard it and
I'm grateful that my little one
has told me that I go in contact
embarrassing even as an adult to
talk to someone
because that that communication
I think also helps connect that
link that we need thank you.
Senator homeland and pope and
Senator Lopez and others for
sharing so since early this.
You know this concern I mean
we're we're policymakers for
couple families that I was very
close to where the just both of
just devastated by suicide and
so with that I want to say now
seventh in that February seventh
two thousand twenty to be
declared survivors of suicide
day in the Senate thank you.
Thank you senator o'neill.
Senator Pinto sorry Senator
Pinto.
Thank you madam president
unanimous consent to make this
announcement seeing no objection
go right ahead thank you madam
One of them was Emily Allison to
the Navajo from annually to and
Joan and street don't talk New
Mexico for almost two years has
in China the in two thousand
eight to two thousand eleven.
Avid family services provides a
twenty four hour hotline is
currently hosting twenty eight
families who need immediate help
Those that are in New Mexico
because we're so close to the
border she also has some that
come from Arizona.
And there is not another.
Next person.
Smith do not say at the.
She's Navajo from that now
Navajo eastern agency and also
was established in two thousand
thirteen thirteen and a member
of the New Mexico missing and
murdered indigenous indigenous
women and relatives task force.
international audience as a
result many Navajo people are
anyone can use the Facebook page
to share electronic foreigners
of their missing loved ones
where could be collected and
searched for and she does this
without any resources.
Very proud to bring her to see
Friday and her mother was very.
Even though it doesn't something
she.
Has personally experience but as
she does this every day she sees
the numbers and sees what's
happening out there.
fifth hosted the certificate of
appreciation for thirteen years
of work as a Navajo bilingual
teacher.
He's currently employed at
today.
the one who walks around clan no
recess.
People.
Mr Clarke is originally from
crystal New Mexico his parents
are Irene and Jimmy Clark.
to several people to recognize
male teachers that are in the
area and especially bilingual
teachers.
But as they found out of him
know you they recognize you
trickle down the line you work
there you came up.
But for a person that directly
works with them did no to me
that the children that are in
presents the material to the
children and described for me
one of his lessons of getting on
the desk and.
Conveying the story of the twin
recognizing him I hope he still
stays within the profession as
we move forward thank you thank
you madam president members of
the body.
There's no objection the reader
all right.
Senator executive message number
thirty seven the honorable Mimi
Stewart president pro tempore a
New Mexico constitution I am
offering for authorizing for
your consideration during the
fifty fifth legislature's second
session submission of Senate
The journal show the message
from the governor has been
received.
Senator Wirth.
that order business messages
from house the readable right.
Madam president I'm directing
I'm directed to inform the
Senate that the house has passed
house bill thirty seven as
The channel show the message
from the house has been
received.
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill thirty
Respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk
journal so the message from the
house has been received.
Madam president I'm directed to
clause house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for house bill one thirty five
and requests the concurrence of
the Senate respectfully
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president M. S. is that we got
our business committee reports.
There's no objection were on
that order of business committee
reports the read will read.
but that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty one to pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
read all the committee reports
that we have found on the with
one motion but the gentle
reflector Act upon individually.
Seeing no objection the right
all right all the committee
reports.
thirty I do pass Senate bill
thirty eight.
Do pass as amended.
Senate bill forty three do pass.
transportation committee up
settlement of.
Madam protiv.
Madam president.
Okay we're back on if you'll
continue to read.
Senate joint resolution ten do
report.
Is there objection seeing none
the committee report is adopted
and the journal reflect that
they are acted upon
individually.
that's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
William P. souls chair Senators
souls I move adoption of the
committee report.
referred Senate bill eight has
had it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that I do not pass but that
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill eight
Senator had a meal.
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the committee
reports but we vote on them with
I move the adoption of the
committee report thank you
senator we're on adoption of a
favorable committee report
three has had it under
consideration and provide same
to be germane pursuant to Senate
executive message number thirty
seven and that's referred to the
Education Committee respectfully
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that the
we act on them with one motion
the general fact they were
active on individually seeing no
objection the reader to read
Mimi Stewart chair.
We are on a Senator Wirth I move
adoption the committee reports
president Ms because that we go
back to that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
run that order business
announcements miscellaneous
senator Wirth I thank you madam
president so we are about to go
to third reading just a heads up
item five and we'll see how
we're doing
we is that unanimous consent we
go to that order business third
reading of legislation and ideal
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino for item
action for placing Senate bill
forty.
On.
Final passage is been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
passed something called the
health quality surcharge Act the
tax and it provides a method for
And the.
Extra payments are made to those
nursing homes or assisted care
facilities that actually improve
receiving an effective way.
It's also added money to our
Medicaid budget for other things
and the we had testimony from
measure that would take away the
sunset provision on this act.
And with that will stand for
questions.
Mr Pruitt madam president I move
that Senate bill forty do now
pass.
And I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate the record show the
To your seats.
Please Senators two years suits
are going to count because
you're not at your seat.
Thank you this.
me.
My lotus thirty five in the
affirmative this year in the
the Senate madam president
Senator Wirth unanimous consent
of members be allowed to remove
their jackets.
A seeing no objection says
senators will be allowed to
final passage is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Senator to explain the bill
madam president members this is
Is there debate on Senate bill
one twenty three.
the Senate this record show the
rules being called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those warning negative
slide show hands we are voting
on Senate bill one twenty three
Diamond voting no.
Shows Senator had a meal voting
no show Senator McKenna voting
shows Senator pope voting no I
got you Senator McKenna.
Five food twenty eight in the
affirmative seven in the
negative Senate bill one twenty
three has duly passed the
Senate.
president what we had earlier
this year in Rio Arriba county a
place Senator had a meal you
have to do the motion to put
your bill on.
I ask unanimous configuration
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all options for placing Senate
Senator had a meal to explain
the bill thank you so much madam
president of this bill is was
written after a snowstorm or a
of people in northern New Mexico
lease their tanks and when tanks
are leased they can't get their
doors to see how much propane
they had this bill addresses a
safety and public health issue
and would allow for in the in
the declaration of emergency
would assume liability for the
filling of those tanks and they
would also then ask that the
original LP gas provider provide
president I I for any questions
or stand for questions.
Senator Sedillo Lopez to debate
the bill.
Thank you madam president I
And ended up dying because of
she was sick and unable to deal
with keeping her trailer six so
Gonzales.
Thank you madam chair of I don't
have a question for I just have
a comment
really assist individuals of
families so in on a very very
timely part of trying to help
them.
Under circumstances there's many
parts you know of what happens
to the vendors but on this case
you know the important part is
for families to have.
being able to stay warm and
survive the part so with that I
want to thank the sponsors for
this thank you madam president.
And thank you senator Neville.
Thank you madam president just
that would fill the tank would
assume the liability.
What about the liability inside
the home if there is a gas leak
or something like that how does
just fills it.
Who is liable if there's a
problem inside the home and not
the tank just senator had a meal
the liability and so when this
happened they agreed they would
assume that liability because
they thought it was more
important to take on that
liability David Abbey New
Mexicans freeze to death.
more protests and those kind of
things so we now have a second
company coming out that has not
done the mercury test is not
guess it in but it could be
other guys propane partially
mixed in there so.
just wondering for getting
causing a problem with the house
blows up somewhere along the
Thank you madam president center
appreciated.
Thank you next to debate the
bill a Senator Woods.
In the bill did I miss amendment
madam president and.
Senator Hermio Senator are you
president go ahead answer the
question.
So it's not all right in in the
in the bill and so it's up to
the providers who would then go
and feel if they would take on
assume that.
Madam president the.
I have had some experience with
this in.
The.
before that they do a test to
those lines to see if that
system is safe.
So.
Madam president thank you for
the question thank you thank you
Mr further debate on the bill
Senator Pirtle thank you madam
present with the sponsor please
My question is
Are they required to be filled
within twenty four hours is
there anything in there if they
mandating that they fill it up
having gone through it I'm
trying to find the language
where it says that but if you
could just let me know what the
the company still has the
association has fully endorsed
this bill.
And madam president center how
many propane delivery companies
do we have in New Mexico.
southern Colorado and one in
northern New Mexico now what
happened with this is the
company didn't have enough
drivers that could fill up that
And thank you for that members
you know farmers back in the in
the seventies used to use LP gas
for for quite a few things
tractors and vehicles and such
burn and and farmers used to use
this pretty regular up until
they put a huge tax on it and so
you know we talk about wanting
to subsidize and do some of
these things with LP gas for
but I think I I do have a little
bit a reservation here just
whenever we're putting some of
these requirements in the
statute you know there could be
a lot of situations that are
Senator Griggs to debate the
bill.
Thank you madam president we we
heard this bill in two
not just the liability of the
new provider.
But potentially under the
declaration of emergency what
liability might the state have.
Okay ill Senator Hotmail madam
president I yield.
Thank you madam president center
at the response from.
I can't remember if it was a she
and I I think that the
the overall response was just
the fact that the state of
Madam president and center that
that is correct is not madam
president senator that is
correct.
Thank you madam president thank
center.
president I would move that
Senate bill one forty one do now
pass and ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the role has been
called and asked for a roll call
voting on Senate bill one forty
one with an emergency clause
senators to your seats those
wishing to vote no please raise
show Senator Baca voting no show
Senator Moores voting no.
So Senator Ingle voting no.
Senate.
Senator Hotmail thank you madam
president and members of the
body.
Thank you next we'll move on to
bill thirty nine as amended on
final passage it has been taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Senator Shendo to explain the
bill.
let us know who that is on would
see for GST.
Right seeing no objection the
your expert witness can attend.
Senate bill thirty nine it would
eliminate the July first twenty
twenty sunset clause.
Make permanent the certification
from five to ten to eight
percent.
Remove the three million annual
gross revenue cap limitation.
Remove the ten consecutive your
Right is there debate on the
bill Senator creeks.
general statewide is that what
this bill does is it allows a
particular better to actually
Sure what I want to want to
point out is in the city of
Alamogordo.
It works that way almost except
taxpayer of New Mexico what the
procurement damage to the
taxpayer of New Mexico
potentially allows individuals
on that particular project show
madam madam president senators
members of the body I think that
is something as we move forward
Mexico company it may be at the
expense of another New Mexico
company.
And it is without question at
President would Senator Shendo
yield.
Remember it's not Mr today.
Madam president.
aware that it's a great respect
I hold for you.
Mr president to Senator Shendo
yield.
Senator Ingle.
Anderson over you.
Madam president the yes I will
guess service co sponsor of that
bill on.
Is that the same person that
setting by yours that total been
retouched of.
to yours from from my
perspective the awfully
look like this I can't really
tell.
Madam president center I was
just curious because I I I know
Present Senator I appreciate
this bill and I think you you
have there's some things here
that we we can take a look at
that will help our industry and
Senator Pirtle to debate bill
thank you madam president with
the sponsor please yield.
a valid.
Native American resident
business certificate issued by
the taxation and revenue
department what are the some of
the requirements for applying
The requirements are are laid
out under section F..
an interpreter resident
business.
A certificate or a mid America
resident contractor so include
an affidavit from a notary
public setting forth at the
part within the student with in
New Mexico.
Is at least fifty one percent
owned by the Indian nation tribe
of located in what in.
In whole or in part on the line
with in New Mexico.
of more evidence was a member of
the New Mexico Indian tribe.
and so forth.
And thank you madam president
and thank you for answering the
question I I did have a concern
going to exclude any native
American business as long as
they are from national tribe and
and madam president Sanders my
understanding though that that
sets forth what it takes to be a
member of of any of those three.
Madam president that is true
it's tribe has their own
membership ordinance and I don't
section only speaks to of
businesses that are owned by the
tribe or on the reservation.
I have a brother in law who
operates you know of member
reservation.
There are basically operating
similar to any individual that's
operating in the state of New
Mexico either as a resident or a
native American.
the nation are not recognized as
in state resident businesses
madam secretary me a settlement
the president.
the federally recognized Indian
nation tribe or pueblo located
in whole or in part so it would
include the the Utes the Navajo
Nation and then almost all the
Native American businesses or
people who are members of state
a a tribe from California or
Michigan or Oklahoma.
No if if if if somebody from
Thank you madam president.
Next on my lips.
Senator share.
do have some questions that I'm
confused about here Senator
share to yield I am not Center
share madam president.
good senator from San Juan
County.
Thank you compress.
And the fellow B. S. member
So.
New Mexico your new Mexican pay
taxonomic said but.
If you live on payments you
don't qualify as a New Mexican
for purposes of these contracts
cases I will be incorporated as
a state.
Corporation even though I live
on the reservation.
I want to start a business I
One has a group of company let's
say a state corporation.
Senator publish a good example
they have a corporation state
corporation.
considered in state.
Company because of the fact that
they're on their own sovereign
land.
So that's the only thing we're
tribe can also be eligible for
for these of.
Of procurement of within the our
public entity.
one percent owned by an Indian
nation tribe pueblo located
wherever so.
procurement advantage so I go to
the Santa Clara and I say Hey
guys you know.
I want to sell you fifty one
percent of my company but I want
I just think we can game the
system Madam president that's a
and I think it's wife for the
And madam president and Senator.
Right now as it is on online
referred to line six on page
eleven.
Right so so if if you of then
president and the senator.
So they have to meet all of
those as well.
So madam president senator.
So I move my.
The I move my head quarters.
Could could we open a business
could I open a business I am not
native American or at least not
enough to count.
Could I open a business with a
As long as as long as I said
that he on fifty one percent but
I still managed a hundred
percent a company.
Madam president and under under
a on page the eleven on page
eleven of nine six.
It has to be operating own lands
So.
Mr president it.
If if we wanted to have B. S.
it was and it was a useful to
you as part of the.
part of this corporation it's
really us.
The Management madam president I
know because I as an Indian
person and I am not the nation.
But if you read online nine at
least fifty one percent owned by
an Indian nation.
missed madam president I am not
Hey miss nation I am one
we're going business we would
incorporate as the New Mexico
corporate you know entity I just
happen to be fifty one percent
owner amend present you are
I'm starting to catch up to them
just madam chair okay okay I I
am surprised to learn that you
were not the heinous nation I
thought that.
want to make sure I say that
because a.
Members from the tribe might be
listening.
Senator share so so for anybody
that's listening I was just
trying to be a smart aleck I
example they're owned by the the
Navajo Nation but they couldn't
get of a preference for some New
Mexico.
that are listed if you notice
essays and it doesn't say or
they may this is and so in
addition to be native phone just
like in tech they would then
have to meet all those other
what was what's the purpose for
for that.
Senator Shendo thank you madam
president.
Okay already of.
In of in twenty sixteen there
was a five million cap was
That number of right now in this
bill we're removing that cap.
To allow you know for for larger
contracts.
not the same but functionally
for the state of New Mexico so I
am a veteran owned business for
my business is a veteran owned
business because I'm a veteran
The pueblo tribal of.
An Indian nation tribe or
pueblo.
This phone I can be in the same.
the procurement of code so just
makes us the same it just opened
it up.
Okay.
All right madam president
Senator appreciate it thank you
yield to the senator from
Bernalillo county jails thank
you madam president thank you
senator Kerr of quick question
in the case you already answered
this I wasn't aware since I was
effort then on top of that a
preference for being a veteran
company and on top of that a
preference for the native
American tribal owned companies
American resident business of
from five percent a percent and
that's it.
Thank you Mr chairman president
so it's just corporate so just
make sure it's not.
particular questions I think
for doing that another question
I had was doing with
Representative reciprocal
agreements that we have armed
also says that there's thirty
seven states
preferences including all of our
border states Colorado Oklahoma
Texas and even Utah since
because we yes we have a.
thirty seven of the state's term
at a ten percent disadvantage
from doing business and save the
state of Texas or Arizona
correct.
Madam president though we are
Madam presentar need to restate
the question does this go for
New Mexico businesses a ten
percent disadvantage to doing
other reciprocity.
Representative I'm getting an
answer I Senator Shendo if there
the business coming from the
state investor just like you're
doing business in the state of
Texas.
They don't have these
preferences and they actually
say in their law that if your
disadvantage for doing business
and I'm just gonna use Texas as
an example because our product
and some of our biggest trading
partners out there.
Madam president I don't know
what the procurement goals for
dollars in the state of Mexico
as much as we can for our
resident and veteran businesses.
President I I get what you're
saying but I just want to point
of those working on the by
Colorado it will hurt New Mexico
business trying to do business
across the land of state lands
our state to do business so we
can keep that New Mexico money
here and in our state that means
businesses are doing trying to
move into businesses in Texas
going to be.
Much more beneficial working in
Texas with a huge economy that
they have their industry and as
an example then it is a state in
New Mexico so I really hope that
but we need to be careful of how
we do that in the damages can
due to some other folks were for
picking winners and losers.
As far as helping New Mexico
small business in in American
business and veteran business
reciprocity with New Mexico.
Madam president of madam
president
from your original Albuquerque
to do all of our water project
for public works projects so our
tribe does not own any of
business there for all of our
support our enterprises.
And then probably forgot that
one specific example so I guess
my question is in your
procurement code about the
tribal have are they in return
tribal businesses owned by the
Navajos for instance our
schedules as examples will goals
there anything in here that
requires those tribal
governments are for looking at
giving New Mexico businesses and
other tribal businesses a
preference to reciprocate for
this incredibly generous.
bill is a hell tribal.
And veteran businesses in New
Mexico businesses we're giving
us preference and I get the
Mexico tribal businesses in the
tribal owned businesses should
help their brothers and sisters
who live in the same communities
and help their brothers and
sisters in New Mexico and
entities to have very
significant purchasing power we
can go through the whole list
madam president.
But if their job is to help New
They can spend their money in
Phoenix or Albuquerque's
Colorado
Because then and then contract
anywhere.
creating economic development
and supporting small businesses
and tribal business there should
be that reciprocity that if
payments is going to partner
that preference because they
have a lot of purchasing power
so I guess this is a huge
clearly problem with this bill
is a preference is only going
one way this is going to hurt
all four border states her the
former bill states not Connors
owner have that will penalize
New Mexico businesses.
In order to support these other
business which is great.
Glaring omission in this bill is
one tribe wants to help other
tried to help solve New Mexicans
should use that significant
purchasing power to help out no
other New Mexico small
same thing for New Mexico
businesses and other tribal
business right now it's just one
way resolver prosody required in
this bill the big glaring
problem out of president of this
Senator Munoz thank you Mr
president will the sponsor you
madam president of the sponsor
this you.
Let me ask you some questions I
don't have any arguing about the
native American preference and
everybody being treated equal
that's not an issue I think
pueblos state money and then
they require native American
preference.
Well so that's New Mexico money.
Mexico contractors into our
system.
Madam president Senator.
Can data American residents
combined.
The native American resident
that some preference madam
president no.
Mr president and center you're
sure about that you can't
combine those two preferences to
bid on the job.
will be ten percent not ten
percent plus to eight percent.
Madam presence Senator thank you
point that out and what section
of the bill that says limits
amount of points.
On page four of starting line
three
borderline for except for
resident business or neighboring
with business to be five to
Eight percent of the total
possible points a resident
business or ornate American
resident business.
And then on page line more page
So madam president that in and
I'm reading that ten percent of
total cost points to resin
Veterans or and native that is
cap on the total points in my
on page nineteen it talks about
community solar.
And I have no why don't idea why
the next pages twenty twenty
one.
And.
President of the reason this
section is in there is to be
It's new right madam president
if you go to page twenty.
business that's all it's doing.
K. for consistency doesn't do
anything other than add that to
the special.
And madam president center is
of new and entrepreneurs in the
state.
Madam president of we we are
hopeful that with the resident
business and them a resident
As well as existing business
systems are I mean Madam
presence Senator so I have and
if you have a a young man who
works for a company and then
He will never be able to do that
and you know why that is.
Madam president if the great
Senator can explain the that I
MFA for low income housing and
he wants to go build ten track
homes in a role at in that and
the job budget for one point
five million or two million
rating in New Mexico and now you
have a.
Multinational company who claims
New Mexico residents in comes in
and says all we can we can build
field that I don't care what
feel it is it could be in
computer technology they can get
out of bed by somebody else that
could be in in whole goods paper
goods and printing paper it
bigger companies will come in
been in the lower rate.
More employees have cost
savings.
And you have now crippled any
That that could be a possibility
it could they may not be I don't
get the on of the preferences.
And then present the just the
secretary right there could you
tell us a procurement costs and
and he probably can get the
numbers for any new companies or
awards and the contract in the
state of New Mexico he has
ability probably Texas office or
do something to get that.
Madam president we could provide
And then present Senator my
point is is if you're gonna
right eliminate the cap.
Then that tells me this is a big
industry bill.
I don't care whose children is
in New Mexico wants to start up
a business or their sons or in
the contracting business and and
in New Mexico by taking the cap
off just allowing them the
opportunity to start with a
hundred thousand dollar bid R.
or half a million dollar bills
so Mister presents internet have
we got that information from GST
at.
Madam president no.
Mr president let me ask another
question what do you know of any
There might be a handful but I
don't know the number.
Then present you know anybody
that's a million dollar
contracting company in the state
of New Mexico.
I do I don't know those numbers
specifically.
And then present then give you
another example let's let's just
preference but a California
company that contracts with the
the movie sets is all we can
supply chicken wings at twenty
five cents and the New Mexico
and if we're trying to do this
for really New Mexico businesses
then I think we got some
problems of this bill and so
Okay thank you madam president I
do have some numbers so they
came in of as of last year
seventy two percent of New
forty New Mexico contracts worth
over one point four billion.
We awarded to New Mexico
contracts and in four hundred
Only exists for vets.
Of removing it you know levels
the playing field for for tribes
invests.
every single dollar keeping the
captain allows smaller companies
to bid up to three million and
then they have to bid equal with
other companies and someone
Then present I see senator
Sanchez has his hand raised a
meal the senator Sanchez for me.
if you look at the bill all
removed and it is from the vets.
Madam president and so then
where does it remove it for and
where does that leave it for the
other.
And then present the cap exists
for veterans it was it was
placed in twenty sixteen it was
at five million and it was dues
Mr presents and so where is that
in New Mexico preference sources
the cap is on limited.
Mr.
President madam president center
could you tell me what your
expert witness with their more
here is the cat that was placed
in twenty sixteen at three
million from five million that's
all we're doing in this bill is
removing that cap.
Then present center it says
that about sun setting the cap
on the New Mexico resident
preference in that sense it is
am I correct in making that
statement then present center.
Senator Shendo a moment
president there is a sense that.
Not not in the.
There's a sunset not in this
other bill has a son sentiment.
Madam president.
Madam president and we don't
The president will we'll get the
answer shortly.
Members and etcetera so if the
sunset is another bill and that
doesn't have a cap on it and the
number and each one it doesn't
track the same and seems a
little bit fishy out there for
me.
If and let me give you another
example we're waiting on that if
Laguna development corporation
comes in and use the native
do work in New Mexico when it a
giant corporation can can how do
the cost savings on.
One of the yes.
Madam president I don't have the
Madam president I I guess I'm I
am waiting for an amendment
Senate bill seven removes the
census.
Then present so Senate bill
seven removes the sunset and and
then I know we're not debating
The cap was there for certain
reason.
And the cap was there to allow
people to get started in
business so big companies don't
paper may paper places Xerox
company a local print shop
whatever it is to compete in New
Mexico.
so you now you've taken
advantage of New Mexico
businesses again and and this
bill just by removing the cap L.
haven't really any other issue.
The cap never existed for
resident businesses.
It only existed for veterans so
all we're removing it is from
the veterans nothing more.
I'm not I haven't read the
Senate bill seven you know and
and and so for what it contains
but what we're trying to
competing at the same with the
same level right now because the
cap never existed for resident
businesses madam president it
only existed for veterans and
crucis look at that statute he's
not paying attention to me I
have a look at that staff and
see what the what the sunset
clause what or what the cause
pretty quickly for journeys.
Madam presence Senator
there's probably some lawyers
debate then why is there sunset
on the cap and I'm trying to
figure that out and and.
Members I'm I'm being equal
across the board.
In New Mexico we should treat
everybody the same but we should
not get over run in New Mexico
the cap if you remove the cap
New Mexico's gonna lose and New
Mexico residents are gonna lose
and so when we talk about
contractor preference in
dollar highway job.
And they get the bid for the
fifty million dollar highway job
and a million dollar highway job
comes up the small guys gonna
and shrivel we already have a
shortage of them we already have
a short of employees throughout
the entire system so when you
change this.
Madam president again
of.
Senator the cat never existed.
For New Mexico residents
Senator Munoz.
Amend present I I guess well
and someone it would taken off
the cap it will kill the New
Mexico businesses your small
printers.
Your small businesses that do
sand Mr and can can compete with
a three million dollar cap and
selling that when a larger
company comes in to do
something.
Madam president unanimous
consent to recuse myself from
this vote due to conflict of
Madam I don't know there's been
a ruling on the request for the
excuse of I I haven't I I would
like to join the debate.
Hi we have a unanimous the
you
Then president and Senator
Shendo I don't know that I have
to ask that you here but I do
think there's something
important to point out in all
relates to all goods and
services in New Mexico.
What I would tell you it is
lawyers good lawyers can be very
clever.
But but if you look at the
existing language you would say
that this preference only
relates to projects which are
subject to formal bidding.
A formal bid process and if
projects out of the formal bid
process.
In other words your bill on the
floor now gives a preference to
native American businesses which
And and so that's why Taylor is
to be really clever because what
happens up here in Santa Fe as
we pass these laws that have one
intention and then what happens
really frankly is very clever
people figure out ways to avoid
and other things and and I got
to tell you when I read some of
the bills.
You'll have to forgive me for
this but as a lawyer but I'm
sitting there thinking how the
whole time have somebody avoid
hope you're aware of that that
two bills that you're carrying
right now are in conflict in my
mind.
This bill to give a preference
native American businesses but
that's in Senate judiciary now
that you're carrying begins to
take out projects from that
formal bid process and so then
so then what happens is the big
contractors who want to do these
so there's a very clever people
who figured out.
What what what this preference
may do and then how to make sure
that they don't get posed by
the preference in the bid
deserving of the preference then
there's easy ways to get around
it.
So if I was import arise on the
issue that that with with again
with due respect my good friends
transportation concentration
things in the state of New
Mexico who are not going to be
entitled to the preference but
they're going to figure out a
way how to do it they always do.
clever lawyers and that creative
won't.
And I don't know that that's
ultimately good policy for us
here but I thought it was
important for us to at least
recognize what's going on here.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president
You know I think it's there's a
lot of confusion about what
we're doing here we're not
So we're increasing the amount
of the preferences and just
looking at this we are taking
the cap off the veterans piece
Native American businesses are
veteran businesses and certainly
the house co sponsor up there is
been a huge advocate for our our
that it's just the veterans
piece of this
Is is is is something that that
makes me look at a little
differently because again I do
think you might have some
smaller veteran businesses that
said we've had a few of these
debates
I do think that this is a good
policy that we've had on the
books and.
Making a little more robust is
Madam president the yes and
thank you madam president and
senator I I did have a a request
from a constituent to ask a few
pueblos our nations within the
state of New Mexico.
Madam president the I was
reading my emails of that came
in can you restate that question
native American owned business
was owned by a tribe with lower
nation if there's a requirement
that the employee members of
either their own nation tribe or
twenty two tribes are outside of
my own or we do have a
preference for hiring but our
know health can for example I
think you know you know we don't
have a lot of doctors all your
doctors dentists and overhead
behavioral health and folks that
provide services are all non
win the bid at a plus ten and
then subcontract out in the goal
here is is to you know get
employment
by our veterans and by our
the work can you speak to that
madam president.
The madam president yeah me I
partner together to block
certain contracts of before this
I I need this is I can't speak
to what other tribes are doing
but but I think our intent with
public dollars here in the state
and supporting our small
businesses.
And and madam president Senator
did it ever come up in committee
to put in an employment
requirement to include is to for
No not not in committee because
this bill is for the state
procurement not tribal of
procurement.
Mexico was due the tribes
pueblos a nation within the
state of New Mexico do the
similar within their own
procurement or going out to bid
pueblos within the state.
I am familiar with ours I'm not
familiar with anybody else's but
we do provide preference for
data broken businesses of a but
certainly try to look at our own
tribal not what if it's a tribal
member business or Indian on
business which is different you
know if you're tribal member of
Amos or you know tribal member
to other other non Indian all
businesses and and thank you
madam president and senator I
would like that information if
we could get that I don't know
who could provide that for us
madam president because I'd like
preference to their own people
because I think that's an
important thing for economic
development on in all of these
rural parts of the state thank
you madam president.
may be a conflict with now three
bills in Senate bill forty five.
It doesn't strike the the the
procurement for native Americans
everything's aligning in these
bills because this is a.
it strikes the the resident and
the veteran procurement for a
preference no issues with
treating everybody equal the one
bill conflicts another another
one conflicts another and so I I
might ask a good center to make
sure your strings out all these
think that that other bill
conflicts so now had three bills
conflict.
Thank you madam president.
Is there any other debate on the
bill.
Actually have an amendment.
We'll have to make copies.
Senator Padilla thank you madam
president with the the minority
leader's permission
madam president I yield to my
good friend from Bernalillo
county thank you madam president
and and Senator Shendo thank you
for yielding so I went down this
road a couple times those of you
an odd number to me because of
how these things are developed
can you just walk us through why
eight not ten or not fifteen or.
Madam president if I understand
percent to eight percent the it
just seems to me like such an
odd number to go the only three
points up is our particular
reason or have our of peas or
whatever the change to.
It was just allow the the the
the veteran businesses to still
have a two percent advantage
rather than then get of putting
odd to me but I'll I'll take
your word and I love that you're
trying to do something and we
have the amendment here now I
guess but thank you madam
president just want to try to
clarify that a little bit.
Thank you.
we do have a floor amendment the
reader all right.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill thirty nine
as amended amendment sponsored
by Senator Baca.
explain the amendment thank you
madam president of this simply
it it doesn't affect any of the
percentages or anything like
that it's simply restores that
cap of three million madam
larger institutions and
organizations would just more
resources after hearing the
debate I think really that's
what we're trying to do was to
madam president the appreciate
the good senator of the to and
from the amendment.
bill completely I think it just
like the good senator from
Valencia County said allows a
little guy to play laws a little
guide to start a business and
them to play allows them to stay
open allows them to service
those contracts and small
community so I I support
amendment.
Other debate on the amendment.
Senator Baca the the.
The amendment in the men's one
of several places where there's
a cap to do not intend to I mean
Senator Baca thank you madam
president on.
I'm gonna continue with this
debate closed so will address
those in just a moment.
So further debate on the
amendment Senator share.
And we could do some good things
there of that we took the cap
off in in in what I think we did
there is.
of you shouldn't have the
opportunities when mega
businesses that have attorneys
stomped on once again once again
and so the cap to me make some
sense with let's not let's let's
the revenue in there the people
that support the local
communities there the people to
support the local dances in the
that's a real disservice in in
in I've seen this madam
president last year particularly
seem to have a rash of bills
that seem to have contempt for
things.
But at the same time were taken
the these really big businesses
which we all claim we hate we
need them to pay a higher tax.
smaller businesses should have
to compete against mega
businesses.
And and madam president we know.
We're gonna lead fifty one
percent of of
The pueblo the nation of the
tribe bonus but but because
we're so big.
buy uniforms for the for the
soccer team.
We're not going to help out the
local of food bank we're not
going to be a good neighbor Sir
because we don't really care.
actually is in Gallup.
Four billion.
Roswell or Farmington suddenly
has to compete against this big
New Mexicans.
That actually live in New
Mexico.
That actually pay tax in New
Mexico.
played to get another huge
advantage.
An advantage that for them only
served for greater profits and
driving up the cost.
And not really helping New
Mexicans.
This can only only allows.
The mom and pop businesses the
That's what this cap does it
gives them an advantage.
First is gaming the system to
let try again till mega thank.
the about the pueblos of the
tribes of the nation.
Why would they do something that
it vantage is there people
certainly.
the small New Mexico companies.
Without giving this.
This huge advantage.
language.
We are addressing the issue of
the persons for the people or
whatever in New Mexico that
actually pay tax in New Mexico.
And as long as we're as long as
we're.
Ice icy contempt for small
business.
are being crushed.
This this is we lost forty
percent of our business in New
Mexico because a COVID now.
You can argue whether we should
It's the small New Mexico
business they can't figure out
how to game the system.
Because they just they just the
that we're trying to quote that
we've created here by trying to
solve another problem.
And so I think madam president
that there are few things that
The nation the tribes and
pueblos without damaging
everybody else.
We can do what we can work
unintended consequences as
things come up.
This is one of those huge
unintended consequences and
that's really the value of
having the debate.
these unintended consequences
and as you know madam president.
Too often the unintended
consequences sneak through us
anyway.
It's helpful it's useful to the
entire state.
So I hope madam president that
we can actually find a way to
make this happen.
That we can actually figure out
that this was not an
intentional.
Anti small business or
intentional.
Anti non native.
created a bigger problem and now
flushing it out through here is
really the thing that we need to
do.
So madam president.
I think that we ought to
continue the debate on this.
The discussion and debate you
know I I think there's sort of
some mis understanding about
what this bill is really doing
but this time of.
Majority Leader I think we're
going to try and work on this
you know and and and bring it
back to to the floor.
Senator Wirth thank you members
of my understanding that there
what we're gonna do is just stop
the debate at this point on this
bill will move to the next bill
understanding that isn't one to
get the floor sat down we'll go
etcetera is that correct but yes
madam madam president that is
correct I think majority floor
leader and so we will work on
that and we'll move on to the
next bill at this point all
right Sir gonna roll for this
to thank the sponsor of the bill
for for working on that with us
and I want to thank senator
Ortiz Y. Pino for pointing that
number five Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you madam president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the directors show that
all action for placing Senate
bill one thirty four on final
madam president this bill
is a very important bill and it
has to do with funding and
housing trust fund with the
intent that this fund should
have funding in it so that we
can ameliorate at least the many
problems we have since way back
this fund and it has been
nonrecurring.
the result is that you can't
depend on nonrecurring funds
when you're going to build
affordable housing and provide
our finance committee issued a
request to legislators to give
us your priorities what you felt
we all felt are the priorities
that needed to be addressed
through this pandemic and
that being said we figured out.
Away that hopefully we can
finally if this bill passes we
there are two hundred and
seventeen thousand people in New
Mexico that are cost burdened at
least that amount and cannot
afford housing last year we
be used for based on need not
only on competition but those
that apply can apply and inspo
wards would be made based on
this fund it generates and I
request attention to this
because there's no other fund
and no other place we can
generate twenty nine to one in
Mexico with affordable housing
so many people that are cost
burdened with that have to spend
more than fifty percent of their
income just on a mortgage
members of the Senate passes
major concerns not only because
a person cannot get up in the
morning and set up a set on a
table in their home and have a
problems that are just huge in
New Mexico.
All all are linked to somebody
being homeless or the financial
stress is not not been able to
it would provide jobs you will
find more gross receipts tax for
the state because more
construction materials will be
purchased and many other forms
the funding would come back to
twenty five million per year.
Recurring dollars on an average
if we take two point five
percent which is what my bill
take individual lump psalms of
of of capital from individual
legislators because what happens
is it takes that portion of the
of housing projects so this will
go to weather is ation whether
rising homes for more energy
efficiency to
it provides for very low to
based on need and sell is just a
something that is so badly
needed and I hope that we can
pass this bill madam president.
I just today the Albuquerque
journal has not only been
talking about the thousands of
affordable housing units needed
in our state but also how are
teachers who just received
housing thank you very much.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Senator Pinto.
Thank you madam president and I
to rise and support of the bill
kicked out on the streets with
the economic downturn.
But as we move forward that
affordable housing to allow
areas and mortgage isn't like
other things used to go out and
buy and that is it the end of
the transactions these mortgages
go over a couple of years the
president thank you members of
the body.
Thank you senator next we'll
hear from Senator Padilla.
Thank you madam president I also
to one this might be one of the
greatest returns on investment
that we can see here in New
Mexico the housing crisis here
the homes remain affordable as a
result of what's happened to the
housing market here in New
Mexico and the sponsor sure to
me that that is the case we we
have a massive crisis in housing
here and this is one way to help
of us would benefit from this
very measure and this return on
investment something we cannot
pass by and I want to thank
sponsors for making this happen
for all of us thank you.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Senator Hamblen.
seen the positive impact of
housing of the housing trust
fund specially in Los crucis for
four years I disclose this
before I had the honor of
serving as the president of the
board of directors of the state
homes and I'd like to remind the
body that all of us are one
catastrophic event away from
become from losing the security
of our homes if any one of us
under a bridge the reason why is
because we have a housing
shortage in the state.
However with the support of SB
one thirty four our state
agencies would have an
crucis we have the desert hope
apartments this was spearheaded
through them to see about
Community of Hope the mortgage
financing authority and other
state agencies that renovated a
apartment complex.
One of the things that's really
unique about Los crucis is that
we have camp hope.
Which is a transitional.
they're sleeping there until
they get into their own housing
but we have a housing shortage
so this brilliant idea.
From the C. Valley Community of
So this forty unit trauma
informed care apartment complex
now has been completely filled
Now here at the doesn't hope
apartments they have a pantry
they have a case manager on the
like this in addition to we have
sue's house.
In Los crucis which houses women
who are formally homeless who
are who have disabilities of
housing so that you can address
the other issues.
So we start talking about people
who may be drinking or might
have addiction issues well if
they have their own house.
So just be one thirty four will
annually allocate two point five
percent of severance tax money
capacity for the New Mexico
housing trust fund.
Which is administered by the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority.
complex that maybe run down may
not have a whole lot of folks in
it certainly not being used to
its capacity.
And what we could do is actually
into their own apartments having
a roof over their head like all
of us have the luxury and good
fortune of doing today.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam president
their resources and sometimes
they're not so we start building
housing and then we that we have
to abruptly stop we we start
down the path and we have to
abruptly stop and the the
point out that housing trust
fund appropriations over the
last few years included five
million in fiscal year twenty to
one point two million in fiscal
year twenty one two million in
down we have to constantly be
rebuilding and the brilliance of
this bill is a consistent
support for for low income
housing and address and
Thank you next we'll hear from
Senator Tallman.
No thank you madam chair thank
you Center for bringing this
bill forward I wholeheartedly
supported.
country wide shortage of housing
rents are skyrocketing.
And the housing prices will
probably increase more there's
been a few times in our history
Mexico for housing prices have
gone up twenty to thirty percent
again I want to applaud the
center for bringing this forward
done more to address the housing
issue and Senator Rodriguez
thank you.
Thank you hear from Senator
Lopez.
I thank you madam president and
mentioned just want to remind us
that we also have many children
in our schools who
are considered homeless and
madam president I know of of two
three or four families that live
together
they may be a single parent with
one child or as it is
that this I think is the
or heard at least
on the news late last night with
a talking about housing houses
that are for sale at New Mexico
right now we don't even have
enough homes on the market for
the market is tight people are
selling homes for premium even
to rent an apartment madam
president in a simple apartment
you're looking at close to two
support thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Hickey to
debate the bill.
Thank you madam chair I also
want to rise and support.
representatives of the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority have called this
legislation transformational.
And I believe that like a school
for bringing it forward thank
you madam chair thank you next
we hear from Santo Gonzalez.
on this and the summary of key
and very LA complains of being
brought up with the two things
that I just want all just
state for many years you know
their tradition of the area that
they live in and what the market
has done you know it is racist
born raised and they cherish
their culture into this areas
because not all of not being
able to afford a home and though
this spring so you know that
other professions that you know
if they want to locate in a
concerned community and it's you
know can they afford housing so
better us henceforth as we move
on for other years so with that
all madam president thank you
Senator Rodriguez for your
tireless efforts this is one of
those bills that you dream that
some day you could ultimately
have a solution this big.
anyone nationally this is a
national issue
and you know this is a solution
that a.
Well you know it's interesting
on also took my hat to the folks
for the New Mexico finance
Katie X. even eclipse what this
will provide and
But this makes a serious serious
effort to try to find that
not to mention the match so this
really we talk about
transformative this is a
transformative bill this is
historic and I really want to
thank you senator once again for
bill that people may not have
read it may not be aware of but
I want to point it out to again
which is that.
Any unused money the to crude
after three years will go back
the general fund and that's
that's pretty unique and
hopefully a feature everybody
can feel really good about so
thank you again and really
wanted to support this
and I'll come right back to you
Senator Wirth.
Okay Senator Brandt.
The agency present with the
sponsor yield.
Madam president yes senator I
So how do we have a housing
shortage.
Mr president Senator Brandt
thank you for your question the
know it's something that we
truly have reneged on we put
this band together in two
thousand five but we have failed
we have not provided enough
funding to continue to sustain
thousand
have a peak individuals here are
homes that and families that are
have there's a huge shortage
that the problem exists and is
getting worse because people are
just not the wages the it are
not keeping up and the you know
Thank you Mr president and
senator you know we we've seen a
large increase in housing values
at least in my community
I I think that maybe we have
statewide issue from my
understanding and talking to the
MFA I don't think you can go to
any community in any part of the
state not find people pushing
is a problem that exists
everywhere.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator I appreciate your.
passion on this issue.
And so I I do have a little bit
of knowledge in this area.
and.
I I'm not sure building more
housing.
Who are starting families
though.
And going into trying to buy
their first home.
Even if they have a decent job
Have a big struggle does this
help them in any way.
Madam president Senator Brandt
this is based on income and
income criteria that has to be
is the area median income
restrictions than would be
eligible.
Mr president Senator water those
income levels I'm not sure
exactly what you're talking
would be eligible that's for
mortgage assistance or housing
assistance if it's for rental
assistance that would be one
hundred twenty percent of the
would be for building affordable
housing and whether rising and
and also by the way compliance
with the American disabilities
act because right now we're
here would be able to assist the
disabled the individuals who
can't afford to pay to have
these these amenities in their
home something we all take for
and saying that wrong thank you
madam president senator I
appreciate that
So does it change by region or
understanding that these are
statewide and those are income
criteria ons that exist in
that's what they use at the
mortgage finance authority.
is it allows.
Some of our severance tax funds
I think I'm the right fund to be
used by the MFA for
new to what we do every year
other than one thing and I will
explain every year or we try not
as often as we should but we try
approved capital for this fund
the problem is we don't approve
recurring it's always
nonrecurring item we don't
approve enough of it so they
can't build affordable housing
that's the issue the difference
now madam president center
Brandt is that is that this will
provide for a sustainable
Thank you madam president and
senator so with this mostly then
be for apartment complexes or is
it also going to be used for
apartment complexes or homes for
homes that's really the intent
whether it be called that inside
an apartment or whatever it may
private individual homes.
Miss madam president I don't
have the breakdown of of that
with me immediately I can get
little later.
Thank you madam president Sir I
I appreciate that because I'd
really like to know I'd like to
know how much of it is actually
being used for individual homes
they're standing right here by
the door and we have is the
Hernandez is the CEO and
director of MFA and Rebecca
Velarde the planning and
witnesses saying none of come
right ahead into the chamber
thank you madam president thank
you Senator Brandt let's see if
we can get your answer here.
Wants to know what percentage
Did you find that.
Here's all right so currently
because of the funding
advises me that with this new
funding that would change
because we would be able to do
more of everything building and
would be more homes and
intention then to take this
money and really focus on single
family homes
Since they're already using
ninety percent of the other
funding for apartments is that
Madam president center Brandt it
yes are director here says
absolutely yes there will be a
huge focus on that and also to
include rehabilitation for homes
for elderly and those on a fixed
are used I just I just want to
get the answers to how we're
subsidizing things
and why I didn't get to see this
in either of the committees that
footing I think helping people
get into a home
I understand a lot of people
just want to get a roof over
their head but when you're
someone else to own an apartment
complex and so I I hope that's
where the focus is going to be
hi hope that's where the the
funds are going to go.
people own a piece of property
eventually and subsidizing have
their income and so I really
basically since I got out of the
military I bought my first home
by the way in Albuquerque
and
people to be able to do that and
helps build your credit it helps
it helps you with everything
else.
being able to do that we need to
really focus on helping people
will be used wisely it does
concern me that we are taking
funds.
Out of our severance tax and we
have so many infrastructure
needs in our state
there's a leverage now of it was
thirty one percent during the
pandemic because we got more
federal funds but ordinarily on
average it has been twenty nine
senator Wirth thank you madam
president he's sponsor to yield
but I just want to echo I think
center Steinborn and many others
have said this is this is a big
at the top of every local
governments and it's this is the
top of our list as well and so
to be able to find a way to
is a transformational bill I
certainly can speak for our
constituents Senator Rodriguez
here in Santa Fe this will make
a huge difference thank you
don't need the of the stellar
Senator from Santa Fe Rodriguez
to yield I really have words of
Bravo for her way to go.
colleagues have any of us ever
heard a four five or six year
old want to say.
When I grow up I want to be a
criminal.
I did a quick search and there's
about sixteen shelters in the
Albuquerque metropolitan area.
And I just wish they could all
Their applause of this
legislation.
This is really going to address.
Many of the landlords.
I heard of some families who
were able to find a place to
live but I think about those who
are not because they simply
could not afford it.
So when someone is refused to
have a shelter and they suffer
from depression.
In other.
I'm sure they regress and they
don't want to.
As I was listening to my
colleagues speak madam president
I also thought about.
And I think with Senator
Rodriguez is bill.
She's going to be able to it's
Who is abusing them so.
Bravo.
Senator Rodriguez Bravo New
Mexico thank you madam
president.
I think you to start to learn to
talk about transformative here.
This is kind of a contrived plot
in all of this if it was truly
I think the thing that we're
missing here with all of this is
that we need some kind of
permanent fix instead of helping
somebody constantly over over
and and the only way to do that
is really have a strong economy.
To do things that will really
help so that people can in fact
And like so many other things
here.
How do we help them.
Truly help them.
particularly the small New
Mexico businesses how do we help
them become tax payers in the
part of the greater economy.
that I voted against this in
committee.
However madam president I'm
gonna vote for it today on the
floor.
next year assuming we ever get
to take the mask off.
They need help now.
And we can do that with this
bill.
We can help.
get us away from homelessness or
domestic violence it doesn't
transform our school system.
It helps these folks that need
help and I'm going to support
Coming up with the money to do
this.
Where is the seed money from New
Mexico coming from to make this
happen.
I know nobody in this room heard
We should support the industry
that pays the bills we should
support the industry that helps
understand that we are enjoy
that we ought to take pride that
we have the resources in New
Mexico to do these things.
And we could do a lot more madam
president.
Because if we didn't have weird
policies and we're tax policies.
We would have even more money
and a stronger economy and
I think that's huge.
But we keep turning our back on
the actual tax payers.
It all of those folks.
Do we willingly.
Almost all too willingly.
We should applaud the CPA for
the family doctor that pays
taxes.
And we should certainly applaud
all of those oil fields people
and we have lights and
computers.
And all of the plastics that we
produce we should be thankful
for all of those folks.
And we should help.
Madam president I just hope that
we in this room can figure out.
That there are people that are
This isn't a bad thing this is a
good thing we're doing here but
it's not enough.
Help us build the economy
stronger.
Thank you next we're here FOR
Senator what's.
And what I say is when we.
Tell people during the pandemic.
The housing complex has to make
a mortgage payment.
And if they hadn't been
collecting rents.
You have to realize the people
that make an investment.
Have to have a return on that
The only major thing I have this
is bill at I told the Sanchez
this is a very righteous dean
What the reservation.
It helps with Representative it
does all Kernan righteous
things.
My only problem with that is.
No I you madam president.
Why wouldn't we have a constant
funding from this in the past.
No one would it be this.
Group in here think that it
year for that out of the general
fund.
What would you do that.
You all thank you to write your
program hardly heard anyone in
here that didn't speak for.
years before ten years before.
But guess what.
It wasn't a priority for you
before.
Don't take it away from me so
you want to put it through as a
percentage of the severance tax.
I just want you to realize that.
You that ability in the past
you could err spent.
So don't give me the fact that
the only way we can do this is
to tenants staff.
This month.
So it's not gonna matter what I
think in particular.
Madam chair madam president.
And
and Senator Rodriguez.
We are dictating to the future
legislature how they have to
spend money.
carry a bill and say no Picone.
Pecan you Senator Rodriguez.
What if we decide someday in the
future that we need one percent
Or what if we say in the future
we need behavioral health in the
For behavioral health.
There's no reason we can't do
that madam president.
In what we're doing.
We we know we got a twenty six
to twenty nine percent return.
to do that.
But we are we're making grants
available grant is a non
interest bearing.
To give grants how many of these
programs.
So just just a thought.
Mortgaging the state to give up
So I'm not going to ask any
questions.
Madam president Senator.
Rodriguez I'm not going to put
The votes going to be one
against right here and and
dissolution no that's where I'm
coming from thank you very much
Mr for madam president thank you
next we'll hear from senator
analysis that we have in the
breakdown for course we we
separate out nine percent for
water trust fund four point five
for colonias and then four point
five for the tribal
half of what they get this is
two point five percent and the
reason for this was that MFA
felt that that was a reasonable
percentage to generate enough to
debate because as this a
continued through the morning
and maybe realize what an impact
this has had on my community the
work that MFA to us and and
experts if that is the type of
company that we're talking about
here that would build these.
Yes madam president Senator
Kernan give me one minute.
very much and and that that
clarifies for me what is
happening in my community with
regard to this kind of funding
and I know we we wait year after
have managed by the company I
just mentioned over the last ten
fifteen years and it's it's it's
amazing to me of what this
everything is so terribly
expensive and it's it's it's
hard for me when I call in check
with these management companies
that they're full and there's a
opportunity to to figure out how
to do that that that the
apartment opportunity for my
community is just amazing and
and very very helpful with what
this truly does go out to every
community in the state that
works hard to get that money and
and they're they're guidelines
it's difficult sometimes I
a good way to to provide housing
for people that are low income
medium income that have no place
to go and I appreciate very much
how we've talked about this
Mr any further debate.
Senator Burt.
Thank you madam president and I
appreciate the time I don't need
about affordable housing and and
we can all be honest that often
times of portable housing has a
negative context for connotation
lot of different.
Areas and categories of folks
and I want to give you two other
perspectives of this so that you
will have a broader range of
military folks are given a a
stipend and amount of money to
live off base.
and so becomes very difficult if
if there's not enough housing on
base young families or
individuals are forced to live
downtown as we call it and
will allow us to do I believe it
is to create housing at a more
affordable price so a more
matches that B. A. H. or that
stipend that they get and so
substandard or uncomfortable
place for young family to live
one individual to live.
And that happens in every
community I'm not talking about
Question whether or not there's
enough housing.
And if there's not enough
housing in a certain category a
few certain categories the
mission may be cut back.
support Alice decide to go
somewhere else because it
doesn't fit.
Their their quality of life or
the amount of money that they
have to put towards housing so I
well.
The.
The other perspective I want to
mention is the service industry.
You know I talk to people in
town also talk to people and
read also which is in my
community that is a tourist or
interesting community for people
to come to as a destination.
And what this will allow us to
in capitaine Alamogordo or
places outside and then get on
the road at five thirty in the
morning under very bad
conditions to get into begin
That would be a wonderful thing
and as a a quality quality of
life issue that everyone should
have at least the opportunity to
we talked about that people who
are are under duress and have
problems with housing but there
this is a broad spectrum bill
that will cover a lot of
different genres in a lot of
different categories of people
of construction for housing and
the time it takes to get that
done so I'm hoping that this
will in fact take the pressure
off of those categories as well
sponsor to yield I just want to
thank senator loony Rodriguez
for bringing this bill forward
which will benefit a number of
my constituents in Rio Arriba
county we have the eagle village
which is a transitional housing
housing to get them into a
permanent home.
This bill will also help those
who are in Los Alamos and Santa
Fe counties who tell me they
want to stay in the town that
they were born and raised in and
feel that they're being pushed
Thank you senator bricks.
Thank you madam president and I
just wanted to to bring up a
couple of things senator Byrd
Communities Alamogordo that I
live in and Representative yeah
there's a lot of opportunities
for military to come in and have
biggest booms I guess The New
Mexico is seen in a particular
community and so the man can
ever over there were.
Numerous and the number of
it and hopefully use it is it
will turn out in communities
that generate some of it will be
a positive thing for for New
madam president.
Thank you any further debate.
Sen Nancy Rodriguez close.
very much for joining us to in a
team to be able to make some
great changes here to provide
more people with affordable
housing we have approximately
seventy million dollars worth of
and I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
that the role has been called in
all those present more in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of
hands.
No Senator Woods is voting no.
Senate Senator Rodriguez thank
you madam president members of
the Senate thank you.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president will or waiting for
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
one forty four as amended on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
officials of both parties at all
levels has increased tenfold our
own secretary of state was
targeted by the state of Iran
and have to spend time in hiding
result of these threats in the
street and the stress that it's
placing on them and their
families.
The federal DOJ and FBI have
created a joint task force to
investigate and take action on
that end Senate bill one forty
four makes amendments to a law
that we have had on the books
since nineteen fifty three.
Which is the intimidation
threats of violence or harm
against a voter on election
board member a challenger
washer for the purpose of
impeding are preventing the free
exercise of elective franchise
broadens the pool of folks that
this applies to to also include
our elect our elected and
appointed him volunteer Alexion
officials the secretary of state
parties and is an important step
for New Mexico to take to ensure
that the free and fair
ministration of our elections
which depends on the countless
continues and had and that those
folks have the same protections
that we have given to calendars
watchers and voters since
nineteen fifty three in New
Mexico.
With that also for questions.
keep our street our streets safe
I just want to graduate you
Senator on over one of the COVID
probably not so good job we're
gonna keep those criminals on
the off the streets.
you madam president the is this
the language here is does this
just apply to people that are
you know in the act voting or or
deterrent said we we have other
book laws on the books that
would just apply on election day
this this isn't limited in that
same way but whatever.
The threats or threats of harm
election election code so
because it requires that
specific that intent and in
reality it's going to end up
being just around elections
because otherwise.
On page two line to obviously
the that would apply to a large
amount of the population so what
what I hear you saying is
somebody would be.
The kind of bowling somebody for
some other purpose a a voter a
registered voter.
but that person is not in the
we're not gonna be charging that
person with a fourth degree
felony whereas if somebody is
bullying someone and say Hey I
know you are from a certain
some in some way madam president
center that.
That is that kind of where the
difference is is that kind of
we're going with this bill Madam
presence Senator so the voter
part that's existing language
that's been there since nineteen
the case that if someone was in
do seen are tending to induce
fear in a voter
through the threatened use of
force violence infliction of
damage X. Sentara for the
Okay great then present and that
that's exactly what I want to
hear I I didn't hear this in
committee and I didn't take the
time to look at the context of
this you know the state statute
pin down well you're making a
specific threat with the intents
to disrupt a specific political
activity or the commencement of
school a school activity or
something like that so just want
Thank you madam president
Will that will the.
Chairman of judiciary yield for
a moment.
Because you let a bill with a
felony in it escaped Judiciary
Committee how did that happen.
within the question so how to
get out of the committee after
very deliberate thoughtful work
by the committee members and
excellent staff great lawyers a
lot of work and the debate on
normally due to me and that
we've got two of them trying to
do this to me at the same time.
I do have a the real question
threat I think that's always
been my confusion so certainly
of people have called me all
kinds of bad names including
about twenty five for you on the
room right now.
put me out of your misery misery
a threat against me.
And madam president Senator so
Whenever that is is charge or
heard in court there's always
going to be someone who is
assessing the facts and seen if
they'll say would a reasonable
person here this and think that
this is a a threat and attempt
to induce as they induced fear
going going to be either the DA
when they're choosing to to
bring these charges in the first
place or a judge when they're
reviewing them they're gonna be
looking at the facts they're
specific to the case and making
old assault includes any
unlawful act threats are
menacing conduct that would
cause another person to
reasonably believe they're in
danger of an immediate battery
that it is always a fact
So madam president and Senator.
That can vary from person to
person I mean clearly there are
people in.
dance let's do it but.
But but for somebody else that
may be a terrible threat to them
certainly for a lot of the poll
some of the things that are said
to me is a serious threat.
That I wouldn't take as a
threat.
How does that work I mean if
somebody's just listening to it
you did not feel you there was
no fear induced in you
One I don't think any charges
would be filed
making their judgment based on
that which is what they do all
the time I mean likely we have a
judicial system that is set up
to look at cases on their merits
senator I think one thing that's
worth noting because I asked the
secretary of state's office you
know how because they often
generally at her office or
county clerk's office offices
they get this information for
the most part those situations
are dressed and dealt with right
there and no charges were ever
into into play is when those
cases rise to a level that they
are being referred to a district
attorney not just.
important now madam president
two X. two to make this
amendment is because we've seen
this dramatic up tick in in
Madam president Senator what is
it in a I understand the threats
than and I don't truly don't
mean to make light of that but I
am looking at where.
off go away in this turns into a
shouting match which might even
include be on to that these are
both poll workers.
This is the starting part it's
already if they were actually
inducing fear of a threat of
violence for the purpose of them
essentially not being able to do
their job this would already
more can of of what we already
have on the books for disturbing
the polling place which is where
if there's there's a disturbance
that's creating disorder
disruption at a polling place
but again only if referred to a
DA for prosecution.
So madam president Senator so
we've got a variety of bills out
here both state and federal of
that be intimidating.
Or intimidation under this.
Madam president senator I think
don't think so because it has to
be by use of by use of or
threatened use of force violence
infliction of damage harm or
loss or any form of economic
clearly there there for the
purpose of intimidating somebody
know they may not say anything
that may not have a weapon but
you can tell they're they're
ready to.
In in so I agree we don't need
that well I do want to have.
Fair elections free and fair
elections all the time and if
anybody interfering with that I
very specific us but you get a
tweet saying you know die you
gravy sucking pig
for your other question about
saying from the drop box that's
already covered by one dash
twenty dash seventeen
obstructing the polling place so
that's what something like that
The question I'd appreciate
about president.
So the question settlement
president Senator is if I
received that text and it had
ask that is because on social
media today.
Things are said that would never
So madam president senator.
Only if a judge found that it
was done for the purpose of
impeding or preventing the free
exercise of elective franchise
as Mexico online behavior might
be something like.
Similar to what happened with
our secretary of state where
and if someone in New Mexico
decided saw that online and
cited to take that take them up
on take it was the that was the
the state of Iran I believe that
So madam president certainly
that's already a crime I mean if
I if I went over to to kill
somebody would matter if they
were of if it had anything to do
with an election or not that's
third party that was
encouraging the crime.
This this this this bill apply
to the third party that
encouraged the crime even though
they themselves didn't do
probably would be seen as a.
Attempting to induce fear by way
of threat of force for the
purpose of impeding
Mexico but I with folks in New
Mexico were to do that then yes
I think we would see this come
into play.
anyway I do I I do understand
why we're doing this I do
understand that there seems to
be an increase in the threat of
violence in fact violence.
that all the time even in this
room but certainly outside of
this room this room is much more
pleasant than outside most of
the time.
never tell it to me in person
and therefore neither one of us
got all worked up over a very
long.
And so how do we deal with that
which is a much greater problem
More good in each other and less
contempt we don't need contempt
for each other I do think debate
is is is useful debate helps us
get to the bottom of things like
we did earlier we found an
be funny it can be sad.
But it doesn't have to be
hateful and I would hope that
that all of you that wish that I
Thank you madam president with
the senator please feel.
Certainly madam president.
And and thank you madam
president thank you senator and
I do have some concerns with
this I think you know it's
Twitter and all of those that if
somebody post a I'm voting for
so and so candid and somebody
responded you'll regret that.
inflation like we've never seen
before is it something like that
you know I I think the way the
languages written it's a little
open and I find a little ironic
was then voted against by by a
few members in this body and so
I think the the irony or
hypocrisy is is kind of running
thick right now.
polling places are schools that
you could call up and threatened
to shoot a school on Monday when
there's not an election going
on.
But then if you call in on
Tuesday and threaten to shoot at
Was there's quite a bit of push
back and it was written very
similar.
and I was astonished that we
that wasn't a crime already but
And here we are with with poll
workers in in things which I
don't think you should threaten
them you shouldn't threaten
anybody.
But I find it funny that one day
opposite of the arguments that
I'm hearing and I in in.
Pushing this bill forward so I I
really do have some concerns I
think we need to find some
consistency in this body with
shoot up a school or threaten to
shoot up a school on Monday but
yet are okay with it if there's
an election being held at that
school thank you madam
president.
madam president the sponsor of
the bill yield certainly madam
president she else thank you
madam president
no present senator you
actually intimidated that no
charges would be filed that's
not which bill says is it and
then present center you're
correct it is it is inducing
be bringing those charges if he
indeed felt that there was.
That this did not rise to that
level.
You are correct that it is it is
the person that's being
intimidated or attempting to be
intimidated.
With thank be the one who have
to bring the charges are could
is that any DA who the victim
themselves was not wanting to
pursue this would where it would
be unlikely to want to to pursue
the inducing or attempting to
induce that's existing law
everything about voters is
existing law every application
of this to challengers and
watchers and election boards and
only difference between our
existing law that's been in
place since nineteen fifty three
and this bill before us as that
it would now the same
Thank you madam president and
senator I
You know I I.
I'm very confused because I I
person who's being intimidated
has to bring the charges it can
be anyone as long as the person.
Is attempting to induce fear
according to the current law
right is current law.
that discussion on the floor
this session.
About honestly.
The apparent Pachter State.
But if I call in a shooting
threat it's nothing.
We're just adding the current
law.
But.
That you intimidate.
Fear in the secretary state.
Or one of our employees.
For this building.
Employees of this building or a
synagogue and the prisoners and
But it be great if for once we
had some consistency in this
building.
I think it's horrible but you
can call school or this building
We should protect secretary
state.
We should and protect the
integrity of our elections
absolutely.
Thank you madam president just
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward our
our democracy is definitely
being tested in and
unfortunately intimidation is
sacred institution of our
democracy and really the bill is
just an expansion of what is
already law New Mexico which
includes poker suggests include
secretary of state staff and
President thank you any other
debate on the bill.
Senator creeks.
Thank you madam president with
about the inducing fear alright
but down online twenty four
which is current law madam
president and and senator we
Madam president Senator.
Honestly now I mean that that is
existing language has been there
since nineteen fifty three I'm
At any inducing are tending to
induce fear through threat of
any form of economic retaliation
against if it met the if it was
That language on this on page
two is is I think the most
critical part because unless
unless any of these actions are
being taken for that purpose
felony and madam president and
and etcetera you.
We have I just had.
Change I was in the I get it
and that has been rejected in
favor of a a a misdemeanor for
madam president center could you
enlighten explain to the body
Madam president senator let me
look that up very quickly.
State.
Three hundred sixty days.
sixty days local for a
misdemeanor.
Thank you madam president and
center at I get a petty mean a
petty misdemeanor is up to a
year.
And start madam.
Senator what I'm I'm hearing
from folks who know the status
To a you know to manage this
sectional all in order to
address concerns.
I would think to if yeah that's
on the floor or on the floor but
over the house and to reduce the
penalty
at the cares.
Felonies specially fourth degree
felonies and that inserting
misdemeanors are just seems like
that would be a logical thing to
because you seems like that is a
big inconsistency in the way
we've been attempting to
legislate in New Mexico at least
Senators saying none.
Senator to hit too close thank
you madam president Theo we want
to make sure with this bill that
we are giving the same
debate and I urge you to vote
yes on the bill.
And with that madam president I
move that Senate bill one forty
hands.
Senator is we are voting on
Senate bill one forty for us
then to please go to your seats
I voted thirty eight in the
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president M. S. consent within
our business committee reports
from that order of business
committee reports the reader
will create madam president your
amended and that's referred to
the health and public affairs
committee respectfully submitted
Daniel A. Ivey Soto chair
Senator had a male madam
Senator more.
Senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr madam president
Senate memorial twenty five
introduced by Senator Griggs.
And others a memorial requesting
the legislative finance
an Indian Affairs to examine the
state of gaming in New Mexico to
help shape the future of gaming
in New Mexico so that it is
competitive with other states
Senator moral twenty I have been
read twice by title is referred
to the rules committee and vents
to Senate Indian rural and
cultural affairs Senate memorial
to conduct and complete a
comprehensive study on long term
care insurance and its
affordability seven memorial
twenty six.
House bill sixty five introduced
by Representative Romero and act
relating to housing clarifying
the requirement for a written
rental agreement increasing
periods of time required for non
payment notices requiring the
issuance of a judgment of
restitution prior to a writ of
refusing to renew or seeking to
terminate a rental agreement
during a declared emergency or
disaster declaring an emergency
Committee house bill sixty five.
House bill fifty two introduced
by Representative Lujan and
Representative Hochman Vigil ile
and act relating to health
that possession of certain
supplies or devices is not a
violation of the controlled
substances act adjusting the
department of health and
advisory committee duties
dash two and twenty four dash to
see dash six NMSA nineteen
seventy eight being laws
nineteen ninety seven chapter
committee offense to Senate
Judiciary house bill fifty two.
House bill forty seven
introduced by Representative
Chandler and act relating to
receipts tax liability declaring
an emergency house bill forty
seven also forty seven have been
read twice by title is referred
eagles and act relating to
taxation extending the deduction
from gross receipts and
governmental gross receipts for
non athletic special events at
Referred to the Senate tax
business transportation
committee since to Senate
finance house bill thirty nine.
measures in low income
households authorizing the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority to apply for community
energy efficiency development
and access to electric water and
waste water service authorizing
utility rate preferences for low
income customers directing
Senate finance committee house
bill thirty seven.
House health and Human Services
Committee substitute for house
children into the Indian family
protection act providing
additional requirements
governing child custody
proceedings involving Indian
children providing for
confidentiality of certain
in K. plans in abuse and neglect
proceedings amending repealing
and acting sections of the MSA
nineteen seventy eight house
That.
House health and Human Services
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for house
bill one thirty five.
Senator Wirth.
is the time for committee chairs
will be in tomorrow morning at
eleven o'clock
and I know Senator Shendo I
a the Senate bill one fifty
eight hello from the Senate tax
business transportation referral
and us into the floor this is
And present what we're losing
next referral on center brands
Bill of Senate tax business of
transportation was only refer.
He went through judicial okay
I'm just checking.
Right other announcements
Senator Ortiz Pena thank you
madam president and the Senate
health and public affairs
committee will meet at four
fifteen today starting at four
Hemphill Campos and souls and
myself and that'll be it for
fifteen in room three eleven
thank you Senator Pinto.
president sorry will meet at
four thirty in Senate Judiciary
Committee the usual place and
please be on time because we go
out to get through and will have
a hard stop tonight will
probably go to about seven
at nine AM tomorrow we have to
built a senator Munoz and
Senator Diamond thank you very
much thank you senator Munoz
thank you madam president I I
think we're wrapping up things
line to make sure we get
everything correct as we move
forward Senate finance are going
to go in about for twenty
madam president thank you
Senator creeks.
Thank you madam president
unanimous consent to introduce
some gas.
gallery are rather are three
filch one is my my wife Joan.
And and two others are friends
would ask real quickly if
Senator Padilla would yield.
Senator Padilla do you yield.
A yes man present ideal he and
Good answer good answer and
president of the nineteen
ninety.
Thank you thank you madam
president thank you senator
because I want you to know that
them so we go back quite a ways
but I would certainly like to to
introduce.
Retired Air Force captain John
receive the recognition thanks
for their service to John and
Monica.
have a caucus meeting at six
thirty on Friday so just letting
you guys know on the majority
side and just in case you didn't
hear finance will be going in at
four twenty today.
a little bit today Senator
Gonzales has been given since
ski report for the last several
days and I want to be as an
update on house I made the
mistake of a going to Santa Fe
whole different deal so a little
bit of a level of manager today
but I want to thank Senator
Gonzales for encouraging us to
enjoy New Mexico's outdoors and
dance in finance.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president I have had a chance to
visit with senator serve on days
and senator Munoz
unregistered voters that Senator
Duhigg brought up and there were
some constitutional question so
I'm not going to object to that
referral so it will be an
All right well thank you.
So looks like it's happening
Senator Wirth Pirtle.
Senator Wirth I think it's on a
I guess there's no limit to how
high that budget can go.
Any other announcements.
We will be in recess until
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning
see you then.
