amended by the house and further
amended by the Senate.
And how state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill to fifty as amended by the
And Mister president I'm
directed to inform the scent
Senate that the do rules and
grossed Kathy's.
signed by the officers of the
house in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted Senator
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk of
the house.
session house bill twenty five
house bill ninety two house bill
one forty six house bill one
seventy nine and house bill one
eighty three.
Mr president so we do have for
concurrence calendars tonight I
think we're going to do one now
which is Senator.
other one throughout the evening
so unanimous consent we go to
that order business concurrence
an ideal to Senator Lopez that
is wrong that order business
Senator Lopez thank you very
Senator Senator what initial
coin that what that does.
Thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate
placed on the house floor
actually clarified a little bit
more than what we had done
within even our own have
committees and essentially what
regarding a person who has
requested confidentiality
pursuant to subsection C. of the
bill Mr president members of the
Senate this is just a little
Senate the the second house
floor amendment what it did is
inserts a little bit more
discretion description if the
missing person who request
confidentiality regarding the
regarding.
And that the person has been
families requested
confidentiality you Mr president
we had discussed that I'm even
here on the floor and I believe
amended Senator thank you Mr
president so I I see this and I
like this is not a problem with
me at all Mr president but of
Is
Is seventeen years old.
So old enough to be on their own
or what they're doing but still
a minor technically.
found.
Mister president senator we did
debate that here on the floor
anything Senator Schmedes had
asked a similar type of question
Okay the for if the dead honest
everyman stipulated if they're
emancipated that's a whole
different section that we would
deal with.
but normally Mister president
senator if they're seventeen or
president Senator.
The so Mister president senator
on this one it talks about the
custodian appointed by judge
Roy.
So in this case I am the
law enforcement founder and she
said I don't want I don't want
them to know Mr president of the
law enforcement officer would
still be notifying.
through law enforcement anyway
so they know that this person
would be have an impairment and
they would be again
communicating and again Mr
Okay Mister president thank you
Senator thank you Mr president
thank you senator sure we do
have for the debate Senator
Cervantes.
up my only concern still is you
know the these are people that
have been assigned a custodian
there they they they may not
Who makes the decision that they
are of sound mind to be able to
make that decision Mr president
Senator Schmedes as I just
would be notifying
probably throwing as I call it
the clearing house support go to
vacation would already been sent
to a.
even for your elders a silver
alert one of those alert status
I.
No I there there's young
gentleman who had come to
committee and you know had a
concern I I believe what he was
asking for is he just want to
know that is family member had
custodian that the person has
been found.
you know unless there's there's
another issue so they're they're
gonna notified they have been
found.
included in this is it doesn't
say law enforcement is gonna say
twelve they're they're over here
there in there in Roswell or
they're in Farmington and you
confidentiality and so you we're
not gonna find any way for you
to to find her and that that's
my concern is that does that all
makes sense or no Mr president
course could also be amendment
brought in front of a judge.
if need be I mean there's other
steps that you can go through
that again if you have a family
entered into the clearing house
if say might my family member
who has a disability has downs
is out walking or has another
also.
Yes I'm in this prison and
etcetera I I I see that and I I
it had looked this up.
about the amber alert and and
alert statute twenty one at
fifteen eight IST three really
talks about looking for somebody
it it doesn't say anywhere in
those.
we're clear on the on the on the
intent here the the amber alert
stuff is about searching for
somebody it's not about
notification.
And I just want to make sure
here's silver alert and so
Brittany alert the these these
are pertaining to searching and
they don't specifically say
about once you have found the
individual that you that you
parents or custodians.
So I am I'm a little I I I like
this concurrence better than the
request confidentiality how are
we really going to.
Going to make sure there.
They're competent to make that
decision and then the flip side
of the coin is this the flip
person is actually running away
and really needs to remain
confidential so it's it's a hard
issue but I I still have that
concern and then lastly Senator
little bit outside of the
concurrence I think so forgive
me for that but it only says
that they shall report to a.
What we're dealing with here is
member a private investigator is
not a custodian or an immediate
family member and I do have a
concern that as written of this
bill just if we just concurrent
you can the in the nothing
precludes them from giving
information to PI or an uncle or
a grandparent or nieces or none
of those are immediate family
think it's clear than what we
had but I still have a few
lingering concerns with the bill
overall thank you Mr president
any further debate on the
than I would so move at that we
can current by a roll call.
Or actually Fernandes um
consent.
concurred with the house changes
to Senate bill ninety two as
amended Senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr president well
we're on concurrence lets to
Senate concurrence calendar
we concur with the house
amendments to Senate bill two
eighty six as amended all staff
the discussion there for
question Senator Ivey Soto thank
you very much is present agency
president this has to do with
the bill related to the special
or or maybe former
representative Dave Holland I'm
not sure she may be secretary
Department now.
And the issue that came up was
if the.
What happens of the absent voter
County clerk will notify the
sheriff's office the sheriff's
office there the sheriff
indicates that a W. is not
available then they the county
will hang out all night until
the election board comes back
and challengers would be
available would would be allowed
to remain as well with that I'll
be happy to send questions thank
Sponsor yield the center I'm so
the deal with president have to.
Was president senators so what
happens if that is the county
how's that work Senator Ivey
Soto certainly this president
and Center brand actually as
you'll see at the bottom of this
as if neither.
deputy chairmen onsite until
they're trying to us of our
lecture board and shall allow
any challenger.
Or observer to remain present as
well everything would be put
If it is the kind of corporate
chief deputy who who has to stay
there all night because no law
enforcement officer is available
than any challenger observer
would be allowed to stay as well
four of the state police to come
in order for the court to stay
with the challenger staying as
well are being allowed to stay
as well agency president Senator
president senator Brandt and so
by asking the and then what
question are one way to motivate
someone to provide a sheriff
deputy or patrolman to be there
Any further debate Senators
Senator Moores thank you Mr
president I will Senator Ivey
Soto yield centers of the agency
and senator Morris at as much
time as practicable would be
when the sheriff let's the card
no that no sheriff deputy will
Senator so the again Mr
president and Senator Moores at
the consequence of nobody be
available as of the forecast to
stay I imagine they will try to
approximately some time in the
afternoon maybe if not early
evening late evening somewhere
around there depending on who it
is approximately Mr president
Senator was of the agency
approximately has a definition.
But practicable ends at eleven
PM.
Thank you Mr president I learn
some new everyday so it's muscle
metals about sometime around
then.
concerned senators so that close
thanks very much is present
was president I asked that the.
concurrence calendar number
five.
consent for the Senate to concur
with the changes the house is
made to Senate bill two eighty
six as amended.
See no objections the Senate has
concurred with the changes from
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
in that order of Business
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so just to give a
will be Senator guy Aigles item
twenty seven will be Senator
Kernan.
Item twenty eight will be
centers the Phanteks.
doing that at that point so with
that Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that our
business third reading of
legislation ideal to Senator
vibrate and those that are on on
further participating ism to
have exams on when you speaker
vote and make sure that your
microphones are off until you
has been taken that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution say no objection
etcetera etcetera explained the
bill thank you Mr president
The national flood insurance
program provide subsidized flood
insurance to property owners
renters and businesses return
for community adopted minimum
eligible for federal flood
insurance and other types of
federal assistance states needed
to bring their floodplain
management standards the the up
insurance program it and may
come in eligible for some.
Types of federal assistance in
areas of identified of flood
risk.
Could be placed on probationary
and or suspended as well.
Most importantly of
noncompliance state development
So this bill is a the statutory
change to ensure that the state
of New Mexico continues to be
eligible for federal flood
insurance and other types of
federal assistance as well as
program is not retroactive it is
not for individual residents but
only owns ons for state owned
buildings.
At this time I stand for
thank you Mr president to if of
the senator would yield etcetera
etcetera DO a test so you.
So Mister president senator of
we does not for private
residences and I'm grateful for
issue on on a lot of these there
certainly could be in on a lot
of these four hundred year old
buildings of would they be
included in this.
Senator Shendo.
Mission to allow my expert
witnesses a.
Matthew Stackpole with the as a
department.
Seeing no objection.
Senator Shendo would you want
the question to be asked once
again yes electors senator from
San Juan County to repeat the
question Senator thank you Mr
president with this
Mr president Senator it's all
Been here three or four hundred
years then.
So Mr president is there.
Is there enough staff to do this
the C. ID have enough staff to
to manage this program is
has a staff but as this program
goes they may need to add
additional but at the moment
they're sufficiently staffed to
to to take care of this.
Okay Mister president.
Into the future how many new
staffed we think we need to.
Put in our budget for next year.
Okay Mister president the
senator of at this time is it is
floodplain issue do we have.
Is a real concern in New Mexico
I know that there are some
places that.
Let me put that little different
has it been a real problem on
the ground to the really results
Regulation local.
Local regulations of our
buildings have been built.
And this is to just bring
for private property I know in
Los crucis
There was a with the with the
water would run down off the
organ mountains in it and it
washed everything away and so
Which always confused me and I
know this isn't doesn't deal
exactly with private property
but could they have.
Stop that housing development
from going in there while it was
only to for state owned
buildings.
Okay Mister president that
particular part of Los crucis
does absolutely confuse me I
there you go much present thank
you Senator we do have further
debate on the bill Senator
Ingle.
Thank you Mr president with the
senator yield please send a
representative of who does the
state by the insurance from.
Senator Shendo Miss Mister
I sure would like to know a
little more about that because
that's that's not a very good
Anyway hi.
I would like to go over the next
if you know a couple of days
insurance that the state state
has and I think it's a little
bit.
We we got premium cost here and
things like that.
I guess that's what that is.
expert come and talk to me
because that's a that's a little
bit unusual for
and I'm not questioning what
you're what you said at all but
there's got to be more to this
security folks to come come is
with you.
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate Senator
Shendo to close on the bill.
house bill one sixty eight tier
seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
The clerk in this league
Senator Baca Senator Baca no
Senator Candelaria yes Senators
around this Senator Cervantes
yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Hermio yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan now Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator to
simply now.
Senator disciplinary as senator
for the.
Senator Bob yes Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
senator Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez now Senators
Senator sure Senator sure no
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator souls yes Senator
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
are the center center the call
center thank you Mr president I
I'm not certainly questioning
anybody's of.
Reason on this bill accept their
Out of sight here and we need we
need to see where we are on this
and I'm not questioning the
senator or representative in any
president the Senator Stewart
Senator Ingle the the folks on
the home security will be
reaching out to you so I talked
to so with that thank you a was
present members of the body
thirty as amended and I yield to
senator Davis.
This present we ready.
You want to place it on final
passage Senator we'll go from
debate amendment or substitution
interjection Center guy goes to
explain the bill.
Mr presence.
Excuse me let me get my right
page us it's going to amend
section sixty one dash twenty
giving some of.
Definition changes.
And I do have an agency present
whenever possible I'd like
unanimous consent to have person
Are you ready for for debate yes
Sir all right Senator is we're
debating house bill two thirty
as amended anyone wishing to
debate.
Misprision I thank you for the
lack of debate I move that house
bill two thirty as amended do
now pass and ask for a roll call
vote thank you senator Senator
Senator Baca Senator Wirth okay
yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos yes ma'am Senator
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
yes Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator
Senator Neil yes senator Ortiz
subpoena Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes senator for the.
Senator Stewart AS Senator Pinto
Senator pro yes Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
senator Sanchez Senator Sweetser
yes senators we these.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator shows yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes Senator
Pirtle.
two thirty as amended has passed
the Senate Senator this thank
you Mr president Senator I
appreciate the help Senator
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
sixty seven on final passage is
been taken that is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution no objections of
the current explained the bill
voting members serving in an
advisory role it will be a
volunteer council and the
purpose of the council is to
recommend policies to improve
the delivery of primary care and
report back to the legislature
and hopefully we all know that
situation with that I'll stand
for questions Senator debating
house bill sixty seven anyone
wishing to debate.
present voted in the affirmative
I recall Senators tier seats
please voting on house bill
sixty seven.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes senator with
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gonzalez
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Moores.
Senator Moores yes senator Munoz
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
yes senator for the center for
the a yes Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator printer yes Senator
Pirtle.
senators with these Senators
maybe yes Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Stefanics is Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart Senator Stewart DS
Senator Tallman.
In the affirmative on the
negative house bill sixty seven
has passed the Senate Senator
AUMENT thank you.
record show that all action for
placing house bill one eighty
five on final passage has been
taken and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the no objection centers the
attesting to their age in order
to be excused from jury service
we currently have statute the
statute on the books and this
would simply take away the
requirement for the affidavit.
you Mr present with the gentle
woman my good friend from Santa
Fe Torrance San Miguel and many
other counties are yield Senator
Stefanics yield Mister president
center I will yield the was
at home reading this Mr
president Senator they could in
fact call in and of request of
due to disability or age or
condition of the whether it's
of checking the records to
verify the person's age they're
accurate age and they could get
them excuse they would still
have to request it in writing
they just wouldn't have to get a
says that the governor packet
vetoed this conceptual was there
actually a pocket veto on on a
similar legislation.
he was president and the reason
I bring that up it's sits a
Senate bill one seventy four so
it most of obviously we pass
something similar in two
thousand nineteen and was pocket
For expressed to us because
whoever Care that bill two years
ago probably worked really hard
to get that bill passed.
It was pocket vetoed so for
like for you said you know if
why was pocket vetoed.
Mister president senator I
wasn't involved with the bill a
few years ago Representative
McQueen was and he is one of the
the main sponsor on this bill as
out once again hopefully if she
has issues with that you're
watching you'll submit a message
which I think is the appropriate
super sweet lady never had a
drink of alcohol
super sweet probably never said
a curse word in our entire life.
You know I I heard her say some
words that that she would never
said before about what does it
take to get my dad.
And so these types of situations
that we create because of
statute make make these times at
the end of lives that that we're
taking care of our grandparents
And so I I won't say what my
mother said but it wasn't the
most polite thing and it caught
me a little off guard.
But that's that's the reality we
president if if the governor
feels like pocket vetoing you
know maybe I can send a text
that says from personal
experience please don't do this
thank you Mr president.
You have further debate Senator
Woods.
Incapable of doing making
decisions are judging.
Sitting on a jury so.
I've got a problem with that Mr
Chairman thank you.
yield Mister president center I
will yield thank you Mr
president Senator and and I
actually have no problems with
the bill all but you had said
something about they would need
to request to do the request in
just call in and say M. above
seventy five you can check that
for yourself in the records and
I would like to be removed from
from the AOC Matteo page who
indicated that the
administrative office of the
courts could accommodate
requests in various manners
of notary bill out of this
chamber so I thought was a
really good idea good bill it
actually would help me with
closing on a house a few weeks
ago
but you know that's I I think
it a lot easier for that bill so
so I think either way it works
good I I I I keep bringing up
though every year and I don't
know who the powers to be are
enjoyed jury duty
I I was to do jury duty in
California
and I've lived here back here by
third time since two thousand
four and I've never been called
me on the list and give me a
call.
Thank you senator
Representative.
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
you have to do it all online and
for some people that's kind of
difficult and they need to have
a way to to check that all for
really didn't want me coming
there for that purpose so it's
so it can be a little bit
difficult and so as they develop
that good I'm not that great on
the computer sometimes so we
want to make sure the process is
smooth and easy for them to do
that's that's my only comment
thank you.
Further debate Senator Ingle.
there and how many judges and
things like that folks that
holder are liked on juries
because of life experience and
experience with all kinds of
experience there that are very
good on juries and
You know it's a it's a it was a
simple process and very easy to
people on juries but it is it is
it is truly part of our good
justice system so I hope this
isn't something that just
automatically takes everybody
Thank you Mr president what the
sponsor yield Sierra XTO Mr
president senator I yield.
be on a jury over the age of
five seventy five what it says
is that if you're over the age
of seventy five you can request
you can't read anymore.
Is not right Senators phonics
CENIC's Mr president center that
is correct you need to request
an exemption it does not
automatically exempt your if you
Saying no further debate Senator
Stefanics to close.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president I move that house bill
one eighty five do now pass and
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
yes Senator serve on this
Senator syringes yes Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg.
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill Senator Hemphill yes
Senator Hickey Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle.
Kernan Senator Kernan yes
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be no Senator need to be no
yes senator for the.
Senator for yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes Senator songes yes
Senators Wheaties.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senator so yes Senator Stefanics
Senator Tallman as senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
And Senator Ivey Soto.
Say no objection sort.
I have a thirty seven of the
thirty one on the calendar.
And I yield to senator Byrd.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
amendment or substitution.
See no objections center vertex
landfill thank you Mr president
the this simply streamlines the
process of licensure and
the person this is that
the families come to New Mexico
for one or two years they're
very dependent upon that second
sometimes third income so we're
trying to do our best to get
elections and the need to fares
Senate health and public affairs
Senate finance and house all the
passes the piece of legislation
unanimously and I will stand for
president haven't we pass this
through the legislature in the
past Mister president senator
Ann Arbor yes will similar to
this and Mr president and
Since then the department of
defense has come of us more
specific language and and
verbiage that they would like
have in this to make it
consistent across the United
States as military members
happen as they transfer around
to different military bases.
So Mister president and senator
what are we specifically adding
we this is been approved by
licensing regulations and the
one area that was not included
in the last one was C. ID and
my cosmetologist and that type
of license or licensure they
will try and transfer all
licenses if you have a good
record wherever you're coming
will be addressed as you get
your license.
Well Mister president seems like
a pretty common sense approach
and so I'm really surprised it's
passing the legislature thank
you Mr president.
other House and what the bill
the bill what this bill that
over there can you share that
with us once again yeah once
Mister president senator Byrd
why do we care what the house
did I'm just trying to give you
perspective that has been vetted
by many different groups and
president the lower chamber has
their process this is the
opportunity for appear we seem
see a lot of bills that come
through here unanimously that
the troglodytes over the house
of passed unanimously that we
so Mister Mister president I
appreciate that a is this is the
rules Mr president are not even
supposed to be I think it used
to be an unstated rule that we
and Senate finance also passed
this bill unanimously well there
you go Mr present those geniuses
or other in finance thank you
appreciate about make sense
thank you Mr president and
support of house bill one twenty
it ties along with the
investor roaming the purpose our
school program these are bills
again giving taking care of
these families DOT is looking at
and when we look when we want to
compete for military missions
they're looking at how we take
Say no further debate senator
Byrd to close on the bill thank
you Mr president I move now that
house bill one twenty is amended
do not pass and I ask for a roll
call vote.
Senator Parker yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator and then that is.
Senators about this.
Senator savant is yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
Hermio Senator how to meal yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator Munoz.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
yes senator for the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator Sweetser yes Senators
committees.
Senator Schmidt is yes senators
so they are Lopez.
Senator souls yes senator should
from the.
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of forty one of the
Fuhrman is there on the negative
house bill one twenty as amended
Senator Ingle Mr president would
senator Byrd deal Senator Burt.
Yes Sir I will yield.
Senator Byrd I just noticed your
big box well it did they did a
good job.
The other is you look like
you're about forty.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record reflect that all action
for placing.
Senator voting on house joint
resolution fourteen.
I'm sorry we're now voting
revert to.
department to grant of easement
for a road over seven parcels of
land consisting of acres of land
more or less to the village of
straight resolution fourteen we
have Senator Pirtle followed by
senator Morris followed by.
Senator Pirtle of mistrust with
senses.
Mr president I would be the
tires.
And Mister president and and the
Senator.
the two point three six eight
miles of the football field.
And Mister president center Los
Lunas titers any good at
football.
Senator Sanchez.
know unfortunately for Valencia
hi and billion.
They have to face these two
teams down in Chavis county
every now and then and then they
don't fare so well if you ever
heard of the rules will coyotes
this overpass help the the fans
coming from Ross will easily
find the stadium where they're
going to just dominate these
these Tigers.
now I think you know if if we
make it easier for my my Russel
coyotes to come to town and and
their their supporters come in
and you know go down to that
Thank you Mr president Senator
Sanchez which would yield
percent assesses the various
questions Mr president I yield
the was present are you as for
asked some questions are pretty
standard now and I hope we
continue to do them in the
future to prevent any future
hall issues so Mister Sanchez
the question I've been here
thank you Mr president senator
Sanchez who owns the land
currently that is being
transferred and who is it going
to.
to the city done is there any
land around or included in this
transfer or any land that is not
adjacent to potentially could
increase in some of value
the best of my knowledge no.
Thank you Mr president and the
last one question is there any
broker fees Mister president
issues we need to be aware of
during this trip the this
transfer the lightness about.
Mr president Senator at this
time no the Suazo present thank
This is the health.
Mr president I yield.
This president the center Sir
course at some of the questions
I was going to ask but do you
No.
Present senator how often do you
find yourself in Los Lunas.
This presents center and do you
do you actually like spending
time with us Representative
for sheet that was present
senator so this is this near the
new Facebook centers that we're
Senator Brandt was present
Senator there any good
restaurants where this is going
to go and that I can eat stop
eat out when I'm down in Los
Lunas Senator Sanchez Mr
I thank you very much Mr
president really have to have
the sponsor here let's see
actually wants to Mr president
but I I just have to say that
this exit this work that's being
done with this particular
miles of the road it is really
devastating that community they
they have seen so much
incredible growth and there's
just absolutely no way to add
additional capacity to that main
the any further debate.
Say no further debate centers
such as to close on the bill.
Mr president I move that house
joint resolution fourteen do now
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
serve on this senators have on
does yes Senator Diamond Senator
Diamond yes Senator Duhigg
Senator Gallegos Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hemphill yes
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Morris yes senator
Munoz.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Schmidt is yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Senator.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senator socio Senator Stefanics
Senator to Venice yes Senator
Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Lopez can envision Mike.
Mr president thank you I meant
to do this but I got involved in
something else I wanted to
his land much because I don't I
don't think it's really close
and I have you spoken with him
about it and I did I was not
aware but I I just felt like I
Thank you senator Senator
Sanchez.
Mr president body thank you very
much the people of all
insecurity really appreciate
Senator gonna item number twenty
five it's House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
before us three times amended
and I yell to Senator on this
thank you Mr president as
passage is been taken and that
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
See no objections center just a
clarification that's three times
I think all of us watched.
In for eight minutes and forty
six seconds a police officer's
name.
On George white's neck.
minutes and forty six seconds
that.
Senator Woods.
The horror of that video.
Because this is a country to
once again.
our society and the protection
of those rights and government.
We have the New Mexico
legislature with the governor's
leadership convene a Civil
Rights Commission.
The bill you have in front of
you is the product of that hard
work of that commission
something the competition just a
matter of months showing the
importance in the urgency of
of action to allow New Mexicans
to assert civil rights that are
violated.
In the state of New Mexico and
in our own point.
Today New Mexicans have a remedy
This bill would allow New
Mexicans to assert this in New
Mexico state courts with New
Mexico state judges and New
Mexico juries.
The federal system differs from
of this other than the title in
the definitions this bill
establishes in section three a
cause of action for claims
brought under our constitutional
bill of rights and a cause for
immunity offense is one of the
principal reasons why New Mexico
needs to have its own state
cause of action.
Section five of the bill relates
to attorney's fees there will be
Representative Lewis from the
house to try and make some
concessions with regard to the
matter of attorney's fees and
let me take a moment Mr
president to let this body now.
law and I have no conflict of
interest or financial motive in
bringing this legislation.
Section six of the bill.
within three years section eight
provides for indemnification in
other words a cause of action
brought against a law
enforcement officer is entitled
to indemnification by the
that belong to the judiciary and
the legislative branch of
government.
Section eleven requires that
records be kept for all
judgments and settlements and
that all judgments and
prospective application meaning
that that actions that arose
before July one of twenty twenty
of twenty twenty one and that
actionable this will only apply
preceding a claim under the
Civil Rights Act there B. notice
provided to the governmental
entity within one year or in
cases of a death up to one year
in six months.
and I look forward to hearing
those tonight.
Because I'm persuaded and I hope
that the end of this
conversation that you will be
persuaded The New Mexicans
should have.
will direct you to the of those
parts of the bill that would be
amended by this.
The first amendment principally
addresses section five which as
to this bill be clear about this
one section.
Because right now claimants have
civil rights laws remedies in
our federal court system and in
the federal court system
interrupt them can we please
move the amendment and going
into explanation not have my
service present use agency
present this present move Senate
floor amendment number one to
house Judiciary Committee
I was saying that in federal in
the federal court system
attorney's fees are recoverable
or mandatory.
This bill would amend the bill
as a concession.
To the ongoing negotiations to
The other change this bill is
section twelve.
Provides for the prospective
application I tell you this
earlier that the that the bill
preceding that date.
Section thirteen of the bill
would be added by this amendment
to provide for notice to assure
the governmental entities and
opportunity to review the claim
interview individuals gather
evidence and retain evidence
that may be important to defend
the claim.
reflects the on going efforts of
the speaker of the house the
house Sanchez me as a sponsor
and others to try and be
reasonable in response to
concerns brought by city and
Thank you Mr president
Senator the.
So on on section five you've
you've struck out.
Mr president and so that's
exactly right that's what it
reads it says the attorney's
fees may be recoverable and it
reads specifically in its
discretion that of the court
reasonable fees that would be
paid for the defendant and your
rights under that's the section
five of the amendment.
Mr president Senator is there
anything in there and I know
plaintiffs I mean the the
defendants miss present and
senator the the prevailing party
in any case is entitled to claim
for costs that's the New Mexico
law for with recovery of costs.
Thank you Mr president Sir David
this is again the prospective
application date July one twenty
twenty one and section thirteen
would be added this is the
requirement that there be
noticed a governmental body
that the person so it basically
excludes anything that happened
prior to July first of twenty
twenty one is that correct
Senator that's correct overall
omissions Senator about this Mr
president etcetera
I'll give an example.
In in a case of state sexual
harassment or gender
subjected no welcome recipient
of sexual harassment over a
period of days or weeks or
months or even years and this
bill is intended to assure sure
trying to to get through the
amendment
Some of.
Under notice of claims this is
Senator you're looking at
section thirteen A. effectively
what this section does is
require that a person who may
event that would give rise to
claim they have to give that
notice of within one year to the
government again so as I said
earlier the evidence can be
preserved that witnesses could
Senator Brandt this presents
hacking that section only
applies to law enforcement
officer.
Senator Hernandez Thomas present
and senator in this particular
knowledge that that a great deal
of this.
Legislation this act the study
of the commission relates to an
as I said from the beginning of
the argument tonight relates to
this act.
Present center and.
I guess.
Is Your Memon your amendment.
this act is brought within one
year and I'm not understanding
Senator run this agency present
for let's be clear because you
use the word claim being brought
they have up to three years from
the event giving rise to the
lawsuit that the potential for a
loss that they have up to three
years to do so whether it's law
enforcement or any other
that's specific to law
enforcement.
Under this bill.
Thank you Mr president in center
and I'm just trying to figure
out why we have
from any incident the harder it
is to approve or disapprove that
incident.
Agency present and senator also
rights you can bring any those
plans within three years the
goal here I believe was to do of
effectively what I think you're
saying which with regard to law
presume that that rises again
from the commission's work
looking at the preservation of
evidence the give them the
accumulation of evidence and
listen so sorry that if this
takes a little bit of time.
tons in section B.
that says no sue or action for
This yes miss prism sorry about
that Mr than subsection B.
relates to the of the.
serious accident or hospitalized
we're we're recognizing that
that individual may have
difficulty giving the notice
required under this subsection
that injury that's the the
provision of subsection B..
So much present back and.
So if.
And so if a person is in a coma.
and then so that that one year
than wouldn't start for them
this is a in my reading that
right in my understanding that
correctly.
during which the injured person
is incapacitated so what
transgression works precisely a
person who's in capacity does
not have indefinite for a
limited amount of time but
time or from the time that they
were able to make a claim to
make that point.
Mr president not entirely
Senator what the what the the
time they would come out of a
coma but simply the time they're
in a coma would not be counted
toward that year.
President does serve like you
that they would have to file
from a year from when they came
out doesn't sound like to me not
exceeding one year.
that's the word use in the bill
and and you can have up to an
additional year to give the
notice of hearing capacity for
that period of time but for
example if you're incapacitated
president Bridget Downes trying
to to read that section because
I think I'm I'm not
understanding that particular
piece sorry about that
Thank you Mr president regarding
the notice provision being
ten cases like that where people
have a good claim but the clock
is running out and there are a
lot.
And.
common law negligence to damages
to you or your property.
You have a whopping thirty days
I.
In which you have to provide
So what notice provisions do is
actually protect the government
quite frankly notice provisions
don't empower litigants.
but in light of the debate I
just wanted to Rising given that
real world example that putting
these notice requirements and
strict notice timelines.
I'm.
Because I do civil rights
litigation and all make that
disclosure I don't think by any
I'm a bring cases in the future
by clients under this I may not.
The past.
But none the less that
disclosure made.
mandatory fees I think it's a
huge concession to the local
governments who have raised
various concerns on this bill.
restriction we are sent under
New Mexico law doesn't apply you
have to go in front of a judge
and prove your case and say I
brought value to this and I
the best interest of the
government agencies its roots
not in the best interest in and
of itself of claimants but I
will support the amendment thank
you Mr president.
the amendment but I just want to
reiterate with senator
Candelaria just said about kind
of this concession that's being
made here and and one of the
biggest criticisms that I heard
the mandatory attorney's fees so
slip and fall case will be
brought as a civil rights case
and there was concern expressed
about that I don't think that
Walking this back I just think
eliminates that fear it really
eliminates that fear and allows
this process
to apply in such a way that you
this that's the whole purpose
behind the bill and this
amendment I think provides.
We've used the word guardrails a
lot during the session but it
provides the protection I think
essentially these on the
amendment thank you Mr president
with the amendment sponsor
you'll please Senator up to the
field are you.
Thank you senator Mr presents
The article two bill of rights
which is yes twenty four
different.
Sections there
so Mister presence interment my
this agency presents and I'm
glad you have your constitution
not it looks like you'll note
that that there there you have
heard a great deal of
misinformation about this bill
and the suggestion for example
that somebody could bring a
rights that exist in our
statutes or the constitutional
bill rights which is article two
sections one through twenty four
and answer your question if it
be sadly aware of circumstances
where we have a law enforcement
wrongful shooting of the
excessive use of force and of
those cases are usually brought
somebody's knee on their neck
for eight minutes.
Thank you Mr president and
center I'm returning to a
section eighteen and yes I see
employed by the state of New
Mexico could claim be brought
wrongful death claim be brought
against such
such person or and and then such
brought as a violation of the
constitutional right those cases
are exclusively within the
purview right now The New Mexico
medical mal practice that and
that act provides the exclusive
the how could how would of the
plan have been brought if we
don't have a private a a right
of action against that not now
we're creating a new right of
action.
claim because right now the
medical malpractice act is all
they have but now we're creating
a new right of action
and one which can be wrongful
Can it be if if this bill is
passed this amendment adopted in
the in the bills passed
with the wrong and how it's
pursuant to wrongful death could
it could arrive action be
Mr president and and the
senators so the the causes of
action that are set for the bill
are under section three.
So to use your example you'll
see that on that same subsection
may relates to the deprivation
of any rights privileges or
immunities secured pursuant to
the bill of rights in the
our constitution of the state.
Thank you Mr presence understand
you haven't seen one I'm I'm
just be because I didn't see the
term wrongful death.
my it is it seems to me that a
patient being treated in the
state hospital.
Would now be able to.
File.
section eighteen due process
rights to.
Not be deprived of life.
So that's a that's a concern of
mine.
firefighter should have known my
daughter was in a certain room
of the house.
And they didn't go in that room
Senator llantas Mr Rosen center
now and and like your example
with medical practice they're
like in one respect which is the
basis you're describing are
cases of negligence.
to violations of constitutional
rights and that's sickly
specified in subsection a of
section three okay thank you Mr
this presents an.
quick I just wanted to I feel
like I'm incorporated want to
correct something the notice
provision under the tort claims
act as ninety days not thirty
days but again the point is you
one here but I did want to add
Mr president I think that the
the Supreme Court in New Mexico
has recently sort of giving us
some guidance on the issue
that's being discussed which is
just have to submit to the
president that the Supreme Court
recently addresses question.
The Supreme Court was recently
asked by the house Republican
Identify where in law that's
clearly spelled out where is the
right from which that process
that you're saying was not given
to you duly springs.
And so Mister chairman I think
we're having this debate what I
want to offer is that it also is
happening in the context of a
much more developed system of
instruction they're always
they're always in there
instructed in our law to always
arrive at the constitutional
issue last.
And so if there is a cause of
notice provision of the tort
claims act this is a bit more
generous one year.
But by imposing this ammendment
we are limiting significantly
Beaten so badly.
By a state after you put into a
coma for eighteen years Mr
president.
not clear about Mister president
to Senator Cervantes.
Any further debate on the
amendment is for that that this
I guess that one here and one
day you as an individual you is
a living person on this earth
loses your claim as I understand
your passing which may not be
for thirty years.
During that thirty year period
your family.
first all responded I don't I
don't believe Senator you've
given is really implicated by
this bill are changed by this
bill then and to get candidly I
five years later whether that is
a a wrongful death cause of
action although I think clearly
you and I as years would make
that argument and I'm confident
the courts would probably find a
there's the case law on that
issue but I can't cited to you
Mr president I think we're
approaching the issue from the
same perspective I I just think
that is present again it just I
scenario I explained I do think
we will see a case may not be
next year then up in five years
with little happen I think.
We'll have a person who is
So George Floyd for example just
use the name yes in the comma
The New Mexico under this bill
at one year and one day I think
his claim would expire.
still have a plan which is a
separate legal entity it only
comes alive when we die our
state doesn't exist until we are
dead I think than the estate
of time between death
incapacitation.
There will be some cases where
the individual and their family
unfortunately are on the hook.
Any further debate on the
amendment.
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator Cervantes to
pass and believe we're gonna
want a roll call vote was
present thank you senator
Senator seats where voting.
On Senate floor amendment number
one.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
the line here.
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Moores no center my
nose.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Pino test center by the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator probe.
Senators committees Senators
reviews no senators to the
Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
funding Senator for Braniff yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Stewart
Senator sure DS Senator Tolman.
Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Browne.
There were no.
By a vote of thirty one of the
affirmative ten of the negative
senator member number one has
been adopted to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
step closer to trying to get us
where we need to be I don't
think it's exactly where I want
to be but it's wake it's a
dramatic improvement over where
we were and just the internet
Senate floor amendment number
two to House Judiciary coke the
committee substitute for House
before as amended four times
I move the Senate floor
amendment number two to House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill for as amended.
Four times.
both ended up with the same
amendment not apologize to her
for handed money to you before
hers but
what this ammendment does it it
House Judiciary Committee.
Percent both our health and
public affairs committee.
One minute let me figure out.
amendment and add it essentially
adds a so on water conservation
district to the list of.
Of people that are.
Not included.
hope it does thank thank you
Senator Woods we do have debate
so I'll go to Senator mantas
thank you Mr president the
proposed amendment number two
Senate foreign to is acceptable
Senate foreman over to center
was to close Mr president I move
the a do pass with the.
Content coming consent.
I
no objection I post.
starboard.
Senator what's the last for roll
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Candelaria test centers
around this send restaurant is
yes Senator Diamond Senator
Senator good yes Senator
Hamblen.
Asked.
Asked.
Yes ma'am Senator Hamblen passes
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator I.
Or do you simply know.
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator pope yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez buses
Senator share Senator sure yes
Senator Shendo.
no Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Hamblen yes.
Yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Four in the affirmative one of
the negative Senate floor
amendment number two has been
adopted.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill for is
now five times amended centers
remember that we did this in the
in the Senate health and public
affairs committee if that's
correct and so that I I just got
confused with this but yes I
Senate floor amendment number
three to house bill four is five
times amended amendment
sponsored by senator Neville.
House Bill not for our House
Judiciary Committee substitute
house bill four is five times
amended as of right.
That's correct senator Phil
explained Mr Memon this.
basically it changes a lesson so
that sections of state
The report back up.
A New Mexico District Court
having a district boundary
encompassing the public body and
the point of that Mr president
is that it would
Thanks Seneal we're debating
said a farm member number three
Senator survive this Mr
president I have to consider
this an unfavorable amendment
and urged the body to rejected
would be running counter to what
we generally do let me explain
if I may.
We have what is called the
general venue statute in New
Mexico it's section thirty eight
and the reason we put it in one
place is so that we don't have a
situation like what you're
proposing here senator to put
into every bill and every act a
different venue so that you
lawyer when I'm trying to decide
where I can bring a lawsuit on a
given cause of action I go to
that general venue statute
instead of having to go through
every possible cause of action
with a claim originates and and
that is already the law that
would be under the general thing
is that you're now to put it
under this act would be
beginning embarking on a on a
Senator Senator Kernan so thank
you Mr president will the
sponsor of the bill yield
Senator on this deal yes you so
Mister president Senator are
there any exceptions to that of
Thomas present and center in the
case of a malpractice action
there are a number of
alternative venues I'm sure that
what you're you may be thinking
of a may be most concerned about
is when I malpractice case
representative may establish the
venue in a medical malpractice
case which results in wrongful
death but we are General venues
to ensure that are referred to
earlier would also allow for
where the hospital exist so
there are a number of
alternative venues they're all
set forth in our general venue
statute.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator I think I'm still
be in the location where the
event occurred.
Mr presence there no that's
that's not what the what I
intended my answer to explain in
the case of a of a malpractice
of action.
One one alternative would be to
bring it in the county or the
city where the hospital for
example of the malpractice took
place at a hospital where the
result in a death the lawsuit
could be brought in the city or
county where that doctor
resides.
in the case of wrongful death
action a personal representative
alternative venues the plaintiff
gets to choose from the problem
with this proposed amendment
would be to try and put in a
venue selection in this
particular act because we were
For the right on the amendment
Senator.
Thank you Mr president of Willis
Bonser of the bill yield Senator
Part of the the tenant of of of
of America American
jurisprudence is a jury of your
peers.
Not a jury of somebody that
doesn't even know where your
Capital city of the state.
So all all this amendment is
really asking is that we follow
this tendon of jury.
The the question you're asking
with regard to a jury of your
peers is a broad question
because again what that means
may be subject to some debate or
discussion what is what is your
peers and isn't limited
that relates to the proposed
amendment the proposed amendment
here would effectively only
recognize what is already in the
law which is that a suit against
the city or county government
right those no reason to begin
putting venue provisions in
every possible act under the
statutes.
So Mister president and senator
I'm is present and senator I
would never use those terms of
frankly those of us that are
practitioners of the law under
our rules of professional
responsibility are precluded
statutes and given a citation
earlier you can refer to it
section thirty eight dash three
dash one the title of this
statute is the county in which a
against domestic corporations
where the defendant resides with
different venue in the cases of
personal property
there is a different section for
trespass on land there's a
one section that one statute and
and that's why again for
efficiency purposes that's why
we draft the laws the way we do
is we try not to put.
simpler on ourselves we put in
one place.
so Mr president I try to keep up
with the with Senator here as he
was quoting chapter and verse on
the law can you can you give me
Mexico and the title again is is
top county in which the civil
action in District Court maybe
convince commence this is the
section of the cases that are
decided under that section
lawsuit against the city would
be brought in a judicial
district with the city's located
what I'm suggesting to you is
that's already the law.
That's already law and and the
same with the county government
our courts over many years
interpreting that menu statute
which again is another reason
why we put it all in one place
so that I if I'm not trying to
understand that statute Anderson
that section which has the the
requirements for venue and then
includes all of the annotations
from the court decisions
interpreting that statute.
Senator.
fortunately there's a drive that
likes to read books and so
handed it to me.
So I see here suits against any
state officers.
officers employees of the state
educational institution.
So be brought in the District
Court of the county which the
principal office of the state of
officials it takes and school
board members it certainly takes
in people that are.
Have nothing to do with law
enforcement and it appears now
Here's.
And is that right as a jury of
your peers.
Mr president and Senator so the
your suits and it says a show we
brought in the District Court of
the county in which the
principal office of the state
educational institutions located
or in the District Court of the
county where the plaintiff
institution is located or where
the plaintiff resides.
So Mister president how about
Mexico State University that is
a state university with that
still happen in Dona ana county
and so I believe the best fit
among the alternates for the
venue statute reading this
quickly I didn't come here to
prepare to debate what how do
you bring a lawsuit against the
of the county in which their
offices are located at the
capitol or in the county where
the plaintiff or any of them the
case resides.
constitution article twelve
section eleven did clearly says
so who the of.
State educational institutions
gone.
And some others.
So so that they're clearly in
here and so I believe.
these employee of any of these.
Then we can go shopping.
At least at least decide that
Santa Fe is a different place
than Dona Ana County Santa Fe
judge shopping or jury shopping
could certainly look that go you
know what.
The people in Dona ana county.
We're really concerned about
this and that's a good place to
go.
different argument.
I think that that while maybe
not official certainly has to
play in the minds of.
Of people that are trying to
figure out where they're going
to bring a case.
Of does clarify a lot of the
concerns I don't see how asking
for this ammendment that really
clearly states.
Sometimes you ask to change
venues on purpose.
Because of news coverage or
things like that.
But just as the default.
In general terms are the people
in and around the community in
which you live.
So with that Mr president.
And follow the the tenant.
That Americans are innocent
until proven guilty by a jury of
their peers not a jury of
chair.
Any further debate.
Si no further debate on.
himself even pointed out when we
were talking before between
sessions all ago that if he's
doing something he appoints a
trustee of New Mexico to implied
the the R. bring the case in
Santa Fe aren't where whatever
jurisdiction it shows that's
just the the if you're a good
lawyer you can do those things
and that's the problem and I
Santa Fe and they get railroaded
they get drug up to the big city
and they're and they're forced
to defend up there and and it's
expensive it's it's not their
Mr chairman I move that Senate
floor amendment number three to
House Judiciary Committee House
Bill number four associate for
We're gonna send a four member
number three the clerk to call
the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
the lawyer Senator Candelaria
most senators have on this
Senator Cervantes no Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen so Senator Hamblen no
Senator Hemphill no Senator
Hemphill no Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey no Senator Ingle.
to meal Senator Hermio no
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez no Senator McKenna
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neill no Senator need
to be now.
Senator Ortiz bureau most
Senator part of the year.
Senator pope no Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez no senator
senator.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez.
No Senator severe lovers know
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator sure no Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Brandt DS.
three is failed to pass we do
have another Senator Neville.
Thank you Mr president members
of another Farman.
a few comments and questions of.
And the.
For those of you who don't know
I live the summer on the Civil
Rights Commission
was a pretty stacked deck we had
a bill that came out of the
house and.
In the interim committee and it
said will have a Civil Rights
start of the process first day
the officer's role preselected
and some of this kind of got a
little concerned about was going
I'll give the the sponsor some
credit and the others that we've
come up with a much improved
version of requests to that
still have some concerns about
it but I'd like to ask a few
issues in the bill first off why
do you were the the champion for
revising the tort claims act
last year you didn't number
waivers mostly for police
first committees that my
remembers tort claims act
amendments were presented the
did not pass those amendments
but I agree with you we should
be amending the tort claims
year of people's access to the
courts in the assertion of their
civil rights.
I'm sure there's a couple of
them the bills out there we can
get it done but
immunity as I understand it it's
I don't know the page number
section for.
He says we won't have qualified
immunity in this bill.
But then you go to section eight
that defense of qualified
immunity and then the other one
I guess they'd.
They don't have to pay any money
if they do get convicted or
attached our judgment against
concerns you heard from the
opponents of the bill who have
been misinformed mis read the
bill which essentially says that
if you was to a law enforcement
officer for example in that case
enforcement officers that that
we help law enforcement officers
personally liable that we would
not have people want to be hired
as law enforcement officers are
what make it problematic for us
to hire law enforcement officers
judgment or settlement made on
behalf of the law enforcement
officer which is entirely
consistent with the tort claims
act now.
In effect the law enforcement
action which give rise to the
claim occurred within the course
and scope of the officers
employment and and a number of
factors and criteria like that
the answer would be yes
to have a couple of drinks at
the bar and and then perhaps go
back to work or something along
those lines something the law
enforcement officer does while
they're on a frolic may not be
Just the going on and section
six there were some amendments
that put in the words per
occurrence per claimant
I'm sorry Senator centers so
your question is with regard to
you look at it which is a good
way to describe it it's a term
of art in the insurance industry
has to limit the scope or the
application of the policy to any
given circumstance and so in
two men are caps as per per
individual or claim involved a
good example Senator is
or domestic partner may have an
independent claim for what we
call loss of consortium the loss
of guidance companionship and
other relationships between.
brought on behalf of the person
who may have died as a wrongful
death action.
Mister president senator would
not include the children of the
like the lawyer it depends the
answer to that would depend on a
number of factors principally in
my experience and I've handle
these kind of cases it would
depend principally on the age of
loss of consortium so that child
would have a cause of action for
the loss of the affection the
love the guidance that any
parent provides to their child
how you ask me about children
consortium claim begins to
diminish
in most circumstances there are
still some circus circumstances
where the parent child
relationship remains one of
day and in that case the loss of
a parent may allow an adult
child to bring a claim for a
loss of consortium but generally
speaking a minor child a young
the limit it could be a spouse
and three kids and the husband
is killed in the line and some
incident so we can be looking at
eight million dollars
conceivably is that not a
you have a referral refer to
each claim it you're right if
you had a motor vehicle accident
and there are eight vehicles
involved you don't get the one
biggest concerns at the local
governments and I'm a local
government guys so it's one of
my concerns is the costs and
insurance pools and they don't
they have to get reinsurance
because none of the tools
actually
Have enough money and to
actually cover a huge claim of
To do this we're not gonna do it
I don't know if there's any
information or not but by
restricting the the number to
the two million dollars all in
number for each claim that not
total with each claim that.
Mr president and senator I
believe we do and you do have a
report that was prepared by the
General Services Department
with the fiscal impact analysis
and they meet certain
judgments might go from three
point six million to six point
six million in total of over the
year and a thirty five percent
projected increase the made
and judgments and so they
projected a total of three year
cost of nine million dollars a
one year cost of four point five
million dollars.
concerns of one one question's
going to ask as you read that
off Mr president Senator was
that for counties cities and
everybody schools as well or is
that just the state costs.
I got to believe that the the
the
analysis here does not
distinguish between city county
all civil cases civil case
settlements and judgments and I
think because they do not
distinguish between cities
counties and schools I have to
believe that's an aggregate of
all cases and all claims.
date so we don't have to be
concerned about that particular
case but we're that filed next
summer after July one as a class
have is is we have to be
cautious about making sure we
have some reasonable limits and
I'm not sure of the two million
isn't because of first off it's
it's multiples of two millions
questions or answers thank you
we are for the debate we have
Senator Griggs followed by
Senator Candelaria then Senator
Senator Griggs.
I've seen lots of lots of of
agreements with
A cost of living adjustments
and.
I've always wondered when I
Shane in it that if the CPI went
down nothing happened.
because for the most part.
An agreement that allows for
encouraged.
Plush CPI adjustment
presence there yes it is common
in fact it's required we have a
state statute New Mexico law
that provides for what we call
post judgment interest when a
common and it's longstanding.
Sure agency presentation mean
that the interest is required is
the CPI adjustment required as
well.
the status these caps we fail to
periodically adjust them and
recognize that they should be
adjusted I'll give you an
example.
Centerville asked earlier about
the tort claims act I believe
recoverable and the maximum
recoverable in tort claims act
for medical expenses.
Past and future total medical
expenses has not changed in
thirteen years and you tell me.
but the tort claims act has not
been modified and despite my
efforts this year I was unable
to do so.
Thank you Mr president center
high interest rate.
And the the ability to keep up.
Some of this for some of these
the smaller municipalities or
whoever it is having to having
as we as we listen to what
Senator Neville said as I look
at and and think about the
community that I used to
represent Alamogordo I mean even
officers better people better
obviously
but they're also going to have
to be able to afford the cost of
of claims the cost of the
but at the same time we can't go
the other way to where we.
We bankrupt cities counties
interesting to me that we have
both the CPI and we have
interest and we round things up
to the nearest ten thousand
people that were harmed because
of a and action and I get it I
get it but I also I think
there's reason somewhere and I'm
I appreciate you standing here
for the questions.
We do have a foreman at.
The reader to read.
Bill for as amended amendment
sponsored by senator cliff R.
Pirtle.
Jennifer little moving explained
amendment move Senate floor
amendment number three to house
president this would set the the
floor from
presumption of negligence to
review table presumption that
the state actor
be a bunch of frivolous lawsuits
filed and so that when there is
actual violations of of someone
Civil Rights that
That those are the cases that
and would consider it done
favorable what it does is it a
man's the qualified immunity
language in the bill that
precludes qualified immunity as
a defense and essentially put
immunity as a defense they would
be a complete conflict.
Senator debating Senate floor
amendment.
it actually goes further and
creates a legal burden on
plaintiffs that does not exist
in section nineteen eighty three
litigation claims under federal
I submit a lawsuit.
I say.
When we use the we won't even
The child then goes on to either
rape or kill your child that
happens.
Guess what under current law
I'm a government agency after
some discovery moved to dismiss
the case.
Just search the defense of
qualified immunity.
Has to bear the burden of
demonstrating.
That a reasonable officer would
be on notice for the reasonable
None.
So what this amendment does
actually doubles down.
The problem we're trying to
resolve in this bill.
but it all comes down to this
idea of sovereign immunity.
And it's exactly what it sounds
like.
just part of the kingdom of
Spain it didn't really come from
Mexican civil law and we were
part of Mexico for greater to
time it came from British common
law.
sound important to us in two
thousand twenty one at least I
hope it will.
That individuals have no rights.
We were property of the king.
brutally raped and murdered my
family members no of course not
that so that the king can do no
wrong let us and one.
because it's wrong it's
fundamentally at odds with who
we are as Americans.
Thank.
Can do no wrong.
Mexico a couple of them not just
the British one but the Spanish
one to so we got a two for on
the rest of the country that
they should really respect.
rights now our constitution the
bill of rights Mr president.
I think it was raised a moment
ago.
is bringing a claim pursuant to
the New Mexico constitution's
grant of a.
Of a free an adequate public
education.
Under this act.
And so the doctrine of sovereign
immunity existed in New Mexico
for decades until the Supreme
Waving that sovereign immunity
in some cases.
Because Mr president as I said
on the floor before and I I mean
it sincerely.
quick reference to the
amendment.
On the rights.
Who's remedies would be
restricted by this amendment and
I think these are the
fundamental rights we share as
government Hey.
You'll have a legal basis to
lock me up that would be
actionable here.
And with the amendment.
The quartering of soldiers is
prohibited our bill of rights.
And in times of war soldiers are
quartered on to Rios or St
Three search and seizure.
You're right to be safe
protected and private in your
home and your vehicles.
Your cell phones.
of religion would be actionable
under this bill.
Under the amendment.
The government would be
benefited by a presumption.
They acted correctly.
married it's why loving.
The Texas or Virginia I believe
was decided.
That blacks and whites could
marry.
closing is this the government
doesn't need any more help.
Welcome to questions you have a
victim whose rights have been
violated by the state.
tremendous amount of courage to
even walk in the door and be
willing to engage in an act it
is so fundamental to who we are
as Americans but yet so
That is essentially what we are
talking about and the government
has the resources to defend
those cases.
Let me share Mr president I'm a
recovering civil defense
Defense lawyers to pack and
packed agendas in the
depositions and.
You know maybe the chairman of
monument else will agree that we
should take a closer look at
some of those bills because I
But our constitution can promise
anything at once.
But the promise of due process.
Means nothing.
a search and seizure of
quartering of soldiers of habeas
corpus of the second amendment
none of that means anything.
But for a remedy.
As I mentioned to present the
government does not need more
my rights as an individual
matter.
And I'm gonna take on the whole
system.
Mr present we should be making
claims thank you Mr president
Senate chairman and senator
member number three.
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senate president close
valid concerns brought forward
Mr president members of the
body.
And so I think as we move
forward
you know we're probably gonna be
We would put this ammendment on
take it out of the hands of a
judge and put in the hands of a
jury to ensure that it is in the
the hands of the jury of our
more voting on the amendment
Senate floor member number three
to the chamber.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator combos now senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria no senators
have on this Senator Rodriguez
yes Senator Gonzalez no Senator
Gonzales now Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen no Senator Hamblen no
Senator Ivey Soto no Senator how
to meal Senator Hermio no
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator mo nos no senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neill no Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator pope no Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez no Senator
No Senator Sedillo Lopez no
Senator sure.
Senator share yes Senator Shendo
Senator Shendo no Senator souls
showing one Senator Steinborn no
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart noted Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman no senator
Wirth.
By a vote of fifteen in the
Senator.
Thank you Mr president members
of the body.
Senator is we are back on the
bill and I'll yield to senator
Candelaria.
like to to first start out just
by looking at some of the FIR
issues here so right off the bat
just is the Civil Rights
Commission in its final report.
It said.
Would reasonably anticipate
substantially more on claims
which would eventually
Our public education department
reports the costs associated
with HB four or no but quote.
Based on the language it is
likely that there will be more
claims against schools and
school officials under the board
under the broad claim of
depredation of.
education school safety in
Bowling rights related to
standardized testing.
This is what the schools are
worried about.
That's what our schools.
What all that means.
Is that the taxpayers are going
to pay for that.
That's what that means.
Some relatively minor things.
And our schools are worried
about this.
Our cities and counties are
worried about this.
really don't care to debate this
tonight we just care to get it
out here because it's twenty
seven fifteen we know that.
Maybe maybe sixteen whether
maybe there maybe sixteen over
there.
our own panelists our own
analysts say that they're out
there.
And so this is a.
Definition of a public body.
Well let's see.
Public bodies police departments
yes.
But wait there's more.
government and receiving public
funds including taxing and
school districts.
Except now not a state cues.
in here.
If this is about police.
What are we doing this to the
county manager.
Because it can be a lot of
Had a particular curriculum that
that a parent did like.
Well because the teacher
somehow deprive somebody the
And I think it's.
It's scary it's scary.
No Mr president I heard all
about qualified immunity there
minute ago.
But the difference between
England or Spain or France or
anywhere else that had a king.
Is we.
Are the sovereign.
And so is my wife by the way.
So.
In this particular case what
harmed.
This is one or the other we can
talk all day long about all the
bad things that happened.
But it's the tax payer that has
But we also are a government.
Of the people by the people and
for the people that means two
things that means we won't don't
Into this endless pit of
lawsuits.
We don't want to do that we want
both.
Of what's happening nationally.
But you know we're we're New
Mexico ranks in danger zones
here.
So we're somewhere in the middle
but twenty eighth in the ranking
of who's the most dangerous
state.
There's also been another side
to the story.
The other side is the seven
hundred Maso menos.
Law enforcement officers.
Who have been attacked.
officers since toward Floyd to
today.
Have ended up somehow with
injuries.
And many of them were killed.
Many of them were killed.
were ambushed.
And just maybe.
Shotwell are just sitting in
their car shot to death while
they're trying to buy a Cup of
Because they knew that he'd been
a police captain.
Slaughtering police officers.
We don't talk about the police
bring little piece not throw
this out here just get more
people fired up and have more
for law enforcement officers
assassinated.
It went to work.
And didn't come home.
actor police officers in New
Mexico.
Was killed here.
Show to me.
They were assassinated.
because the the police officer
was trying to make an arrest.
These were intentional assaults.
On police officers.
We go in here and we use this
well it's about time that we
were able to take action against
Just the opposite.
In Farmington just.
Two months ago three months ago
but then this round building I
lose track of time.
The please show up the police
know they don't want to take any
kind of leaf leaf lecture.
They're trying to talk described
When he started throwing Molotov
cocktails at the police cars.
When he poured gasoline on
himself.
But he didn't die.
Right after the shot him the
immediately went to first aid.
And they're faced with this.
Was another incident.
The dark road.
We're guy jumped out of his car.
This guy was pointing a
cellphone at the cop but he was
pointing it as if it were a gun.
work thinking I gotta find me
somebody to kill no.
Is a peace officer he was is.
He just wanted to do the right
thing.
This isn't about going after bad
actors I don't know what this is
about says another one of those
weird political stance we have
to rein in.
Growing crime on our streets.
I think there's several reasons
for it but none of more the
police department.
Number the sheriff none of my
fence outside the state police
are here to protect us.
Stupid stupid but the police are
here.
For very good reason.
But they also protect.
Worried that all of a sudden
they can't afford the insurance
premium.
And our FIR agrees with them.
If you have a police force are
all.
Your fire departments also at
risk.
Your school for at risk your
teachers or risk.
In fact I believe and we are at
risk under this.
violated because Cher said
whatever he said.
This is scary stuff.
I don't understand why we're
doing it.
do know that the taxpayers had
they known what was in here
would be scared to.
Because of the cities and
counties are right.
There will be more violence in
And he with with the best
weapons wins.
And that's not the way civilized
fear once we do this.
The cities will no longer be
able to maintain the streets.
They won't be able to deal with
the water systems.
will go into the insurance.
And it won't be anything left.
Many taxes will be raised in
Was a balance.
Between the sovereign's of each
one of us.
Not seen people are wrong.
But it's that balance.
And they've been saying this
over and over and over I don't
know what day were on I think
our books as well a day for.
But I'm sure that it's the fifty
us.
Please don't do this to us.
Because.
If we do this to them we're
We can deal with bad actors
today and we have.
We saw the George Floyd twenty
seven million dollar settlement.
officials performing
discretionary functions immunity
from FTSE civil suits unless.
The plaintiff shows that the
There is a way if you clearly
violate.
And you're one of those bad
actors.
But when we throw that out.
To get the cities and counties
to actually talk to us.
But of course we've got a stupid
fence around it so no one can
come in this building and talk
to us.
The hive of activity.
With people talking to us and
sharing their concerns and
helping us work out little
And we're rushing into this
thing.
I think for the same political
purpose we put up a fence.
But there's no balance here.
No balance at all.
With this bill really does.
Just to pay for insurance.
Because somebody might be upset
with the school teacher.
I know where this is going.
I could be told to the vote
count on November third.
In a couple of dozen of them
assassinated.
Those families have been
destroyed.
And here we are trying to
pretend like those heroes.
But the people we need to
control.
Mr president.
Thin blue line.
Keep the civilized.
If we were smart we would take a
moment right now.
In the last year.
But that's not the pretty
politically correct thing to do
today.
Thank you Mr president.
Only the sponsor yield.
Thank all the questions have
been answered.
Officer Greg Anthony Nigel
Benner.
Murdered.
Was crushing to our community.
We still mourn his loss.
To address the problem.
Public employees.
Violate individuals rights.
All we've done in this bill.
Is create a lawyer in Richmond
Bill.
And public body.
Is going to try to fire if an
employee.
And the you rightfully so
The public body.
Lose.
And I know that because we had a
As a school board.
We have held firing that
teacher.
Peeled.
So no you can't fire her gift
for back to work.
We haven't addressed the issue
at all.
ones that are caught on camera
all the time.
Usually make them have a camera
there in the public all the
time.
Our public employees.
And that's the real issue that
we need to be addressing.
Is what do we do with the
employee.
Steps to cross the line violate
That gives a someone else to
soon.
Well just to make more money.
this is not the way it works in
our system.
Because we have an employment
board who even when the person
You're wrong to let them go you
have to put them back in the
classroom.
Of our law enforcement officers
who put their lives on the line
every day like officer better
did in my community like G.
these gentlemen are doing up
And makes us look good.
Us.
going to talk about a bit said
but I do think we are really
going into a of Prussia plus
here we have the most liberal
liability laws of any place
what it is but I think we're
going to have a system here in
New Mexico that is gonna be very
hard to define.
Not only for we're we're liable
counties and our cities our
highway department every state
agency we have I think it's
going to be subject to things
that they have never even
thought about nor has their
insurance our liability
into an area on so many things
here that have never been
touched before and I hope I'm
wrong.
But unfortunately I don't think
I will be because I've seen this
something that we're gonna have
to reckon with us and try to try
to fix but once we have these in
laws and their own the books
they're very very difficult to
they're they're really doesn't
matter what changes because the
cases have been decided and
they've been heard and there's
been judgments rendered.
And they don't change.
The same is present with the
bill sponsor you'll please.
Senator on this yes so you.
Thank you senator
This presents under.
and I had asked this question in
committee.
let us again the export will be
more.
Mexico bring a a suit.
Against our state or the
secretary of state.
claiming a constitutional
violation.
Under section eight.
Senator about this agency
presence in a way request to
question the answer is yes that
people can bring a claim with
center yes I
would your bill find a way.
Four of the Courts to provide
Mr president center courts to
have authority to grant
injunctive relief.
Thank you Mr Mr presence on
earth and that is a concern of
mine.
boxed out of the prior election
could potentially be awarded
injunctive relief to the
election and and because as as
creating that possibility for
judge I'm on my last line
questioning Senator Mr president
center
not elected.
So agency presence enter so my
question was yes Martinez is
there was found to be a
constitutional violation.
The the issue with that was that
the students were not prepared
they were weren't prepared for
for life one prepared for in a
life after high school they
this precedent of a
constitutional violation for the
result of an education that we
are constitutionally the state
of New Mexico is
You know twenty twenty two that
Hey I I I went through this
process and I'm not prepared for
college I'm not prepared for
life after high school.
section of the constitution but
the do you think the agency
presents under do you think that
a class action lawsuit for
Mr center a one hundred thing
there's no I mean could it be
under no due process or some
other part of the bill of
Thank you and so many to revise
my question is for the center it
can you file a class action
lawsuit based on deprivation of
constitutional rights.
action thing out of it all of
that's making it too complicated
but an individual so
It is far as this bill goes is
there anything within the bill
findings and Yazzie Martinez.
Mr president and senator I'm not
review the Yazzie Martinez case
for the constitutional claims
are violations or any findings
another concern that we have
president.
And now.
you know could this open them as
a rhetorical question.
constitutional rights because of
a lack of quality education.
And.
So there's a precedent in and
now you know what are the.
I wasn't accepted to college I I
didn't do well on my ACT exam or
could get a job and and and
because the state deprive me of
an adequate education.
great if that's really the
state's responsibility.
our education is basically you
Miss presence enter it is far as
the also Martinez president so I
undergarments thinking about in
a house gonna use understand
precedent here and that I think
is going to hold up.
And present an obstacle for how
our government functions on a
day to day basis and I'm afraid
thing is presentation thank you
Senator committee senator Munoz
thank you Mr president and and
there's no need to ask the
sponsor yield but.
As we sit here today and and
great as we've seen during the
session.
we used to be able to reconcile
income to agreements and move
forward and and we're not at
Santa Fe want Santa Fe gets what
Albuquerque once Albuquerque
gets in rural New Mexico is
All rural communities small
school districts and I use of on
that page I know they have one
or two cops anything happens
there the mid filing for
bankruptcy and who pays for that
are they come to pay for the
state.
There may have been wrong doings
and they'll go through the trial
process and that's really it
should be but the more we divide
no further debate.
Senator wanted to close on the
bill.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president like to begin by
thanking senator Neville I
realize he was not perhaps in
District Attorney sacri Callan
Victor Rodriguez chair of Kim
Stewart attorney Denise Thoresen
judge Stan Whitaker all who
As the body to reject some of
the rhetoric here tonight.
It's only diversionary to try
and suggest this is us versus
the police.
for everyone of those men and
women.
I know I do.
The suggestion of this is us
versus the police is a diversion
that's a tactic to divide us.
earlier saying that we needed to
have a jury of our peers.
Senator recall that debate.
But realize right now when you
bring a civil rights action
Carlsbad are damning for
Sapporo.
Because the federal districts
are so much larger than our
state twelve districts that you
draw a jury pool from very far
Which is where the remedy takes
place now.
There's been the suggestion that
we need smaller government local
government from some of my
Congress.
Not voted on by anybody elected.
Created by the Supreme Court.
And it's ironic to me that
oftentimes my colleague from the
To me in that.
There's an irony to me the.
People who oftentimes decried
big government federal
government national government
Create our own body of case law
New Mexico.
The irony strikes me.
At times as diversionary.
Let's not forget.
Just last year in Los crucis the
city Los crucis agreed one
Antonio Valenzuela was choked to
death.
damages none.
Well this bill has a two million
dollar cap on damages let's not
forget that we have to look to
George Floyd and a twenty seven
million dollar settlement rate
a camper in the Sandia foothills
let's not forget the two point
three million dollars jury
verdict in Albuquerque for the
excessive force that for staff
force in the case of Rodrigo
Garcia.
Let's not forget the set five
million dollars settlement in
the case of merry hawks in
five million dollars settlement
paid out again by a police
officer recklessly driving
through a red light.
The kids.
Passenger vehicles we struck and
the single case a civil rights
case brought in federal court
under existing law that now
exists with no damages cap
whatsoever.
No cap on lawyer fees at all the
No caps on damages in federal
law.
And so the suggestion that this
is going to have some financial
consequence to our city and
damages the cap that includes
attorney's fees.
Within that damage can.
May lead to prompter settlements
may lead to less money paid for
In all of the discussion about
protecting police officers
protecting teachers let's not
forget the twenty million
dollars paid on behalf of the
Espanola school district the
teacher who right.
Let's not forget the people who
are harmed in this discussion.
Mr president.
Hi.
do now pass and I just that we
do so by roll call vote.
Senator is more voting.
Here's.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg gas Senator
Gallegos.
Senator day there's no Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Kernan noted Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the yes senator for
the A. S. Senator Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator Sanchez now Senators
committees.
Senator committees now senators
of the all of us.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator share
planning.
Senator confronted yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator.
Senator Munoz.
has passed the Senate Senator
mantas.
Thank you Mr president resent.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president we're going to do two
rules be suspended that the
record show that all actions for
placing Senate bill fifty four
as amended on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
budget as a percentage of the
amount of awards that they make
it is based on a three year
rolling average when we've got
lots of volatility in the in the
out of money that they're able
the and then the two amendments
one of them of the strikes on
page five the section there and
puts the implementation date two
but it's on page four on lines
eight nine that's all.
Senator is we're debating house
and Senate bill fifty four as
amended.
vote senators tier seats where
voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator number yes senator
Candelaria.
All Senator Candelaria yes
senators have on this.
goes.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs Senator Hamblen
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator I resultar yes senator
economy here.
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Moores yes senator one
of.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator printer yes Senator
portal.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator fallen.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
affirmative one of the negative
Senate bill fifty four as
amended has passed the Senate
Senator cels thank you Mr
president thank you members of
the Senate.
Thank you senator cells.
president that members I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate
finance committee substitute for
to explain the bill thank you Mr
president so members of this is
been a lot of work especially
for the Senate finance committee
college presidents and and so I
just want to really thank Senate
finance for all the over time
they put into this but anyway
opportunity scholarship
continues to support recent high
additionally we have included
language to support students who
completed the requirements of
the home based education in New
Mexico this bill also continues
to the specific port
Finally the returning plotter
skipped lottery scholarship
lottery student pilot is an
innovative program to allow
students to finish their degree
if they lost their scholarship
Senator debate in Senate finance
committees of super Senate bill
one thirty five Senate Bill.
Just one quick question I guess
how much money.
then anyway yes eighteen million
for the opportunities because of
been in fort million for the
pilot program so total of twenty
two million.
nontraditional as it broke down
all those categories Mr
president center.
Mr president members I I asked
It will be Mr president it will
be distributed by HUD to the
various institutions.
I'll be sure if I write a book
called it my hand writing I'll
give you an autographed copy
thank you Mr president.
Any further debate centers.
that just really boy they work
so hard on this and and really
appreciated so Mister president
I move that Senate okay for the
clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator surrounded yes Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris Senator Moores
yes senator Munoz.
to be now Senator to subpoena
yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez.
Senator Schmidt is now Senator
to the office.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Representative
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
percent of the one thirty five
has passed the Senate centerman
Austin centers committee to
explain their votes centerman
us.
Thank you Mr present with the
sponsor the bill please bring
Charlie's I have spoken
standoffs so you are you in you
know comes on now we we feast on
donuts and unusual session it's
seen with that does that
increases the price of tuition
and so I just I just can't go to
support that Antill street that
the door just got a thousand
dollar check.
We think some of the prices
inside the store.
the quality of higher ed has not
gone up.
yet the value the the cost has
gone up over the past to have
want to remind people that
tomorrow is a very special day I
you St Patrick's day so remember
that when you get up in the
morning.
Candelaria shared from committee
will be meeting at spic and span
in Las Vegas tomorrow we may be
a little hard to provide for a
couple days
look at the flood look in the
So unanimous consent we go that
on our business concurrence
ideals Senator Stewart for
concurrence calendar number for
Senate bill one twelve in that
order business insurance Senator
president members of the body of
the house inserted part of
another bill and this bill they
put in house bill two ninety
they added in Advisory Council.
I think this really helps the
bill it's up public body they at
at this New Mexico clean energy
workforce development study.
Senator debating the
concurrence.
mentioned that the inserted a
part of a different bill into
this during one of the members
well what happened to that bill
that they inserted wasn't killed
of my bill and then the two
groups just kinda kept working
together and so three or four
representatives put in a just
back together and so that bill
remains in committee somewhere.
Senator Moores thank you Mr
president for your for more
somewhere into this bill on and
try to get through a concurrence
Mr president no of that wasn't
it at all we have been working
kids in any committee I've
looked it up and it you can't
really tell but that was a house
bill two ninety seven so so but
side of the chambers.
Mr Mr chairman sorry Mr
president can you say that again
im service programs lead COVID
proton so what I'm hearing you
saying is that there was not a
president for you then program.
Any further debate senators.
CNN center Stuart close Mr
president I move that the the
Well the roll call.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd Now Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria no senators
Senator Duhigg give Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos Now Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Hermio.
Senator economy are yes Senator
Kernan.
of.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure no Senator Shendo.
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator Corman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Stewart I think
everybody.
Senator Wirth.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in engrossed copies
the house bill twenty three is
amended house bill fifty one is
the officers of the house in
open session in requests the
signatures of the officers of
the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa Marty's McCutchen
chief clerk the general show the
message from the house has been
amended house bill two thirty
nine as amended and house bill
two forty as amended.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk
that'll show the message from
the house has been received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
the house in requests the
concurrence of the Senate to the
house amendment respectfully
submitted Lisa Murty's McCutchen
chief clerk at also the message
Senate bill to eighteen as
amended by the Senate and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk of
the house.
that order business the reader
to read.
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two eighty five.
The next related to capital
conditions for the expenditure
of severance tax bond proceeds
providing continued
authorization to the public
education department to request
budget increases for certain
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two eighty five.
Plus taxation and revenue
committee substitute.
Bill two eighty five Mr
president.
Do we have any means to go along
with all that point.
Thank you for.
eleven o'clock so it's time for
a committee chairs to make their
announcements centerman us here
is present I just want the body
recognizes their compasses there
Mr presence enter approximately
a twelve and a half hours from
right now we will go into Senate
finance at one o'clock everybody
have a good evening the snow
it's not a little bit be careful
Thank you seven yes further
announcements Senator.
Thank you Mr president my we
friend in the back row here
that on St Patrick's day you're
all Irish.
And please let's be happy
tomorrow because the Irish I
Did of my Irish brother.
So your Judiciary Committee will
be meeting tomorrow at one half
hour after the floor session.
from morning at nine AM we have
a couple of constitutional
amendments from the house that
come over the house to consider
a cabinet secretary and more
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I appreciate
ceremonials mentioning the staff
and everyone's help.
In these wee hours of the
AM today.
