Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator McKenna here Senator
Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator souls your.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart here.
Did you count me in for a quorum
Everyone will please stand for
the invocation to be given this
morning by Representative Gail
Lynsey mariner the unitarians
arch of Santa Fe and remain
pledge to the New Mexico flag by
Senator Hickey.
We are gathered this morning.
vocations and avocations as
people from different political
parties with an array of guiding
values.
Do join together as one each
time you speak and act as a
public body.
To prepare for the work that you
inviting in three essential
guides encouraging.
Compassion.
And commitment.
These three impulses dwell
within each of us and whether we
our spiritual heritage as human
beings.
In the name of all that is in
needs and vulnerabilities of the
many peoples of our state and
that moves your hearts and your
hands to help suit their
distress and in the name of that
That you come together to do the
work that needs to be done.
In these tumultuous times.
And in all of us together.
Senator share what you lead us
in the pledge please.
I pledge allegiance.
for all.
Though they are eleven data the
Los estados Unidos Madam chair I
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico and dizzy assemble
a perfect friendship among
United cultures.
morning to everyone as well.
unanimous consent we go that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous.
There's no objection will go to
announcements and miscellaneous
and thanking Reverend Gail in
the mariner for being here I
thought it was a beautiful.
Kind of moment to celebrate you
know our differences are are
here.
so a couple of announcements up
front our financial disclosure
reports I need to be filed with
the secretary of state by next
can get you a copy of those
instructions.
we talked about this yesterday
but all continue to remove the
capital outlay priority.
This this two Sunday January
of us and and you should have a
list of all those requests and
what Council services **** that
you go through those and just
cross off ones that are not
tradition from the New Mexico
primary care association
and I think Dr Hickey he's going
to say a few words about those
hundred percent of the federal
poverty level and plan
incredibly important role in our
state and I won't.
I won't get into any more
specifics because I know when we
second so let me yield to a
Senator Hickey just to follow up
on that and talk about primary
care docs Senator Hickey.
Thank you.
Leader Wirth and.
years so don't come to me for
any advice okay.
But I am a primary care
But unfortunately the economics
of health care as messed up as
we know they are.
Really does not support primary
was formed by the surgeons
because they did procedures and
we have this courageous the.
Idea that procedures should be
And in turn is can spend twenty
four hours and then I see you
bed guiding someone through a
diabetic coma the orthopedic
surgeon gets paid five thousand
So anyway that's how we got to
work on but I just to the wanted
is point out how that
illustrates.
That today only eight percent of
cognitive chasm was so wide and
getting wider it was almost
fifty percent.
So as we have bills coming
of osteopathy our ours is same
as M. dis but they have a
greater tendency to go into
primary care thank heavens we
she or he not only is able to.
Diagnose and treat AT the ninety
to ninety five percent of what
would we go to the doctor for
You know it's really tough for
them with loans and so forth to
keep hanging in there so you
know in any ways that we can
find a honor.
recognize primary care internist
internists and family
practitioners and the residents
who've been on the front lines
but thank you for this and and I
just want to do a big shout out
to David rowdies been here for
state so please please honor
them when we're able to through
legislation thank you for this
opportunity thank you Senator
things across the state we often
in the past have been able to
have them here to recognize them
in person with the protocols and
other things that's difficult so
we're going to try something a
chairs spirit squad one the
state spirit championships a
place first place in the game
day varsity coed grand
championship award chair
believe is their spokesperson
but are is the general with us
can we get you on on the zoom
video with us.
The video stream I'm sorry well
we certainly can hear all of you
and in doing this and I
committed this would not take
more than five minutes but just
particular group practicing
routines of getting ready for
the competition and then
actually performing on game day
and Mr but the if you like to
Yes miss other coach job
distorted side just kind of
speak to that.
If you would very quickly.
These athletes work day in and
recognition as they definitely.
You deserve it so.
Thank you very much appreciated
all of the names but please know
that you're appreciated and if I
could get the body to to stand
up and give a little recognition
organ mountain high school to
Thank you madam president.
Thank you cells.
US senator had a meal for
chair team and I wanted to tell
or give out in schools I will be
seeing you at the state
competition or competition in
March as your tech judge thank
you madam president.
Seeing no objection it is so
ordered a centerman yes.
Thank you madam president every
members got a Gallup the pen
sitting on their desk it's a
is a less for Gallup's
priorities and and what's
happening in Gallup and and we
know that COVID is a big problem
in our community and and I'll
call it so enjoy the pans every
Thank you centerman yelps
Senator Lopez thank you madam
president unanimous consent to
excuse senator Toleman and
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president so basically we're
gonna roll the clock here in a
minute and then today it's
not a whole bunch up on the
now being eleven fifty nine AM I
move to adjourn until twelve or
one PM the Senate will come to
order.
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
consent that the rules we
suspended at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
Judiciary Committee.
Madam president it is a special
day for you it's madam
president's birthday so Senator
Happy birthday to you Happy
Birthday sure you the first day
Thank you Senator Ingle part of
the Stewart caucus I appreciate
your lovely voice today.
If there's no objection messages
from the governor the reader
will read.
Senator executive message number
thirty.
Senate opportune pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
development act to report job
creation and capital investment
information requiring the
taxation and revenue department
to compile and present a tax
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
Senate executive message number
thirty.
Senator executive message
number.
pursuant to article four section
five B. two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature's
second session submission of
and prohibiting insurance
coverage discrimination against
persons with disabilities
receiving organ or tissue
transplants and associated care
Senator Wirth thank you madam
Judiciary Committee to home is
been referred Senate bill
thirteen as amended has had it
under consideration and report
same with recommendation that do
committee report is there any
objection saying on the
committee report is adopted.
And that Mr leader it's madam
president.
that do pass.
As amended.
And that's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted Daniel A. Ivey Soto
no objection the committee
report is adopted.
Madam president your committees
committee to whom is been
referred Senate bill eight has
had it under consideration and
Mimi Stewart chair.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president us and consent of the
Senate agree to be allowed to
read all the committee reports
germane and that's referred to
the health and public affairs
committee Senate bill one forty
four germane and then for for
two due to the Judiciary
bill one seventy one germane and
that's referred to the health of
public affairs committee Senate
bill one seventy two germane and
that's referred to the Education
bill one seventy five germane
that that's referred to the
health and public affairs
committee Senate bill one
seventy six germane and that's
we're adoption of the committee
report.
If there's no objection
committee report has been
adopted.
that order of business
introduction of legislation the
reader to read.
Senate bill one seventy eight
introduced by Senator Ivy Soto
and Senator Padilla.
impose a property tax subject to
election for a special levy for
purposes of that act authorizing
the creation of an
administrative committee
Development Act allowing only a
governing body to impose a
property tax for purposes of
that act authorizing the
creation of an administrative
committee pursuant to that act
amending the audit act to allow
the government component unit to
be audited separately from its
primary government entity and to
bill one seventy eight.
Senate bill one seventy eight
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee
and Senate rules committee fence
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go that or as business
announcements and miscellaneous
if there's no objection were on
announcements and miscellaneous
now's the time to introduce
times for this afternoon and
tomorrow is committee meetings.
So I'll start that off by saying
will meet and the committees
any announcements chair senator
Munoz.
Thank you madam president the
hardest working committee in the
building is meeting every day
and every morning and we heard
I think we as a body need to
start looking about free tuition
for nursing how do we
incentivize those get the
teachers in the system pay for
issue that affects every single
person in the state at some
point in time well we are going
to have Senate finances
afternoon we have few agencies
we're gonna start about one
you madam chair thank you
centerman you Senator Shendo.
Thank you madam of the pretend
three.
All right the twenty one to our
thank you Senator Ivey Soto
thank you very much madam
president madam president your
Senate rules committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning at nine
confirmations the session will
be doing just the secretary
designate John Garcia and I just
secretaries aren't and so will
be brought doing that tomorrow
morning at nine AM thank you
very much.
Thank you any other
objection will go back to
introduction of legislation the
reader will read.
The reason for the Senate bill
one seventy nine introduced by
county seat repealing section
thirty four dash seven dash five
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
being laws eighteen sixty nine
bill one seventy nine.
Senate bill one seventy nine
having read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate committees Canadian
cents to help public affairs
seeing no objection were on that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president so
just one other a deadline I
stand in recess until noon
tomorrow.
If there's no objections the
Senate will stand in recess
until noon tomorrow thank you so
much.
