Senator McKenna.
Here.
Senator Sanchez.
There.
Senator Shendo.
Here Senator how to meal
present.
And Senator Pinto will be
joining us so.
Very good thank you Rebecca and
so since we have acquired we're
gonna move on it too House Bill
two thirty four one is amended
straightened guardianship
provider oversight and with that
we have Matthews and very here
good morning if you want to go
ahead and introduce your bill.
Good morning and then at I'm
sorry not madam I'm on the phone
I can tell though that you are a
Mr chair
and.
Appreciate you all sitting is in
this close to the end of this
bill is relating to the office
of guardianship.
And it's HSD bill
and it does a couple really
important things
as you know there's been
various.
I mean in the movie out there's
all kinds of things happening
about we are guardians a court
appointed guardians and.
Mr door or or do not do a good
job with the people the
protected person that they're
working for and the important
thing about this bill is we
recognize that a court appointed
guardian of course cannot.
You cannot fix what it doesn't
know and need help figuring out
if there's problems I'll be on
just the report that a guardian
submits every year what the one
of the very important things
this bill does is it provides a
mechanism going to be a pilot
project and initially
to have court volunteers who.
Basically do interviews with the
protected person do their own
report and then submit to the
presiding judge Jian's over the
case information as to whether
or not they think there might be
a problem that the court should
look into and that will be an
incredible boost to the
monitoring system of the
guardianship program
we do have an amendment.
and if it's appropriate
Mr chair chairman we would offer
that at this point.
Perfect zero but if you have the
amendment if you want to pull it
up yes traverse putting it up
right now thank you Trevor and
so Representative did you speak
to the amendment.
I'm going to let Alex McCoy is
my experts on this and who is
the head of the Hughes executive
director of the office of
guardianship explained that the
amendment and before we do that
do we have anybody on the
committee who will move to hear
the amendment of that discussion
of the amendment.
I'll make that motion reserves
are all move the okay perfect
thanks for them and add this
question on the amendments on.
The house bill two thirty.
For.
Perfect thank you senator
Sanchez okay go ahead
Representative.
At at this point I would ask
miss eight to explain the
amendment.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee amendment is that
simple cleanup language I'm part
of the bill requires the court
when they receive an annual all
conservatives Reports to send it
to the state auditor's office
and the state auditor's office
will have a process for doing
initial review of the report I'm
or apple ID I'm at their
discretion and so what we've
done here in the amendment it
different cleanup language that
the state auditor's office has
requested and it didn't change
the bill I'm Jeff is that will
be compliant with that undergird
properties and procedures thank
you for that do I have any
questions or comments from the
committee in regards to the
amendment.
Seeing none of will then go back
to the bill Representative.
Thank you very much
at.
I at this point I would defer to
our local agency if you want to
add to my initial statement and
then we will stand for questions
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair
representative members of the
committee the primary purpose of
the well as Representative
Matthews had mentioned it that
we really want to strengthen
oversight and we're taking
improvement that we've already
made I'm in that party should
stand and extending them and so
a few things that we're doing
and taking a deeper look at the
annual reports that are being
filed by contemporary and
guardians and that will be done
by the court to the
administrative costs the court
and and in partnership with the
state auditor's office sh what
we're also doing it
strengthening oversight of state
funded guardians drive the
guardianship is at provide
guardianship services to income
eligible New Mexicans who needed
two hundred apercent poverty
level or below and we have of
the hundred and I approximately
certified professional guardian
cure New Mexico over eighty of
them are state funded guardians
with state funded guardianship
cases that specific on at the
total number of cases there are
about six thousand just over six
applicant guardianship and
conservatorship cases here in
New Mexico I'm a thousand of
those are awesome guardianship
cases I'm this bill will require
the guardianship to conduct
annual comprehensive service
reviews and conduct protected
person welfare did that
throughout the year to ensure
that our state funded services
are high quality services and
that the client that we have are
receiving the appropriate level
of support from their guardians
I'm a couple of things will be
you out not only will we make
sure that folk to receiving high
quality services I if the level
of guardianship is inappropriate
for that person and I'm sorry it
can move to a job that level.
Guardianship whether it's
increasing the guardian powers
that they need more support or
if they have graduated out are
you sure terminating the
guardianship that we can free up
state resources for folks who do
need that level of care I'm into
at in the finally at what this
bill does it create the.
Working interdisciplinary
network of are you should
stakeholders and this at the
reason we want to put the the
statute that that H. national
model that's been used by our
state all over and in this
country and also comes with
federal funding at that model
that works really well in other
states and we would like to
bring those resources and that
expertise into New Mexico to
continue doing reform work in
our guardianship with them and
that in general with a bill that
and I now stand for questions
thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
clean up before we go to
questions Rebecca and Trevor we
do have chairwoman Pinto whose
in the waiting room she logged
in via her cell phone if you can
letter in and so with that
representatives and miss but
quite will go to public comment
before.
Representative chair yeah I just
like to add a few words really
quick of why this is so
important
we
With this passage of this bill
will be able to take then met
excuse me major steps towards
better protections for
vulnerable status.
The elderly and those with
developmental disabilities this
legislation will provide
guardianship program the
stronger certification and
monitoring process for
guardianship service providers
and conservatives as well as set
up and complaint processes
immediate recourse when issues
arise.
And many families and their
loved ones have suffered the
consequences of the guardian.
Ship that went wrong and some of
them were secluded and exploited
yes the protected individual and
stolen from their friends
relatives and their quality of
life and there's been many
people that I've talked to
Last four years five years that
I've been at.
Representative and we're dear
guardianship really did take
terrible stat one moment was a
retired lieutenant colonel
Sheetï¿½ they did go to the
hospital with the astronaut or
family she couldn't she was
thinking she or her spouse on
her partner was gone.
And when her friends and
relatives tried to help her.
They could cause the
guardianship we give them
permission she died just last
year without her friends even
family even knowing that she was
in hospice and another quick
story was is a person who is
seeking power returning with her
son and the attorney they went
to the state only
She went to have a guardian ad
line item when they didn't and
From home some of her
possessions were sold or thrown
out in the
Even though her son has moved to
take care of her and her.
The home phone.
They point will not be
considered an important changes
that eighty two thirty four will
bring to the guardianship
program besides those already
mentioned will help us better
protect the interests and
desires of some of our most
vulnerable and to ensure ensure
that the courts take past half
of least restrictive options
thank you Mr chair and committee
members thank you Representative
with that we'll now go to public
comment.
Covered we have anybody in
opposition.
Yes.
First we do have a.
No no no we have no opposition.
Okay every go for those who are
in favor of the bill and while
you're looking for those welcome
to the honorable Brian Cologne
our state auditor who's joining
us this morning thanks for
joining us today.
This thank you chairman good to
see you and great to be with
these great advocates for
oversight and protection
conservatorship and guardianship
chairman miss business with
practice bill Sanchez and with
the.
What is going to create jobs
during this through the process
thank you Mr Westerman.
You for joining us Trevor and
any others who are in support of
the bill that the Senate
banking.
Yes.
Right now.
You for that.
Representative is welcome to the
committee I look forward to
meeting you in person.
Can't wait until we do that.
This.
First rule isn't.
Dr listen and I live in Los
crucis.
we are watching and act in you
then in place in Los crucis
because all.
Guardianship.
And that system for you can bass
stated seniors.
We have what appears as some
type of conclusion collusion
between judges lawyers and a
group calling themselves.
This is.
This system has destroyed the
relationship between a son and
his mother to the point where
the mother inner nineties is
literally locked away in
assisted living and the sun
can't remove her to take her to
her home.
This system also brings the
financial resources of the
individual and the family.
There isn't and adequate method
for the sun to protect the do
protest these actions so we need
what house bill two three four
provides for and protecting
seniors from being held hostage
to a corrupt system that is now
in place so please give house
bill two three for a do pass
thank you.
Thank you and now Trevor if we
can go on to our next person in
public comment.
Yes we have justice Shannon.
Good morning Mr chair and
Senators thank you for giving me
an opportunity to speak today
my comments today about this
bill are going to be very
honest.
Bit of commentary.
Philosophically we agree with
the bill
Judiciary does we don't disagree
that it's important.
but I would be remiss and doing
a disservice to the judiciary if
I didn't express that my support
for all.
At this point and it's happened
because the funding that was
supposed to be provided to the
judiciary.
For this work
was given to DD PC the
disability the developmental
disability claiming council not
the judiciaire.
Choirs the judiciary to hire for
full time employees.
the funding went to the
executive branch of government
rather than just the judicial
branch of government.
We will in the short term be
forced to work out how to
transfer that funding through an
MO you.
To the administrative office of
the courts but what it does in
the long term is it is not
secured recurring funding for
the judiciary for this important
program.
So we are now in a position once
again this happens to us almost
every session.
We are now in the position of
having an unfunded mandate from
the legislature we will have to
keep our fingers crossed thirty
second hope and pray that the
the legend to rectify this error
next year if it doesn't this
program will never get off the
ground so there go my tepid
support for this bill today
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senators.
You so much.
Trevor.
We have a long.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee just a I think I've
expressed my.
Sentiments so when I came on to
greet the chair with his
gracious welcome I would just
say that it's going to be a
continued process communication
is going to be important between
the PC the judiciary in the
office of the state auditor but
anything we can do to continue
increasing the quality of the
oversight for conservatorship
and guardianship is to protect
New Mexico's most vulnerable
that is our agenda that is our
purpose it is our point and it
is we look forward to doing but
it's going to have to.
It will require increased
communication and we look
forward to that and I appreciate
turning the corner reaching out
to us.
At that point she did to get our
input on this bill and make the
proper adjustments in this
committee substitute I
appreciate it very much.
Thank you Mr.
Next we have Jessica S..
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee I would just like to
echo the sentiment expressed by
the state auditor we're grateful
agency not quite for working
with us on a day of proposed
amendments to the committee says
to and think it is a workable
framework and we look forward to
collaborating with the upper
other stakeholders to make this
better moving forward thank you
very much.
Get over.
Next we have Natalie Cordova.
As part of I do see that you're
on mute but we can't hear you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that's the W. state of
New Mexico coming at you from
through chest New Mexico and
broadband isn't always
cooperative so hopefully we can
get it on mute and that you're
fine remark she is our
incredible deputy state auditor
agency where the buses sometimes
I have addition Espana less if
you turn your camera off we've
been can more than likely
you're.
Can you hear me now I can hear
you now my friend all excellent
my apologies Mister chair
members of the committee thank
you so much I also support echo
the state auditor and Mr
guidance is comments.
Thank you Trevor.
Next we have a Brandon
Mascarenas.
D. chair members of the
committee I I also struggle with
my broadband access I I live in
rural Santa Fe County we may
come out but I would also just
like to echo the the comments
made previously by our state
auditor Brian Cline and our
general counsel Jesse Gaydos no
deputy auditor not only part of
a thank you.
Next we have a back about.
Good morning everyone thank you
for the opportunity good morning
Mr chair thank you I work with
the director for the office of
Indian elder cares one area of
need of course is is working
with our tribal communities
within the confines of
government to government
relations it's an incredibly
important vulnerable population
that we certainly do pay
attention to words supported
tested but we strongly encourage
support for Indian country
within those confines thank you.
Uber.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members are my name is Jackie
Cooper and I'm an advocacy
volunteer for a a RP New Mexico
I want to thank the legislators
who banded together to bring
this bill forward
representatives Matthews and
Ferrari Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
Lopez and heck I'm speaking
today on behalf of the two
hundred and forty eight thousand
A. A. R. P. members in New
Mexico as a fifty plus
membership organization our
members are a vulnerable group
for significantly impacted by
issues surrounding guardianship
A. A. R. P. stance in strong
support of the committee
substitute for H. B. two thirty
four as we continue to fight to
protect vulnerable seniors who
rely on legal guardians and
others to help them make vital
decisions we are especially
supportive of the wing's
component and look forward as a
national resource for the re
wings program we also urge full
funding for the judiciary to
implement this program thank you
very much.
Next.
The Mendiola.
Okay good morning Mister chair
and committee members can you
hear me.
We can hear you.
Okay my name is Lorraine
Mendiola I have a disabled adult
son who was placed under court
appointed guardianship in two
thousand eleven so for the last
ten years I've been involved in
the New Mexico guardianship
system dealing with guardians
attorneys and judges advocating
for my son house bill two thirty
four is not the panacea to the
guardianship Crisis in New
Mexico however is another step
in the process that will
eventually lead to the
protection oversight and
accountability of the protected
person.
This bill also keeps the public
aware the changes needed.
Despite the enactment of Senate
bill nineteen and Senate bill
three ninety five several years
ago I applaud Alison Lou makori
executive director of the DD PC
also guardianship for her
willingness and efforts to
attempt the licensure component
which would have provided
oversight and accountability
concerning all corporate
guardians of the state however
the courts intervene and that
component was deleted.
This call is a leader and
sincerely cares about making the
lives of our most vulnerable New
Mexicans better thank you Mr
core.
Another important factor is the
office of state auditor now has
full authority to fully
investigate all conservatorship
annual reports however this
means that the conservative must
include bank statements and any
other important documents for
the essay to obtain complete
picture.
Thank you to the sponsors of
this bill please vote yes for a
do pass on house thirty four
thank you.
Next we have greater.
Thank you Mr chairman of fellow
members of the committee
I'm here representing myself
your private guardianship
insurers or we operate out of
Bernalillo New Mexico.
I'd like to thank Alice do
according and the other Sanchez
I really see this legislation as
a continuing series of reforms
that have been put in place in
the last couple years.
Senator white at a great deal of
influence on these on these
reforms and so you know I I in
the position that I'm in now I
sympathize with justice Bacon
just mistaken as a District
Court judge was always
scrambling for resources and so
I I hope that you know these the
problem with resources that are
appropriate for the office of
guardianship can be worked out
but it is a well crafted bill
does follow a lot of national
standards especially when it
comes to least restrictive
and other important concepts
that constantly need reinforcing
to become reality
so I'd like to support the
opposite guardianship this bill
and I would ask the membership
to support this bill also thank
you Mr chairman.
And lastly we have LA times.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Ellen
times representing the
disability coalition and this
morning I'm also speaking on
behalf of disability rights New
Mexico since Jim Jackson is in
the house Judiciary Committee
and could not be with us this
morning of as the name implies
both of our organizations
represent the interests of
persons with disabilities and we
stand in strong support of this
bill we believe that it will
provide much needed
strengthening of oversight of
guardianship and conservatorship
and we particularly appreciate
the inclusion of the
requirements to consider and
implement least restrictive
alternatives whenever possible
to promote independence and self
determination per persons who
may be subject to the three
engine thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you so much now we moved
to members of the committee
members of the committee do any
of you have any questions or
comments at this time.
We have a question from Senator
Shendo.
Thank you.
Chairman of just a quick
question
I know you've heard read stories
in the paper and
of things on TV and so for how
how are you guardianships a
selected a what is it what is a
requirement or what are the
minimum requirements to be a a
guardianship.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you for that question
I'm going to let this ensure
that.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee thank you senator
Senator for that question so
they they're in a at in compact
the standard that laid out in
that probate code in New Mexico
and at and when a judge at has
and paid for them fort petition
for guardianship they usually
require update you require I'm
reports from certain
professional no one is a
qualified health care
professional another one is the
guardian Adlai item who is
assigned to to look at that
position that the person that
alleged that the person and also
talked very and stakeholders and
to to give the judge a report of
I'm the overview of the person
that you iterations and then
finally there is a report from
the court visitor in accordance
there is the one who seek to I'm
the important people in this
person's life and given the
court an overview I have and yet
their circumstances and whether
or not they do you need
additional assistance in the
form of guardianship and so with
the pieces of information
DataCore hold a hearing the
professional com and testify
about the report and add that
usually how a judge make a
determination whether or not
guardianship is important I'm in
necessary to support this person
I'm in the state of New Mexico
the at court do you
lay out the guardian.
Howard in the court order I'm a
judge make the determination of
what level of support this
person needs and based on their
level incapacity they will grant
the guardian certain powers and
to support this person is
decision making thank you your
question chair Senators and that
that that that's good
information but what I was
getting at is like in order to
to select someone to be a
guardian for a L. or something
what me too if if my mother
becomes income capitated and I
wanted to be a guardian and not
my five other sisters.
That means what me what is the
criteria what is a selection
criteria to determine who that
guardian should be for that
person because you hear stories
about elders and others being
taken advantage of I want to
find out you know what what is
the minimum requirement what
kind of background checks are
done for those are going to be
guardians or caretakers or or
you you know in in this in this
role.
Here is this is Representative
Matthews maybe if if I could and
Senator at you give a quick
answer to that question before
Alice come to about it
additionally it's one of the
important things that happens in
this area is that families have
the choice through a series of
documents powers of attorney
health and health maintenance
and health direct directives and
so forth to decide the
individual has the sat Hey can
it's decide in advance who they
would like to be in charge of
them at that point in time when
in our life when they need this
additional help and that
But if you do end up in a
situation where you're in court
I'm I think there is a there is
a preference left in the at
probate code on who gets
preference and I I'm sorry and
but maybe get that they can to
do that but I can't at this
moment I'm run down the left
that there is a preference let
I'm but the bottom line is that
despite the preference but it
really depends on the situation
of the percentage and that's
what so important for these
report I'm for that the court to
get all the information in every
situation every family is
different and so did the job of
the corporate there the job of
the guardian light and and and
and tangentially the job at the
qualified health care
professional well to be able to
give the information the court
to help to make the best
decision so despite any
preference let that in there is
really a situation situation and
the court needs to make that
determination on a case by case
that's fine I appreciate that
thank you.
Any other questions for members
of the committee.
And.
Okay motion by Senator Pinto for
do passed I hear a second.
Senator McKenna do you have a
question or you seconding.
Chairman I have a question okay.
Thank you chairman and thank you
representatives and senators for
bringing this to our attention
are.
Fascinating and of high priority
and I do I defer to my
experience legislators I can't
help but
Keep thinking about what justice
bacon said about the financial
arrangement that is of what
We as a committee do we have
any.
Any action that would be due on
our part to help.
Help remedy the situation.
Mr chair and members of the
committee Senator yes I believe
we can probably draw something
up our see what we can do during
the interim for the next
session.
Okay very good chair madam chair
thank you.
Thank you and we do have a
motion for a do pass do I hear a
second.
I will second that motion
Rebecca if we can get a roll
call.
X..
Yes.
Senator McKenna yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator Shendo yes Senator
how to meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Six yes is reduce pass thank you
so much congratulations
Representative Matthews and very
you have a deal passed and I'm
sure next committee or that I'm
to the Senate floor.
Senate floor at.
Senator senator thank you all so
much really it congratulations
and now I took over the
chairmanship back to chairwoman
Pinto thank you thank you by
chance you good morning to you
all slight one slight change can
change your whole morning and
how you use them
to get things going so let's
move on since we
what time and even in the wet
time remember members and also
those that are presenting so we
are on H. B. two thirty one it's
as emergency clause went in and
did a native American polling
place protection and lose a job
Sen and you may present your
bill.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members so house bill
two thirty one was actually one
of the things that we address
during the pandemic to ensure
that native Americans can excuse
me native tribes native American
tribes can have polling places
on tribal reservations even when
their borders are closed because
generally polling places must be
open to the public but when the
pandemic occurred we saw that
many tribes were closing their
borders to ensure the safety of
their tribal members so this
expands that to the extent that
you have a emergency as declared
by the president of the United
States the governor of New
Mexico or a tribal leader in the
state and they be able to still
obtained polling places so the
committee members can vote and
with that madam chair I stand
for questions I do have one
slight amendment to the bill
that was approved and and Senate
rules and I don't know if you
want me to explain the amendment
now or wait until we're back on
questions about madam chair I
take the motion to to discuss
the amendment the discussed even
adopting a into the it go head
us and Representative Lewis
about great thank you thank you
for moving that so in the Senate
rules version
We actually have and
Section two.
Okay.
I'm aware it states the Indian
nation tribe or pueblo submits a
written request to the county
clerk no later than and we
change that there excuse me
that's the wrong one I'm sorry
I'm pulling up yeah so right to
the county clerk between the
second Tuesday and March and the
second Tuesday in April so we
actually want to strike that
language and keep the language
that is the no later than the
first Monday in April and
basically this this changed
rated you know around it was
just over five Hundred Days and
were a try would have to find
the right and request so we're
just putting that back in place
to what it was originally stated
to what was originally stated.
Thank you Representative and do
we have any public comment
and then we'll move.
Well it was on the amendment
first
any questions from committee.
So any objections to the
adoption of the amendment.
Okay so the minute is adopted
and let's go on to the
Representative Lewis did you
want to comment on anything else
before we.
Go into public comment thank you
madam chair and committee
members thank you for adopting
that amendment I'm ready for
questions and ready to hear from
public comment.
Because I think.
Have the extended amendment.
From the pages that are not to
be.
The.
Hundred page the.
And that the committee is aware
of this I'm madam chair yes I'm
sorry so we had originally
discussed that to with the
secretary of state but the
tribal leaders that I've spoken
to do not want that amendment
included they want to keep that
to just the focus on their
native American calling
protections so I just want it to
but that before the committee
thank you madam chair.
Okay thank you thank you
Representative and the Rebecca
thank in.
We have we have.
The video.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is E. L. I. in
the elections director and I'm
here on behalf of the office of
the secretary of state
people.
This legislation we stand in
strong in support of this
legislation it does assist
election administrators and
provides tools.
What are tribal governments to
ensure that during an emergency
situation we would be able to
accommodate the needs of that
voting population we saw this
work for us between the primary
it was a lesson learned between
the primary and the general and
we certainly saw these
provisions bring just access to
to that community and assist our
office with being able to I'm
kind of work in collaboration
with the county clerk's and our
tribal government I'm so with
that I am happy to stand for any
questions that you may have.
Good morning.
What what what's happening.
Unless you have a Richard Mason.
You
chairwoman and members lighting
and a mistake then your share
the action committees legal
women voters New Mexico we stand
in strong support of H. B. two
thirty one thanks Representative
Lewis for bringing forward
during the last election we get
support SB four would July beta
American control act access to
their voting locations during
health crisis but you know I
think it's time that was a
temporary fix I think now it's
time to put in statute on a
regular basis I'm it's become
clear that sovereign nation
status important as sovereign
nations that down native
Americans should be able to
control access to the
territories to specially during
any type of health crisis for
those reasons of the strongly
urges you to get rid legislative
between seventy one and the
Senate doesn't send it to the
Senate floor thank you.
And that concludes.
Thank you thank you that respect
and make them we have questions
from the committee Senator
Griggs.
The Griggs is talking to someone
else Senator Sanchez Senator
Griggs Europe.
R. I did I got a dash thanks our
you know technologically
challenged this morning okay and
I guess what I wish when I was
concerned about and I just want
to ask Miss the representative
who you know I am saying
Representative lotion while and
it's good to see her but the.
I guess we've got this other
bagel amendment that you're not
intending to drop present is
that correct Representative
Lewis.
Thank you madam chair and
senator graphics it's good to
see your tier that's correct
okay all right we're so so thank
you David.
Madam chair so the bill goes
back basically to be in a pretty
simple bill not a not a mammoth
bill.
Madam chair and and secretary
excuse me senator that's correct
okay all right thank you madam
chair thank you representative
will.
Thank you Senator Griggs senator
Sanchez.
Madam chair Senator Griggs beat
me to the punch so yes Sir
Michael my questions answered
thank you for being with us
Representative Lewis.
Thank you senator Sanchez
anymore questions from the
committee.
Senator Shendo
a motion for the past we have a
motion for do pass from Senator
Shendo do we have a second.
Second second by Senator Griggs
Rebecca please call the roll
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator McKenna yes senator
Sanchez yes Senator Shendo yes
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes we have six yes is for it to
pass.
Thank you Representative Lewis
for bringing your bill and you
move on and thank you committee
members thank you madam chair
committee members I appreciate
it thank you and we are on to
committee substitute to
healthstream resolution line
public assistance for
infrastructure and.
Ellison and Chandler are we
ready to go.
You may begin your presentation.
We are ready.
Good morning madam chair good
morning members of the
committee.
Good morning Mr Shendo could see
you.
What this this morning we bring
before you.
Joint resolution number nine of
the title on it is public
assistance for infrastructure
development.
To recap the resolution is that
a state are in line with.
Place a ballot question before
the voters at the next regular
election whether to amend the
anti donation clause in the New
Mexico constitution to allow the
state to invest resources
ensuring access to basic
infrastructure for all New
Mexicans and if approved the
amendment would not be self
execute it would require
implement legislation to ensure
that tax dollars and other
public resources are properly
safeguarded and that the
legislature as appropriate
oversight authority.
Okay with I am here today with
my a co sponsor of my esteemed
colleague Representative
Christine Chandler.
Thank you madam chair and nice
to see you committee members and
it's been a pleasure to work
with my colleagues
Representative Allison on this
point I just like to underscore
that what is driving us toward
in this direction is we want to
add flexibility for the state to
be able to invest directly into
infrastructure to support New
Mexicans and what started my
interest in this was broadband
internet which is up on item I
been working on throughout the
session anything prior to but
the realization is that across
the state there are still many
many people who do not have
access to running water
secure electricity and the like
and what this will do with the
appropriate kind of safeguards
that will be enacted through
legislation if this if this
resolution is adopted by the
voters it will give the state
the ability to invest in what I
will expect low income folks who
need access to these basic
necessities and and that's
really the driver the I do want
to note that the I. T.
department you know information
technology department very much
supports this because it they
believe it will give them
greater access to federal monies
as well when investing directly
into internet service and with
that I will stop I know you have
a very you know you're going to
be on the floor pretty so so
thank you very much madam chair.
Thank you representatives and
we'll go to public comment
Rebecca and make it.
There were there were no public
comment on this on the screen.
Thank you and we have questions
from the committee Senator our
meal.
You madam chair what I just want
to thank both representatives
for bringing this legislation of
this right now what what is the
joint resolution forward there's
a number of people
Representative that I see in my
community students who have to
park in the parking lot of the
lows need to access free wifi
who go to fast food restaurants
to access free wifi and so I
think that this addresses that
concern that we have and I want
to thank you for bringing this
forward because I've seen a
number of our students in Rio
Arriba county fall behind in the
virtual classroom because of the
lack of internet and I'm happy
that you're addressing that
issue no questions for me I just
want you to know that you have
my full support thank you madam
chairwoman.
Thank you senator and I think
one of the things I'm not sure
if we would be able to answer
this for me is how
it's are we appropriating this
into the public education.
madam chair it certainly would
allow
tentatively depending on how we
rate the implementing
legislation the ability to
support educational initiatives
I would point out and I'm sure
you're aware of this madam chair
there are many students who
don't have access to internet at
their homes and that certainly
impedes their ability to fully
engage in the educational
process this would allow will it
would allow the state to invest
more directly in those kinds of
initiatives madam chair thank
you and thank you madam chair
yes Representative here of what
sparked my interest and running
with this resolution is that at
the onset of the pandemic.
It really highlighted of
deficiencies and of the
shortness of services in our
rural areas when the pandemic
struck and the it highlighted a
lot of stuff one of the first
requirements out of the office
of of department of health was
to frequently wash your hands
that was easier said than done
to their urban urban communities
because in our rural areas some
of us have to haul water for
forty to sixty miles one way
just to get water in addition to
that because the water was being
called there was no waste water
system so that really
highlighted the shortage of
running water into seven Senator
communities and then the second
the man from the department of
health leads to
Of social distance and stay
inside the home as much as you
can another one of those things
it's easier said than done most
homes in our area of the rural
areas lack electricity and the
some of the families have to
make frequent trips into the
border towns to restock their
food supply because they don't
have electricity they don't have
refrigerators so they have to
make more trips into the border
towns more frequently and then
the third request was to the
students they us to go online in
the state of keep up with the
class and so forth but
We found that.
A lot of children did not have
proper internet and we basically
did not have the broadband prior
to the pandemic we used the
teenagers.
Excuse me in in Burger King and
McDonald's and I I know they
weren't there to eat because
they have their laptops open
they were doing their homework
so that really really
highlighted the shortness of
adequate internet in the one of
the things that we say or.
Before I go any further in in
the highlighted some of these
deficiencies in my rural area I
found that this did not apply
only to our indigenous nations
we had similar or parallel
situations in southern New
Mexico where there was an
adequate water supplies and
adequate wastewater and truly an
adequate broadband internet so
it revealed a lot of things
that's what made me really
jump on is this resolution and
then one of the things that we
say for our state is that we
want to thrive and economy that
is what we stand behind but our
state cannot have a thriving
economy that works for everyone
if so many New Mexicans are
still suffering from the lack of
basic infrastructure we hope the
passage of this bill will bring
to the rest of New Mexico along
with the rural areas up into the
twenty first century so we would
ask for your support with this
resolution thank you madam chair
thank you committee.
And thank you Representative I
think one of the things being in
Education Committee is that we
need to be very careful that we
are not just.
The state lining the pockets of
one special interest group in
that sense that it does have to
be really neat that's essential
to our students and that it's
affected we've seen couple of
bills that could try to be put
forward that kind of just we're
just for one into teacher
provide service which is not you
know that that's not good to to
just be doing that so I'm I
don't know the members have
questions or if they want to do
a motion Senator thanks.
Thank you madam chair in the and
and Representative
I guess I'm I'm concerned about
this approach which is the
constitutional amendment
approach and I'm not.
You know I think I think it
opens the door awfully wide for
a lot of different things when
you to provide essential
services back on page six as
internet electricity natural gas
water wastewater all of those
are you know usually
requirements of communities or
and I I guess representative
Allison I I understand you know
what you're talking about as far
as
Individuals who live probably
outside of communities in in
areas that for me since I don't
have any reservations in the
district but I do have you know
unincorporated parts of the
county were individuals happen
to you know have their own wells
having to do right thanks this
ammendment actually I would say
we could spend the.
State money to provide services
to every unincorporated county
every unincorporated part of the
county in New Mexico.
And I'm I'm not sure that's what
we really want to do and.
I'm I'm just concerned that this
really this proj is really not
the approach we need and.
And madam chair representative
I'm not gonna supported today
that mean there won't be some
other ways but I think there's
other things we can do and other
approaches other than the
constitutional amendment so
thank you very much madam chair
thank you Representative.
Madam chair may I respond to
that yes
on on the plates on page six
that you referenced the new
addition says that nothing in
this section prohibits the state
from expanding state funds for
the purpose of providing
essential Helsel service if they
assistance is granted pursuant
to the general employment and.
Legislation so we would have
control over it by the
employment legislations.
Thank you Representative us
Senator Griggs do you have
further questions.
Yeah Senator Shendo.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Representative Allison
and Representative Chandler of.
Up I had a similar question too
I know that
Right now I find it quite a bit
of funding to chapters for a
water line extensions and
bathroom additions.
And I believe I I I I I don't
have time to research it but I
but I back in the I think in the
nineties Senator Pinto and
Senator then Senator soci did
something to allow for that kind
of investment and so ever since
I've been in the legislature for
nine years I've been
appropriating money to chapters
for water line extensions for
bathroom additions for those
families that don't have it so
so I I do get a chance to the
reserves a all of that piece it
and so I understand what you're
trying to do but that may
already be allowable under our
current the.
policies otherwise we would be
doing this helping individual
families within our homes for
bathrooms to be constructed a
water lines connectivity and
power lines.
So.
Just food for thought
I don't know if you have a
response or you got a chance to
look at of what's currently in
place.
May I answer that if you don't
mind Mr Representative Allison
said Senator I think what you're
referring to is likely you need
to monies that are given to
sovereign tribal nations frankly
I'm I know that for example the
do it department has been
investing in internet on Cochiti
pueblo well that's it in a
government to government
exchange you know entity item so
that it that is permissible
under current current anti
donation stuff what we're
talking about potentially once
the implementing legislation is
crafted is the ability of
government the state government
to execute on programs that
would allow direct full cups to
homes potentially and that now
is prohibited in many rural
communities I think the native
American situation is a little
different in the way the state
can invest in and have an inter
governmental extra money
transfer if that makes sense
madam chair and Senator.
Up I think it it does it has to
do with the anti donation
a clause and and the monies that
were appropriating right now or
to the local governments to
chapters or in the in in some
instances the pueblos advantage
does government entities are
working to connect them not
necessarily this so in your
situation they would not be the
government entity is that is
that is that the case I'm.
Madam chair and senator in an
arcade in non sovereign nations
where there's an inter
governmental exchange it's very
difficult for the state or local
governments to invest directly
and hook ups to domiciles
because of the anti donation
clause that that is a different
kind of an issue than what
you're probably experiencing
madam chair and Senator Shendo.
Okay.
All right thank you that's all
members madam chair.
I'd like to speak to add on to
what the Representative has
stated and also what we need to
know is that the federal
government has many programs to
help fund basic infrastructure
but often times there are asking
for a small
A small mansion state funds so.
And also voters have previously
approved limited exceptions to
the anti donation clause for
affordable housing and economic
development so what we're doing
is is something that has been
done before only that data and
ask for assistance with
infrastructure and that's what
we're asking for today is their
systems with basic
infrastructure.
Thank thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative.
Thank you and in my questions
from committee.
Do I what's the pleasure of the
committee motion for a group S.
I second chair madam chair you
have a motion for two passed by
Senator Hermio in the second by
Senator McKenna Rebecca would
you please call the roll Senator
creeks no.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
No.
Senator Shendo.
But yes.
Senator had a meal yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
For yes and two dollars for to
pass thank you thank you Rebecca
and thank you make them
Representative is I think there
probably does need to be a
little bit more clarification
unions are needs to be pointed
out as in go further with this
to exactly you know how the
effects are of a on this to to
the state and even though
helping those others on the
other end
thank you representatives for
being here and to make committee
members thank you very much for
this first session that that
being a chair and hello forget
it it's been a very different
session my first sixty day
session to the freshman senators
just this year and a half has
been thirty day special session
executive session pandemic sixty
day session I mean talk about
crash course for me during this
time but I appreciate all the
mentoring in the leadership from
my senior senator Senator Shendo
Senator Griggs thank you very
much and to the freshman there's
a lot to look forward to in the
next couple of days this is very
different than what I have
observed with my grandfather and
the other years so
I don't think what you see now
it might not even be the same
the next sixty day session.
Thank you all and you guys have
a great day I don't know how
hope you guys keep up your rest
and stay healthy and thank you
Representative for joining us
and thank you Rebecca so much
and Nate then I know we don't
see that much and what does he
look like and Richard thank you
to our analyst and now and then
all those that helped us to keep
the committee going in and out
we're all going down to the
floor and crash course for the
next couple days Senator
McKenna.
Thank you madam chair I want to
echo your sentiments I think
everyone has been so interesting
for me R. will never forget this
time in our lives thank you
Rebecca and mate David and
Richard for helping us steer
this steer the ship
thank you chairwoman thank you
all my committee members I
learned a lot from you and I'll
see on the floor.
Thank you madam chair thank
Senator harming you Madam
chairwoman and thank you for
allowing me to serve as your
vice chair now I would never
know that this was your first
full session because I've told
you before I I came mentorship
from you and I have a lot of
respect for you I respect you as
a leader as a champion of our
native communities and now I
consider you a good friend and
so thank you for all of your
hard work thank you to everyone
of this committee who helped us
as freshmen Senator Shendo
Senator Griggs I appreciate you
Rebecca Mason thank you for your
hard work I appreciate you as
well and I'm gonna miss you see
bit better make sure to email
me.
Thank you Senator Griggs thank
you madam chair and you know
I've I've got a ways to go to to
help us Senator McKenna and
senator Kerr meal understand a
few more things I I got to work
on that list but that but madam
chair you did a great job this
year your grandfather would be
very proud of you you did that
you did your your district proud
you you you work hard I I
appreciate the work you did you.
Yeah handled the committee well
even when you have to deal with
Senator Shendo but you know all
all in all it was a it was a
good year and and thank you for
your work and look forward to to
next session which we believe
will be far different than this
one show a show take care see
you across the enrollment and I
guess we'll see on the floor
even though your height in your
office we do not show any.
All right here Senator Shendo
but thank you madam chair I do
just want to congratulate you
for for a job well done in the I
think the Senator Griggs Griggs
distorts out of my mouth to you
know grab will be proud of and
he's up there singing his
potential song
and I can still see or hear him
and and and those of you that
that the that didn't serve with
the late Senator Pinto if you it
was it was fun it was myself
share and Pirtle along with Mary
Kay Papen and and Stuart Ingle
you know over the last probably
eight years of part of the
Indian Affairs Committee and
It what I liked about Pinto was.
He would let everybody in the
whole room introduce themselves
there B. thirty people in there
and he would let everybody
introduce themselves and there
were times that the
introductions took longer than
passing the bills.
Right.
Senator shared in the pearl
ridges it we just had a
wonderful time yet always
stories to tell in
And we miss so much but here his
his spirit the.
Lives in this chambers of
forward on time and the.
On the Senator a Shannon Pinto
you.
You're doing well and and I want
to thank all the freshmen also
all of you is very exciting
I was a freshman nine years ago
and had no idea what I was
getting into but the it's been a
good journey and we do what we
can for for our constituents in
our respective communities and
we we we we debate on policies
but at the end of day when we
leave the chamber and all were
friends or family and I think
that's what I love about the
Senate we don't question
anybody's vote we represent who
we are and when that ball goes
on we would move on to the next
course of business and of again
so thank you all for for being
part of this.
Thank you thank you senator and
thank you all will see one
before thank you.
