Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Moores.
Senator by the.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stefanics.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
Presbyterian church here in
Santa Fe I ask that you remain
standing for the pledge of
allegiance to be led today by
Senator pulled the pledge of
allegiance in Spanish to me that
Eternal spirit earth maker pain
bear life giver.
You whirling dusty winds you
sending snow you howling with
coyotes use soaring with ravens
Be with us as we work
constructing homes caring for
the ill teaching children
tending farms writing policy.
with the on house with the
exhausted.
Plus those who work to keep this
body working the aids and
Be with this body as they work.
Less than the regions they
represent and the lands they
call home.
Show them clear paths forward
through the legislative process.
Keep in their minds the good of
all the farthest corners of
wilderness and the concrete
All these blessings we ask
trusting that you walk with us
no matter where we go.
And we offer praise to you the
I pledge allegiance.
this is the those who need those
they medic at the Adler
Republica Representative that
the net ASEAN on to the else
into the CIA on the right path
Good morning would like to
welcome everyone to today's
session I'll turn it over to get
us started with senator Peter
Wirth.
Around that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
will go to senator Wirth thank
you Mr president thank you
reverent heart Anderson for
extending those blessings not
just us but all the people who
make this process happen and
again we we really need to
recognize them constantly
because it takes the takes the
that are gonna discuss a
certificate memorial all talk
about that first though
Last Thursday each of you
received a list of capital
gonna sponsor the deadline for
submitting those is this Sunday
January thirtieth at five
o'clock PM if you did not get
up front Senator the phonics is
going to.
Got a certificate of
congratulations in just a minute
with
and then Senator Shendo has a
there's nothing wrong with
members standing up to say that
they are there with respect to
the memorial we won't actually
take it off the president's
table at this point we'll
referred into committee and
Senator Shendo has pointed that
out so I'll make a motion at a
certain point before I yield to
our with I do want to introduce
comes in each week and we talk
about process and she's
following a bill she's a junior
at Santa Fe high school.
she's a reporter and had a
really good article about the
impact of school closures from
her perspective so let's all
give Valerie a big welcome this
Lopez and then Senator Stefanics
and then Senator Shendo.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president majority floor leader
unanimous consent to allow
have some guests that have to go
to a luncheon so what that'll
yield to Senator Steinborn thank
you very much Mr president and
colleagues I know we've got some
process and colleagues please
give a round of applause for
visitors from NMSU.
members of the body today I'd
like to recognize that today is
the fiftieth anniversary of el
Rancho de las going green us
two but we received more than
fifty thousand visitors every
year from all fifty states it is
century New Mexico.
More than twenty thousand school
children have visited this site
and Reno so run today Law School
and green us and some of the
board members I believe might be
in the building if not in the
audience thank you Mr president.
today.
In a normal day we will be
celebrated at first.
the it all of us to know that.
You know Ag culture plays an
important.
Part of our significant part of
our lives in history and culture
in the state.
The agriculture is composed
roughly about twenty five
thousand.
Farms and ranches across the
state composition over of forty
our our farmers ranchers the
legislative endorsement the one
of the the the reason why we're
pulling it from the president's
table is that
curriculum into our schools but
for now we're just recognizing
Ag day and if there's any other
members of the Senate they want
to speak of
I'm so happy that the Senator
Shendo brought this up but you
know Senator Shendo if you if
you don't mind I'd like to offer
And I just want to pray to god.
That he looks over the many
agriculturist out there.
That are they're tending their
mercies and and dear lord just
be with the groups that.
Every day raises food for our
an odd thing because now I
didn't I said before I gave a
speech done in Los crucis here
during the summer and made the
You're you're a one person.
One percent of the population
raises food.
For the ninety nine percent.
To to praise these people.
It's hard to do for what they do
for us.
bring a group together a
beginning agriculturist
beginning farmers and ranchers
to feed the local people there.
To actually grow the food to
deliver right there close to
home.
So much of our food come from
even not only all of the United
To produce food to feed our
people.
That's a that's a real goal that
I see that our state can achieve
Thank you senator was for your
words we do have others would
like to speak to this will just
Senator Lopez and followed by
Senator Diamond Senator Lopez I
Mr president colleagues in
Those who produce and provide
food for us do we deserve an
extra thank you of support
And of course in in my area
Bernalillo county we have many
who do produce
With hoop houses and everything
else with regards to protect
Bernalillo county that do teach
our young people the value of
what it is to have your hands in
the dirt because ultimately I
believe being in touch with our
thanks to those who do the work
to provide for our sustenance
and I just want to stand and
support thank you very much Mr
president thank you Senator
today's access day typically we
would all meet at the convention
center tonight we have face to
face interactions with our
farmers and ranchers from
throughout the state and it's a
and ranchers to us today by
hosting access in the back no
unfortunately we were hoping to
have this all set out on the
Senate floor just like they did
in the house today and have
access to your but it is waiting
some to your legislative
assistance to just to kind of
celebrate our farmers and
ranchers here in the state so
thank you for those groups
during that the sponsors of
those are listed in your bag
entities and they are all
represented by members
represented by members from
throughout the state but these
numbers many of which are here I
see some of the cattle growers
appear C. Travis with chilli
restrictions to assist them when
they are needed and one way we
can do that this week alone I
allocated a lot of my junior
money to programs in New Mexico
state that would help the Ag
you do for New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Senator Diamond we do
have further discussion on this
agency center by the.
its proper due just want to say
that you know my family came to
this country and when they did
the very first thing they did
was they became a farmers in the
faster growing Chile and apples
have to go to Santa Fe it's
really cold up there why do they
have the legislature at that
time of the year and I had to
explain to them that New Mexico
was largely an agricultural
economy for a long time and as a
thank you to all the folks in
the gallery that are doing their
work and it's really is god's
work so thank you very much and
I appreciate you Mr president
thank you thank you so much
Senator for the and we do have
For bringing this forward you
know it's so important.
And not one part is so several
years back when we were still
And it always put a big question
in my mind to for.
It was discussed that the number
one priority.
Was ranching and farming.
is carrying the load of phone
ninety nine percent.
But today's population is that
seven point nine billion that is
years and I always look at you
know all.
Four is all that food from come
from and some of us have really
countries like Mexico the
country of Spain that they
utilize every square inch to
And the Senator Shendo you know
we we have to work with this
every day you know and really
work with this you know at a
very very strong level because
Thank you Senator Gonzales we do
have further who would like to
speak on this we have centers of
this.
Is present as presidents
by growing up in our family is
really part of the American
dream.
My grandfather didn't have a
high school education and have
any money he.
Started selling watermelons out
of the back of a truck.
and continue that for
generations but I think it's
important to point out a few
things that have been itching to
me growing up.
When I when I grew up Dona ana
of diversity.
The reality is not done any kind
of there's very little of that
anymore.
The the value of New Mexico
really doesn't grow a lot of
We don't grow onions and
tomatoes and lettuce and Shelly
much in Dona ana county where we
grow alfalfa pecans.
in this country now comes from
south of the border and other
places and is important.
And to some degree this is the
problem we created for ourselves
we become to rely more on for
production mechanically
harvested with crops that are
inexpensive to grow into the
into produce where we can
compete in the marketplace so
it's important that we keep in
about jobs and job creation and
I and I like to point out the
fact that it's very easy.
For us as politicians to get
excited about things like the
spaceport.
Another been other economic
development missions but the
fact is that most of those
businesses will come and go
Bennett based on our economic
incentives in our tax breaks in
our credits and the money that
the tax credits expire and
you're not going to pack up and
leave when the economic
incentives and economic
development can't give you money
for Lida.
You're gonna stick it out
gonna scrap our way out anyway
we can.
We all we all of us in politics
we got a good chance to the to
speak to groups all the time I
got more young people you go to
anyone and I are so excited to
see people like.
Presidents.
People like Bill Clinton or
Barack Obama who if you look
back and we realized they came
you really can't being.
You can't as a young kid state I
want to grow up to be a farmer.
It really is impossible.
To do that these days you can't
there are very few exceptions I
I have a really hard time
thinking of anybody who started
out.
Going to high school and
colleges that I wanna be a form
friends those Senator in you
sponsor this is about
celebrating I just farming other
segments but also family.
something that's very dear to
many of us because we're holding
on.
I think candidates improbable.
And so that that's heartbreaking
of course at one level but it's
also a realization that that's
what we're celebrating here
We don't have a lot of twenty
and thirty year old farmers.
And this is such an important
part of our New Mexico economy
we better be talking about this
as much as we do talk about the
film industry.
of attention when we all farming
families keep their nose to the
grindstone keep their head down
keep their hands in the dirt
maybe don't get the handouts
don't get the grants don't get
the lead of money.
sometimes without them and ask.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
up in Los Chavis on a family
farm that my brother still still
maintains
and with a lot of struggle
because of the water struggles I
legislature we often stand up in
praise what they do and yes we
put we honor and we praise what
they do because they feed us
they feed our families and they
And that really struck me it's
very important that we don't
just stand up today and honor
them although we should we do
honor them.
make sure that they can do their
jobs in the way that they have
wanted to do it another farmer
there said
listen to the people who are
actually doing the work about
what they need.
And how to how to support them
and help them be successful I
was really heartened to hear
president and and again I think
in honor all of those who grow
our food
raise a livestock and and
otherwise support us thank you
Thank you thank you Mr president
since everyone's.
Bragging about their
agricultural background so they
make a few comments.
The summer of nineteen fifty
that summer we open the the
first milking parlor in the
today County it was owned by for
gentleman one of which.
Eventually went on to become
And the hired hand had a brand
new tractor I had an old tractor
and I am virtually turned on my
Peter's through newer all over
The largest tree nursery in the
state of Wisconsin in eighteen
sixty four the oldest continuous
operating business in door
county Wisconsin which is County
that's forty miles north.
uncle has a path madam sheen
that.
The plants the evergreen
seedlings M. I. another uncle
eighteen miles south of the
Canadian border also that mocha
ship four hundred thousand New
York City and finally I just
happening in upstate New York of
the lot of the small dairy farms
are disappearing and.
And being taken over by New
Mexico businesses and finally I
went to high school with a lot
a long day and how I lived
across the street.
The high school and I was often
late vice principal state health
I'm sorry set Center semantics.
Thank you Mr president in my six
counties I have many farmers and
mind is the future farmers of
America and in some of our
school districts they are a very
active group they're very
and ranching but it's a great
group all over the state so far
young people let's encourage
them to keep the tradition going
thank you Mr president thank you
Recognize that that Otero County
is not necessarily a hot blooded
hot bed of farming but the Otero
government decided that they
needed a lot of that land for
that Alamogordo bombing range in
an awfully became white sands
With with the understanding that
the on the federal government
was going to compensate them
fair and reasonable a for that
time and then maybe for the for
back and the compensation level
was never what aid should ban.
show Terrel counties ranching.
families the leave the Jones we
have the stones in the in the
mountains but the mountains are
so those guys they don't they
don't not only have to struggle
to just make a live in to
Prior to the the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo.
But terra county also though
we've got farming from there we
So I want to thank Senator
Shendo for bringing that up so
we can talk about some of the
Mexico's history and some of the
issues that have changed our
state and put it in a position
that it's a so thank you Mr
president and thank you Senator
Shendo.
county and northern Santa Fe
County have a proud tradition of
farming and agriculture in my
district including Santa Clara
fun fact is the chili which is
in space and grew in space came
from Senate district I and so
with chili that was a high bred
of the big Jim from down south
were able to eat some of that
Chile that they harvested and
the there's farmers that have
done this for generations of my
district including a new crop of
Senator Shendo.
Thank thank you Mr president as
one thank all my Senate
colleagues for a assuring their
thousand six hundred twenty six
students last year about five
hundred ninety one teachers and
then about three hundred twenty
seven volunteers so we hope that
understand what in the city kia
is I remember Senator souls and
conservation had this look on
his face years ago.
people across the state will
understand that you know
agriculture in all of its
variations and nuances across
the state will understand our
children.
Yes thank you.
Wirth thank you Mr president
before we go off announcements a
Senator Shendo mentioned this
particular memorial does kind of
at the end include a requested
the president's table and
referred to the Senate rules
committee and then the Senate
Education Committee and Senator
Shendo was aware of that and we
consulted doctor.
Senator there's been a a request
thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to remove us at a more
L. three from the president's
table and refer it first to the
Senate rules committee then
Senate Education Committee is
privilege.
Please proceed Senator.
Version I just would like to
thank Senator Diamond for that
nicer group of agricultural
generous gift I've ever had from
him.
And I just hope that the Senate
will take note of that when they
see that.
him and he has delivered them
and I thought all but you.
The teacher free gift from
Senator Burke.
Well Mr president they work.
Thank you Mr president Senator
Ingle before you leave there
will take Senator Burt back to
finance and and we'll start from
yes any further announcements
Senators.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I have here then we'll Lujan
manual Luna who is a masters
student at highland university
he graduated from university of
New Mexico and he is also a grad
Thank you Senator Lopez any
further announcements.
Scene and senator Wirth thank
you Mr president so just for the
Around that order business.
The reader to read the
announcements.
Amended Senate executive message
number thirteen the honorable
Mimi Stewart president pro
five B. two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature
second session submission of
certain minimum training and age
requirements for licensees and
their employees clarifying that
a person seeking a cannabis
license may also hold an alcohol
and licensing department and the
New Mexico department of the
environment clarifying business
location reporting for tax
purposes and authorizing
nonprofit corporations
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
amended Senate executive message
number thirteen.
The gentle so the message from
the governor has been received.
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of Senate bill one
forty one a bill providing
been received Senator executive
message number twenty five
pursuant to article four section
five B. two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
one five seven one a bill
enacting the credit for
reinsurance Act providing for
credit to insurers obtaining
reinsurance and repealing and
Senator executive message number
twenty six pursuant to article
four section five B. two of the
New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
prosecute missing indigenous
persons cases creating the
position of missing indigenous
specialist within the office of
and making appropriations Senate
executive message number twenty
six journal so the message from
the governor has been received.
Mr president your committees
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill forty three
has had it under consideration
respectfully submitted Mimi
Stewart chair Senator Stewart Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
Senate bill fifty four germane
and that's referred to the
conservation committee Senate
bill seventy five germane and
that's referred to the Education
bill one oh three germane and
that's referred to health and
public affairs committee Senate
bill one forty germane and
that's referred to the Education
one forty eight germane and
that's referred to the health
and public affairs committee
Senate bill one forty nine
germane and dense referred to
bill one fifty two germane and
that's referred to the health
and public affairs committee
Senate bill one fifty four
committee Senate bill one fifty
six germane and that's referred
to the health and public affairs
committee Senate bill one fifty
committee respectfully submitted
Mimi Stewart chair Senator
Stewart Mr press I move adoption
the committee reports that is
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
respectfully submitted Joseph
Cervantes chairman Senator on
this moved up to the committee
report that is we have a motion
to death Committee port.
three has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that do pass
amended as follows one.
Ortiz Y. Pino chair center to
subpoena Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the reader be allowed to read
all the committee reports that
Senate bill four do pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee Senate bill thirteen
do pass as amended and that's
sixteen do passed as amended and
that's referred to the finance
committee Senate bill nineteen
committee Senate bill forty do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee Senate bill
forty one do pass and that's
Senator have a motion that's
committee report and injection.
I see no objections the
committee forty minute drive to
the journal show that they're
acted upon individually.
pass and then for for to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted the list of us to fax
chair.
Senator CENIC's Mr president I
Here no objection the reader to
read the committee reports
Senate bill eighteen do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee Senate bill thirty
respectfully submitted
Elizabeth's to fax chair.
Mr president I move adoption the
committee report that as we have
a motion to about the committee
for any objection.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president Ms consent we go about
our business introduction of
senators Ivey Soto and Senator
Diamond and representatives
Lewis and Representative night
birds.
education and elections Task
Force specifying when the
inspection of public records act
applies to disco disclosures
pursuant to the election code
the process requiring service of
process of the secretary of
state for election related
litigation addressing
qualifications of election board
providing for a program to
reconcile voter registration
lists allowing for electronic
poll book alternative adjusting
absentee ballots and military
overseas ballots amending the
intimate partner violence
survivors suffrage Act adjusting
requirements for nominations and
candidates eliminating pre
primary convention designations
amending voting systems
order of offices on ballots
requiring the sending of a
notice of election requiring the
certificate.
Ation of voting machines
amending the election fund
paper ballots addressing post
election duties revising
requirements for the empowerment
of ballots audits and recounts
amending the presidential
amending the campaign reporting
act recompiling a section
authorizing legislative caucus
committees into the campaign
reporting act amending the
of absentee ballot amending the
crime of obstructing the polling
place amending the local
elections Act amending the
lobbyist regulation Act
providing requirements for
state for purposes of
maintaining voter registration
records amending the
confidential substitute address
Act conforming provisions
relating to certain special
director requirements for
artesian Conservancy districts
Conservancy districts and soil
and water conservation districts
amending the Conservancy act of
regarding parent making
conforming and technical changes
making an approach.
Radiation amending repealing and
acting and recompiling sections
Senator Morris Mr president
are we reading built in a
retired the two times are our
rural.
I got tired County Senator.
the pages.
That would be two hundred and
fifty.
Four pages Senator two hundred
fifty four and let me guess who
we read that the bill in its
entirety three times it's gonna
be a good one thank you Mr
president and and there's
something in there about parent
could you re read that low the
Daime about what.
About communism is in there
thank you can't wait to have
this debate but thank you
senator Senator on this the
famous Business present fall to
Senator Moores he's going to
that'll be the the decision that
you as a body to make we'll
figure is present I I think
center Moores us to do that and
you know with the Senate
Judiciary we'll go through it
line by line Senator don't you
worry about a thing and the rest
of you will wonder what happened
the Senate committees committee
that Senate rules committee that
Senate finance committee Senate
bill six.
Mr president Mr.
School majority floor leader
would you Senator Wirth Thomas
present happy to.
And thank you Mr president is
there anything in the bill that
that wouldn't need to go to
Judiciary I know that you know
So Mister president the here's
what I'd suggest again it does
have a really important piece of
this is the is the Alexion Fund
the referrals like they are bots
I do want Senator on days for
you to take a look at that bill
and it may be that we need to
juggle things at this stage in
understand what's going to
finance it looks like it
probably cost about fifty
thousand dollars a bill to to
print that soccer so I
understand that this gonna put a
issues so we should take a long
hard look at it and send it to
Judiciary I'm sure we'll get it
right in and get through it it's
only two hundred fifty five
pages thank you Senator Pirtle
as chair of the Senate Judiciary
popular did show in my family
and so comes to mind I share
with all of you input in Moscow
and that a book just about going
to the most requests for those
of you who know what that means
release does seem like this
would be the perfect bill for us
to exercise the constitution on
and ask the reader to read
but instead of breaking them in
really long bills but it just
seems like that they're really
fun one to just have the re read
the entire bill on the floor and
and you know that's our
constitution actually requires
really a motion to make that
Requirement be done but I'll
reserve that for later time
thank you senator rand centerman
us.
Martinez Senator Duhigg Senator
pope and Senator Hamblen.
And act relating to elections
providing for a nominating
designation of a tribal
government building as a
qualified electors mailing
address amending voter
registration procedures and
requirements repealing and
allowing access to list of
eligible but unregistered
individuals providing that
inmates are eligible to vote and
address other election and
address other election issues
involving voters on Indian
nation tribal and tribal land
clarifying procedures for the
holiday declaring the day of a
general election a school
holiday providing for a transfer
from the excess extraction taxes
requirements for the restoration
of the right to hold an office
of public trust making
conforming and technical changes
amending repealing and acting
committees committee that Senate
rules and Senate finance Senate
bill eight.
Senate bill one sixty introduced
by Senator pope and
Albuquerque to widen Paseo del
Norte in northwest Albuquerque
Senate bill one sixty Senator
Senate bill one sixty having
been read twice by title is
sixty one introduced by Senator
Hickey and act making
appropriation to the higher
education department for a space
valley center contingent upon
committees committee than Senate
education that Senate finance
Senate bill one sixty one.
Senate bill one sixty two
introduced by senator semantics
Senate bill one sixty two Senate
bill one sixty two having been
read twice by title is printed
and referred to the Senate
committees committee that Senate
conservation then Senate finance
Senate bill one sixty two.
state person and acting the
diversity act creating the chief
diversity officer within the
state personnel office creating
diversity and inclusion liaisons
policies to identify assess
decrease institutional racism
providing criteria by which
state agencies shall implement
such policies requiring an
title is printed referred to
Senate committees committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee
events Senate finance committee
Senate bill one sixty three
Senate bill one sixty four
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee and
Senate finance Senate bill one
sixty four.
one sixty five Senate bill one
sixty five having me Senate bill
one sixty five having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee then Senate
and act making appropriation for
transitional housing and
behavioral health services for
individuals released from
incarceration Senate bill one
six Senate bill one sixty seven
introduced by Senator Baca and
act relating to the delinquency
Act allowing for the imposition
sixty seven having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee that's
Senate health and public affairs
committee that Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one sixty
Thank you Mr president Ms
because that we go about our
business committee reports on
that order of business committee
reports.
The reader to read the report.
pursuant to Senate executive
message number twenty three
events referred to the rules
committee respectfully submitted
Mimi Stewart chair Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president Ms
because that we go about our
business announcements and
miscellaneous run that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
president so just for committee
chairs the floral will begin
tomorrow at noon so in terms of
announcing a committee meetings
for tomorrow morning.
going today about let's just say
one forty five give everybody at
least a little recess grab some
lunch the junior bills we did
receive everybody's junior bills
were sorting through those it
correct and how you put it in so
everything is correct as a
junior bill gets built it's all
done by hand and it's all double
check through agencies so that
may be why everybody is so
correctly so members know
whether junior money went.
Capital is going to be coming
pretty quick.
We are we are headed towards the
to remember look at your I. C.
I. P. less that they have put in
and try to prioritize those on
the I. C. I. P. list.
transportation committee of will
also
Committee let's say one forty
five.
Senator Shendo what room number
is that I'm sorry is we three
we've got about four five bills
on the the list and I believe
the first one is Senator
Stewart.
Thank you senator so Senator
share.
But I would like to point out Mr
president that there are people
who are not farmers who grew up.
To at least own agricultural
So these two are are leading a
juggernaut to buy up to a
foreign land all over the place
in so you cannot be a farmer and
figure out how to own a farm
o'clock will begin voting on
conferees about twenty two to
vote on and the rules be
considering Senate bill six the
done of the hearings the
sponsors will be presenting the
conferees on the floor tomorrow
we'll see if there's any public
comment related to the to to to
listing and wanted to log in to
give some public comment I think
so far I don't want to predict
too much for the committee to
more but I think we're generally
much Senator so the can you tell
us what room number that
committee is going to take place
in center certainly as president
room three two one.
Thank you thank you senator
Senator pope.
They're counting on us to do
this.
Children are the future of New
Mexico and it's important that
we keep there will be their well
being in mind as we pass
legislation and budgets for the
natural resources and we have
record levels of new money in
the state budget however
eighteen point two percent of
our population is living in
have their futures limited by
poverty.
The counties with the highest
poverty among children zero four
are catching County fifty two
Even in Los Alamos a community
with one the highest per capita
incomes in the country we allow
one in twenty children one in
Children cannot move themselves
out of poverty it is up to us we
must do better.
It is incumbent upon us to
the data for how children are
doing here in New Mexico hard
copies of the annual report are
no longer being printed but the
report is available online at
kids count dot org thank you Mr
issue you know I think a lot of
a people use the buzz word of
sustainable farming and I can
tell you having been an
experience farmers for quite
some time you know what
take some of a Senator posted by
and realize that the decisions
that we make here have real
longstanding effects on people
out in our in our districts and
brought up then we need to make
better decisions and do a better
job Mr president thank you
thanks Center fertile Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr president the
committees committees will be
meeting tomorrow morning at
Si no further announcements
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent the
Senate stand in recess until
twelve o'clock noon tomorrow
morning no objections the Senate
