at this point and we're still
waiting on the committee report
from Senate Judiciary and we'll
just see where that is when we
get done with this finance
Unanimous consent we go that our
business committee reports on
that order of business committee
reports to chief clerk to read.
Mr president your finance
manos chairman.
Sentiment us move adoption
committee report that is we have
a motion to adopt the committee
report.
on that order business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president now being eleven fifty
nine AM we we adjourn until
twelve or one PM Senate will
come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
we go to that order business
third reading of legislation
ideal to senator rod Regus for
House Bill number one and that
order of business third reading
amendment or substitution say no
objections center of the ring is
to explain the bill thank you Mr
president you have before you
first special session that
amount includes the following
ninety five thousand seven
hundred dollars for the house of
representatives eighty five
eighty seven thousand one
branches for the cannabis
related legislation as follows
one point seven million dollars
to the regulation licensing
department to administer the
impairment four million dollars
to the taxation and revenue
department for the
implementation of the cannabis
tax act and five hundred
thousand dollars to the
administrative office of the
and tell you that these
appropriations that I just read.
Here that are cannabis related
are in fact contingent upon
you Mr president that's all this
bill does thank you senator they
guess Senators we're debating
house bill one.
Senator Brandt followed by
Senator Woods Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr present with the
in House Bill to during the
regular session that we just
ended ten days ago
we had two million dollars in
there for
one thank you Mr president and
thank you Senator Brandt for
that question it the that money
did not materialize because it
was contingent upon this
This is not a duplication thank
you senator Graham thank you Mr
president with but
Center that money was two
million dollars so ten days ago
it was gonna cost two million
Mr president Senator Brandt the
the numbers that came down here
for as an estimate came down
additional revenues to proceed
with this and at that time there
have since that time there been
some changes to the cannabis of
formulated so after that it was
completed and that will be
before us here and so as a
result of that they had a better
idea as to what the estimate
would be.
Senator Brandt.
million dollars to fund the same
exact legislation with a few
changes and that
And I'm not sure calling that
And we haven't even seen it yet
I mean we see that sorry we
haven't debated it yet.
But I I'm still really concerned
as to the doubling of the
expenses on this.
Senator Mr president I Mr
chairman could could you help me
understand why we took from two
million and made it for and I'm
just not understanding the
triple here investments
overnight so what happened is in
house bill two one we put the
contingency language in for four
million dollars two million
floor clean up for TRD was a
million dollars so the other two
million dollars was continues in
language the increase right now
your scene is seven hundred
for regulation and licensing
which wasn't included in the
legislation on house bill to be
for and then two million dollars
of five hundred thousand for AOC
be missing one I don't think so
but I think I'm correct.
Thank you Mr president and
etcetera I appreciate that and
and what we've done is is we
went from and you brought the
During the regular session
correct.
In center and that is correct
we've taken that and we've now
made at one point seven million
to RLD.
To taxed revenue.
So actually I was wrong before
we tripled the amount of money
R. L. the in house bill two was
never included the contingency
language upon a bill passing.
And so we had two million for
TRD taxation revenue there's two
three point seven million.
We had five hundred thousand for
AOC.
Which takes us to four point
four.
Thank you Mr president and
senator if you go to the actual
bill.
Starting on the bottom of page
two.
We are appropriating money.
for cannabis.
Seven hundred fifty thousand
goes to.
The department and for public
additional four million dollars.
Going to the tax and Revenue
Department.
For the implementation of the
cannabis tax act.
So that's a little bit more than
five million dollars.
Senator Brandt was that question
directed at the sponsor of the
dollars to about six million
dollars in the yes Mr presence
and so if you look online eleven
that is split between two
million.
Senator Brandt thank you is
present that that is.
Helpful so that splits the cost
in the two years is that for
Mr presence in so when we when
we start new legislation the
Gentex system has to be updated
and they have to figure out how
to regulate that so when you
follow up here is to make sure
the systems up and operational.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president Sir
appreciate that
increase the cost so much in ten
days
I I think you know some
departments may just be seeing
this is the way back filling the
budgets but thank you Mr
president thank you center we do
Thank you Mr president
I'm gonna ask you pretty
technical question Mr president
and Senator Rodriguez I want to
ask a pretty technical question
we're going to spend seven
hundred fifty thousand.
And it goes down on line seven
and it says impairments yes that
enforcement has been telling me
time and time again.
That there is no way to to
actually take to test the
in order for them to to actually
have something would stand up in
court
Mr president and Senator
Rodriguez.
here the director of the
Legislative Council Service also
to help us answer questions but
may I respond to Senator what's
thank you Senator for your
question and that is why the
is nothing available that
already exists than they would
be working at developing that
yes and that's why they need the
funding and also to get their
certification their training to
dollars as necessary thank you
Senator Woods.
Thank you for that a that seems
to be the the question that law
enforcement my chief of police
Our from cannabis exactly how
are we going to be able to
identify that impairment that's
exactly the question he asked.
you for your quick answer thank
you very much Mr president thank
you senator was we do have
further debate.
Senator.
president thank you senator on
page three in subsection a.
Paragraph two we have seven
hundred.
Fifty thousand dollars to the
officer to do this type of
training.
Senator the biggest thank you Mr
president Senator we don't have
the exact cost at this point
through this year which is
twenty twenty one and then
twenty twenty two we understand
that in the future we may have
to come back in and and request
state
have DRT training.
that for you but it can't be him
immediately unfortunately.
So Mister president know how
many currently have I'm guessing
point we don't have those
numbers we they were not in the
requests and also looked at in
the F. I. R.
any current road side yes.
either in development or being
used in any of the other forty
it's my understanding from my
expert witness here that there
have been some that have been
developed and tested but nothing
that has been formulated to its
Mr president Senator at this
point this was our best estimate
that we could come up with to
and we will have to look at it
for next year depending on how
things are going thank you Mr
president senator Senator so
Mister president senator is
and do we have any idea what a
contract with such a lab would
cost to develop a roadside test
to test the metabolites within
somebody system.
every possibility to be able to
to get this developed if it's
not available for purchase.
So I could be through
contractors are or otherwise to
yes center this is non recurring
money.
And Mister president and senator
do we have any guarantee or any
promise that this will be in in
mine since we first started
talking about cannabis
regulation that we ensure public
safety especially with drug
recognition expert training.
don't know how far that will go
the officers that were not able
to train what we have moving
forward to ensure that in
recurring money and with that
being nonrecurring that means
that we can't put it into an
ongoing recurring basis for the
next fiscal year but this is
the cost is going to be I would
think just like anything else
when you start a new program you
know you have to start somewhere
and this is the best estimate
for more recurring form of money
if that needs to be done.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president and Mr president and
portion it goes into effect
regardless of what happens to
either whatever the house bill
is and Senate bill three.
Just like all these other
appropriations that you see
there there all contingent upon
these bills passing if they
don't pass and this is not
effectuated so Mister president
we all know that regardless of
whether cannabis is legal or not
there are people driving under
the influence of cannabis along
with other drugs and that's what
this section only being
contingent on the passage of
house bill two.
like these I show up in a bill
like this and so the way to do
it contingent upon the bill
passing guess if the bill
state.
The statewide house
appropriations bill in there we
had legislating amounts of money
actually approximately fifty six
the last question if you may
allow me to elaborate a little
bit on your initial question I
just got something here from the
department of finance and
it's at the cabinet secretary
Debbie Romero says that DPS the
department of public safety
estimates that ten percent of
be two point seven million so we
know that in the future we will
need additional funding but this
will hopefully help us get this
rolling now.
And Mister president senator
refreshing to to get answers to
these questions so there weren't
so that we're not making
decisions in the dark so I do
appreciate that and I'm I'm
happy that somebody is watching
us at ten fifteen at night and
concern though that you know
this is something that we should
be doing anyway regardless of
any cannabis bill being passed
so you know I think it's
to you know prescription drugs
anything under the sun you know
and it's not just for those that
are related to cannabis so
scratching the surface and so if
we're going to
going to legalize recreational
cannabis we need to be serious
about public safety I just don't
think seven hundred fifty
I've put forward for the last
couple years is that we
earmarked that money because
that is an important part it's a
huge concern for my district and
not actually accomplishing what
we need to accomplish and that's
that every single officer should
have DRT training within at
least a year two years then this
and so I I would hope the body.
Would take a long hard look at
Senate bill three where we put
it's worth the money because
that's a that's a huge part of
this.
That's a huge concern I think
that's why you're going to see
some no votes on the cannabis
legislation is that.
cannabis or if they've just
simply consume cannabis in the
past thirty days so that's
that's a huge concern and seven
hundred fifty thousand it's just
language in whatever Kandace
bill passes so that we can take
seriously
D. R. E. training and roadside
but we're actually not doing
anything seven hundred fifty
thousand isn't gonna get the job
done as we've heard so I I'm
definitely going to vote against
this even though you won't find
success for the state if we took
it seriously you're more some
money from the revenues from
cannabis to contract with Landel
or one of our other labs to
toward that so I think that
would be a great first step
being the sixteenth state.
To legalize recreational
cannabis to take seriously the
roadside test and so I I I think
serious and contract for those
yes so I'm gonna say I'm gonna
definitely stand in opposition
of the feed and fodder bill but
hopefully we can get that
Programs present idea I don't
necessarily have to many
question for the for the sponsor
of the bill although I do
Why this wasn't just included
with the bill for the
here experts are you answer that
for me.
legislation to feed bills that
include both expenses for a
special session other
appropriation and as a matter of
fact Mister president senator I
remember
feed bill before just at a
recent session that we had but
anyway just wanted to bring this
up because this question have
And I just feel like this this
ought to be with the bill but
that's neither here nor there I
think this is just barely
scratching the surface of what
this act gonna really cost to be
insurance rates and other things
until we get this worked out and
it's going to be something
that's extremely difficult to do
there's gonna be a lot of
uncertainty on how this works
Almost a paltry sum of what this
will actually cost the state and
its people to right to legalize
this particular on.
back to many many many times so
it's a.
I just for **** at times and I
know we put things with the
bills I've been here a long long
time.
it's an easy way to do it but we
have a bill that this directly
relates to the to for the Senate
here's going to be voting on and
I think they all ought to be put
members of the Senate I move
that house bill one do now pass
and I asked for a roll call vote
thank Senator voting on house
bill one.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator manos.
Senator Munoz passes senator
Neville.
Stewart yeah yes Senator Pinto.
Yes yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pro.
Senator severe Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart Senator Stewart AS
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator one LCS.
passed Senate senator Byrd to
explain as well thank you Mr
president to and I voted against
this bill because I whole
heartedly support funding this
funding on this bill and then
turn around and vote against the
cameras Bill of tomorrow
sometime so that's why I voted
against the bill and I hope
others will take note of that
president to unanimous consent
we go to that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
for in that order business
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so of the there were a
do is here that bill at ten
o'clock tomorrow morning so
that's when we come back in
and then at noon
we're going to hear both
committee of the whole on the
Senate floor and there will be
an opportunity for public
testimony there will be the
opportunity for experts to be
the floor so that is the plan
for tomorrow morning so ideal to
any other members for
announcements but that's it for
this evening.
we've had between the majority
floor leader and and the the
minority whip in terms of the
order business in the committee
of the whole that we're looking
at doing just that everybody
Once we've had a presentation
the Senate bill and gone to a
public comment.
Then to to begin having a
Following that then we'll be
able to take a vote on each of
the two bills.
That way they will have a full
discussion of the two bills.
Thanks service other any further
announcements Senators.
Saying no for the nonsense
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president thanks members with
that unanimous consent that the
