We're lacking a quorum.
we're lacking a quorum.
You now have a quorum Mister
president.
Thank you senator is a big and
all please rise.
the country is also the New
Mexico Senate chaplain.
Please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be led
today by Senator Burt.
and our great state.
We pray that you'll take away
our natural foundation first as
of the year.
And despair as we move this work
along.
in this body and then our home
community.
May we place our hope and what
really matters and what last
trusting in your eternal present
impaired off knowing good god
you are hearing us better than
we are speaking.
We offer these prayers but bless
our work here today.
And for the two weeks that
the pledge of allegiance to the
flag of the United States of
America.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
So they are allowed by data the
Los estados Unidos that medica
the I love the public up
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico and the Z.
assemble of perfect friendship
among United cultures.
Once again senators would like
announcements and miscellaneous
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president thank you to our
pause and I think that's always
a very good thing.
Mr president one announcement
I'd like to make up front has to
Again that's what the Senate
rules state and.
Again I know that sometimes
coordinating between the board
and the camp cameras an issue
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president and senator Wirth
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator wrote Senators Rodriguez
Senate floor as well as in the
gallery thank you no objections
so ordered thank you senator
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president before I
Seneal announcements will
work I think the plan is to do
items one through four on the
floor and then get up to
committee.
so with that Mr president
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house consumer and public
House bill one twenty three
house bill one forty four as
amended by the house house bill
one thirty eight house bill one
fifty three as amended by the
amended by the house and House
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty eight and
requests the concurrence of the
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
committee reports on that order
of business committee reports
the reader to read.
Mr president your finance
committee to who has been
chairman.
Thank you Mr president ask
unanimous consent to send three
to be allowed to read all the
committee reports we've on them
with one motion and the journal
reflect they were acted upon
Senate bill two seventy one do
pass.
Senate bill three forty one to
pass.
feminists have a motion to adopt
the committee reports.
They no objection the committee
part is been adopted in the
journal so that they're acted
upon individually.
do not pass but that Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill for twenty five is
reported without recommendation
and for the recommends that it
The.
Senator thank.
Mr president I move adoption of
Thank you Mr president so next
up is a confirmations so.
Calling our Senate rules
committee chair I'm not sure
proceed you know and and do both
those confirmations.
Okay miss present I'm I
understand we have not read the
committee report yet so we need
to wait for that before we do
that.
That is we can just please mute
your microphones on the
computer.
We are that order business third
placing Senate bill ninety three
as amended on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution no objections
broadband access and expansion
this office is something that is
a long overdue and and has been
needed for a very long time Mr
president what will the office
little easier to see a broad
view of what's going on with
broadband here in New Mexico the
plan is going to consist of a
financial plan also the
financial plan will help us to
managing statewide bulk pricing
agreements in these bulk pricing
agreements are going to bring
the cost of broadband down
dramatically and gonna allow
others to to join the broadband
about seventeen of them that
I've counted.
Centers we can please keep the
volume down we're on third
reading center by the.
Very much Mr president thank you
etcetera so that we can draw
down additional dollars here for
New Mexico we we believe that we
can see for every investment
dollar New Mexico make some
we're able to maximize those
dollars that we invest.
The office is also responsible
for managing and negotiating
rights of way easement access
that's going to allow an easier
the information together when
they design develop and want to
implement a broad what band plan
for their area.
the office is going to provide
reporting and analysis on the
the next item the office will be
responsible for is supporting
other political subdivisions Mr
president so today if you're
down in Columbus as an example I
love to use this example the
do that because the more there
is a volunteer just like of the
members here in the Senate this
office will help them to design
and develop fund and implement
broadband and every dollar that
we put into broadband we can
draw down anywhere from nine to
thirteen dollars Mister
president and truly help move
the the the the needle on
broadband here in New Mexico
the awarding of dollars outside
of a fund that we also created
their The New Mexico broadband
fund.
And then the other thing at the
other the way that the office
will be managed as it'll be
president funding in the range
of fifty five two hundred thirty
five million dollars this year
will put us at the front of the
list we bring down federal
dollars of up to a billion
investment Mr president we can
draw those federal dollars down
and truly move the needle on
broadband here in New Mexico.
So support for this initiative
commerce in northern New Mexico
southern New Mexico we have not
for profits that have endorsed
this this legislation public
employee unions and then on the
way to the floor here Mister
got everything super clean up
give us a ten a unanimous
decision so with that Mr
president I'm gonna ask my co
sponsor Senator Stefanics who
joined I invited her to join
make sure that the volume is
kept to a minimum so that the
presenters can be clearly heard
Senator phonics thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Padilla for continuing to work
need to be addressed and some of
the areas have been addressed
through some of the electric
coops through the extension of
our state universities but we
for all of his years of efforts
and I believe that this
broadband access and expansion
act setting up a designated
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Bennett Senators we're debating.
Senate bill ninety three as
amended we will start with
center anticipate all.
I just have several questions so
I wanted to I wondered if
Senator Padilla would be willing
to yield to some questions.
Senator by the ideal our yes Mr
president I will yield.
wanted to focus on and and it it
looks like the way I remember
you having explained this bill
to me previously this is to be
an economist.
president senator Ortiz Pino I
did that present this bill to
the approximately this might be
the two hundred fifty seventh
time I presented the bill this
year actually and so there were
a lot of kind of twists and
turns and things that happen to
and appointed by the governor it
was important that that this
individual agency office have
the the the the where with all
and and the strength behind them
to get things done but it's very
finance committee amendment take
the person out of the governor's
office and bring it back to the
Department Mr Stewart president
no they did not that that
from the piece of legislation
because the department of
information technology today has
told us that they have several
positions that can be re
purposed actually staff this
and and Mister president
senator.
It with this office still be the
place where the federal funds
coming to the state for
fund will sit there it will have
money appropriated to it on
maybe an annual basis it's
looking Mr president like
there's a range this year of
somewhere between fifty five
million one hundred and thirty
five million somewhere in there
investment that we could be
making this year could possibly
give us a tenfold return so
really about a hundred thirty
some odd million Mr president is
very quickly going to turn into
if the money coming.
This been going directly to
schools for for broadband and
I thank you Mr president and
senator Ortiz **** a PED does
have a function
I'm sorry that that there is a
function that relates to public
education in New Mexico the
a result those will continue to
flow the way that they flow
today these would be separate
monies that they would they
would partner with to augment
those funds or vice versa.
funds for the for the local
districts is that well is that
why it it wouldn't come through
this new office Mr president and
and Senator these if you know
might say or what the US
department of education might
say or USDA so if they would
they would go hand in hand yes.
Well thank you and and of I
for broadband to reach all of
the people of the state Mr
president I still have a
lingering concern over.
Over the.
that operate the internet to
families so that even if we if
we spend thousand millions of
dollars for example I noticed in
the FIR they they talked about
And and somebody is going to be
charging those families for the
use of the internet.
How will those families be able
to.
monthly internet charges.
Thank you Mr president senator
Ortiz Pena excellent point and
and I have to say that that get
all give an example what happens
coordination through this office
will call for help facilitate
that even further they do
receive subsidy to bring that
monthly costs down for the
consumer it is approximately in
Mexico those subsidies bring
that down dramatically and they
they in some cases bring it down
by about twenty some odd percent
in so you're still paying
companies to deliver those
services.
Mister president senator for the
it is there some oversight group
that.
Monitors how much is being
charged for by the private
regulatory body control how much
the charge those families yes Mr
president and so you hit the
nail right on the head Senator
Ortiz Pino it is the public
regulation commission that helps
doing really well with they they
oversee that that very function.
Okay well thank you very much
Senator and and Mr president
thank you and and the the sounds
have on the list will have
cinnamon you lost followed by
Senator Pirtle then Senator
Sedillo Lopez sentiment us.
Thank you Mr president will the
stimulus money that's kind of
coming out
so Mister president currently
there's about nine hundred and
seventy nine million dollars
that are coming out of broadband
Bill that's coming from the
federal government and it says
a.
There's enough for two hundred
thousand households at the
seventy five dollars as a
in total for that so that'll be
coming.
Mr president center
Tell me how the council is going
to work.
Mr chairman the it'll be it'll
consist of a cabinet secretaries
that directly affect any portion
of the liver your broadband it
will have tribal leadership on
and some portion of that life
cycle.
Thank you Mr president and can
you tell me what the vacancy
rate is that do it right now and
how many employees are currently
working on broadband.
point one million people the
fifth largest landmass the forty
sixth largest population in the
United in the United States
statewide for state to state and
of delivery in terms of the Vic
vacancy rates at at the
department of information
technology you probably Mr
chairman Mr president's return I
have more current information
easily absorb and re purpose
that head count is begin doing
this work and then they would
come with a more formal budget
next year in terms of what their
broadband plan or anybody really
working on broadband in New
Mexico.
Mr president center where is New
Mexico's broadband plan.
and I hate to admit this I know
there are several business folks
here in the chamber including
yourself Mr chairman of the
Senate finance I went to the
bank Mr president twenty one
years ago to start my business
to develop design develop and
implement a broadband plan that
is reported on regularly for
accountability.
It is communicated to the people
of New Mexico the governor the
legislature etcetera the plan
thank you Mr president and Mr
president center and since
you've been working so hard on
broadband in the state in New
Mexico.
Has a governor ever approaching
said here's the plan for New
recognition by all levels of
government at this point based
on how the different trials
travails and step so we had to
to get to this very moment and
that includes the governor
recognizing an understanding
that we spoke of just a few
moments ago so there is
recognition from the governor's
office all the way to to to the
entry level employment state
government that this is
something that we must forget
is there's not on nine hundred
seventy nine million dollars
available for broadband there is
no broadband plan in New Mexico
and for us to tap those
resources and get the the the
broadband will never happen
until that plans put in place.
Thanks to there are good
staffers at it and Senate
finance and and some people and
really do do credit deserve
finance so that we do have the
framework we do have the ability
we do have everybody working
together we do make sure that
New Mexico broadband can move
forward.
But at a hundred and thirty
be eligible for another billion
roughly just run it down a
little bit but until we get a
plan in New Mexico.
My and you're still going to see
and this is my notes thank you.
you'll be getting a call from
her and I'll probably get a get
a few more but you're still
amount of dollars that they
wanted not quite but pretty
close they should have been
working on this plan yesterday
so those kids are not sitting in
their cars doing homework.
The other thing is.
if we keep on the path of an
archaic system digging trenches
laying fiber and lane
wire we're never going to get
number one and and get access
that way how do we keep up with
technology New Mexico how do we
advance our state so we're not
left in the dark how do we get
Senator Pirtle not in the
chamber right now so we'll go to
Senator Sedillo Lopez then we'll
go back to send a personal
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I think
Mr president has we have
discussed before his you just
discussed with the chair the
necessity of a plan and
particularly forward thinking
Darius of pots of money that are
being both that already exist
like in the USDA and that are
being introduced I and curious
we'll have a whole year wasted
if it's not absolutely right if
we have to fix something.
I thank you Mr president thank
now Mr president these are the
key elements of this office will
will contain which will help us
to address the concerns that
Senator Sedillo Lopez actually
just raised and so as a result
having a financial plan having a
on rights of way in easements
reporting analytics having this
office Mister president in
statute having it funded having
it's staff those are all the
things that are going to make us
all the different Mr president
senator city Lopez this is
exactly how why the office is
designed the way that it was to
meet those those those really
were delivering broadband Mr
president every which way from
our financial plans are staffing
our knowledge of where we are
from reporting analytics
standpoint on uploads downloads
it's are all that links up it
because most of the United
States that does not have run
but broadband access is in rural
communities that's why we we we
the city and those and those who
of us who live in rural
communities and so I I would
think that I was looking at was
and to get access out to these
rural communities does a
legislation of address that or
is it just going to be left up
legislation there Mr president
this office a lot of what Mr
president Senator Sedillo Lopez
is referring to is is regulatory
in nature so I have five other
framework this has every dis
Office has everything to do with
the the the the actual work of
of getting broadband out to
where it needs to be
coordinating agencies
coordinating private investment
to know I commend the sponsor
for taking such a comprehensive
look at this question and also
for his persistence in moving
extended to every corner of the
state that does not have
broadband access now thank you
Mr president.
Thank you Senator Lopez further
debate Senator Pirtle.
I will yield Mister president
and infernal thank you Mr
president and senator does this
bill grow government agency
presidents in order I thank you
finance committee which gave us
a ten zero to pass.
We the took the amount the nine
hundred fifty thousand dollar
appropriation out of the piece
vacancies will be re purposed at
by agreement and with the
cabinet secretary there now who
I confirmed it's great that you
you can confirm someone one week
and they're open to what you
want to do the next week Mr
to get this thing up and running
and and and manageable so we can
begin to bring down those
federal dollars and match our
dollars ten to one in in some
cases more but but what will
wind up happening here Mister
me be clear so no more new full
time positions but we are
creating a a new division or
department within
an area of government and
creating a new council is that
regular process how we manage
our councils today
this is just a and in over it
away to innovate state
government that's not delivering
for us the way that we would
like and it's it's really to
called out as broadband
specialist in that office but
that's what they're doing and
you know we're just not it's not
meeting our needs so this is re
purposing giving them a very
steep defined set of specific
hundred plus that we already
have in the state of New Mexico
deal with communication or
something similar to broadband.
came to the legislature I was
able to convince the pro tem at
the time to appoint me as the
chairman or vice chairman of the
science technology and
telecommunications Committee and
I want to say that at that point
we had approximately fourteen
now down to about four or five
but that are actually working
that are doing what we're asking
them to do and so I I'm with you
I I I love efficiency and that's
why when I came forward and
tried to make the deposit early
a directed focus.
Thank you Mr president you know
of a pretty wise president once
said no government ever
voluntarily reduces itself in
have to be careful when we do
things like this that yes right
now we're creating a council and
we're being efficient but I can
see next year coming back and
putting those positions back
the the model of the state and
and that goes for government to
I guess Mr president senator
thank you.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
We do have Senator lot in next.
president first of I to
certainly add my voice of
congratulations to the sponsor
for getting this legislation to
this point I do have a question
that Mr president and you know I
coverage is is what what what is
the goal we are going to as
opposed to just saying universal
access which is universal access
actually mean when Roberts the
road.
get that done and help shepherd
that through to to full fruition
I would envision us at ninety
eight or better percent coverage
across the state I'm I think
that we always have growth in
speeds how to those conversely
connect to federal standards
USDA standards etcetera how does
that put New Mexico in terms of
connectivity across the country
and across the world there's
in a piece of legislation I
would call out the specific
percentage or what have you but
but they a purpose for the
creation of the offices is to do
what you're reporting what
you're talking about Mr
gonna obtain could you address
Mr president in closing flat
what if any accountability
measures are in the bill so if
this office and if everyone
I choose to look at tomorrow is
a new day and tomorrow is the
future and Mr president I
appreciate senator kind of this
comments and and I I
agencies with no planning with a
very lean and not even a
financial plan I think there's
so much duplication right now I
could agree with the senator and
I'm I'm a businessman myself
continuum for broadband to New
Mexico and efficient use of our
dollars a way to leverage those
dollars like we do in business
and and and Mr president senator
Candelaria I'm sure he does as
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
president rather
I appreciate that senator and
and looking towards tomorrow
just say I wish this office well
I hope I hope it works and
achieves its objectives but I do
how is the money used and what
results did we get and the bill
doesn't really provide any
accountability so the
responsibility really falls on
us and while I respect that need
to be cheerleaders every once in
of the body I just want to stand
up and recognise the work
Senator Padilla has done and I
want to just share with all of
phenomenal example right here in
our state.
That I've been familiar with and
have learned about and it's one
of our co ops.
Kit Carson electric coop.
Realize that if you use matching
money and you apply for grants
you can extend broadband through
a very rural part of New Mexico.
of February indicating that they
had.
Receive an additional twenty six
million dollars in grants and
loans for a variety of sources
Throughout rural northern New
Mexico including to pueblos
tiles Pueblo and pick a reserve
pueblo with more than twelve
realized ten years probably at
least and maybe longer than that
that this was a direction to go
and they have leveraged the
money and all the federal grants
testament to what can happen and
how this can be done and why
this bill is so important we
obviously because of COVID
country this is the future it's
the connection for everything.
And so the timing of this in the
work that's been done to get us
to this point.
to look at the model of the kick
person has used.
I have a good friend who is a.
The equivalent of a PRC
commissioner in Mississippi was
moved in that direction and it's
working there and I just think
we need to keep this discussion
going this is a huge step
forward and I'm really
encouraged that we are gonna.
right so Senator the thank you
for your efforts on this issue.
Thank you center by the Senator
Wirth.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you see no objections so
ordered any further debate
senators.
Si no further debate center by
the end of close thank you very
is lifting up New Mexico in in
any way shape or form however we
can we know that broadband is
our answer to economic
development and job creation we
know broadband is our answer for
Mexico and we have to do
something what we're doing today
is not working for us and I
believe that this is our path
forward so I appreciate all the
comments Mr president and with
Senators we're voting on Senate
bill ninety three as amended.
All senators to the chamber your
seats.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
A third yes Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator Moores Senator Moores no
senator Munoz.
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator Paul
dear.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no.
songes.
Senator Sanchez now Senators
committees.
Senator sureties know Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator so yes Senator Stefanics
Senator for percentage yes
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes senators to
run this.
Senator savant is yes Senator
Thirty.
By a vote of thirty day in the
affirmative six in the negative
Senate bill ninety three as
amended has passed the Senate
center by the.
Thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate.
Moving on to item number two we
record show that all actions
replacing Senate bill two
seventy two amended on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution no
relief school enrollment they're
about a hundred eighty five
thousand military children
changing schools annually due to
permanent change of station
move.
The challenge of transferring
records state differences in
individual education program.
Yet another layer of concern.
The department of defense
working with the national center
for interstate compacts
and graduation requirements.
These reforms were great.
But still the families a deal
with the issues once they have
arrived at a new duty station.
This will enable them to pre
enroll their children in a
school district before they
arrive at their PCS destination
for the initiative called
advanced enrollment is not
So what is advancement.
And that's the Roman Pletcher
Military child register in a new
school district at the same time
as the general student
residence within the school
district boundaries before the
rules.
The benefits to this are.
They have the opportunity to
participate in random lotteries
coordinating IEP and five or
four plan requirements.
They have the ability to
register for courses and plan
for their course of study.
Don't need to provide
documentation usually their
military orders of a pending
military relocation to the
state.
Second.
Now some school districts
already provide this in our
state especially those near
military installations but we
want to make sure military
that's all I have and I welcome
any questions or comments.
Thank you senator pope we do
have debate Senator.
Mr president I too was so I was
in the army of.
My children went to almost every
kind of school you can think of
starting with department of
defense schools.
district knows you're coming and
it's particularly of useful when
you're not going to a military
installation so for example
all I was the operations officer
the nearest one is in Colorado
springs.
And that's a pretty long drive
so just having this ready the
school knowing I knowing their
the way to showing that to do we
know where we're going I think
that's very useful in so with
that Mr president I stand in
support of this bill.
this legislation we've had
conversations about this before
my father was career military
for over twenty years serving in
the army and I moved around a
lot and that's one of the things
lack of friends and just the
welcoming that they need when
they're moving around so much is
vitally important for I think
you senator for for bringing
this thank you very much Mr
president I stand in support of
this bill thanks and have any
further debate senators.
Senator Lopez.
to the chamber for unless for
purposes of a call and no
objections so ordered Senator.
Si no further debate Senator
pope to close.
miss out on that extracurricular
activities like sports but the
secondary effects of this type
of legislation is you know the
DOT is looking at how we take
compete thank you that is all I
have Mister president.
Thanks Center pope we can go
ahead and close.
My apologies Mister president.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
serve on this Senator Brandt is
yes Senator Diamond Senator
Diamond yes Senator Duhigg
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez VS Senator
McKenna.
Senator Moores Senator Moores
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator for
the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator songes senator Sanchez
yes Senators committees.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Woods yes.
I have a thirty seven the
affirmative there on the
negative Senate bill two seventy
you Senator moving on item
number three we got Senate bill
one eleven Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
No objections Senate office to
explain the bill thank you very
much Mr president members of the
Senate I happen to have the
honor to sit on the interim
is for funding that we go to DFA
department of finance and
administration for the land
grant council which is housed at
the university of New Mexico to
their common lands statewide and
Mr president members of the
Senate to the amount of one
million was stricken in Senate
is very debating Senate bill one
eleven as amended.
Anyone wishing to debate.
Senator Lopez.
I just want to stand in strong
All of the issues that the land
grants the land grants to face
faced with regard to their
cultural rights their heritage
and their land so I'm of proud
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield of this deal Mr
president yes.
Thank you Mr president thank you
sponsor with the with the
this in committee without the
budget okay two hundred thousand
dollars a year is where we were
interpreting that I believe.
Changing this to a hundred
actually says that it's a
hundred thousand dollars each
year.
For the next five years.
to stay recurring money's and of
course DFA will make that final
determination especially with
our junior money so our hope is
of course that this would be
recurring which would allow of
discussion I guess it would you
know that we had in
in senators Indian in rural
affairs was affected.
I I haven't really changed that
and it looks like it would be
just as effective to continue
contracting for the position so
Thank you Senator Griggs we do
have further debate Senator
Stefano.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you Senator Lopez for bringing
committee are both sides of the
aisle both houses many people in
our legislature are very
interested in the heritage the
everyone for joining us during
the interim.
For the debate center how to
mail.
Thank you Mr president I'm
rising in support of this bill
in Rio Arriba county we have a
surveyors that these land grants
don't have the money to help
cover I want to thank Senator
Lopez for bringing this bill and
I don't know that I've been
strong support thank you Mr
president.
I now move that Senate bill one
eleven as amended do now pass
and I ask for a roll call.
That is where voting all
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
this Senator surround is yes
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
DS Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator guide
those.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Neville yes Senator Neville yes
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
two should be no yes senator for
the.
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator songes Senator songes no
senators committees.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Byrd.
Thirty.
we're going on title number for
Senate bill one twelve is
amended sustainable economy task
force Senator Stewart.
Thank
you Mr president Hernandez
The no objection Senator to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president.
This is a sustainable economy
including the governor's office
DFA development department the
land grants the Indian Affairs
and Energy in minerals.
requires stakeholder
consultation and plans for
investment in the economy and
infrastructure.
recommendations from economic
studies that are trying to help
us development efforts from our
universities are labs for state
two to twenty seven.
So we're of course number two
and solar number ten and went
eight into you a thermal we've
recreation and tourism
sustainable agriculture.
Software development spaceport
million grant from the federal
economic development
administration.
To look into economic recovery
sustainable and resilient
economy so that department
stepped up and asked to be the
lead agency for this task force.
I was surprised to see them they
said to me we want a more
sustainable economy in New
Mexico also.
executive secretaries or their
designees.
Pandemic point up to two public
members that can also include
what it's trying to do just look
on page WXYZ.
Find my bill under office paper.
Pages three and four.
Thanks service centers we are
debating Senate bill one twelve
as amended we do have a floor
amendment the reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill one hundred
No objection if you explain what
the amendment that senator so
Mister president.
In this task force.
it's got the governor.
administration government
employee secretary of tax
revenue government employee
secretary of energy minerals and
natural resources government
employee.
The sustainable economic task
force when there's nobody.
In the economy.
This is an economic zero.
actually canonic experience most
of more always government
employees.
From the beginning of their
service until the end.
does so first of all it just
doubles the number from twenty
four to forty eight.
And so it had.
The director of independent
petroleum association of New
just a cell slide show.
It is an actual member of the
task force.
It adds the executive director
of New Mexico farm bureau.
We talked about.
New Mexico State University
College of ed I think that falls
right in line with what senator
of what pro tem a store once on
Mexico mining association and
the New Mexico the executive
director of the dairy producers
of New Mexico.
And so why would those be on
there will obviously.
Sustainable economy.
If this is really about
undermining the economy we have.
Well that's different but a
thing that sustains New Mexico
economy today is oil and gas.
Even though it has its ups and
downs but we have great
opportunities for oil and gas
have have heard me talk about
the products to come from from
oil and gas Mr president I would
I would challenge anybody in
this room.
To.
petroleum this would be a very
scary rural.
Because everything that we're
wearing.
Is either made from oil and gas
For our products our exports
from the state that makes those
products.
Base industry we're always
talking about we need to base
so the idea is how do we take
the base industry we have
instead of just throwing them
out.
How do we incorporate them into
this process how do we make them
to have a truly sis sustainable
economic task force.
We would include industry folks.
I think that's important.
It's not just about wind and
solar when it's always great
let's do it I've never stopped
never talk bad about wind and
solar.
But there's so many more things
that we can do.
It's more difficult to export
solar energy than it is to
export natural gas.
Storage is great I think want to
belong it's it's it's a it's on
But I think that we've missed
half of the half of the program
here Mister president and so
with that all stand for
ideas they're good ideas they're
already covered in the bill.
If you'll notice on page two.
can appoint two public members.
And of the list you mentioned
I'm certainly sure that some of
the communities and they have to
consider stakeholders and
communities of interest so it
can go up to twenty four members
Senator debating Senate foreman
number one anyone else wishing
to debate.
Senator Woods followed by
Senator Baca.
me detailed absolutely Mr
president.
You know I thought that
That the size of this.
Proposal for.
There is a fence around this
building I'm sure that we could
find space inside that fence
that would accommodate us in
small groups that would make the
governor happy about being
inside the fence.
consume them I would like to
point out that zoom does require
a connectivity and Senator
Padilla is going to take care of
that but it also of.
electricity so we put we put the
electric coops in there.
That's what I was wondering you
you know conductive it
conductivity I I need to brag
just a minute and I'm sorry I
didn't get in on the chime in at
a great job for us in my part of
the world and so but I don't see
any members that's.
possibly think about maybe but
someone from Rajveer Grady on
that.
Mr.
I would like to point out that
amendment is put on Mr president
will we'll do Senate floor
amendment number two and had
somebody that owns a farm in or
near Broadview New Mexico.
actually qualified to talk about
sustainable agriculture.
I'm just former so Mister
president.
appreciate the sponsor the
amendment bringing this forward
I did notice and I was concerned
as well
with the membership
do know Mr president and online
nineteen.
That even though it does that
they they may appoint two
members of the public it says so
heck I guess it could be Mr
present to to other secretaries
as well I I think the those with
the qualify as members of the
public as well I would think
Yes.
Thank you Mr president thank you
sponsor members of the public
who do you who do you envision
debating the amendment
and I'm gonna come back to that
Mr president has to do with that
so I'm going to circle around
here just a second so if you'd
indulge me that be terrific.
the business industry is saying
what other economic think tanks
are saying
the Economic Development
Department.
Is already under a grant from
the idea is to give each of
these cabinet secretaries a land
commissioner the governor the
ability to point to public
development department wanted to
be the lead agency is that this
is the work they think they need
to do this will help them do
get to appointments up to twenty
four this will be a robust task
force.
Focused on the work that we all
takeaway cabinet.
The department of budgets where
we continue to call we need more
sustainability that's the
purpose of this and they will
my question was really just
geared towards what was meant to
members of the public but I
think you answered that in there
it means a really anybody it
could be an like I said Mr
industry out because
sustainability you know just
like the Sanchez said is you
know it's a it's a matter of it
of everybody's interest and so I
interagency person and so anyway
I think the sponsor the
amendment for bringing it
forward and all listen to
further debate if there's
Senator deal.
Yes Mr president are you Mr
president Senator could you
elaborate why included New
Mexico mining association in the
amendment please.
White and seven dwarfs in those
seven course taking a peek into
a hole and beat up the earth.
For the most part that is not
how mining happens in New Mexico
today.
follows the Coldstream
underground however goes.
And the earth above it collapses
down behind it.
So if you're standing on the
now you will know local money
was there.
This is this is modern coal
mining uranium mining
again we hear this the stores
which were true.
mining today is nothing like
that nobody goes in a whole
today it's all automation.
On top of that.
state we can from outside the
country.
And I I believe there are
eighteen were minerals but
somebody smarter meal correct me
on that but what we do know is
Mining techniques we could
become.
The the center of of creating
the solar the solar panels those
rare earth minerals are are
needed in these things.
earth minerals which we produce
none of at the moment.
So mining is is certainly
different.
Then some guy with a pick and
shovel going into a dark hole.
over the decades Cole has been
this day number.
Whole has always provided that
flat steady base following gas
mining association needs to be
on here Mister president.
Thank you Mr president and so I
think that's an excellent answer
and and this did this topic I
asked that question and the
And I think we have a unique
opportunity here although I.
When I look at the legislation
coming through this body
I've seen multiple pieces of
Think about the advances we've
made in workers rights
OSHA this sort of thing and I
think what we've done you know
if you read between the lines on
new Dhanya magnets for the wind
turbines a lot of the other
minerals for photovoltaics.
These are coming from
capture the production in the
extraction of those resources
here in New Mexico I think in
general you know it's always a
work in progress but in general
we have pretty good workers
exploitation of not only adults
but children in the extraction
of these minerals and so I I
support the amendment mainly
that's the biggest thing that
aware of that issue which of
course goes way beyond New
Mexico thank you Mr president.
Thanks committee any further
debate on the amendment.
yield Senator do of absolutely
Mr president.
Center I'm trying to walk
through I've got the bill in
front of me on my laptop to see
we came up with those numbers
I'm looking at the bill trying
to figure out for the and I like
the idea that additional members
energy mills naturist resource
in pairs taxation revenue
department of finance in
ministration and then each
member will just appoint two
members of the public can you
list who can each appoint two
more so that would be three.
What we've done here is we've
added eight industry members who
can point to more.
wanted to make sure that we were
giving them the opportunity to
have to.
Our public members on that
committee and I just couldn't
In in and senator my last
question then was.
Broadening the value or the
amount of people on the team to
be able look at this.
presents a absolutely Mr
president so what I was trying
to do is is fine to those
industries that that were around
the state east side the
northwest the southeast so
Senator to my left I know that
on the side of the state a lot
of times we feel isolated and
not representative in though we
do have Senators representatives
Si no further debate on the
amendment.
Senator to close on the
amendment.
So thank you Mr president just a
The governor can do this today
almost everybody on this list
serves at the will of the
governor except the the land
commissioner I believe are so
There's nothing stopping her
from doing this.
So with the exception of the
land commissioner everybody
works at the will of the
governor so this is really the
governor's commission.
department heads could then
appoint.
Members of the public.
I would be amazed.
Mr president.
While somebody might appoint the
member of a motor because
they're begging for their
banking to be involved in this
because all we seem to be doing
is going after industry trying
You probably have.
Of thirteen.
People that.
Already agree with the
governor's position and the
While it's possible.
To bring in people that are not
on this it is unlikely outside
The opportunity for other
industries to be involved put
them in the bill put them in the
law.
Not just all by themselves
hoping that they can get some
China mines most of the rare
earth minerals that we use
today.
And if you just want to look at
the Chinese money disco just
They're nasty.
And the right next to cities
because that's what the Chinese
do they put their cities right
There's no worker protections at
all.
And so I think what we're saying
is well as long as they do it
over there okay.
we can do it much better we
don't want to do it here we've
got environmental standards we
don't want to do it here we've
got workers right standards.
We just want to see it.
about sixty percent of the coal
balls is mind in the Republic of
the Congo.
And once upon a time when we
That's exactly what happens in
in Republic of Congo today.
Then a couple little kids going
colors Committee fallout guitar.
If that's the way you're mining
it and that's exactly what we're
doing.
His mind by people in China who
are dying from it.
And kids in the Congo who are
dying from.
These people are literally dying
so that you can have an iPhone.
It would make all of these
instruments that we have that
you're sitting there looking at
right now.
So much safer.
For the actual human beings to
do the mining.
Would be great for New Mexico if
we could money those products
here those resources here.
That's sustainable.
When we talk about agriculture.
I would like to point out I
don't know if it's still there
because see a hole in New Mexico
Chiles so that they can be
harvested all at the same time
so that we could make our New
Mexico green chilies a super
product.
University made them.
Grow that way.
Using technology to make our ad
And he worked The New Mexico
State University.
College of agriculture.
That's why you should be on here
for his his part this is a.
By.
Navajo agricultural production
industry on the bluff just above
Farmington.
One of the experiments are
working on right now.
Is is is trees that seem to
actually absorb.
But that's amazing stuff that we
have right there.
How we milk cows.
When I was a kid.
grandfather got his first
electric milking machine which
would no one cal.
So the machine one he would milk
one and I would make one
actually he would know two or
And how much of us really want
to give up very.
There is not just milk.
new technologies all of that is
is moving forward to help us
have a sustainable economy which
is what this is about.
We are there.
It's the same with all of the
things on this this.
Amendment.
These are big industry we're
talking about here.
I didn't ask for little little
local company although it
certainly wouldn't hurt if the
I know the people think that he
would never hated wind and
solar.
I just wanted to oil and gas at
the same time.
economy task force.
What keeps us from having a
sustainable economy today.
I believe there are three major
Real tax reform not peddling
around the edges with taxes.
Real tax reform.
Justly.
I'm not talking about tax cuts
particularly.
Mr president.
We're the worst and so then.
We went back to when we said Hey
I couldn't figure those things
out but after they were shown to
them we move from fifty one to
thirty six.
That even the best CPA's in the
world can't figure out how do we
expect other people to figure
out how do we expect mom and pop
to figure it out.
through this this chamber or
this this legislative session
that have things to do with
piling on more regulations on
our small businesses.
It's amazing how many things are
in here and that's that's on top
of whatever the the executive
gets to do it it's not just this
executive it's every executive
ever been in the state.
What they see is only we don't
understand your taxes in your
regulations or are mind
boggling.
a little bit of of business is
understanding what the rules
are.
Right now we we we seem to
change the rules to our courts
on a regular basis.
little a little reform as well.
Because if we want to have an
outdoor recreation industry.
We need to have a little bit
look reform as well.
those nasty one margaritas real
Margarita.
Those things would actually
create.
isn't we do those things and all
of a sudden people will look at
New Mexico state while.
Let's go there.
School is so cool.
New Mexico really is probably
the coolest stated you.
So diverse.
From desert to mountains.
here people don't industry
doesn't so there's no industry
there's no people.
If we really want to create a
really accomplish nothing for
the individual.
That's what we would look at.
We would let the free market
figure out who belongs here and
Mr president look at the bills
that we run into this chamber
right now they're not getting
out a way to get in the way.
We're already suffering from
COVID were suffering from
lockdown for suffering from a
Mexico owned businesses I'm not
talking about the big box stores
with the dollar don't even stay
in the state overnight.
Not a task force to decide who
the winners and whose losers.
And we ought to consider the
people of the rest of the world
as well.
We can do it.
We can do a whole lot safer.
And that would be just painful
economic industry.
And of course we have to have a
voice vote I mean a roll call
vote.
Senator we are voting centers on
Senate floor amendment number
one.
The clerk to call the roll.
Other combos now senator
Candelaria now Senator
Candelaria no Senator serve on
this.
Senator to run this.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales no
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto no Senator how
to meal.
Senator Hermio no Senator
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores yes Senator
manos.
Senator o'neill no Senator need
to be no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
for the no Senator for the NL
Senator Pinto.
no Senator Prochnow Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez no senator
Sanchez.
Senator songes yes senator
Schmidt is.
Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator sold.
Senator sold snow Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics no
Senator domino senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of fifteen in the
affirmative twenty five in the
negative senator member number
one has failed to be added to
Senate bill one twelve as
amended.
the Sanchez deal please Mr
detailed certainly will thank
you Mr president and
Madam protium I'm just kind of
looking through it not I think I
When we look at.
What the task force shall do
with regard to providing
policies and I'm looking and I'm
policies to promote
diversifying the state's tax
base to replace the revenue
generated from the natural
resources extraction sector in
develop policies to replace some
revenue and that revenue is
currently being generated is the
intent to I just.
I'm so Mister president senator.
You know the a previous speaker
That certainly could be
something that this task force
moves forward.
The purpose of this is to think
bigger for New Mexico and to
brought us today.
But it's not going to last.
And the public is asking for a
more diverse economy.
but certainly I'm hoping that
these folks will come up with
suggestions like we heard before
look at agriculture differently
I wish we actually grew food
here.
feeds the cattle and for the
carnivores that's great you know
we do cotton but we don't do
food so there is one area so
Thank you Mr president thank you
and
I guess you know what I'm
thinking about many of the
regard to many of these pieces
of legislation that the intent
is to to either quickly or
slowly at pretty much take the
That we can deny that so so as
we make policy in this policies
being developed by this task
force to do that exact thing
it's almost like the bill.
near term we are dependent on
oil and gas and and I appreciate
that because we've had that
conversation and and you
understand that and.
reading a little bit closer to
some of the language and like on
page seven talking about
implement as much is legally
permissible the strategic plan
I think Texas on the road to
doing.
A lot too quickly removed
following guests from the
picture and then what does that
Also present that part is in
here because this is a a general
statute about secretary duties
and general powers.
So that that is just amending
the duties of cabinet
secretaries it's a different
section that's why I said really
the meat of the bills on page
thank you very much Mr president
and an average somewhere in the
bill and as a center Brett
reminded me this isn't the bill
that we saw in committee so
that's maybe why have questions
that are impacted by the change
in policy and I'm just trying to
figure out how the task force
and who they're going to include
because I represent both Lea and
Eddy County and and when you
think about it I looked on the
website for new mocha and.
Hundred thirty four thousand
jobs related to this and that
those jobs over time is policies
that are implemented through
this legislative body I'm going
to decrease
oil and gas both from for with
counties where they are down and
so I looked also at the New
Mexico clean energy workforce
development studies which is a
new study and I found that
the renewable energy sector.
Those jobs many of our temporary
and then of it takes very few
Thirty four thousand oil and gas
jobs and I guess I continue to
be concerned.
As we pass legislation and we do
applaud the industry for doing.
Thanks that are making it more
palatable with regard to
what many people are concerned
It will always be a boom and
bust in it may be that even in
the best areas we still get
revenue from oil and gas.
And so
sort of a pathway to reaching
the goal in the minds of many on
this floor that we simply just
don't want oil and gas and and
that's okay I won't be around
state of New Mexico so that
that's all I have thank.
Senator Kernan we do have
further debate Senator Ingle
followed by Senator committee
followed by Senator Woods
Senator Ingle.
Committees.
Created before and it's always
Anything to me anytime a
Something like that I think.
And the.
L. so when there's also the the
designate.
The designees will be and will
be the ones generally speaking
that attend these meetings and
then never can have the ability
to really truly make the
The bigness of it seems to me
makes it really tough to to make
it work but that's just my
opinion and but I can't I can't
Thank you Mr president
and to the settlement for time I
just have a few comments for the
top of page four on the bill
Mr Dale yes.
Thank you very much then pretend
Mr president and then this is a
bit of an unfair speculative
question but didn't be safe to
assume that at least some of the
Mr president I have no idea I I
hope they heard us center shares
a passionate speech about.
Of the.
though but the really I just
hope they are and I I just had a
few comments like I said for the
top of page four this is
something that we just really
really really need and I think
we have bipartisan consensus in
what what is you know what the
proper role of attacks and we
start to unfortunately drift
into partisanship we talk about
that issue but at least we agree
growing food I mean that that
goes right to the heart of what
I wanted to briefly comment on
today is what I think is nothing
but my what I want the the
hopefully the listeners who was
listening to understand is this
ultimately is about prosperity
you know in my opinion.
To increase prosperity what we
have to do is we have to
increase the GDP of New Mexico.
Four hundred dollars a year and
you go there and there's a lot
of poor people and you go to
Norway or United States that
have hide you know fairly high
GPAs and you see in general
prosperity.
just speak because I I think we
police are starting out in a
spirit of bipartisanship in
first like to give a shout out
to the mayor of Albuquerque Tim
within Albuquerque and a few
years ago he says some of that
are really really agree on and I
quote a company can Enron an
independent professional that in
process through political
subsidy two point six million
dollars of taxpayer funds to
bring top golf to Albuquerque
and I I I personally I I have
light dolls
really appreciated that a
statement from mayor Keller and
I think it gets really gets to
the top of page four on the bill
about diversifying the the tax
for everyone but what we've done
is we've done things that like
the City of Albuquerque then
they overrode his veto
unfortunately and you know
brought this very specific.
subsidies out to say okay we've
got this one little industry
over here let's bring you in and
this one little industry over
here let's let's bring you in I
subsidies for for everybody for
for anybody we have to have
equity
and so.
Raise sufficient revenue for
limited government.
The limited government and
sufficient revenue.
Number to be fair and neutral
headquartered in New Mexico I
think there's only what either
one or zero fortune five hundred
companies are headquartered in
Mexico some like that and so
we're giving our our our theory
us picking a winner winner when
I say we're gonna pick this in
particular industries that
that's not going to work it's
not going to help our poor
people in New Mexico I'll
explain in a minute so it's
going to be sufficient for the
that one maybe number four
here's a here's the problem be
simple and easy.
And I think I think was center
sure that it's so that that is
very convoluted that that opens
be used to achieve non fiscal
objectives so what that means is
you shouldn't use a tax to just
punish people so punishing
industry that you don't like
what we see that a lot here as
circumstances it is that the
case but taxation should be
about a sufficient revenue for
limited government and so I hope
the comments from and pretend I
found so fascinating about the
farming I'm gonna gonna end it
at this point Karl Marx.
alienation of of the worker okay
in if we unfairly Tax.
Or we taxed too much.
Then what happens is.
tax those things we separate the
fruits of your labor from
yourself.
The taxation does not saying we
don't need any taxation but when
we do that too much.
less income read less savings
less investment if we tax those
things we're gonna get when we
subsidize things well we're
we're subset we subsidize a lot
kind of a dangerous policy there
the other the other thing that
I've seen and I think this was
left out I I'm not critiquing
the bill for leaving this out no
I'm gonna zoom zoom is here I
I'm pretty sure it's there
somewhere
but here's the problem with when
I hear folks over and over and
When federal money comes in from
the outside.
We're not increasing the GDP
we're not increasing the amount
I'm not against it necessarily.
What is it going to help poor
people is it going to help
prosperity in New Mexico I know
a lot of you think the answer is
yes and I think short term
And so the those are the
problems and concerns I have
with the bill and I I I'm
pleading with people who are
hopefully going to be on this
commission as I do expect this
the state's tax base well we
we've got to stay on track with
those goals of and that spirit
of bipartisanship in not waiver
from that.
standing out over his or her
land there's nothing there.
Nothing nothing really of the
value.
In the farmer works.
people out of poverty in New
Mexico where there were there
was nothing of value and then
humans in our innovativeness in
our hard work in our team work
increase the GDP of New Mexico
so I hope that we can focus our
eyes on that and give the spirit
toward those sorts of concepts
as this commission goes for
Thank you Mr president and been
up I appreciate the debate today
and and I know the the sponsor
of the bill also appreciates the
want to say that you know many
people look at state government.
And they're saying.
What are the secretary is doing
now.
what's pass this bill.
Okay they just do it at that
point in time.
Why don't why do we need to make
a special time for them to come
With this data zoom in with this
day of of of internet if you
want if you want somebody to
chime in on something all you
There's a really good suggestion
and there.
And they don't have to be the
people that have the biggest
grease to come up with that
pleasure to see the fruits of
your labor.
There's a lot of great pleasure.
But just Senator Ingle and I was
just talking about.
Then we'll talk about you know
value added agriculture and in
different things in you know I
can I can raise a calf out there
thousand dollars in it.
And sometimes I can get twenty
two hundred dollars for it.
And then Senator the packing
plant and that guy.
He can actually.
He can actually say I'm going to
give you Mr rancher Mr feedlot
operator this amount of money.
man in the in the grocery store
can say well I've got to put
more margin on that.
And he can kind of dictate what
he sells it for now the consumer
whatever.
The very one that the.
I guess what I'm trying to say
And.
The value added three the the
things that they bring in the
most money to an individual.
grain the farmer puts in it.
But the American consumer is.
Is buying the package is buying
The industry in the state.
And we go outside the state to
buy the boxes cereal to bring in
the state.
No I is is who we are we are
critical of oil and gas in we've
all talked about on gas but
methane.
But Mr president did you know
one of the biggest agriculture
methane the matters.
greatest emitter of methane.
But that's just a fact of life
that's that's.
We don't want to start growing
rice.
Madam proteome is able to to
bring this group together and I
hope they come up with some
great ideas and I hope they
bring industry into the states
we cannot prosper.
him pick and choose.
Maybe we should actually go to
open this business up.
In state.
And say to our to our different
colleges and.
And those people that we need to
We pre destined in your outcome
in life.
I truly believe America is the
greatest country in the world.
If we do use the natural things
the natural resources that are
in our state to employ our
people.
Thank you Senator Woods further
debate Senator Gus.
The settlement pro tem yield.
Mr Dale.
Yes.
did not hear your billing
committees us trying to
understand why the Senate
finance struck the department of
finance administration and
reached out to me and said we
would like to be the lead
sponsor in this we have started
this work because we've gotten a
grant from the federal
that federal press and so they
are the lead agency rather than
a DFA.
Mr president Madam pro tem I and
represented in the a line up Mr
president Mr president and
Senator of the report to the
Mr president pro tem then that
brings me back to the dialogue
that we had with the.
Senator sure is on of why we
wouldn't have more the public on
detail get out to the public and
I'm just wondering will this
report be open to the public.
This presents Senator that
we had a task force with the
CYFD I made a trip from Eunice
to Albuquerque and even as a
legislator was not allowed in I
recognizing participant in this
then they'll understand the
outcome whether it's a lost soul
and gastropods the increase in
Thank you Mr president and would
sponsor please yield for just a
we've done in the past and I
just maybe just I don't remember
well enough to to know but you
know we've worked on we've had
Mr president well I don't I
don't really know what the
energy road map is this.
her apartment work on climate
change and how it affected their
agencies so they done some of
secretaries each of them get to
a point to.
So I just I don't know how else
to answer your question it's I
think it's substantially
word how you understood because
I can't I can't draw the
distinction I'd I'd you know
maybe there's someone here that
could but
we we talked to them about it if
The sponsor of that bill
mentioned bill eleven.
and and Senate bill eleven is
dealing a lot with carbon
capture and and things of those
nature.
Is that gonna be problematic
for.
We're we're trying to go on
Senate bill eleven.
for transportation fuels that
that's not what this is this is
trying to look at and I'm just
gonna borrow Senators metes
raised because I like it so much
here to see how we can do
something like open up mining
for rare earth metals to you
know the sky's the limit really
if we're working together on
personally I believe corn to the
scientists the pretty soon we
better be doing it or we're all
in trouble more trouble than now
that we have using all of the
industry.
Senate Bill Levin is about a
specific.
Cleaning up our transportation
different than this.
Thank you Mr president madam pro
tem the.
You know I I gash when we look
red tone transition way from
Coles to help
Ranch transition away from
years but when those industries
sometimes you know I think Colin
rental may have gone away
primarily because of
Reliant on the extractive
industries in order to.
Find for quality of life of our
sedition jurors there's no.
provider of revenues to our
state.
And while I've I think I
understand the.
You know the motivation here I
And I'm I'm a musical sound that
more appreciative of what those
industries bring to wish.
And.
Maybe there's some changes to
List of the bill that appears to
gesture tried to say this one's
bad we're going to go to
something that we think better.
well we're fortunate to have won
a gash in New Mexico.
Those of us who live here of oil
and gas one here we I mean I
don't think our back pocket has
Sure well I I.
I'm tryin to appreciate this
bill and I I just can't quite
get there but I'm I'm trying to
because I think you've got
that as we do that we can be
maybe a little more.
I'm comfortable is not the right
word but we just used to
understand that what we have and
understand that as we're trying
to do different things were also
trying to make sure that they're
cared for their respective there
are
So
Mr president with that Sanchez
thank you for the debate thank
you for the discussion thanks
Senator Griggs seen no further
debate.
No objections so ordered.
Minister to close on the bill.
I thank you Mr president this is
know with one person said this
is this is way too big and the
same person voted to double the
number of people on the
committee so I think we're kind
to help diversify our economy I
hear it every day it's a
drumbeat.
Please can we work on housing
it says is can we work together
and we worked together on all
the kinds of the kind of at of
industry that we want here we
government by the secretary
they can put up to sixteen
public members required to talk
to the stakeholders and the
written I believe it will do
that if we can all have a little
faith.
From the fact.
I move that Senate bill one
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca now Senator Brandt
Senator Candelaria now senators
have on this.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
how to meal Senator meal yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan no Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
No Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle no Senator
propios Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
senator.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
By a vote of twenty five in the
affirmative six in the negative
Senate bill one twelve as
amended has passed the Senate
Senator Stewart.
of Business messages from the
governor the reader to read.
Senator executive message number
six.
Your president pro temper
Stewart and members of the
clause enacted by the fifty
fifty provided for session two
thousand twenty one respectfully
yours Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor that'll show the
message from the governor has
Mr president your tax business
and transportation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
bill two eighty.
Has had it under consideration
and report same with
junior chairman Centel Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate agree to
be allowed to re all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion detector
reflected they were acted upon
Senate bill two ninety two.
Do pass and it's for referred to
the finance committee.
Senate bill two ninety nine do
pass as amended and that's
committee substitute for Senate
bill three twenty one do pass
and it's referred to the finance
committee.
And Senate bill three sixty do
pass as amended and it's
committee report.
I
see no objections the committee
part has been adopted and the
record of the journal so that
they're acted upon individually.
one in which the Legislative
Council makes the following
appointment Catherine Allen is a
member of the state investment
council for to commencing upon
Senator Ivey Soto.
Agency present asking us some
some of the three to be allowed
Legislative Council letter dated
January twenty three two
thousand twenty one in which the
Legislative Council makes the
following reappointment Greg
burns as a member of the board
of directors of the New Mexico
Senate confirmed this re
appointment.
And Senate memorial seven do
pass and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Senator Daniel A. Ivey
committee report has been
adopted in the journal show that
they're acted upon individually.
Mr president your Education
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill two eighty
nine has had it under
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
senator William P. sold chairman
missiles thank you Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read both of the
reported without recommendation
as amended and that's referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted senator
William P. souls chairman souls
I move adoption the committee
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we got our business
confirmations and ideal to
Senator Ivey Soto.
Mr president I hereby submit the
credentials of Catherine Allen
who's been reported to the state
investment council and I now
yield to senator Wirth to
present conferee.
state investment council this is
pursuant to a January twenty
third twenty twenty one a letter
from the Legislative Council
the board of the Santa Fe group.
she someone for over thirty
years.
Has been a leading voice in
technology strategy and
corporate board governance.
the Richardson administration.
And she was a president Obama
appointee to the virus called
perra board.
We had a really good hearing in
state investment council thank
you senator Moore said her
credentials are impeccable.
you know there were questions
raised about some of her
focus will be on her fiduciary
responsibility to manage those
funds for all our New Mexicans
On the conformational service
center pirtle.
You Mr president and just inform
the body of voted known
committee and it was for
multiple reasons you know I
think
she was a governor's appointee
and not the appointee that's
supposed to represent the
legislative body legislative
body prides itself in being
bipartisan and I don't think
Senator Lopez Mr president
unanimous consent to excuse
Senators pope and Ortiz Y. Pino
except for purposes of the call.
philanthropist in the community
and of when she has participated
in the community she has not pre
governor for bringing this name
forward thank you.
Any further debate we are for
the debate on the confirmation
Center Brandt is present like to
Wirth close thank you Mr
president and I do also think
the governor for this
appointment I believe that the
miss Allen has the credentials
cases to do that with the with
the state as well so pursuant to
section six dash eight dash two
and the letter submitted by the
Legislative Council Service
In part of the point of order
this isn't a nomination by let's
council not by the governor.
Senator Wirth Mr president
believe I said Legislative
Thank you senator seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria no senators
have on this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Hamblen Senator Hamblen
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Lopez yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator McKenna.
yes Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be now.
Senator by the.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator senator no senator
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of twenty six in the
affirmative a in the negative
Legislative Council makes the
confirmed by the New Mexico
state Senate Senator Wirth.
Thank you ladies and gentleman
sent.
Senator Wirth.
twenty twenty one I submit the
name of Greg burns Senator Wirth
all you'll to Senator Ivy Soto
is an R&B song center so the
thank you mistress present is
present here by some of the
Wirth thank you Mr president so
this is a reappointment to a
second four year term for Greg
burns to the New Mexico
bioscience Authority the
on biotech and encouraging
development of that in just of
the industry here in New Mexico
Mr burns currently in his other
advocate for its support
accelerated growth and promote
economic value to elected
officials.
So clearly he is in this
business and is willing to step
and we stand for questions thank
you senators we're debating the
confirmation of Greg burns
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president support of the
confirmation of of Mr burns the
the bioscience Authority and so
hopefully Mr burns I think I
think you agree that that he's
going to be a watchdog for the
bioscience Authority he
described it as mismanagement
president thanks in part of
further debate Santo Domingo.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president would senator Wirth
There's always just a little bit
of a different intonation that
he has in his voice have you
noticed that when that person
from his district and they're
getting put on something.
blushing a little bit with pride
like it and his covered up a
little bit but no this is a
great gentleman and I'm glad
he's on the board of directors
state of New Mexico and I know
that to he's one of senator
Wirth range because I can just
tell that little lane he has in
his life so it's certainly
thank you Mr president pursuant
to section six dash eight dash
to NMSA nineteen seventy eight
and a letter submitted by Raul
Burciaga director of the
Legislative Council Service
dated January twenty third
Senator is we're voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
serve on this.
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey Senator
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil yes.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Vote of thirty six in the
affirmative on the negative
Legislative Council makes the
following appointment of Greg
burns as a member of the board
confirmed by the New Mexico
state Senate Senator Wirth thank
you very much ladies and
gentlemen Senate.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
introduced by Representative all
cone for the military and
Veterans Affairs Committee.
A joint resolution proposing an
amendment to article eight
dollars to ten thousand dollars.
House joint resolution three.
Also joint resolution three
having been read twice by title
An act relating to licensing.
Amending and enacting sections
of nutrition and dietetics
practice act to clarify
dietitian nutritionist and
board.
Providing a biennial licensure
fee providing exemptions from
fees for active duty military
service personnel and spouses
licensure requirements for
current licensed practitioners
creating title protection house
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for house
bill one forty seven.
bill one forty seven house bill
one hundred seven introduced by
representative Thompson.
And act relating to health
coverage and acting sections of
regulation Act to provide
covered persons with parity of
access and payment between
participating mail order
pharmacies and participate in
transportation committee intends
to Senate finance committee
house bill seven house bill one
oh five introduced by
Representative small an act
Providing for the sharing of in
the tax payments among certain
school district clarifying that
certain payments to the state
for an electric transmission
project shall be made by the
been read twice by title is
ordered to the Senate tax system
expectation committee fence to
the Senate finance committee
house bill one of five house
bill ninety three introduced by
method house bill ninety three.
Possible ninety three have been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Education
Committee and thence to Senate
relating to public school
finance.
Pacifying uses for state
equalization guarantee
distribution offsets for certain
federal and property tax revenue
introduced by Representative
Gail Armstrong the next relating
to mining creating the position
of deputy mine inspector
prescribing duties house bill
nine house bill forty three
introduced by Representative
Sheryl Williams Stapleton.
An act relating to public
education and acting the black
Education Act creating a
requiring the public education
and higher education departments
to cooperate in developing
programs curricula and
instructional materials that
making an appropriation house
bill forty three possible forty
three having a read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
Education Committee house bill
Never mind madam.
House floor substitute for house
bill two seventy five an act
Also for substitute for house
bill two seventy five having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate tax
business impact.
The house for substitute for
And act making appropriation to
the board of regents of the
university of New Mexico for a
demonstration project to assess
the feasibility and
acceptability of an injectable
opioid treatment program.
bill forty six house bill ninety
one introduced by Representative
Christine Trujillo an act
relating to courts increasing
the maximum mediation fee amount
a metropolitan court shall
Committee House Bill ninety one
house bill one eighty three
introduced by Representative
Roger Montoya.
And act relating to children
eliminating certain fines and
one eighty three.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house consumer
disconnections of qualifying
electric gas water and
wastewater utility customers who
incurred arrears during the
Corona virus disease two
thousand nineteen public health
emergency.
partial forgiveness of utility
bill arrears providing
eligibility requirements
authorizing cost recovery for
public utilities allowing
electric cooperatives to deduct
development block grant act
creating a grant program to
implement energy efficiency
measures in low income
households authorizing the New
Mexico mortgage finance
Requiring utilities to submit
reports on energy affordability
and access to electric and water
utility service authorizing
natural resources committee
substitute for house consumer
and public affairs committee
substitute for house bill two oh
six.
House Bill two oh six I've been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate tax business and
transportation and tends to
Senate finance.
House bill two hundred forty
them and they don't meet the
threshold for the emergency
clause in the house does it get
dropped towards emergency clause
before comes to the Senate.
message says without more.
Thank you.
House bill two fourteen
introduced by Representative
Ferrary.
two section one as amended which
provides for reduced minimum
wages for persons with
disabilities house bill two
fourteen.
House bill one twenty three
introduced by Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong.
An act relating to public health
allowing me to his municipal and
county establishment of overdose
pursuant to or use an
established overdose prevention
program house bill one twenty
three also one twenty three have
been read twice by title is
Creating the crime of damage to
property by theft or attempted
theft of regulated material
providing penalties house bill
Roger Montoya for the
legislative education study
committee and act relating to
public school finance increasing
the fine arts education program
unit house bill one thirty
eight.
eight House Bill to twenty four
introduced by Representative
Lara an act relating to public
assistance changing the
structure of and term limits
served on community action
bill two twenty four house bill
two thirty one introduced by
Representative Georgene Louis
and act relating to elections
providing protections for
polling locations on Indian
changes house bill two thirty
one possible to thirty one
hundred read twice by title is
referred to Senate rules
committee and the Senate in the
in rural and social affairs
provisions requiring oversight
of regional housing authorities
by the mortgage finance
authority.
Requiring regional housing
authorities to comply with the
United States housing act of
understanding or other agreement
without prior approval house
bill one ninety six also one
ninety six have been read twice
by title is referred to the
Health and public affairs
committee.
Madam president that was only
given once committee yes.
So it's it's representatives
else bill and yes it was it was
given the state's that should be
there I thank you.
fire protection fund to the fire
protection grant Fund providing
that the fire protection grant
Fund shall not revert at the end
of the fiscal year.
firefighters house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty eight.
Also appropriations finance
An act relating to vital records
eliminating fees for certified
birth certificates for homeless
individuals eliminating
the Senate health of public
affairs committee house bill one
seventy nine and house bill one
fifty three introduced by
Representative McQueen and act
requirements for all elections
requiring the reporting of
monetary contributions received
during the legislative session
fundraising probation period.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president
unanimous that we go about our
business announcements and
miscellaneous if there's no
section were on announcements
announcements Senator Brandt
this presents not not too long
today but we've we've had madam
president we've had some
the discussions on the floor and
was saying no too often and so I
I just want to it if the body is
okay I just want to share she
got me the special pen.
That here all just.
would remember home so so I just
want to share that with you just
give a moment of levity.
Senator Representative that
sounds like yes to me.
I've got to ask a question who.
Who authorized this fence that's
around us was it of of speaker
Yes Senator sure we had a
meeting with our security
experts your leadership was part
of the our leadership was part
threats that we had heard and
they offered to put up the kind
of security that we have that.
So madam president
I got that but what's the threat
we have listened to the security
experts and they told us that it
should remain the end.
So madam president.
course because we know walls
don't work.
But
I don't know of any other place
that has wall around their
capital.
Of the security so I'm just
real to me and madam president.
I actually lived in places where
people blew up cars and
buildings and I'm not seeing
blown up in Santa Fe.
concern on January sixth and
after.
Has passed.
And I think it's time for us to
actually a quote from somebody
that lives on the top floor of
this building early things out
up there.
And maybe maybe we're worried
about people bringing COVID into
the building maybe maybe that's
it.
you know madam president panic
always creates more death and
destruction then the underlying
cause of the panic.
We know that we have serious
I think you would be a great
step in reducing the panic in
helping the people of New Mexico
if we took away the fence which
humbly ask of you and the
leadership of both sides in the
leadership in the other the
other chamber.
Which we think this.
Just like they do what Walmart
Lowe's home depot.
Certainly we're is leased the
smartest Walmart folks.
This is serious and I do think
the citizens of New Mexico think
this is serious to they're
wondering why they cannot come
to their house the house they
built.
We went from the most open to
the most closed.
And nobody outside of this
little secret ball knows why.
fence he would not stop me for a
few seconds.
It is only a symbol of panic and
This is a simple that needs to
come down now.
Madam president tear down that
fence.
Other announcements Senator
three fifteen thank you thank
you other announcements Senator
Stefanics thank you madam
president the your Senate
conservation committee will meet
Thank you madam president and
members of the Senate.
Sen Indian role in cultural
affairs committee will be
meeting at nine AM tomorrow
Senate bill four thirty one and
Thank you madam chair I rise at
this time as we're closing our
business to commemorate some
folks that are no longer with
us.
as as as I've done it before in
lives to acts of horrible
violence and discrimination over
the past year.
Madam chair all read the names
of the following persons who
were murdered in two thousand
and twenty.
They're all transgender and
Dustin Parker age twenty five.
Lisa Luciano Ruiz twenty four.
the transgender woman thirty
three.
Gianna masker transgender woman.
Serena Angelique Velasquez for
almost thirty two.
L. A. J. Rogan twenty twenty
date.
A black transgender man.
Domenic Remi sells black
transgender woman.
thirty seven year old
transgender woman.
Brian Egypt powers forty three
year old black transgender
person.
Jackie Peters thirty two year
old black transgender woman.
Three black twenty seven year
old black transgender woman.
Steinborn Taylor white non
Cassia hardy twenty two year old
black transgender woman.
Asia Russell Ron spears.
Leah radiation day twenty eight
years old.
Policia Harris thirty three.
Brooklyn the Shona twenty a
black transgender woman.
Was killed after someone
discovered her true gender
identity.
In us carriers that are thirty
nine Asia Gen a faster twenty
two J. Matias Ms Kimberly fee
record as I've done every year.
Madam president because our
country has.
A long way to go in achieving
the promise of equal protection
under the law.
killed you the person who
mentioned.
My identity as a gay man is not
a defense to violent crimes
against me.
So I ask us all to remember
these people.
madam president I thank my
colleagues for again allowing me
this opportunity thank you all
may god bless the Senate.
Senator.
down that fence that today and
Senate finance I think we're
just gonna get some lounge
chairs and see if you can access
succeed today.
If you want to go ahead and take
it down take it down but I think
you just the the presiding
officer said who directed the
fence and I think that would be
thirty two for members time to
get where they needed to get
done soon fell full agenda.
I do want to make the body aware
will set up the language
committee to start reviewing
some of that of we'll see what
the the language does we've been
working diligently on something
that I think members need to be
constitutional Supreme Court has
done that and we're gonna head
that direction slowly we may not
be able to get it all out at one
time so just be aware that
seen some of that now and
senator Rodriguez is working on
that Senator Gonzales so
as we move along the budget's
Thank thank you madam president
the.
Health and public affairs will
meet the the meeting a half hour
after the floor session we have
Representative Garcia house bill
one eighty five.
Representative
The queen and Senator Stefanics
Senate bill three oh nine.
three fifty six senator Munoz
Senate bill two ninety four
Senator Stefanics Senate bill
two ninety five Senator Campos.
Madam secretary.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you madam president just
to.
Madam president yes center is
quickly as you can thank you
madam president thank you Mr
chairman so we had pieces of
legislation along the way that
we're to fund various things one
process how do we ensure that
that that that piece gets re re
positioned in the budget.
I'm Adam present center I hope
project I'll get you a dollar
amount has to that how that
works but that's what junior of
money was for was intended to
Other announcements from anyone.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent the
The more the more I have to give
me something.
As the.
We'll see you tomorrow okay.
