Senator Duhigg Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzales present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Neil but I think the
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez Representative.
Senator McKenna here Senator
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope present Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
members of the body and those in
the gallery please stand.
For the fire to relate today by
pastor Thiago Heidi S. of aven
life church here in Santa Fe
Mexico flag to be led today by
Senator Steinborn.
We pray to the one who is the
object of our collective faith
legislative process that will
require of them encouraging
sensibility and wisdom and I'm
grateful because I know father
that you enjoyed giving these
As these beloved leaders begin
their work today I pray keep
them from the ways of this
broken world ways of greed
another with kindness and
generosity knowing that behind
every single idea that will be
voiced in this placed in the
days to come there is a person
but serves the other in love so
as they gather to discuss
business as they make decisions
that will affect thousands of
people in this beautiful state
never forget the faces of the
elderly population of our state
so that they might not lose
sight of the work and effort it
took for all of us to be in this
place today the faces of the
decisions maybe feel the weight
of that responsibility but maybe
they know that they do not carry
that weight hello so go with
them for their walk with them
together I pray in the name of
Jesus amen.
Ladies and gentlemen of the
Senate honored guests and staff
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
stands one nation under god
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
on that list also needles that
medica elaborate boutique
unconnected to sent the woman a
seal on on the so in the CBA
You may be seated.
Would like to welcome everyone
to today's session I'll yield to
senator Wirth to get us going.
business analysis miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so I'd like to just
the first start by thanking.
Bill hice for his words I just
so everyone knows he also has
this morning were particularly
appropriate so thank you so
much.
So just for the members we're
going to do our script and and
the webcast and we're not going
to do a joint session will do it
from our seats here are so I
asked that.
We get our work done up front
and if we have a little time we
back to you to let us know the
next order of business.
Thank you senator Senator Wirth
will go ahead and go on to the
next the motion there and then
we can proceed from there thank
Senate for the second session
there's no objection it is so
ordered.
Senator Wirth.
I ask unanimous consent that the
officers elected the first
session of the fifty fifty
Thank you Mr president the next
item of business is going to be
in the form of a motion on I
want to let everyone know that
it's a little different.
What if we can come back and
process to have members sign the
official.
I'm gonna call a few times so
that we can social diss and
doing now's your sign in the
official roster opening this
legislative session thank you.
This one right.
We will have Senator Candelario
In here for every one of them.
This is still.
Will your daughter stayed
strangely.
Then we'll have senator dago
Next we'll have Senator Hamblen
Senator Hemphill Senator Hickey
and Senator Ingle.
prefer black or blue.
Which would you like.
I.
I did also like.
Happy.
Thank you very much.
That.
Yes.
Right to.
next.
I'm gonna miss.
The state with the.
Okay
can you want on your phone.
Hi are you.
News I can training.
Was George.
Senator Neville.
should be no Senator Stewart and
senator Pimentel.
Okay.
On.
Senator.
You.
Gary.
So many ways.
I just.
If.
Senator Schmedes Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you for.
Thank.
We've learned that.
The office here.
Thank you.
Yes coffees.
Rating okay hello.
Yes that's right.
It will more because this is a
yes.
The.
Send new.
Senator Steinborn.
Then we'll have Senator Stewart
Senator Stewart.
Can I keep this pandemic.
we got here later and then if
It's great.
Senator Lopez Senator Lopez
thank you very much Mr president
NMAA consent to allow cameras on
the both the floor and in the
gallery the no objection it is
under the rules adopted by this
second session of the fifty
fourth legislature amended as
follows a Senate rule four dash
four dash one is enacted to read
of persons physically present
ensuring that those persons were
a mask that covers the mouth and
nose and not consume in food in
in the Senate gallery Senate
committee rooms rooms connected
there with the Senate lounge in
the Senate hallway shall follow
proper social distancing
including by limiting the number
of persons physically present
rule seven dash one dash one as
an actor to read a Senator shall
be considered to be present and
in attendance for the purpose of
establishing a quorum doing
business are voting during a
confirmed by the presiding
officer the Senate for purposes
of the call members were present
must vote on the legislation
that is subject to the call.
The rules from the second
session of the fifty fourth
legislature so that's the thirty
day session in twenty twenty pre
last for the last year those
rules are not in place now so
this would propose to again take
as the base rules the rules from
the thirty day session twenty
twenty and then these three
thank you senator is the there
has been a motion all you'll to
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president can I get for
clarification was this a
change rules after the beginning
of the legislative session which
was last year it requires a two
thirds majority vote is that
correct.
Mr president previously stated
that it does and that is
think all of us wish it wasn't
but we have a lot of changes in
the last year I I think we we
need to go through the regular
process of having the Senate
that it would expire at the end
of last year
and we need to do the proper
committee process of having the
rules committee take a look at
what changes the CDC is
recommending.
C. Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes thank you Mr president as
president can I just get some
clarity.
up the rules for the last
session or or do we have a
motion to to read doctors last
session and to adopt those rules
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president and thank you center
motion to basically have a
baseline rules which is typical
we always do that but we're
going back here to the prior
thirty day session three comment
and then with these three
though the rules under which we
normally operate and then
adopting those three rules I
suspect we may be able to do the
first half that by unanimous
consent.
back that was the plan I agree
with you can be done but I think
if we if the motion passes we
don't need to do that.
Any further discussion Senators.
Senator Baca.
Candelaria Senator Candelaria
yes senators have on this
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond now
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Kernan now Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator by the Iglesias Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Sanchez senator Sanchez now
Senators committees.
Senator Stewart is now Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics Senator soprano yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
By a vote of twenty six and
didn't request to to explain his
vote centers committee.
Thank you very much Mr president
and I just want to briefly
explain why voted no
colleagues
I do want to also.
Respect.
As I've spoken with many people
that have a different worldview
from me.
would not forcefully approach
you and respect your distance
now I voted no.
Because.
As an individual.
and upon critical review of the
data we have for the way we're
using widespread mask use during
this outbreak.
I have not seen that masks
difference between the control
The case and control groups.
it was also released by the CDC
they have their own data they
look at the Ohio school
districts no difference between
us and on mast for for public
school in Ohio in the list goes
on and on and on
but that's why I voted no
because I do not believe that
there is a scientific basis for
what we're doing and I really
have to follow my critical
everyone else here and once this
rule change occurs which I know
it will I will certainly abide
by the rules duly adopted by
this chamber thank you Mr
president.
vote which would have been a
vote of twenty eight in the
affirmative a two thirds vote
and vote of twenty eight in the
affirmative with forty one
members in the chamber we can
reach that so that's why the
Concept of respect and we just
ask that everyone understand and
respect each other we've done a
very good job of of wearing face
coverings in this chamber
something I very much appreciate
appreciate the statement that
was made even allied I
fundamentally disagree with that
but out of respect I just think
we all need to do that and be
safe.
analyst incentives action.
Seeing no objection.
The motion is successful Senator
Wirth.
office of sergeant arms of the
New Mexico state Senate and all
yield to president pro tem Mimi
Stewart thank you Mr president I
nominate Paula Lee body for the
that nomination cease and the
agency poll you will but he be
elected sergeant at arms of the
Senate by acclamation Mr
president Senator Lopez I second
the motion.
If there is any objection.
See no objection.
I would like to congratulate our
new sergeant honestly haven't
At this time.
The constitution of the United
States.
State and defend them against
all enemies whatsoever.
And that I will faithfully and
impartially.
According to the best of my
ability.
So help me god.
Graduations.
Ladies and gentlemen of the
audience in the body history was
just made.
As a first ever female woman.
Senator Wirth Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that time
piece of the majority floor
that we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
From that order business scene
objection announcements and
miscellaneous senator Wirth.
Give me one second.
like to yield to other members
to begin introducing their gas
but when we get to the one
o'clock time that we will take a
break here from our governor and
then we'll come back and
Neville etcetera Shindo.
Madam is consent to introduce my
guests there no objection
precede Senator thank you of
this afternoon I am a very
Is our governor of Dr raven the
rental who is also a
veterinarian and alumni of the
New Mexico State University so
Aggie.
There we go.
lieutenant governor.
Are you a U. N. M. Lobel.
We also referred to the the
secretary to governor as the
people's governor as many of you
the pueblo of Amos and so today
the pueblo him as is the sole
towards beacon village left in
please give me a north will
welcome.
Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr president I have in
the gallery right above me here
I can't quite see here but my
everybody know thank you Mr
chairman members present my wife
time.
Other announcements Senator
Pirtle.
Middle child George Hamish and
little Dorothea also known as
tortilla so if you would help me
welcome them and then I'd like
to make just one small
announcement thank you.
earlier and you know I think it
it's kind of funny how we always
talk about respect but it's only
wants to be one way and you know
I'd be more than happy out of
in the gallery and you know it's
it's unfortunate because we're
volunteer legislature.
You know I I volunteer my time
by choice thirty days but yet my
little hit or miss here and
there but don't forget that this
moment for us is special and
that was taken away so now when
I'm not playing catch with easy
can have mutual respect but
don't feel respected me if
you're not willing to give me
the same thank you Mr president.
Further announcements etcetera
we have Senator Diamond.
from Los crucis she although she
spends most of her time either
with their grandkids in elephant
Butte or in classes on this show
up my oldest daughter is Katie
diamond thirteen who's an eighth
restatement is an avid sportsman
these two Sierra County is known
for our trail system here and I
would like to to believe that
maybe the diamond girls forge
much to that there so thank you
guys for allowing me the
Mr president unanimous consent
to introduce my guest here in
objects and proceed Senator
thank you Mr president with me
today is my brother on the phone
for politics at an early age and
both Lobo's and with me along
with my brother is a county
commissioner Christine boost
does of Rio Arriba County I left
my seat two years early as a
brother and commissioner boost
us to the Senate.
Any further announcements
a moment and introduce my wife
Joan who's up in the gallery
Joan has a the owners put up
with this now for for ten years
and without her support of
merry Jones since nineteen
seventy eight.
It's been the R. spin best part
of my life show thank you and
Senator Sanchez.
Mr president of the center
introduce my family today no
objection proceed Senator.
And the baby there Carly those.
And that's four of the five were
missing one Cameri she couldn't
make it today she's at Texas
So thank you for having me and
let me introduce my family
they're very appreciative.
Welcome thank you senator.
Senator Steinborn.
kind of surprises him sitting up
in the gallery I want to know
how sorry Jack I want to
acknowledge recently retired
assistant county manager for
Dona ana county Chuck McMahon
literally decades to whatever
needed to get done whatever
zoning whatever infrastructure.
Political on political track was
at the heart of it and really
his a career public service and
appreciate it.
And this trusty sidekick Charlie
me for this for this session and
we have our anniversary every
single session so I'm going over
a lot after this after a after
I'm all done here and also want
See no more nonsense we do have
two more we have Senator Moores
and Senator Brandt centre Morris
vigorous presence want to you
know here we are fifty nine
majority to the minority party
so if you want to work together.
Stopping teenage girl on
Twitter.
Sen Senator Brandt.
everyone knows she she's a Saint
for being married to me for so
long and
I I made sure that she wasn't
old enough to know whether when
this is my you know second
regular session and my wife
hasn't been able to join me down
here and and I will say that you
though we had the email us so we
guess we would have so I think
that's ridiculous I think it was
it's a mess.
and I I think that we need to
to to to reconsider look at all
the facts not just what our site
is pushing out thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Brandt.
Si no further announcements
Senator Wirth.
when that happens just in terms
of where we're going we are
gonna have business on the
Senate floor after the state of
the state
Senator momentarily center
place.
off of a big game or the launch
of some great battle some will
describe it that way but I
encourage you to do what you can
to resist the perception of the
a sacred thing and we're all on
the same team today and in fact
every day.
At the outset of every
legislative session I encourage
effective service can deliver
for the workers and families all
across New Mexico who are
represented here in this
building the entrepreneurs and
but I believe that the values we
share as New Mexicans still
truly unite us the desire to see
our families grow and thrive the
willingness to work hard to
legislature in this
administration have gotten a lot
done we raise the minimum wage
for the first time in a decade
we've guaranteed paid sick leave
we've invested in new economic
sectors and we've sent thousands
more New Mexicans of every age
and background to college for
free.
about what people are really
feeling the needs of this moment
remained great the grief the
loss the volatility brought on
And on top of that inflation
supply chain Crisis gridlock in
Washington.
It's all making it harder for
everybody and especially regular
fiancee my grand kids all of us
there are no exceptions New
Mexicans are calling out for
safety and stability for more
together once again this
incredible state our home is on
the precipice of momentous
positive change I said that
If anything the opportunity has
grown and has multiplied
exponentially the sun is rising
on a pivotal day and I believe
everything and anything is truly
hundred and ten years of
statehood the destiny of New
Mexico is a genuine homestead of
the American dream a place where
people can grow and thrive and
coming weeks we'll set the stage
dating back decades a timid
mindset has afflicted people in
this Capitol Building a
pessimism they can be self
perspective at a moment in time
we have the money to do it all
let's not limit ourselves let's
not be unnecessarily incremental
single educator in this state a
seven percent raise this year
anymore that would be the
biggest pay Bob in recent memory
and it would put us first in the
starting salaries for every tier
of educators which means some
teachers will see a twenty
percent raise this year and let
me be clear this kind of
talented professionals our other
strategic investments in New
Mexico children and in public
education are supported and
sustained our graduation rates
support we get more kids in the
high quality apprenticeship
programs and institutions of
higher learning that would help
them build for filling careers
going to keep going let's cut
taxes for every single person in
New Mexico.
We haven't cut the sales tax in
competitive but under my tax cut
proposal New Mexicans would save
more than a hundred and seventy
million dollars every year as my
hardworking new Mexicans I agree
and I expect the legislature to
prioritize this relief.
I feel the same way about the
that taxation and we must on
burden The New Mexicans who rely
on social security benefits by
cutting their taxes this is good
for the people of New Mexico and
I will keep looking for ways to
do exactly that.
And there are more tax cuts on
the horizon our expansion of the
every dollar counts when we're
trying to support the middle
class we're trying to help
workers build careers and help
families build stability next
year.
progressive reform of our tax
code in a generation this is
real and meaningful change that
helps family keep the lights on
and keep food on the table this
so we're gonna make this economy
work for the every day New
Mexicans and we're getting it
done so let's keep going in the
next twelve months your state
state government will continue
to help keep the heat on in
hundreds of thousands of
households across our state.
We will not leave families
behind and if the Legislature
families and lift them up
because families don't need to
be worrying about a surprise
medical bills or car repairs
they don't need to worry about
We all know there's more to do
but that's the kind of progress
you can build on it should
inspire us to keep going
reducing poverty and shielding
In the last year we're eleventh
best for job growth in the
country overall in three years
we have created over ten
thousand jobs in every corner of
other businesses like the
hundreds of businesses that have
relocated here in the last three
years showing them how
successful are public private
partnerships can be and how
slimmest in rats tone who was
seeing business evaporate into
Colorado before we make changes
he was the first New Mexican to
proactive state government.
That wants to actively support
businesses will not only keep
more Cathrynn N. Reese's
People see the economic
potential of New Mexico now.
We are creating a real pipeline
jobs and opportunity.
stall us and take away years of
growth we will not have lost
another decade.
In fact despite the challenges
The number of unemployed New
Mexicans drop by five percent in
November alone.
We're expanding our economic
footprint and every single
local services in every corner
of our state.
Almost forty thousand more
students receiving high quality
education for free under my
opportunity scholarship program
The intellectual infrastructure
of a nationally competitive
state economy is being built
right here right now on campuses
helping a sprint toward our net
zero carbon deadlines and
decarbonize the transportation
sector.
But if we want to keep up our
in only one part of our state I
don't accept that any decision
maker in this building we say
that somehow this isn't their
problem.
So we need tougher penalties for
the worst of the worst the
repeat offenders and those who
have proven themselves to be a
stand with the families and
communities who have been
victimized unnecessarily by the
violent criminals that this
system needs to secure.
bars simple as that and we're
going to pass a law this session
that will keep violent criminals
behind bars until justice can be
done we will put a wedge in the
revolving door of violent crime
my first year in office violent
crime went down for the first
time in six years.
We can regain that momentum when
we make sure our local
of the department of public
safety to fund innovative new
crime fighting strategies and
hundreds of new positions
including in nineteen percent
raise for our state police
place statewide as quickly as we
can.
And I'm advocating for those
things because New Mexicans are
asking for them New Mexico is a
state that respects and supports
politics it's about basic human
respect for one another respect
from officers to the people they
serve and respect for officers
from the communities they
sure every day that justice is
done equally under the law we
all want safe communities and we
all want healthy communities
invested in affordable care for
thousands of lower income
families we've eliminated co
pays for behavioral health
services and we've begun the
timely access to the health care
they need for access at all
every community deserves high
quality care I propose a new
state government can help fill
these gaps with interventions
like these communities like
those in Valencia County are
moving toward securing a brand
expanding access to treatment
for substance abuse suicide
interventions and more.
New Mexicans call me about this
throughout the entire state we
have the resources to do so that
means in Dowling our medical
school with ten million dollars
ensuring that we keep our best
more highly skilled
professionals enter this all
important fields and it means
once and for all delivering the
health care families in the
twenty four seven.
It's not easy thousands of New
Mexicans are living the same
story unable to pay for outside
help because it's too expensive
it's time we start saying thank
you and I propose a dramatic
expansion of the state program
that directly supports
caregivers what that means is
program for the rest of the
country this is an investment in
people that goes well beyond
politics or any one politician
this is the kind of investment
for and care for our parents or
grandparents or disabled loved
ones the state government under
my leadership will help provide
for that care unequivocally care
by helping caregivers and those
they care for stay in their
homes with the financial support
they need.
On the same note it is time that
to protect our freedoms the
original building on the campus
in tier C. was built in nineteen
thirty six I think it's time for
an upgrade so I'm calling for
their families to serve we're
going to get it done because
when government has the right
tools and the right people
problems are solved yeah we can
dream big and make bold plans
officer Dagmar yung Berg in
Carlsbad took a call from a
veteran who needed some help
taking a fresh look at an old
benefits claim a claim that had
wrong turns out a lot went wrong
in the end miss young for help
this disabled veteran get full
back pay taking back twenty
years recovering seven hundred
get off food stamps and pay off
their mom's mortgage this is a
government that is solving
problems and here's why because
it is filled with New Mexicans
and New Mexicans look out for
to move forward ready to rise we
have all the tools we need my
vision is this communities all
across our state where families
Mexico where the founding ideals
of this great country equal
opportunity and justice for all
are made real and meaningful
with the pursuit of happiness is
finances we're going to fund an
unprecedented suite of new
affordable housing programs at
the state level we're going to
expand protections for voters
because we believe in democracy
would take some snow right about
now.
When my grandfather was a young
man he traveled across the state
across maces and over mountains
thousand feet in an airplane he
never could have imagined his
granddaughter would watch a
rocket blast off and literally
reach space from New Mexico.
have the power to make that kind
of a bold leap into the unknown
beyond together we have the
power to envision a bright
tomorrow and to execute that
So for the next thirty days
let's be aggressive on behalf of
the New Mexicans we're all here
to serve.
Let's remember who benefits from
who just want to live in peace
with dignity confident in the
promise of tomorrow and the
stability of today we have made
God bless New Mexico and now
let's get ready to work.
go back to that or a business
announcements and miscellaneous
that order business analysis
this thing is senator Wirth
thank you Mr president thank you
governor for the state of the
make up front anyone desiring a
flu shots the Blue Cross blue
shield van will be outside the
east side of the capitol all day
today doing flu shots on
to nine AM.
With that Mr president I yield
to any other members for
announcements and then we can
get on to our work we do have
and and she put forth many
things that I think work
consider generationally Changin
and we've got to great promise
to say thank you to that
industry for providing the
resources that will allow many
of the things that we're going
to consider during this session
and also want to just express
More environmentally safe and
moving in that direction and
sometimes they don't get credit
for that and I want this body to
this floor will remember that
every time we vote to produce a
new program or to fund a new
program that much of that
I see no further announcements
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business messages
from the governor we're on that
Senate pursuant to article four
section five B. two of the New
Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
two five a bill increasing the
procurement code preference for
resident businesses and
contractors eliminating the time
limitation for special
contractors respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
general show the message from
the governor has been received.
Senator executive message number
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council Service
drafting number two two one five
an annual registration fee and
establishing a clean fuel
standard fund.
Senate executive message number
two channel show the message
from the governor has been
received.
Mexico constitution I'm
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth the legislature second
session submission of a bill
bearing Legislative Council
teachers were sex respectfully
yours Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor the gentle show that
the message from the governor
has been received some of the
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council Service
drafting number two two one five
message number four the gentle
show that the message from the
governor has been received.
Senate executive message number
five dear president pro tempore
a Stewart and members of the
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council Service
drafting number two two one six
nine two a bill creating the
The journal show the message
from the governor has been
received.
Senate executive message number
six dear president pro tempore
restored and members of the
Senate pursuant to article four
Service drafting number two two
one four nine five of bill
clarifying statutory provisions
pertaining to child care
the governor has been received.
Senate executive message number
seven dear president pro tempore
Stewart and members of the
Senate pursuant to article four
section five B. two of the New
drafting number two two one five
six two a bill enacting the
construction manager general
contractor Act to provide an
alternative project delivery
been received Senator executive
message number eight dear
president pro tempore a Stewart
and members of the Senate
pursuant to article four section
five B. two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
one five zero eight a bill
repealing the delayed repeal of
the health care quality
surcharge Act Senate executive
section five B. two of the New
Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature's second
session submission of a bill
bearing Legislative Council
will be determined and take a
fact that providing that the
rates shall normally remain
effective pending appeal Senate
executive message number nine
pursuant to article four section
five.
B. two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature's
second session submission of a
bill bearing Legislative Council
provisions are applicable to
research park corporations
Senate executive message number
tab that'll show that the
message from the governor has
order of business committee
reports were on that order of
business committee reports.
Mr for.
To the standing committees
respectfully submitted Mimi
Stewart chair Senator move
adoption of the committee report
and as we have a motion to the
Thank you Mr president I think
we all know what this is about.
and.
But I mention that ten years Mr
president.
Because rule nine dash one dash
for.
Of our Senate rules makes clear
Canadian person shall be placed
on committee by rank of
seniority.
And further provides that the
Senate may only depart from this
rule.
By a three force vote.
Of the Senate.
Not for having committed a crime
not for being under indictment.
For any crime.
People may not like that but
that is not a reason to depart
from the rules that make us a
Senate and not a house of
representatives.
that pursuant to rule nine dash
one for any vote to adopt this
committee report since it would
completely disregard the rules
over my objection and request Mr
president inquired to the
parliamentarian in order to
adopt this committee report is a
three fourths vote required.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senate rule that to a center
Candelaria refers nine dash one
dash for.
Seniority of the members of the
Senate shall prevail at all
times and committee assignments
seniority should a vacancy occur
the next ranking member of the
Senate shall have priority on
the requested committee.
Of the elected Senate.
and so and so the the question
that I and as I understand it is
correctly Sierra or Sierra
Nevada Mr president yes.
Senator.
So
thank you Mr chairman the.
To some degree depends on some
decisions of this body may make
or that the presiding officer
may make rulings subject to.
Repealed or suspended by three
fourths vote of elected Senate.
We also have in Mason's provided
manual.
A major does not have the rights
to make a role that cannot be
modified or repealed by a
majority.
or repeal the same role.
Raul can be adopted by major
that can be adopted by majority
vote can be repealed or mulled
by the same vote even if a rule
in a role that provides that no
And so and so the the guidance
that we have for Mason's.
Is that it is improper to have a
a super majority that would be
Then this would be something
that if done on the floor would
require a two thirds vote if
done through the rules committee
would require.
I'm a majority votes.
looking at real nine dash one
dash for.
Is whether not a vacancy has
occurred.
Which is to say.
Committee assignments for this
legislature that time.
that report was adopted
unanimously by this body so it
in terms of the reassignments
that are being done.
And my understanding is that.
R. while.
Is is filling a vacancy caused
by the removal of someone from
Senate finance.
First of all they have the same
seniority.
are no vacancies right now.
And and so and so consequently
the issue becomes.
Whether or nine one four as
As it would apply in this report
to certain members.
In that in that our.
In that in that something for
this body to determine is
Weather than this rules
applicables because a vacancy
has not occurred.
At this time.
So I that's so that's my
brother.
body and there's certain
determinations this body may
need to make thank you Mr a
service of the Sierra Nevada
thank you Mr president and.
I I I color myself I must say
And and we can equivocate and
come up with whatever excuse to
justify the raw exercise of
members to dissent and disagree.
And even when there are
dissenting and disagreeing with
people in power.
Over twelve years ago senator
The democratic leader against a
democratic governor was he
removed from committees now.
Mr move from his leadership now.
Because until today.
We glean some wisdom from this
process.
Mr president the words of rule
nine dash one dash for clear
I don't see how any person of
good will who does not have a
political vendetta could read
this rule and say that it
doesn't mean what it says.
I am struck Mr present by the
irony of today.
I'm struck by the irony of the
prayer this morning that said
let us not use our power to do
harm simply for the sake of
doing harm.
Again I defy anyone of you to
tell me what Senate rule I have
violated to justify the removal
from finance.
To justify this removal.
For ten years I've stood by you
and work with you.
I have more seniority than the
The energy transition act.
Repealing the ban on conversion
therapy.
The expansion to the working
Not on that list of things that
I've been the lead sponsor on
I'm sure some of you can find
things to hate and some of you
can find things to love.
That's Alliance for talud sorry
actions being taken.
And I submit to you that if we
go down this road Mr president
and say that the rule of
I'm also Mr president.
Confused in a way about the
motives of this action.
And I think there will certainly
But I'm struck Mr president.
By the irony that almost a year
ago.
The chairman of rules and
Judiciary.
From their positions.
being obstructionists.
And for being offensive to women
Committee report.
Has nothing to those members.
And I'm not entirely sure of the
form that should take.
But I believe that the question
before the body.
Is.
Does the threefourths
requirement.
And so.
I'm not entirely sure Mr
president and I would inquire of
you.
debate on whether the committee
portion of the adopted so we'll
go to those members who
requested to speak on to this
debate Senator Pirtle.
question of even if this
committee report is even in
order
Many know this committee took
action
and it says the rules committee
during the inner only with
signed in with the committees
committee this morning.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you Mr
president I mispronounced I had
a chance to analyze.
The second special session of
twenty twenty one.
And came out with the committee
report which is never right in
and that they had I believe
another meeting.
And so that that that second
meeting did take place.
Our products gambling in this
the state.
Outside of a regular session.
or special or extraordinary
session of the legislature.
And so that is something I would
likely the action is is invalid
I mean I think you look at it we
don't have any other committees
meet because they don't have
that authority the only
committee that has the authority
to meet when we're not in
constitution you can't do it but
that's that's the the.
I think the most obvious problem
with with what we have before us
today.
Thank you many assignments all
times I'm not sure Mr present
there's a confusion as to what
all times means but I'm pretty
sure that means every time you
But then the point was made that
it's because it's not a vacancy.
Well Mister president maybe a
lame man and may not be a smart
man.
Well I think there's a vacancy
now in finance committee Mister
president.
Whether it's man made or
naturally occurring we have
created a vacancy so this part
Candelaria is point.
So I think when we want to talk
about you know there's a vacancy
there's more than one way to
have a vacancy Mr president this
this case it's because being
removed.
many ways you can go on down the
list as we create VA vacancies
than the next senior members
should have.
four are valid and I do think
that we need to re look at nine
dash one dash for and read it in
a way which I think is easily
understood that at all times
Thank you Mr president so we
certainly checked with the
director of the Legislative
Council
I think when I was on the
committees committee with
budget would not be in the feet
bill which is going to make its
way over I think this afternoon
so it's been a the process that
we do it this way in addition
rules of say that of the pro tem
should check with that committee
before certain decisions are
made so I think we're in order
approve the budget we met during
the special.
Also that committee report would
have been fine but when it was
twentieth I have no objection
should you wish to remove me
from the Senate finance
committee.
the would search for yield.
Senator deal yes Sir sure could
you please point to the Senate
rule that gives the Senate
the procedures that we follow
and that was from the director
of the.
Legislative Council Senator
Representative of this president
session.
Now if we want to change that
I've said this numerous times
about our rules we have a lot of
rules that need to be worked on.
I've actually been offered for
But we haven't done that.
We can't come on the floor now
and so they were rural state the
US but we've done this.
And I get that with.
Mason's the problem with that.
Is that we have a rule that
specify something so you can't
go to Mason's because our rules
are above Mason's.
say what can be done then.
And only then can we go to make
sense.
Unfortunately probably one of
the few people in this body
Is not a great read so but
masons can only be used this is
our rules.
What are rules don't actually
But we've done unanimous consent
on all these things so that
threshold been met now we have
someone this challenging the
man's consent of changing the
committee assignment based on
So the rule says that to change.
Are to fill a vacancy takes
Well for rural to be in place
that requires a three fourths
vote that will have to be put in
place with at least a three
fourths vote.
Was done in nineteen nine I see
But the fact of the matter is
that there's a rule in place.
In the rural part takes
precedence over everything else
through the rules and it says in
the rules of the standing
committee.
As a standing committee the only
standing committee that can mean
Sorry from St a little bit my my
preacher self.
But the rules for the rules
committee.
Is that they can only deal with
messages a confirmation.
Appropriations why so we don't
get in a situation like we got
in several years ago where we
had a secretary as an interim
secretary for five years.
report is romance this committee
reports to be rejected this
should be sent back to to the
committee's committee.
For committees committee to redo
this legally.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Brandt Mr
president Senator Stewart Mr
rules thank you.
The committee's committee I
apologize want withdraw the
committees committee report we
have a rules committee tomorrow
we will do a committees
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
introduction of legislation find
that order business introduction
legislation.
Three three.
Senate bill one.
Relating to public education
Senate bill one.
Senate bill one having been read
twice by committee is printed
senators serve Andi's relating
to the judiciary allowing for
the appropriation of money in
your.
Senate Bill to introduced by
magistrate wrist retirement fund
increasing certain service
credit multipliers provided in
the judicial retirement act and
the magistrate retirement act
providing the justices of the
formulas for magistrates making
appropriations Senate bill two.
Senate Bill to have been read
twice by title is front and
referred to the Senate
enforcement and acting death
benefits for peace officers New
Mexico mounted patrol members
the reserve police officers
changing distributions from the
health public first committee
that Senate finance committee
Senate bill three.
Senate bill four introduced by
senators Duhigg and Chandler
one to take effect the next
January one providing that an
appeal of a determine prevailing
wage rate or prevailing fringe
benefit rate does not state
implementation does not state
read twice by title is pretty
referred to the Senate
committees committee then Senate
Public Affairs Committee that's
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill four.
disclosed agency in the gross
receipts and compensating tax
act Senate Bill I Senate Bill I
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
Senator Woods and others
relating to natural resources
and acting The New Mexico
reforestation center act
directing the forestry division
at New Mexico State University
at the department of biology at
the university of New Mexico to
create the New Mexico
reforestation center to address
account for funding making
appropriation.
Senate bill eleven.
Senate bill twelve introduced by
Senator Pinto relating to law
enforcement creating the
position of missing indigenous
persons specialist within the
office of the Attorney General
network grant Fund making
appropriations declaring an
emergency Senate bill twelve
Senate bill twelve having been
read twice by title is printed
referred to the Senate
committees committee that Senate
missing persons creating the
missing in New Mexico event
declaring an emergency Senate
bill thirteen.
Senate bill fourteen introduced
by Senator Stewart relating to
the environment and acting the
clean fuel standard act
standard act implementing the
assessment of an annual
registration fee creating the
clean fuel standard fund making
appropriation Senate bill
business presentation ready that
Senate finance Senate bill
fourteen.
Senate bill fifteen introduced
by Senator Steinborn.
Making it an appropriation to
the Department of Health for the
importance of proper usage of
masks declaring an emergency
Senate bill fifteen.
Senate bill fifteen having been
by Senator Steinborn making an
appropriation to the Department
of Health for the distribution
of at home Corona virus disease
two thousand nineteen testing
Senate bill seventeen introduced
by Senator Ingle.
Relating to finance authorizing
Senate bill seventeen having
been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee then
Senate conservation committee
that Senate finance committee
Senate bill seventeen.
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate concert
Committee submitted and Senate
conservation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill eighteen.
nineteen Senate bill nineteen
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee that
Senate health of public affairs
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill nineteen.
grants for technology research
repealing the New Mexico
research applications act making
appropriation Senate bill twenty
Senate bill twenty having been
introduced by senator Tolman
relating to electric motor
vehicles creating the electric
vehicle income tax credit
creating the electric vehicle
registration fees be distributed
to the state road fund and the
local governments road I Senate
bill twenty one Senate bill
twenty one having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
introduced by senators to deal
Lopez relating to governmental
accessibility requiring all
state departments to provide
meaningful access to state
programs for individuals with
and Senate health of public
affairs committee then Senate
finance Senate bill twenty two.
Senate bill twenty three
introduced by senator Ortiz EPL
organizations to recruit and
retain eligible clinicians
creating a fund making an
appropriation Senate Bill twenty
three Senate bill twenty three
three members present who's a
sponsor amount.
Senator Moores at Senator Ortiz
if you know thank you.
Senate bill twenty four
introduced by Senator novel
other programming Senate bill
twenty four Senate bill twenty
four having been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee
then sent Education Committee
creating a research grants
closing fund providing for
competitive application process
providing for review panel
making appropriation Senate bill
Senate bill twenty six
introduced by Senator Shendo
relating to local governments
allowing certain municipalities
to retain a certain percentage
of the hold harmless
counties are exempt from the
phase out of that distribution.
Clarifying that certain other
municipalities and counties are
exempt from that phase out of
twenty six have been read twice
by title is printed and referred
to the Senate committees
committee then Senate tax
business transportation
committee and Senate finance
Senate bill twenty six.
certain food and health care
deductions permanent that fifty
percent of the deductions
claimed Senate bill twenty seven
Senate bill twenty seven having
been read twice by title is
introduced by senator pope
relating to employment allowing
private employers to provide a
hiring preference for certain
veterans and veteran spouses
Senate transportation business
House committee and Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
twenty eight Mr president
sentiment also read that title
that million.
The tide of the bill this is
veterans and veteran spouses
widows and widowers Senate bill
twenty eight.
Sentiment just Mr president I
guess I'll need to read that
clarification sent about twenty
eight is going to committees
committee this is Senate to tax
business transportation
committee and Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill twenty
eight.
procedures amending and
repealing sections of the N. M.
S. eight nineteen seventy eight
Senate bill twenty nine Senate
bill twenty nine having been
Senate bill thirty introduced by
senator are a meal relating to
regional transit districts
providing that revenue from a
regional transit gross receipts
tax imposed by county be
title is printed referred to the
Senate committees committee and
Senate tax business
transportation committee and
Senate finance Senate bill
thirty.
and advocacy establishing duties
of the director creating the
family representation and
advocacy oversight commission
Senate bill thirty one.
thirty one.
Senate bill thirty two
introduced by Senator Hemphill.
Making appropriations to the
public education department for
an outdoor learning program to
thirty two having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee that Senate
Education Committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
superintendent of insurance to
study the enactment an impact of
behavioral health parity
legislation declaring an
emergency Senate bill thirty
committee Senate bill thirty
three.
Senate bill thirty four
introduced by Senator Brandt.
Relating to crime making a
committees committee and Senate
Judiciary Committee that Senate
finance committees Senate bill
thirty four.
Senate bill thirty five
introduced by Senator Duhigg
relating to protective
reporting requirements Senate
bill thirty five Senate bill
thirty five having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee then Senate
retirement increasing certain
contributions to the educational
retirement fund Senate bill
thirty six Senate bill thirty
six having been read twice by
Senate bill thirty seven
introduced by Senator Rodriguez.
Senate bill thirty seven
introduced by Senator Rodriguez
fund and the cultural affairs
facilities infrastructure fund
Senate bill thirty seven.
Senate bill thirty seven having
been read twice by title is
Senate bill thirty eight
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
and Hemphill.
Relating to government
organization clarifying
statutory provisions pertaining
the early childhood education
and care department to perform
criminal history investigations
for child care facility
licensure and other purposes
requiring confidentiality
Senate bill thirty eight having
been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee that
others relating to procurement
increasing the preference for
New Mexico resident businesses
and contractors eliminating the
time limitation for special
preferences for New Mexico
and contractors Senate bill
thirty nine.
Senate bill thirty nine having
been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee then
president I I think that's
another one we maybe need to
look at and finance because
we're changing the contractor
and the limits in the dollar
values will want to see that
finance.
Okay since he's not here so so
let's let's do this let's just
hold it over and we'll get it
introduced tomorrow let's visit
with Senator Shendo and and just
make sure we're on the same page
Senate bill forty introduced by
title is printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee.
And Senate health and public
affairs committee that Senate
finance committee Senate bill
forty.
Development Act designating
research park corporations as
public employers for the purpose
of the public employee
bargaining Act declaring an
emergency.
committee Vance Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill forty one.
Senate bill forty two introduced
by Senator Padilla relating to
public utilities and acting the
utility easements to the
property owner providing for
optional recording of such
notice establishing claims
pursuant to the use of utility
title is printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee
then Senate tax business
transportation committee.
Then Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill forty two.
without parole on a child
providing parole procedures
Senate bill forty three Senate
bill forty three having been
read twice by title is printed
and referred to the Senate
introduced by Senator souls
relating to taxation extending
the new solar market development
income tax credit increasing the
annual aggregate cap for the
Senate committees committee.
Then Senator tax business
transportation ready Vance
Senate finance committee Senate
bill forty four.
resident veteran contractor for
public procurement prop purposes
by repealing that version of
section thirteen dash one dash
twenty two and M. S. eight
twenty twenty two Senate bill
forty five Senate bill forty
five having been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee
bill forty six introduced by
Senator Gonzalez making
appropriation to carry out the
purposes of the Askia and
Community did should fund act
committees committee then Senate
conservation committee.
Then Senate finance committee.
Senate bill forty six Senate
bill forty seven introduced by
creating the substance use
disorder treatment fund making
appropriation Senate bill forty
seven Senate bill forty seven
have been read twice by title is
eight introduced by senator
Munoz be it making general
appropriations and authorizing
expenditures Senate bill forty
eight.
forty nine introduced by senator
Thomas relating to taxation
increasing the rate of the
cigarette tax increasing the
rate of tax on tobacco products
income tax for certain
individuals Senate bill forty
nine.
Senate bill forty nine having
been read twice by title is
Senate bill fifty introduced by
Senator Stefanics.
For the Legislative Health and
Human Services.
Committee making appropriation
Senate committees committee then
sent Education Committee.
Then Senate finance committee
Senate bill fifty.
section five of the constitution
of New Mexico to require primary
elections for statewide offices
legislative offices and United
States congressional offices to
offices legislative offices and
United States congressional
offices Senate joint resolution
one.
Senate joint resolution one
introduced by senator assault
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
others.
Posing to amend the constitution
of New Mexico by adding a new
environment and directs the
state to serve as trustee of the
natural resources of New Mexico
for the benefit of all New
Mexicans and by repealing the
current pollution control
is printed and referred to the
rules committee Vance Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate joint
resolution to Mr president that
joint resolution is going to be
a cost to the state
to Senate finance on that.
Senator Wirth.
Well Mr chairman I thought I'd
like to yield to the sponsor can
you just re read the bill number
Mexico by adding a new section
of article two that provides the
people of the state with
environmental rights including
the right to a clean and healthy
environment and the right to
protection of the environment
article twenty section twenty
one Senator Sedillo Lopez thank
thank you Mr president this this
is a joint resolution doesn't
have any implications for tax
resolution may be a cost to the
state and on the oil and gas
leases maybe it costs when the
agencies actually enforce the
rules are changing rules
is promoting our almost one
point six billion or forty three
percent of that in the budget
and so when we have these
constitutional amendments that
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so these are the same
referrals that we had last year
number one and number two
You know we had a bill last year
we had the same debate on Civil
I think the challenge becomes
when you have a piece of
legislation that doesn't
directly affect.
You know this is a state agency
decision not to do that so I do
think for consistency keeping
the referrals like they are make
amendment and so I think down
the road there is costs and if
we want to look forward thinking
in New Mexico there is costs the
state of New Mexico.
with these chairman of Senate
finance you'll to a couple of
questions was that M. S. T. L.
this present yes Serrano's this
would create a constitutional
us briefly how much the state
has spent in defending the
education lawsuits against the
state of New Mexico for not
provide the constitutionally
guaranteed education how much we
present are you referring to
tourney's costs or just the cost
to comply with what a judge.
Forget think it's Stapleton's
order singletons order
is.
sue the state for environmental
issues whether much like the
education constitutional
guarantee would be then the
defending and in terms of the
of.
The findings of judge singleton
to try and meet the
constitutional guarantees of of
the right to education and Mr
president and I can't for the
last two years and I'll try to
get some combine numbers on the
Yazzie Martinez with attorney's
looking at add some past numbers
in the in the budget is probably
going to spend about fifty
million dollars over the last
two years twenty five last year
to five million in in in in
attorney's costs.
Roughly on in defending that
lawsuit.
And the judge's order but we
also know what happened during
Thank you Mr Mr president and
center for you'll into the
questions of finance I just I I
I do support the referral only
because again I'm having us in
action of based on a
constitutional guarantee and and
we got some good thirty from
Senator I'm sorry from Santo
from our former professor of
if we created a constitutional
guarantee to environmental
protections by the state and
that they're in there gives a
defending that will be and and
or the injunctions that would
fall or what the implications
would be to our state budget by
curtailing if not shutting down
Ortiz penal Senator.
Thank you Mr president so.
All of us want clean air and
clean water I don't think that's
an issue here.
turned off public education.
If you turn off the funding
sources for New Mexico.
With this because there's no
doubt someone will through an
Someone will want everyone of
those in a those are the
industries that pay all of the
bills especially for public
education so if we have a a
of these this this litany of
lawsuits coming forward then
who's gonna pay for education.
And it wouldn't matter what
industry you brought back into
the state.
on the road through tourism.
Then we can do the same thing I
think we've lost balance here
and I do think that that's
something that that finance
committee.
Potentially it does a lot and
certainly we can look at and see
if we can't find that balance in
finance because because finance
We also want education.
We also want the you know CYFD
in the department of health and
that and so I certainly support
the the referral to Senate
finance committee because as was
pointed out consumer people over
Because of something the fact
that we drive to work the fact
that we were close all could be
potentially a reason.
Thank you senator Senator these
if you know thank you Mr
president would does senator
Munoz yield to a question quick
question Mr president yes I will
an amendment that Hey would not
even go to the voters until
November and be.
Before any any consequences of
that would happen we would have
to establish the cost of
something that theoretical Mr
president what I would do is I
have a little back and look at
rulemaking through maybe prior
start to score that that
legislation in that rulemaking
but then I'd come back and look
at at costs and what it costs
and how the environment
quality permit for an asphalt
plant when a temporary one got
one in five days and so we have
to look at some that rulemaking
and the cost to that listen.
with the bail reform.
Now we gotta come back and get a
change what bail reform is
they're bringing legislation to
change that
I think that I don't hear
message on that the governor
look.
Mr president Senator every
single thing we do in this body
potentially has cost
implications do you think every
long term costs that the state
will face in cleaning up the oil
and gas wells in cleaning up the
dirty air in cleaning up the
methane emissions have you done
vice chair of we look at all
those in costs in the LFC
framework as we begin to build
our budget.
Well I I I think it's pretty
clear what we're debating here
don't know what is going to be
and I and I and I think you're
you're you're you're you're
pretty clearly indicating that
you're intending to to kill the
amendment in finance committee
suggested this summer greatly
reduces the chances of any kind
of of of legal lawsuits being
filed over the over the
amendment the the issue really
is.
environment as clean as
possible.
Whatever the costs.
And if so.
Why not protect the rights of
the citizen to have of the
this that this amendment does it
just protects the rights of
everybody have a clean
environment and make sure that
that.
The the future will be safe for
your kids and and for my
grandkids and Mister president
in center here something that
You can keep going on the gravel
companies the sand companies
anything that is below a certain
setting we're looking at one
industry we're not looking at
one industries were looking
statewide it at every little
industry the helium industry and
industry not just one industry.
Mr president I would simply
suggest that that's what we have
the executive branches of
being occasioned by this
amendment I think is is just a
an attempted killing it before
we ever actually have a hearing
on thank you.
the concept I learned long ago
in if it was business law or
whatever for the lawyers here
but threat of judgment from a
legal perspective threat of a of
costs and I am also the chair of
the radioactive and hazardous
materials committee for those
that don't know and I can tell
you we have a vast array of
contamination issues here in the
state of New Mexico that we are
look at the cost of health
injuries of our natural resource
injuries.
Representative judgment I think
would make things much safer to
no doubt incur some legal costs
probably on one side of the
ledger on the other side leisure
will it make New Mexico a
cleaner safer place I think the
answer is yes as well be a hard
would produce a much cleaner
environment in the state of New
Mexico so I think I would
encourage Mr president Mr leader
that we stick with the same
inappropriate in this case for
those reasons thank you.
Any further debate for the first
time.
Senator Moores followed by
Senator Brandt senator Morris
thank you Mr president I do
into the constitution order
something that's very difficult
to change for a reason because
this is a with the very the
highest law the land outside the
U. S. constitution of course and
the federal government but I
think it's very important that
the since we are changing the
constitution that this is a just
a regular piece of legislation
that it needs to be vetted by
this bill not just introduce
something first or and and and
first of session and go through
quickly the fans having a
constitutional amendment that is
that fully vetted by the
debated ad nauseam here in this
chamber Mister president for
many many years and eventually
that it that they pass and
to get us to the gate they on
the conservation fund from the
definitely want to finance
eventually and I think it's very
important that these bills on to
about it are very important to
us that once it's in the
constitution it's there are a
on this and support the finance
chairs desire to make sure we
get this right take a look at
this bill in this potential
change the constitution with the
Senator Ivey Soto then Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr president and I
also rise and support of the
looked at and needs to be
considered.
By the finance committee what
the effects of that would be.
Maybe after that consideration
the finance committee says yeah
we can bear that cost.
on at least a legitimate
argument there wouldn't.
Because what it puts into the
constitution will force.
Some.
Directed in specific industries.
Even though we have.
Arguably maybe not even arguably
if you listen to Sir share.
the bill right now I understand
that because we're arguing
whether it goes finance
committee we're wanting to put
more restrictions.
On an industry all of us came up
here excited.
They went into effect you can
forget about that money.
We'll be coming back up here
figuring out how to cut
everything out of the budget.
question Senator steel Mr
present I do.
This presents senator how much
of the.
How much money the oil and gas
either forty three percent of
the entire state's budget or we
can do it in in whole numbers of
about a six hundred million
dollar increase on reoccurring
Mr president center that was
just an increase so I I I
thought I saw an article that
said five point two billion
total is a is that correct.
And I I read that article to and
one answer that it may be a
total cost whether I'm being
extraction drilling
transportation that may be a
total spend in the state.
billion dollar increase in the
availability of funds for our
state.
That's a lot of money guys.
A lot of my everyone's been so
excited to spend a lot of money
of those things are important
but we need to know.
What the financial cost of this
amendment would be and we have a
committee that actually does
a Senator Wirth shakes his head
yes adding a finance committee
referral is not considered a
third committee.
Assignment trust me I've had
this happen to me several times
already.
It's not considered third
committee assignment.
And this constitutional
amendment of facts the budget
state New Mexico without a
doubt.
We need to have that referral
can take a real look with the
experts.
All you guys on finance
committee take that compliment I
just called you experts hope I
don't regret that one.
that request thank you Mr
president.
Thanks to read we have center
this auto.
Yes thank for much of his
presidency present with the
chairman of the finance
committee please you'll
been raised as that is a request
to send to the finance committee
simply to die.
And so I guess my question to
you is is whether not as the
chair of the committee you'd be
willing to commit to giving this
will yield for a question for me
real quickly before answer that
one Senator Sedillo Lopez deals
and yes I do have some presence
Center did that the joint
some concerns that were raised
because of the passage of the
Civil Rights Act this particular
joint resolution specifically
because not because of the
amendment itself but because of
the passage of the Civil Rights
Act which created a two million
money damages against the state
so that it would not have that
kind of this fiscal impact.
Yes Mr president I I'd had it I
don't know what they did to get
that number they may have a
different number this year but
it did have an FIR so that's my
basis the entertainer the good
other etcetera etcetera from
I'm I will I will tell you that
we will score it and look at it
and we could drop the referral
we could have a hearing.
Senator Ivey Soto I think Mr
chairman actually why you two
were talking I did pull up the a
fire from last year.
It was a twenty thousand one
time for the secretary of
state's office but a recurring.
year and I don't know so would
have been considered on the
language of this year but I I do
I do understand what you're
saying and like I said my my
concern is that if it makes to
the to the Senate finance
terms what it would do but if
if that's the case then.
Are you know that it's not just
simply going over the finance
committee to that says to me so
thank you.
today and and you know whether
this is a constitutional
amendment or we all are doing
things in this legislature there
are many rules and regulations
that have been put in place
positive and and I appreciate
the work that's being done in my
area to reduce methane emissions
and and all of the things that
that we do need to address and
that but there's definitely a
costing you can just look back
to the Richardson administration
when the pit row was for sin
that.
That wasn't even a bill it
those bills have gone for
finance committee but the rules
that are being implemented now
are gonna have a tremendous
impact on the state of New
Mexico because there many
producers that are consistently
impact on the state of New
Mexico and on the ability to
provide an education at the
level we wanted because those
dollars went to Texas so just be
confidence in the members of
this this legislature that that
will look carefully and try and
balance truly balance what we
talk about when we talk about
understand those things there's
no question that this will have
any fiscal impact and I hope
that this body will allow the
Senate finance committee to do
due diligence and make that
Pennsylvania Montana both have
green amendments and both of
those states have very vigorous
extractive industries and oil
and I recognize that the
industry provides a lot of money
this is not going to shut down
the industry this is simply
were passed under the the
Richardson administration that
were summarily reversed within
ten months during the Martinez
administration and there was a
It brings the environment into
the balance that you talk about
yes we absolutely need to
I have reviewed the the the
published lawsuits the the
majority of public lawsuits.
In a that have been brought in
Montana and in Pennsylvania.
did the vast majority of them
were reversing permits.
Reversing permits that were
granted that should not have
been granted one of them has an
their access to water and the
courts simply said you need to
reconsider this permit on the
life on the on the fact that it
And I urge the body.
Because this will go to the
voters in November if should it
pass I urge the body to give the
For a second time we have
Senator about this.
Thank you Mr president I
appreciate all the Incheon daily
I just I want about my part of
the state we don't have any oil
berries and very heavily
regulated in terms of water and
air quality and good.
There's nobody happier than me
a good part of the a few years
ago responding to all the
lawsuits against all the dairies
you'll probably remember some of
those a year parts of the state
pays their suit all there isn't
and the I want to make sure
advocate for them.
Also those four because of the
debate discussion is been some
references.
Vaguely.
this body and the public and the
press who seems to be very
focuses days on what happens in
Senate Judiciary to be a little
more specific about what
happened Senate Judiciary.
be implicated by the green
amendment last session they
argue that strong maybe had the
press conferences of a try to
call out Senate Judiciary
Committee we held.
That the green amendment would
have implicated the Civil Rights
Act.
And so now.
There have been changes made.
serves an important role and I
know the debate the motion force
is not Senate Judiciary
Committee but an occasional once
in awhile thank you.
Would be in order.
Thank you Mr president.
resolution be referred to
finance seven minimization to
requested additional referral be
given to Senate joint resolution
to.
To Senate finance committee just
We're gonna do a roll call
Senator nice try.
That's what I get to live for
listening to the parliamentarian
Point of order Mr president Mr
president Senator L. did we
adopt rules put us back a couple
years to where we can do to show
fans.
updated rules within this so we
can
With the proof of the body I I
do think because we've done
consistently with the roll call
we can do that and just see
which means that we can go I I'm
not concerned about a roll call
on the speaker one just as a.
For going forward if we can do
show of hands of certainly saves
a little time and whatever thank
a point of order if if you're
concerned about safety I think
roll call doing a roll call is
more dangerous than simply
raising your hands but that's
just me over in the corner.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg now Senator
Gallegos yes ma'am Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gonzalez
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey Senator Hickey yes
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
McKenna no Senator McKenna now
senator Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator one
or.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Stewart I yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto now Senator
Pirtle.
Sanchez Senator songes yes
Senators committees.
Senator Schmidt is yes senator
severe Lopez.
No Senator Sedillo Lopez now
Senator share.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
that Senate finance committees
Senate joint resolution to just
a reminder that we still are on
vet bill introduction so we're
going to have the reader read.
constitution of New Mexico to
provide that an appointed
appellate judge serve at least
one year before a general
election is held for the office
to which the judge was appointed
shouldn't that be referred to
finance as well the fiscal
impacts are staggering.
Thank you senator Senator
enough.
held in twenty twenty two Senate
resolution one Senate resolution
one having been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
the Senate rules committee that
Senate resolution one.
force to finish the work of
recommending legislation for
paid family and medical leave
and report to the governor and
the legislature by October one
twenty twenty two.
Mario one.
Senate memorial two introduced
by senator Lott Senator Pirtle
thank you Mr president the
sponsor that memorial please
yield.
task force and I know it's a
memorial but is there any
potential for of financial
impact on the budget with this
memorial.
Senator.
black has reached out to me
thanking me to do it and
thanking me for putting him on
task force.
So Mister president that I just
want to be clear that it's going
Senate memorial two introduced
by Senator Diamond requesting
certain state agencies to
twice by title is printed
referred to the Senate rules
committee then Senator acts
Business transportation
committee that Senate one of
two.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you.
Somebody that and so we have one
this is.
president Ms consent we go about
our business announcements and
miscellaneous from that order
business analysis Linus Senator
Wirth I thank you Mr president
with respect to Senate bill
I'm sorry Senator Shendo was not
here.
I ask that it be held over then
Senator send does not back I
just ask unanimous consent that
not the the intent there was to
hold back so I just wanna
clarify what ask unanimous
consent on Senate bill thirty
nine that it be held over.
Thank you have clarification
senator Wirth.
at one o'clock on the Senate
floor we've got a couple
committees the need to meet in
the morning and I yield the
chairs to make their
announcements
be meeting daily because if you
see most of these bills in fact
all the bills are referred to
the committees committee we have
staff working right now so that
hour before the floor session
we're making an exception
tomorrow so it's eleven thirty
room three twenty six for
tomorrow committees committee
I think we're meeting in room
three twenty one four nine three
twenty one go find this in room
three twenty two.
And but we'll be considering
point I think over much thank
you we do have further
announcements with Senator
Steinborn did you have an
announcement.
Any further announcements.
nine o'clock I don't have that
agent in front of me I do also
want to have members know that
that the junior bill is going to
be coming out and so the junior
out electronically and by paper
to your office there are
guidelines on their and so
please follow them of the
rather quickly because we don't
have an electronic database to
transfer your information it's
all gonna be have to hand typed.
Into the computer system and so
that and then your capital will
be turned around pretty quickly
too and I see I. P. less I want
to member to members that that
we haven't seen executives rack
million in in STBs and so if you
got a lot of money to spend just
make sure that you member that
two things I'd ask.
And so projects have to be
completed we're sitting on two
point five billion of STBs that
hasn't been spent.
So make sure if you're gonna re
off.
issues and inflation coming.
So when you add a new project
make sure that project can be
completed that's the number one
problem we have we have tons of
quickly how quickly ran to that
so those are some things you
should ask for cities and
counties how much money you put
in the project how quickly can
you haven't done and
would you yield to quick
question on capital outlay
sentiment has to yield Mister
president yes is it I'm getting
capital outlay requests.
That didn't make it in by that
up to the Legislative Council
Service Mr president so all
cities and counties had wrecked
the requirement of being on your
I. C. I. P. the list right I I
may have the same situation in
as an issue.
So so then Mr present we just go
up to the Legislative Council
and and and at the you're you're
saying the entire list the
entire inventory of capital
less maybe I'll have that sent
to every member so they can look
at statewide in within their
district of of what the I. C. I.
P. list is and then you can look
looked at and then you can go
from there.
Okay and then just one quick
clarification did you Mr
president senator Munoz did you
say.
want to caution members look
because last year was our kind
of first year with the junior
bill I don't like to see
reoccurring money spent on local
we're not trying to do that
recurring that just becomes a
governmental nightmare for you
for the agency for everybody and
then frustration levels get high
Say no further announcements.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president and
members with that unanimous
consent the Senate stand in
