Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator communities.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
We do not have a quorum madam
to begin Senators please come
into the Senate chamber.
Please stand for the invocation
to be given this morning by
chaplain Jose the A. class from
the New Mexico state police and
to be led by Senator souls and
the salute to the New Mexico
flag to be led by senator
Neville.
Let us go forth into the world
in peace and dedicated to your
service.
Let us hold fast to which is
good rendered no person evil for
mighty merciful god that the
ideals.
Bless our families our children
our state legislature colleagues
a political leaders from
throughout the Great this great
now to strengthen us about us
keep us above us to protect us
the need to us twelve hold us to
of us are sold in the Senate
chambers with a holy breath.
I'm in.
Prometic though let that I love
and that I the Los estados to
the those that medica yeah
I salute the flag.
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection from that
order of business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you madam president thank
Next Thursday morning will have
four hours to go I guess will be
almost over thirty minutes to go
so we really are in the home
stretch but we really appreciate
former mayor hobby or Martinez
how the organs Aulus yesterday
he was a champion for Santa Fe
he was a champion for New Mexico
and I just if we could just
years old which is way way too
young and it just.
Again reminds us of how fragile
life is
will continue to do so madam
president just a couple of
announcements today is C. N. M.
community college day at the
legislature and senator Tom and
Taos except for state and
senator Morris Ashley took his
office chair so he'll probably
put it on now self there there
we go.
center Tommen and Senator
o'neill I would be able to
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much majority
floor leader and madam president
then unanimous consent to excuse
Senators Duhigg.
Gonzalez said about this Pinto.
miscellaneous Senator Moores.
Thank you madam president this
might be a little hard for me
you'll appreciate this I think
you've heard me talk about my
Just the way this couple months
ago and you never got a chance
to come to the Senate and during
the session.
Is also what's really really
touched me today is my bonus
small.
she's this was the second
smartest person ever been around
outside of my father she
graduated college when she was
nineteen years old I think you
just on twenty actually there
herself one of my favorite books
that she did with my father on
it it was deafness around the
world where they the current
authors talk about difficult
certification and tough
was really emotional for me I'm
so glad she's here for the meet
you as a educating yourself
madam president Senator
Rodriguez is in the room
applause for my bonus small Dr
Marjorie Miller Moores.
Please stand for a moment of
silence.
In a round of applause for my.
Thank you madam president in the
journal this morning there was a
really good article about.
The young lady from Hobbs that
we have had such conversation
the state with regard to to teen
pregnancy and that is true but
what I want to mention is that
in twenty ten we were number one
we have reduce teen birth rates
sixty eight percent for fifteen
and seventeen year olds in Lee
County fifty five point nine
percent for fifteen through
through schools and during the
summer leadership camp camps
over ten thousand young women
have been impacted so we can't
just want to share that with the
body thank you.
Thank you senator.
Other announcements center had a
meal madam president to none of
us consent to make a comment.
bowling championship yesterday
snapping the five time winning
streak of Artesia high school
the congratulations to bowlers
need to in order thank you madam
president.
Thank you Senator Diamond thank
you madam president unanimous
can get Building services to
respond.
But I want to introduce in the
gallery we have some Agpiece for
joining us and among those keys
is our brand new head football
Coach kids it's exciting to have
you here coach kill is an
accomplished coach having been
named the big ten coach of the
of the year for FCS in twenty
We had Johnny Montoya Clayton
Abbey with us and then also in
the front row is board of
regents Arsenio Romero who
doesn't miss a game so thank you
guys all for joining us today.
wanted to sing the fight song I
have.
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you madam president I
would like to offer my
condolences to all Senator
Moores last us session right in
the middle of the session my
father died.
ninety three and from Ohio and
they had no idea what being in
the state legislature was all
about.
had found my path and so I send
my condolences to senator Morris
into every person on the floor
he's lost the parents and
hopefully they will have the
commissioner of Santa Fe County
well before he was more of the
City of Santa Fe and if there
was quite a buzz that he was as
young as he was coming to the
county commission with no
in but you make the best of the
you learn what you need to and
you succeed and that was my
friend's hubby are Gonzales
thank you.
Thank you.
to see Senator diamonds New
Mexico state Jersey there you
know at our honor chair but I
know I know that these loyalties
can can kind of fade away I do
basketball front how dare you go
over to the Senate and go to you
and then because you know when I
was in the house coincidentally
we won the trophy but we won't
were a U. N. M. body okay
eventually but in all
seriousness madam president you
know this is a fund raiser this
game that that I talk about a
believe one your the last year
we raised almost seventy
thousand dollars for this this
wonderful cost so just always
keep that in mind and I am
Members can wear this Jersey as
they count the days when we get
to play this game as senator
pope certain awaits etcetera
underdogs which I just take
personally so anyway having said
all that it's a great cause next
year thank you.
medially after the floor session
we should not affect any of the
committees meeting so merely in
room three oh three right up for
session and madam president
So it doesn't yield she's so
sorry twenty three Google
flights on wood for the idea
coaches everything
thank you madam president thank
the same time I was we got to
know each other were both very
active in the association
counties at the time.
And have here actually went on
to become the national president
of the New Mexico association of
So I don't know which one got
the best deal but I just wanted
to say I grieve his loss in the
which is family well and wanted
to bring that up because he was
a good friend thank you.
underdogs thing a little
personal honestly madam
president because usually our
scores are like twenty six to
twenty four.
And so I don't know if there's
think we're going to school or.
ball hog from Senate district
nine or ten whichever one it was
sapien.
So you know I think we're a
different team debt now madam
president you know o'neill might
actually get to touch the ball
works out maybe you know this
mask mandate will be lifted
pretty soon and things will go
back to normal maybe we can play
the game in the middle of summer
madam president thank you.
Any other announcements for
miscellaneous madam president
Senator Lopez thank you madam
president and would coach
o'neal.
Yield for a minute.
other team members.
We have a
my my substitute who could play
for us and as you can see the
LCBO Jersey fits in quite well
I have recruit that could be
pretty strong for the team to
bring that trophy back so I'm
lobbying and madam president
coach o'neal.
Thank you thank you madam
numbers are few and specially
Senator schools whose our our
big man underneath you need some
help so let let me let me work
on that and I'll get back to.
and we can get that trophy back
thank you madam president thank
you.
Any other announcements or
miscellaneous.
I'm here this morning you have a
gift from a Sanam.
Which is the U. S. B. storage
drive an electronic device
charger.
named the one of a hundred and
fifty community colleges United
States to receive the aspen
award there's almost fifteen
hundred community colleges
certificates awarded to native
Americans.
And among the top ten for
Hispanics eighty four percent a
CNM students graduate with no
debt.
For many our jobs that are in a.
Big demand.
A lot of the jobs you can get
home comparison and with a two
year degree and make more money
traveling in the neighborhood of
CNM you might want to stop in
and Telemeds this was the best
the most thoughtful gift you
received during the two thousand
twenty two session thank you
just wanted just to take a few
minutes to also mention of
another community leader that
has been lost to the state of
in politics many other issues
surrounding
At lack of equity and inclusion
in many parts of our community
working with reguards here to
ask for lighting within the
international district and other
communities they're the
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
so madam president if I could
also ask the Senate to adults
for just a minute just to also
send her and her family and her
Baca.
Thank you madam president on a
lighter note I'd like to wish
our chief of staff of for the
Republican Senate Vince torrez a
Happy Birthday today.
We're all looking for him is he
not on the floor.
That timing.
Then Senator Pirtle we please
I'm.
Senator Wirth I think Senator
Ingle might have a little song
he wants to saying for.
Vince there so ideal Senator
Domingo Senator Ingle.
floor that means so much to all
of us and.
It's one of those great things
to bench here we go Happy
and happy birthday to move you.
met Vince he was just a strange
voice coming across and I don't
even know or was coming from but
he was the Senate reader.
And I don't even know who is
reading.
Thank you senator Senator K.
goes on present I'd like to
follow up on Vince he's it's
quite the blessing to this he's
them in Spanish and I think
that's a tremendous opportunity
for us to be able to hear her
sing not that that's a Senator
Thank you senator other
announcements and miscellaneous
madam chair Mr I think we have
some
Visitors from the house who have
just showed up and would like to
Madam president no taunting
allowing this is where the upper
chamber we do not allow such
taunting and we're going to get
it back.
Madam president we have all the.
There legislation over here
madam president such chaos
Senator Pirtle madam president I
Okay.
So much fun Senator Wirth.
confirmations would start with
items one and two and kind of
see where we are I know that
senator McCain also has an
announcement to make
may not be on the floor hole No
super long time today so you'll
Center McKenna Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam president yes
we.
All right Senator Wirth thank
you madam president unanimous is
that we go about our business
has passed house bill eighty six
as amended by the house house
bill ninety five as amended by
the house and request the
concurrence of the Senate
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill seventy
one as amended by the house a
request the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
There's no objection more on
that order business committee
reports the read will read madam
president your finance committee
to home is been referred Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill seven do pass respectfully
on them with one motion and the
General flecked their act upon
individually if there's no
objections the reader will read
all the committee reports Senate
report is our objection seeing
non committee report is adopted.
Madam president your Judiciary
Committee to home is been
Committee substitute for Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill eight to pass a
budget referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
And and that we act on them and
with that one motion.
On for that the journal reflect
their actions on individually.
and then for for to the finance
committee Senate bill eighty
four do not pass but that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill eighty four do
favorable committee report is
Serra projection of singing on
the committee report is adopted.
Madam president your
conservation committee to whom
is been referred house bill
thirty seven as amended has had
Elizabeth's a fax chair.
Senator Stefanics madam
president I move adoption the
committee report production of
state verbal Committee report.
Seeing no objection the
business of confirmations and
ideal to Senator Hermio.
Senator had a meal if there's no
objection will go to that order
business confirmation Senator
to Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you madam president and
thank you Senator had a meal.
pursuant to a.
that the Senate do here confirm
the appointment of David Norton
to the.
To the tourism commission.
involved in the developing two
new ski areas in Japan and
Korea.
He has served in the different
parts you know in the western
definitely would be a very
strong asset to the tourism
commission.
And with that madam president I
would stand for any question yes
there debate on the
confirmation.
Norton.
To the tourism commission.
A Centers we're voting on the
confirmation of David Norton to
tourism commission for term
commencing on October twenty
seven twenty twenty one and
expiring January one twenty
twenty where eight has been duly
confirmed by the Senate.
senator Morris Senator Moores
thank you madam presidents are
pursuant to Senate executive
letter number thirty dated
October twenty seven twenty
twenty one I move the Senate do
legendary Bristol family in New
Mexico of course been is the
current
Madam owner of the skit sixty
mean younger how do not know
that until recently so no one
better than the rules of Family
representing us on the tourism
commission and with that madam
president I stand ready to
close thank you madam president
I ask unanimous consent that the
record show that all those
present voting affirmative to
Foles voted in the negative by
show of hands centers we're
voting on the confirmation of
For.
twenty twenty one expiring
January one twenty twenty eight
has been duly confirmed by the
Senate.
Center how to mail madam
Senator Tallman Senator Tallman.
Madam president pursuant to exit
Senator executive message number
seventeen dated January twenty
one twenty two I move that the
The senator to discuss the
conferee.
Thank you madam.
President the Mr Gabe moves.
Has the good sense to live in my
district.
He directs the current position
is director of the space force
the celery to program for the
Air Force research lab.
A prior that he was program
manager for the Air Force
research lab has a long history
And he lifted the.
Twenty publications.
It's going to highlight to a
long.
So we also list of.
In great numbers significant
award the state has a very
impressive.
Resume.
close.
I am the amendment madam
president asked that the Senate
do hereby confirm the
appointment of Gabriel moves.
months as a member of the
technology research
collaborative for term
commencing on January second
twenty twenty two expiring
January one twenty twenty four
technology research
collaborative I now yield to
Senator McKenna Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam president
pursuant to Senate executive
to the technology research
collaborative.
Senator McKenna to discuss the
conferee.
Thank you madam president Mr
exceptional results and he has
worked with a number of
companies right now he is with
three D. glass solutions as
Is there debate on the
confirmation.
Senator Lopez I thank you madam
president no debate on the
duly comes back.
Seeing no objection so ordered.
Any debate on the confirmation.
Seeing none Senator McKenna to
Senators we're voting on the
confirmation of more pop of the
H. to your seats please raise
your hand if you wish to vote
now.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative here in the negative
January one twenty twenty four
has been duly confirmed by the
Senate.
Senator Hotmail madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
of John Clark who has been
executive message number
seventeen dated January the
twenty first twenty twenty two I
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of John
it is a distinct honor for me to
support and to be right behind
if you will Mr John Clark as he
moves forward to continue to
level of regard and respect for
the work that he does he's a
person of integrity and
intelligence and he always
aspires to excellence excellence
and his accomplishments include
he is a principal analyst or he
has been he's been and he is the
deputy cabinet secretary for the
New Mexico economic development
things that we do he is a has as
education from the Anderson
school of management at the
university of New Mexico master
of business administration
he's an individual who continues
to master of the areas that he
researches and the information
that he provides to each and
everyone of us in the form of
stand for questions thank you Is
there debate on the conferee.
Seeing no debate Senator Campos
to close thank you madam
confirmation of John Clark to
your seats if you wish to vote
no please raise your hands.
As a member of the technology
research collaborative for term
commencing on January second
twenty twenty two and expiring
January one twenty twenty four
the credentials of Trenton S.
James who has been appointed to
the unemployment compensation
board of review I now yield to
Senator Ingle Senator Ingle.
the Senator hereby confirm the
appointment of Trenton as James
to the unemployment compensation
review board.
Hughes on the administrative law
judge for the New Mexico
department of workforce
solutions.
And here's in the wage and hour
Yes a juris doctor from the
university of Denver bachelor in
business administration from the
university of New Mexico.
And I added he had looked at his
it and I think you'll be a real
addition to this bureau thank
you thank you was there debate
on the confirmation.
I see none Senator Ingle to
board centers we are voting on
the confirmation of Trenton just
change to your seats if you wish
to vote no please raise your
hands.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative seer in the negative
the appointment of Trenton just
James as a member of the
unemployment compensation board
of review for term commencing on
Ingle thank you madam president
members of the Senate thank you
senator had a meal madam
president I yield to senator
Wirth Senator Wirth thank you
madam president unanimous
consent we go that our business
fifty nine AM and will be
and gentleman until twelve or
one PM.
The Senate will come to order.
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the journal show
consent that the rules be
suspended at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
Judiciary Committee there's no
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show that all those present in
this morning session are present
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee if
there's no objection is so
ordered.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
Correa Hemphill for item number
one on today's counter if
there's no objection we are
going to third reading Senator
Hemphill.
Thank you madam president I ask
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution there's no
objections Senator Hemphill to
explain the bill thank you madam
president president unanimous
chambers.
Thank you madam president so
Senate bill one thirty five is a
follow up to Senate bill fifty
nine and that passed in the
Committee that revenue
stabilization and tax policy
committee so Senate bill one
thirty five incorporates
recommendations from the LFC
since the December meeting with
canceled due to the
redistricting meeting.
But it did receive very positive
feedback from the committee
a high reserve level because of
the volatility of the oil and
gas market that we're very
reliant on for revenue however
the current relationship of the
a risk of growing more
restrictive reserve accounts at
the expense of less restrictive
ones and that limits our ability
many of the senators in this
chamber remember back in two
thousand and seventeen when we
had to indoor painful cuts to
a school psychologist to be a
teacher because of those painful
budget cuts so this bill
addresses that issue by changing
current statue when the
operating reserve exceeds eight
percent of the prior year's act
appropriations the excess is
transferred to this tax
tax stabilization reserve is
less than twenty percent of
appropriate.
Tions so when the balance of the
tax stabilization reserve
exceeds twenty percent no
reserve to the tax stabilization
reserve has the benefit of
allowing the operating reserve
balance to grow when
stabilization rivers reserve
review reserve if those funds
are needed to shore up budgets.
So it doesn't change.
doesn't need to continue growing
the size of one of its more
restrictive reserve accounts
when the balance of that account
is already high so with that
madam president to we stand for
questions.
Once upon a time.
We had reserves of about one or
two percent.
And we spent like crazy I would
say that we spent like Baca
ownership except that I can't
say things like that anymore.
decrease in our budget it was
huge.
And then we see what work along
there have been little little
gains along the way and then we
had another huge increase in oil
That crash is coming.
We know that.
We know that from the seventies
we probably know that from the
sixties but I don't remember
This particular fund was built
so that when we had those giant
swings in the industry that pays
all the bills.
We did that on purpose.
To avoid what we're going what
we've done in the past which of
those huge swings and what we're
going to do in two years.
to shoot each other in Ukraine
then they'll go up.
At the risk of blood.
Not something we want.
Specifically built so we don't
have to slash agency budgets.
And we try to make it just
That's what was built that's why
the legislature and the governor
signed that.
Because.
We're gonna slash agencies
budgets and that is going to be
so painful for the people in
this room.
Because how we gonna go in there
Department of public safety with
strong on on on on a crime
bills.
We have to slash your budget
because we have any money.
We went to the school districts.
And clawed back money that they
had not yet spent.
fast.
With nothing to soften that
blow.
That's why this Fund exist
today.
And we made it just hard enough.
But not so hard wooden that that
that we couldn't ever use it.
Today if there is an emergency.
We can get it with a with a
simple twenty two votes in the
from.
because we just feel like turned
into it then it takes two thirds
of us.
And I think that's appropriate.
The agencies to keep from crying
that that money out of the
schools because that's what we
did.
Because we wanted there we
should want their.
Is terrifying.
When you have to look at your
superintendent of schools and
say gosh I wish you would teach
We really need a higher
education funded because we have
this temporal Graham so we need
to have those folks in our
but it hurts all of the people
of New Mexico.
The people that are directly
affected when you close down
programs when you slash
programs.
And I know they are you all we
have we have needs right now
today.
We have needs there's never
enough money for.
There's never enough money
that's just a rule of politics
the more money you have the more
money you will spend.
There is no doubt about that.
It may come sooner.
Under two different governors
Republican and a Democrat.
these are things that we need to
do we've got people that are in
need of I get that.
Well we're gonna have those same
problems in two years we're
get better.
We're gonna have those in two
years.
And we're not gonna have the
money to do it.
So I wanted that's one telling
you.
Tell you that's what happened.
I'm telling you that we took
money away from the school
Leave this money alone.
Leave this money alone.
This is an important.
Program.
twenty well that means you're
going to have a three percent
reserve.
Three percent reserve because
almost all of our reserves
currently in this fund.
You can't funded.
At least you can't find it
without slashing.
Or departments again our
And it will happen again thank
you.
Senator Novell would deal to a
couple of questions.
I would I'm president all right
he heals.
On how much money that we can
budget and the budget.
Madam president Senator it's a
places and they all sat down and
they develop the revenue
estimate and they keep that up
to date all year long and they
try to make sure that we've got
during the session.
So
What control do they have missed
for a madam president of Senator
overall economy or you know for
personal income tax you know or
The price of oil because we get
Madam president I have no
control the utilize of all of
the national industry indexes
that are available from the feds
and the various
what we'll have available to
spend from year to year it's a
very it's a difficult process
and it has failed us on the
number of occasions I've been
some cases it's been it's it's
been very rapid if you will miss
madam president senator I recall
back I think it was a lose six
corner of this place we had of
fourteen dollar gas and make
notes about five dollars
fourteen dollar gas was the big
money he called a special
session and prices started to
falter a little bit when you
call that.
By the time he was done with
getting the special session and
pretty miserable and it's very
volatile and it's very scary
when you're in those situations
that's why if I can continue
madam president.
of the of the reserve the tax
stabilization reserve we always
called to learn how to fund for
that forever and we finally
started not doing that but it
will it's there's always a
demand for money and have
developed this concept and
that's been probably the savior
to to some degree that skips out
of the of the poor house so to
it's the one that will keep us
solvent and able to pay the
bills if things go south.
And thank you for that Senator
and and madam president.
That that there is money in the
treasury.
In case we needed that's that's
that's money in the bank
account.
That the those monies are always
in that bank account.
Does that mean that or even a
better question.
Is there another reason to have
president is because of we all
love to spend capital outlay.
And that's bonded money that
money is severance tax bonds
And you know those bonds are to
be paid back.
So how would you determined risk
of that bond.
reserves if you have adequate
reserves.
Those bond salesman those bond
purchasers say.
And they pay less interest and
they're willing to bomb because
it's a.
A nice smooth transition for.
But if you get down to that two
or three percent reserve.
That doesn't look like you are
able to pay back what so what.
This is one of the funds that to
reserve.
And what you're asking to do
madam president.
essentially diverting it before
it gets there.
Now.
I'm pretty sure that's what's
happening.
But Mr madam president if the
Yes I yield madam president she
kneels Senator okay what the
purpose of your bill.
Is essentially to divert funds
thirds majority to get it out of
these this of funding that we're
going to do but from is that
right madam president and
senator.
reserve order the tax
stabilization reserve and it
doesn't change the legislature's
total reserve targets and it
doesn't make it easier to spend
So when the balance of the tax
stabilization reserve exceeds
twenty percent no transfer will
occur in the frontier state in
the last restrict Representative
funds away from that reserve.
And it puts it in a less
restrictive operating reserve
makes it easier to spend.
doesn't have a ideal place to
spend more money.
And I can prove that if if but I
don't want to embarrass anybody
but.
And then you know I don't blame
of.
But somehow we have to think
about the future.
Somehow it is our duty.
I don't know how many in the in
the chamber today remember
they're they're not the least he
and I had some.
And he said tell me one time.
That they left out of there in
the late eighteen hundreds
because it just got too crowded
for.
But it got too crowded from and
they went and seen no.
So.
Very conservative gentleman.
Because it simply wasn't prudent
to have excess revenues to spend
it was just too easy to spend.
A a supermajority vote if we
need that money shouldn't be
hard to achieve.
so.
Thank you madam president the
sponsor please yield.
Do you yes Apley she yells thank
you madam president thank you
Madam president and senator I
don't have those figures with me
right now.
And madam president and senator
members of the body it's
important because
member for cap outlay the budget
was decently large compared to
what it done in the past but
grown at a normal rate and then
Found what we could to try to
hold the department as whole as
possible and then the the
revenues were even lower the
next year to the point where
remember being in the body
during that time going why why
don't we have a better reserves
system why don't we have a fund
that's a little bit further out
of reach.
When times were good you need to
hide it so that way when it got
really really bad you always
have that little bit of reserve
buried out in the yard for
whenever you were starving to
death.
did this.
That is not fair to department
is not good government whenever
we have a budget one year of
seven the budget the next year
have consistent programs for for
our elders.
It's just bad government.
Looking at a I looked at a graph
Mexico and and the other states
that depend on oil and gas is a
lot of there's are much higher.
Alaska can operate for seven
hundred and thirty four days if
the price fell for too long of a
period of time they have enough
money that they can operate
their government and ensure that
the programs and things that
they have in place can operate
for two years.
This was put in for a moment
like now.
For years like this year to
build up that true rainy day
fund.
For a true emergency emergency
So hopefully madam president we
can we can reject this this
legislation because we need to
ensure that we have a steady
budget so that we can maintain
Thank you madam president wills
the the senator Sanchez you'll
please Senator Hemphill dealing
you madam president I yield she
privilege of working with for
for a short time in the house.
And.
Hit his wisdom and and putting
this fund together.
How to build a lot of these in
college is a converter that
converts to a fluctuating up and
down signal.
where the signal comes in it's
going up and down Senator comes
out nice and steady this is how
I see this fund and I can't tell
you how many times.
away that excuse we're not
really a boom and bust State
with this fund intact working as
a way that this is a solution to
a boom and bust so none of us
that fluctuation and it gives
you this nice and steady stuff
we can all plan on.
It takes away our excuses for
not planning for the future.
There's a book called money
matters that I think it is if
you're interested in cross
cultural communication.
And how people of different
think that's why we're finding
it hard to live with each other
anymore.
And we see money differently
because it's called it's a it's
truly a cultural difference.
know I don't like being a boom
and bust State.
I don't like uncertainty.
Then keep this fund intact to
take that excuse away.
Trying to think of the adjutant
madam president.
It's a very it just innovative
approach and a fund that has
gas like we are so much.
So I would I would highly
recommend to the body the please
consider that.
I I I I I understand that and I
know I'm not and some people are
laughing I'm not trying to make
a joke I just.
You know I've had a lot of
discussions with this woman in
an investment and and and I hear
from from you guys you say well
we need to we have pressing
issues and we just need to get
that money to invest it and it's
We we are a as of still now
we're going bust.
The other thing I think takes
away the argument for why we
need this bill now and I think
Inflation is outpacing our
interest rates we rely on a an
endowment fund right the
permanent fund.
We rely on that based on
interest.
and the cost of things of
building roads of.
You know our groceries we need
we increase our teacher salaries
because they're gonna go to the
grocery store and they're gonna
pay a lot more money.
destabilize and an open
ourselves up to vulnerability to
boom and bust again.
So if if inflation continues to
name it for our citizens.
And we're gonna open ourselves
up to vulnerability I think the
timing is off.
been politicized in interest
rates have been politicized
they've been artificially kept
low.
In my opinion and appropriately
and math comes it math comes
inflation it's not a good time.
It's really not a good time but
I do once again I understand
from a cultural standpoint where
you're coming from.
close look it is not the time to
big to.
Bring us back to a bill in the
state.
It's just not.
Just.
Encourage my fellow senators how
just wonderful of a man he was
Senator Brandt.
Thank you madam president and.
Because occasionally I get that
wrong but on this one I got it
right.
Because I predicted this would
happen when we passed.
And project the year ahead.
Not.
Ten years ahead.
analysis on what the permanent
fund balance would need to be to
compensate for reductions in oil
and gas revenue over the next
ten years.
Do expected decline in the ten
year time frame that you
mentioned.
These models building a
Our revenue but production
affected even more.
And this is saying that in the
If you assume that level of
reduction the general fund would
need over one point one billion.
So we would need a average
balance of sixty five billion or
more than forty billion more
than the current balance by
twenty thirty to.
Know what you wonder why are we
gonna have lower production we
have the Permian basin.
When we do.
these wells it starts out really
strong for the first few years
and then it starts lowering.
And so if you have lower rig
counts then you're gonna have
every morning I threw on.
One of the financial news
networks and just kind of.
For a few minutes catch up on
what's going on.
According to the news casts that
translates at least in the
mountain States.
To an inflation of nine and a
half percent.
Hopefully I'm wrong.
I'd love to be wrong.
access this money so can be
spent today.
And then I hear.
Comments about we need to make
investments.
Investments.
It's putting money into things
that that you think will have a
return that someone some
Economists that have looked at
it and said yeah this is
actually going to bring a real
investment a real
diversification of our economy
I'm really going to add to our
To everything in our state.
Thanks that we never get a
return on.
We have a pretty big class ten
years ago but before that we
made these great investments
called the rail runner.
Well that was a great
investment.
And we saying no return from
that investment or how about the
great investment a little
further south called spaceport
America.
We're still not seeing flights
go out of their we're still not
seeing any return to our general
fund from that investment.
You know.
Return on our investments.
Well let's put it this way.
Including many of the other
investments that we make as a
state.
spend money to get people
reelected.
And that's what we're doing here
is we're trying to free up money
so that someone can make a
And in ten years.
Well hopefully someone else will
be here not me.
enforcement budgets because we
wasted.
Some of the best economic years
that we will ever have in the
state.
I mean how in the world would
you pay for everything if you
shut down the oil and gas
industry that you hate.
education wouldn't have any
money for roads.
So I'll sit here.
And in two or three years when
we're all cutting.
I'll stand back up here on the
floor try to remind everyone of
Thank you madam president and I
guess I'm I'm the.
mattresses a little further.
Make a little plumper we're
wasting the money.
and to think that by adopting
what spills over from the
ladder Jaga Fund when it's full.
And there's going to be four
billion dollars in that in a few
years.
So this is this is a really
artificial.
we're being prudent stewards of
the public trust and yet this
public trust.
Is not just maintaining things
don't try a few things we can
hook our wagons exclusively to
oil and gas.
And then when it drops that's as
even the the supporters of the
All we're talking about
reasonable steps to change the
trajectory.
And everybody acknowledges that
We have to diversify.
And I was really I was really
dismayed to hear.
The.
this floor the to add one lane
on each side of interstate forty
between just between Gallup in
Albuquerque.
Was gonna cost over a billion
dollars.
we fully utilize it the
potential to obviate the need to
ever add that extra lane to I.
twenty five from Albuquerque to
Santa Fe because it reduces
most progressive countries have
we wouldn't have to spend
billions on interstates by
adding extra lanes and Phillip
lately you've seen the the dozen
or more companies that are house
there.
Everybody focuses on virgin
galactic.
state that has great promise.
So I'm just surprised that the
that is being argued that we
shouldn't do anything we should
to spend it later the investment
idea comes from investing in
education now in early childhood
now so we have people in the
that's the investment we're
talking about not wasting it on
some kind of wild goose chase
and certainly not just sitting
on it I think this is a very
Thank you very much madam
president you know I I try to.
When I first started here about
ten years ago I would jump up
they're coming from and why they
feel the way that they do.
That every now and then I hear
something that just really gets
in my crawl Senator Woods would
say.
So do you yield are you yes
Shiels thank you madam president
thank you Senator are are you
eliminating the TSR with this
measure.
do we have the tax stabilization
revenue Fund.
I'm sorry account.
this tax stabilization reserve
has been around for quite awhile
but it was in two thousand and
seventeen where it was turned
into a rainy day fund.
Thank you madam president and
funds we have funds are dormant
out there we have funds that
just you know they they could
accumulate all the sudden we
wake up and we find that we've
got some dollars to do some
creative things I think this is
allowed it to have about a half
a decade to make it's
It's intended purpose show what
it can do to it for us and
that's that's I think a very
an organically grown business I
have grown this business from
scratch from nothing.
And one of the first things I do
every single morning madam
president I waited about five in
it does.
And I just respectfully I I I
love my mic my colleagues and I
agree with them a lot of things
on the other side of the aisle
here but I will say on this I
is that this is a proactive move
for us.
We're not eliminating it we're
not making it go away we're
doing this the smart way giving
it some time to actually set and
it into motion and and make some
We're are very proactive
measures madam president the
proactive the real runner I
don't understand it either when
it came about but I don't know
is this thing the legislature
they were working on something
so it's not like this thing just
came about all of a sudden under
a particular governor.
This is being studied for about
thirty years before was
implemented.
The spaceport I think the jury
is still out there but it's a
big decision that the state of
New Mexico made so it is also a
primary swim lanes that I I I I
swim in here in the legislature
very proactive move for the
children of New Mexico's gonna
turn around the ship of New
Mexico I see are very very hard
heck out of that one the last
several years.
Very proactive moves to fix New
Mexico's economic woes health
care in rural parts of New
Mexico distance learning that
moves to help build up our
children and our people I don't
ever want that to be lost on
this body I hope that you will
consider those for what they
were intended we didn't try to
create these programs and these
as possible to to make New
Mexico into the robust state
that it can be.
And I don't think that this move
that the sponsors trying to make
madam president is is is in the
chance and I want to thank the
sponsors both of them and you
madam president you're in the
chair right now but you know for
making this very smart decision.
Thank you.
Senator Lopez madam president no
debate unanimous consent to
excuse senator o'neill.
There's no objection so ordered
respond in the event of a
recession with more flexibility
than we were and able to in the
past so madam president I move
that Senate bill one thirty five
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands.
That work will call the roll
Senate bill one thirty five.
Senator Baca.
Senator serve on this Senator
Cervantes yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Kernan no.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator share now Senator
Shendo.
Senator Stewart yes senator
Coleman.
No my my vote senator Tom and
now senator Wirth.
duly passed the Senate.
Senator Tallman to explain his
vote.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Madam president.
The devil is to spend this money
wisely and we're going to use
evidence based programming I
would be more comfortable but
all we hear about is spending
Decline and the price they're
predicting what's hard to
predict what they're saying is
stay the same or go down we love
There's no correlation between
the amount of money you spend.
And the outcomes if that was
true we wouldn't be number fifty
education.
enforcement than ever before and
the crime rate is still high the
number five I agree with the.
Senator Ortiz that this base
would have to spend so much
money on roads in the spaceport
I don't think you can honestly
say that that's been a failure
the jury is still out on that.
Budget that we're going to act
on next week.
Ten million dollars for job
training and
in tax incentives for.
probably our number one the
order number one priority
senator the top five and we need
to spend more money in that area
so thank you madam chair that's
Right so we are Senator Wirth
for removing to item number two.
Right senator Munoz.
Thank you madam chair I ask Miss
consent of the Senate the record
there's no objections when US to
explain the bill thank you madam
chair this is everybody's junior
money I've pretty much no.
What's there and and members
money day to county governments
and the house is gonna put their
ads in it and send it back for
concurrence with that madam
chair will stand for questions.
The unanimous consent for an
expert witness seeing no
objection surge of arms can
allow him on to the floor.
Munoz to close then present a
move that Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill forty eight do now pass and
ask then commands consent of the
Senate records show that the
rules being called and all those
seats if you wish to vote no
please raise your hand.
By a vote of forty in the
affirmative seer on the
negative.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
eight has duly passed the scent
to may Center were thank you
madam president unanimous
consent we go about our business
messages from the house there's
no objection were on that order
of Business messages from the
one house bill eighty two as
amended by the house and request
the concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
reports there's no objection
more on that order of business
committee reports reader will
read madam president your health
and public affairs committee to
whom is been referred Senate
submitted Gerald Ortiz a Pino
chair Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
madam president ask unanimous
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
Senate bill two to five do not
pass but that Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill two
Senate memorial seven as amended
do pass as amended house bill
fifty to do past events referred
recommendation as amended and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee house bill one thirty
chair center to the panel a move
the adoption of the community
the committee report madam
chairman madam president.
We're adoption of favorable
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
introduction of legislation
there's no objection from that
business introduction of
legislation the reader will
read.
twenty two public employees
retirement association day in
New Mexico and celebrating the
association seventy fifth
anniversary Center memorial
twenty eight.
memorial twenty eight.
House bill eighty six introduced
by Representative Dixon
Representative Figueroa
Representative Matthews
disbursement to certain law
enforcement officers providing
reporting requirements making
appropriation house bill eighty
six house bill eighty six
Thompson and Representative but
iris and act relating to health
and acting the easy enrollment
act establishing the easy
coverage programs allowing the
Human Services Department to
enroll consenting taxpayers in
Medicaid allowing the New Mexico
health insurance exchange to
five house bill ninety five have
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee the house bill ninety
in valuation of residential
property that is occupied as a
principal place of residence
providing a ten percent
limitation on increases in
valuation of residential
twice by title is referred to
the Senate tax business and
transportation committee fence
to Senate finance house bill
seventy one house bill twenty
state programs for individuals
with limited proficiency in
English making appropriation
house bill twenty two house bill
twenty two have been read twice
I am concerned that that bill
only has one referral it
Was not a bipartisan bill.
for for we put on to the bill as
it does happen appropriation
Senator Wirth Madam can you read
the title again.
programs for individuals with
limited proficiency in English
making an appropriation.
So madam chair I did visit with
referrals are important and I
really tried to be fair and how
I do it and have consultation
and communication with the
minority leadership on this so I
did look at the bill and look at
the F. I. R. and it's so minimal
it's twenty five to forty eight
thousand and didn't need to see
that and finance.
No we try to send one to you
know send bills to one referral
at this time of year if there's
a lot of bipartisan support.
at this point four thank this
point is that the if a bill has
a lot of.
negative votes that it should go
through our committee process
just like we're supposed to do.
has a lot of of no votes on it.
I I know the house does the same
thing I understand that we have
a week left
you know that's the process
and so not challenging the
germane this but the fact of the
matter is.
That you know we have typically
to give to a committee referral
so that two bills to committees
can here and if you don't think
that the right committee is the
finance committee I.
Then let's add Judiciary
there's concerns at least there
was in the house again I haven't
read the bill.
I haven't had my analysts look
at the bill.
Thank you madam president
there's a and I do appreciate
the majority floor leader
consulting with us on these
reasons it hasn't been met
mentioned is actually looking at
the bill madam president The
appropriation has actually been
stripped off unfortunately this
the road to strip the
appropriation off of this
happens to be one of those bills
it looks like it was stripped
off along the way somewhere
They're worth.
Well madam president certainly
that motion could be made I
think there is been a long
We have been working I think
very collaborative Lee in.
Senate committees committee to
work through issues
think in this particular case at
this point I I certainly have
the right to make the motion but
I will I won't support that
particular motion.
referred to committees committee
for determination of Germanus.
Right we're on the motion to
of of yes and the bill will be
referred to the committees
committee vote of no and it will
All right so we're voting on
moving the house bill twenty two
to the committee's committee.
o'neill's voting now Senator
Steinborn voting no Senator pope
voting no Senator to see Pino
voting now Senator McKenna
voting no Senator Padilla voting
no Senator Duhigg voting no
Senator Wirth voting no Senator
Hemphill voting no Senator
no Senator Stefano X. voting no
Senator souls voting no Senator
center font yes voting no
negative that motion fails to
pass the Senate.
PPE
resin.
Thank you members the chamber
that there remain if they have
an appropriation they go the
first committee and they struck
appropriation off so we've
decided that that's okay.
Hopefully.
and hopefully it doesn't go to
court.
Right we are back on
introduction of legislation the
reader to read house concurrent
Senate regarding availability of
analysis and proposed committee
amendments and substitutes house
concurrent resolution one.
House bill eighty two introduced
by representative Cadena.
And act relating to taxation
making a gross receipts tax
House bill eighty two have been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate tax business and
transportation committee house
bill eighty two house joint
congressional delegation to take
into consideration the impact of
drought when setting federal
agricultural policy house joint
memorial one.
conservation committee House
memorial house joint memorial
one madam president.
Senator Pirtle thank you madam
president I believe in the past
Senator Wirth.
know traditionally most
memorials do go to rules and so
I'm just wondering if this is
going to be what we do from here
on out or or is it just kind of
advise the chamber what the vote
count was in the house.
And madam president I've been
involved in the table in quite a
thoroughly so I'm just hoping
there's plenty of time for to
get through if it needs to go to
rules I think that would be
appropriate.
Senator Wirth that I can't find
again I mean it just.
We can continue to do this and
discuss them and I think when
there's unanimous ones it's it's
that's how we've done it with
unanimous memorials and setting
heard the the words farm and if
I didn't like it I wanted the
opportunity to vote no twice
thank you madam president.
So the.
The vote count on this was
No.
I'm sure Sir Ivey Soto would
love to see this.
Okay.
There were some people over
there sitting in that chair and
Natcher both the rules sticklers
on the rules and one of those
stickler rules was the only
ever who's just that important.
So.
I just wanted to share that with
the body thank you so much
Senator Senator Baca.
start maybe going through these
a little bit deeper because
they're certainly not on the
other side respecting us the way
they gave it the full committee
assignment.
With with the no remorse
apparently and that's not
happening over here we're green
lighting all of their unanimous
counts so you know just on the
us a certain treatment we need
to maybe we consider looking at
their bills with the same.
But I thank you madam president
Of you know the other side here
again I just also let me let me
just suggest I and I have just
heard that there was some issues
I am more than happy I think we
will go have that discussion and
I'm more than open to doing that
I just think what we're at the
point where both chambers do
need to have some reciprocity
and the way we're doing things
and I'll make sure that message
is.
Committee members Senator that
our business announcements and
miscellaneous if there's no
objection more on that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous Senator work I
caucuses which is why we're
gonna wrap this up at this point
Senator Stefanics thank you
madam president
I had notified the Senate
two state so I'm just letting
the public know thank you very
much thank you senator souls
thank you madam chair I don't
believe we had anything referred
to Senate education said
have some house built by that
time percent it'd.
Thank you Senator Shendo thank
you madam of a.
The president the Senate tax
business transportation
Soto thank you very much Mr
president then president your
rules committee will be meeting
tomorrow morning at nine AM we
have a the state engineer and a
few other confirmations to Care
the.
you know I I have a neck injury
myself and sometimes hard to
turn my head all the way so I
appreciate that
yesterday was the committee for
wasn't read until today on the
floor.
But it's already been scheduled
for today in the finance
committee.
That doesn't given the public
Slowly other bills depending on
what party designation you have
get scheduled here.
I think the biggest concern is
that this bill.
And yet this bill without even
being right on the floor yeah it
was already scheduled another
committee.
And.
I don't think that's the right
approach I don't think that is
being transparent to the
isn't even seeing what we're
doing up here we schedule it for
another committee so I think
that's in poor taste and is not
being fair to the public of New
reconsider putting bills on as
coach agenda that haven't even
been.
Read in on the floor thank you
Madam thank you present any
after the Senate caucus thank
you any other announcements.
Senator Peter Wirth thank you
rural and cultural affairs
committee to who was been
referred house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for house bill one thirty five
has had it under consideration
And that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Shannon Pinto co chair
Senator Pinto at a president I
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous.
There's no objection on that
order business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth.
