Brandt.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Gonzales present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna here Senator
Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator Stewart a seven we can
get them in Senator Pinto bill
that spectrum Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
be that today by Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino pledge allegiance in
Spanish with that today by
Senator Peter Wirth and the
salute to the Mexican flag to
be led today by Senator Stuart
Ingle.
take a moment just for
intelligence to introduce
myself.
This is my seventh year in Santa
Fe is pastor Christ Lutheran
Our acronym has over three
million members of the lesson is
part of the Lutheran world
federation.
Price right here in Santa Fe Y.
service pastors one of twenty
four initially led by none award
that faithfully for two decades
by Ruth Papen most recently by
director part later.
dialogue among leaders of
diverse religious paths and
works to cultivate healing and
transformation in the greater
community I am here by the
of the literacy volunteers of
Santa Fe our mission is to
provide free tutoring to adults
in reading writing and speaking
English to strengthen our
Santa Fe branch which locally
eight the historic program to
welcome about a hundred Afghani
refugees to Santa Fe.
Part of the two hundred moving
Myself before this morning's
prayer is it knowledge meant
that we you Senators staff
visitors.
And the people involved in the
Yes we continue to face
uncertainty as we strive to be
faithful to our missions which
Botha verse all work to
from him no evangelical Lutheran
worship slightly modified.
Let us pray.
Gracious god source of all
creation.
As we prepare to face a new
winter storm stirring up.
Blowing into northern New Mexico
across the United States
bringing much needed moisture to
our dry lands.
And we pray.
For all the gets you already
bestowed upon us.
Stir up in us.
Stir up in us pointedness.
For ourselves and for our
neighbors especially when we
sometimes stumble or fall.
That our words and actions
influence the world around us in
ways to build the greater good.
Stir up in us.
Stir up in us.
Patience.
To close our mouths open our
years active listening
To continue to face the unknown
with trust a new created that
To ventures of which we cannot
see the ending.
I pass as yet untried.
Through perils no.
us and your love supporting us.
And then in.
Thank you Mr president good
morning as well and welcome back
to you were glad to have you
back unanimous consent we go
about our business announcements
and miscellaneous.
learning about your church and
how it fits in I thought it was
a particularly good roadmap for
us to stir up wisdom kindness
So couple of announcements for
the members tomorrow is the
deadline for introducing bills.
Second you should receive an
email from Legislative Council
five o'clock today.
Today Senator Lopez is going to
say some words and there's just
reception in the Aqaba railcard
to other real cars of the
railyards five to seven thirty
by invitation only and without
They're not junction cameras are
only allowed on the floor
Senator Lopez thank you very
much Mr president and also
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Steinborn.
the chamber hearing no objection
so ordered.
Senate is one that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous and the senators
wishing to make an announcement
attention you may want to get
your pen and write this number
down each member will be getting
three million ninety five that a
ninety five and two hundred
thirty eight we may around those
exact rex and so you can count
on that three million and ninety
five.
as your capital outlay number
so.
Saying no further announcements.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so just
for the members we are going to
got a little committee reports
for so I wanna make you run too
fast there
So with that the Mr president
unanimous consent.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to home is been
referred Senate bill four Senate
bill four has had it under
consideration and report same
Senator Senator.
This present move move adoption
of the committee report Senator
there's been a motion to adopt
the committee report there was
Mr president your Judiciary.
Mr president I ask unanimous
Senate bill forty one do passed
as amended.
Senate bill thirty four do pass
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one sixty four to pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Joe's of Serfontein as chair
the journal show they were acted
upon individually.
Mr president you're in the in
rural and cultural affairs
committee to home is been
referred Senate bill one forty
committee respectfully submitted
Shannon Pinto co chair Senator
Pinto I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that there you to be
allowed to read all the
committee reports and that we
to the finance committee
respectfully submitted Shannon
Pinto co chair Senator Pinto.
I've move adoption for the mid
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go back to that or a business
announcements and miscellaneous
an ideal to Senator Lopez who's
gonna.
members of the Senate I know
that during this COVID time we
are not how should I say having
certificates of recognition read
as has been our tradition into
Of that many of us have known
during our our ten year here the
legislature and another your
places around the state of New
Mexico and this is honoring a
listening to this honor and also
smiling upon us which I know and
we've always appreciated and do
appreciate now.
Mr president he describes as
long labor history starting as
an apprentice in the sheet metal
workers union in el Paso Texas
from nineteen sixty five to
workers local you forty nine in
the eighties he was elected also
as president of the New Mexico
federation of labor.
president members of the Senate
including opposition to right to
work laws keeping the prevailing
wage in place in regarding an
improved version of the workers
compensation act.
back in nineteen ninety five
nineteen ninety six and I had an
opportunity to meet with him and
other representatives in the
you.
And for you he was lived in my
was certainly let me know.
EOG of course
Is a treasure for New Mexico
he's a treasure.
having been raised in the union
family also I understand and
realize the value of what are
you spring to us and what as the
are you brothers and sisters so
with that Mr president is see if
if maybe they'll be some other
comments from my colleagues here
on the floor this morning thank
you Senator Lopez for that
and to George G. bill and I want
to express my deep appreciation
for the many years of service
that he provided to the people
of New Mexico.
individual of commitment this
person who is devoted and
dedicated.
To not only his passion which is
For the betterment of our
workers and for the betterment
of the future of what we're
going to be leaving to others.
Jeep go land and his family
you gave me early in my career
here in the New Mexico state
Senate.
That guidance that you provided
me definitely helped with the
insight and to better understand
Heartfelt express.
What I really feel about George
need to go around is a person
many others thank you Mr
president Senator Campos thank
you.
Any further announcements
Senators.
and I've had great discussions
on lots of different things an
agreement on some disagreement
on a few more but he's damn good
then thank you.
it's good to see him up there
maybe he's coming down I'm not
sure always on the other end.
All there is good over how he
got behind the pillar there but
working for and that's that two
jeep is and always will be just
a passionate voice for for
workers and for unions and you
thank you center Lopez for
bringing it.
Thank you senator Wirth any
further announcement Senators.
Senator Stewart.
you know I don't I think someone
I think Senator Lopez mentioned
this but he just left us a
really wonderful gift with his
daughter Rhonda who is totally
jeep us just a lovely person to
work with so appreciative for
all these years all of your work
for all of us so thank you Judy.
the floor if we could Mr
president standing give of Mr
Gilliland a round of applause to
say thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez for that
we are still in that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
want to announce a money men T.
who is here with me but Larry R.
Ramirez if you can stand up
she's doing a year round
mentorship and comes once a week
generation next in the paper
let's all give her a welcome to
the Senate again.
Europe first and then Senator
Rodriguez items one and two so
with that unanimous consent we
go that our business third
reading of legislation ideal to
Senator Ingle for Senate bill
show that all action for placing
Senate bill seventeen on final
passage is then taken now
subject to debate amendment or
sure came from the New Mexico
finance authority and what this
bill does and it was passed in
nineteen ninety two one of my
early years here and basically
city and there's a loan program
that the is generally speaking a
zero percent interest and
there's a this year the the.
Six for water conservation or
treatments recycling or re use
twenty one for storage
convention delivery projects
funding source for them that
comes every year certain
percentages state to severance
tax bonds and things like that
and this is something that we
Senate bill seventy with
emergency clause anyone wishing
debate.
Senate debate Senator Ingle to
close on the bill.
bill seventeen do not pass and
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show the
rules been called all those
voted in the present except of
voting in the negative by show
By a vote of thirty one Fuhrman
is here the native Senate bill
seventeen with emergency clause
has passed the Senate Senator
Ingle.
Mr president thank you members
Mr.
This is doesn't work I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
thirty seven on final passage
we do it is merely I'm carrying
it for the New Mexico finance
authority and the doors
unanimously and basically is
just appropriating a total of
this in order to get matching
funds every year that's what it
does Mr chairman Mr president
thank you center there is
centers we're debating Senate
bill thirty seven anyone wishing
the Senate that the record show
that the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands that is to your seats
please.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative zero on the negative
Senate bill thirty seven has
passed the Senate Senator yes
you'll to the reader the reader
to read.
Senate bill one ninety nine
introduced by Senator Diamond
and act making appropriation for
ordered printed referred to the
Senate committees committee then
Senate conservation committee
events Senate finance Senate
bill one ninety nine.
task force Senate bill two
hundred Senate bill two hundred
having been read twice by title
is ordered print and referred to
the Senate committees committee
then Senate rules committee.
act relating to public school
finance creating reporting
requirements for school
districts and state chartered
charter schools related to the
use of federal funds from the
Senate bill two on having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee that
Senate Education Committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill two on.
certain public officials Senate
bill to to Senate bill to to
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee
that's Senate health and public
of.
So.
act making appropriation to the
department of transportation to
study the feasibility of
constructing a high speed
passenger rail road in New
then Senator acts Business
transportation committee and
the Senate finance committee
Senate bill two or three.
Senate bill two oh four
bill two oh four Senate Bill
tool for having been read twice
by title is ordered printed
referred to the Senate
committees committee than centex
business and transportation
introduced by Senator Griggs and
act relating to towards
exempting volunteer fire
departments and volunteer
emergency medical technicians
Senate committees committee then
Senate health and public affairs
committee events Senate
Judiciary Committee that Senate
bill to I.
the termination of obligations
pursuant to revenue sharing
agreements in futures state
tribal gaming compacts Senate
bill two oh six Senate bill two
finance Senate bill two oh six.
Senator called for you know what
committee to who was been
referred Senate bill ninety five
has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendation that do pass and
then just referred to the
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion in
the the journal reflect they
as amended and that's referred
to the finance committee.
Senate bill one nineteen do pass
as amended and that's referred
one fifty to do pass and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one fifty
nine do pass and then just
the committee report and as we
have a motion to adopt committee
for.
Any objection.
I see no objections the
committee part is been adopted
and the General show that
that's it for today that's all
the work on the table and the
two bills tomorrow we're gonna
come in at twelve thirty so
committee chairs now's the time
meet at one PM in room three.
Twenty one.
Thanks edition Senator Ivey Soto
I thank very much Mr president
was president your Senate rules
of the I consider the the the
confirmation of the secretary of
education designate and we also
have on our amended agenda
reminder we are having the
basketball game or eight
February tenth and it the way it
looks now we are in deep trouble
our our anchor there the Senator
game is on its Thursday February
tenth and for you newcomers we
usually have the coach of the
respective universities Lou
Henson whomever you know
Thank you for the invitation
Center nail senator Morris was
present as our president of
always argue that you should be
able to play in the game so I I
ask unanimous consent that that
happened just a reminder to the
Republican caucus and to the
three oh three of course you're
welcome Mr president.
Thank you senator Morris.
Senator souls thank you Mr
president Senate education will
be meeting tomorrow morning at
nine o'clock in room three
some rounding on the capital
numbers and and so we're going
around that up to three point
one dead even so members don't
have to figure out how to do
that so that's very important
a letter out to your offices
today on the the exact dollar
amount so you're all correct and
there's no questions Mr
president financial going at one
on doing
and so that's it Mr president
thank you senator Munoz Senator
Stewart.
I thank you Mr president the
Senate committees committees
Thank you Mr president first I
have a question for the chair of
finance if you would you'll just
sentiment us deal.
Mr president why should I.
answer but it'll help everybody
Mr president just because
capital is running behind let me
look at those dates I don't have
off the top of my head you do
you that dates time at deadlines
and everything for your capital
B. and.
Thank you Mr president I would
just like to point out that I
people's troubles because the
only gave us half the answer.
So but that's okay so Mister
president I do want to make sure
that we're not too myopic with
budget is we're talking about
we're going the law the money
for ever and ever so let's not
destroy the industry this
pandemic thank you Mr president.
remember the first years we had
a basketball team here and
We
We were very young bunch.
glad to get involved in a pool
tournament portion occur since
we both grew up in a pool hall
and I think that's where we
should aim for instead of doing
the showers so anyway
basketball's getting to rigorous
has to.
Of we have some young people
here Senator pope that I can
tell is going to be a strong
forward.
sure that we have a game that
all of us will enjoy and play
and if we can go around and
around and I now yield the
center and you know just.
And so
we can win that game just let me
in Santo Domingo go in the other
locker room and and believe me
are practicing Senate Mr
president sadly none.
Well put me in coach.
and then we can like move into
something gentler like
volleyball or you know of
something but but we need to get
the tank trophy back it bothers
secret weapon will be our our
dazzling point guard Senator
Pinto but she's grads and you
know and the issue but that but
so I mean I don't know man we
just weren't but I think we can
do it because we're even though
we're older were smarter.
We are then that chamber over
the Senate side no one from the
houses been showing up which
means they are even worse in
shape than we are so all's not
lost Mr president senator Munoz
Any further announcements.
Unseen no further announcements
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president we've got a couple
more items up on the table
four has had it under
consideration and provide seem
to be germane pursuant to house
executive message number twenty
two and that's referred to the
read all of the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion in the journal
reflect that they are acted upon
individually.
No objection the reader to read.
the Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee Senate bill
one ninety one germane and
that's referred to the Indian
rural and cultural affairs
germane and that's referred to
the tax business and
transportation committee Senate
bill one ninety four germane and
that's referred to the
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
respectfully submitted Mimi
Stewart chair.
Senator Stewart Mr president
move adoption of the committee
individually.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
introduction legislation one
that order business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
portion of the liquor excise tax
to counties for the provision of
alcohol and substance abuse
prevention and treatment and a
portion of the county alcohol
and substance abuse prevention
to the Senate committees
committee that's Senate tax
business and transportation
committee Vance Senate finance
Senate bill two oh seven.
act providing that a custodian
may convert an electronic record
to an open format without that
being considered the creation of
affairs committee events Senate
judiciary Senate bill two oh
eight.
Senate bill two oh nine
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
programming for students in
northern New Mexico Senate bill
two oh nine Senate bill two or
nine having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate
Thank you Mr president is that
we go that our visit
announcements and miscellaneous.
I see no objections senator
Wirth Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr president and
senator you know there's been a
I think suit in a perfect place
underneath the basket that could
also assist in that in a way
that house of representatives
do we allow.
that relative of yours and boy
we sure could use of you know
but now like what that's a box
of Pandora's is a state I mean I
don't know how many people of
in the day our previous attended
governor they did we wouldn't
allow him to play so hopefully
it's not a partisan thing.
Well Mr president Senator
of some of those house members
thank you Mr president thank you
maybe we could look at that and
there are also some really good
staff members there's a certain
guy named Miguel who's really
Thank you senator thank you
senator Senator Lopez.
Si no further announcements
Senator Wirth no that's it for
today with that unanimous
