Senator Gonzales present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna here Senator
Moores.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Neville.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Paul.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator songes.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
For them occasion to be that
today by pastor Thiago honey
just have in life church of
Santa Fe please remain standing
for the pledge of allegiance to
Let us pray together.
We pray to the one was the
object of our collective faith
and hope.
The one who even though we are
tired and weary.
one who sees precisely for the
gift of sight.
For the gift of sight to be
given to all of the beloved
people who served in this
building today.
Give them sites to see one
another.
Give them sites to discern what
is best for this land and the
people in it.
Specially as the right policies
imagine projects that will
come from their decisions but
above all.
Please give all of the beloved
people here today the grace that
The legislation on this acutely
like us you can assess the
Buddha and will perform of this
record us on his own beast of
some others you could do this
estados Unidos the Amedica the
low Republica Representative a
una nazione on the us into the
sea billet committed Dawn it's
Once again would like to welcome
you to a session to start off
today I'll turn it over to
senator Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr president good
president thank you to our
Senate chaplain
for potentiating I know we move
the floor a little bit not
juggling schedules but we really
appreciate how you're handling
announcements up front of
financial disclosure forms I
need to be filed with the
secretary of state's office by
next Monday January thirty
first.
The filing is done
Again capital outlay priorities
are due Sunday January thirtieth
by five PM in the council
bills is February second.
one thing I do want the body to
no Representative Roger Montoya
word from the speaker but he had
to be taken out through the
windshield on some photos out
there of the vehicle and it was
serious so he certainly is in
our prayers
for him so Mister president with
that ideal to Senator Lopez
first Senator Lopez I thank you
very much Mr president unanimous
excuse the senators to heck
sirventes o'neill and Toleman
until they return to the floor.
inn and spa at Loretto from five
to seven by invitation thank you
Mr president thanks to our we
are that order business
announces the state is Senator
Woods.
The the the great part of waking
up in the morning and seeing
what's known ground.
And again I I want to pray for
In Jesus name I pray Mr
president thank you very much
thank you senator what's we do
have further announcements
Senator Pinto thank you Mr
president you spend consent to
Thanks etcetera etcetera we do
have further announcements
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
president on your desk you have
multi state agency initiative
that the governor has set up
with includes the department of
agriculture economic development
requested to be part of the
funding formulas that are going
to be set up thank you very much
members thank you Senator
CENIC's if you have further
announcements and recorded
Hemphill.
today's Grant County day and I
just want to thank the Grant
County prospectors for their
advocacy up there such an
met so huge thank you to the
Grant County prospectors and
thank you Mr president thank you
senator.
Any further announcements.
going to get to that and the
next day or two.
Remember we are waiting on the
governor's executive rex to wrap
up that that number and then we
president could you kind of put
somebody up there at the podium
and go take care of that for us.
Thank you centerman yes.
I there's nothing you'd want to
capital right.
But we'll talk about that a
lot happier down here once that
gets done.
Thank you senator I am happy to
hear that the amount may be
larger at the think that's going
to go to good use for the people
of the state.
Mr president twisted your arm
yet.
Further announcements Senators.
different committee reports then
we also have a large number of
confirmations and when we get to
that point actually maybe maybe
I'll yield the center Ivey Soto
so.
The rules committee came in
about a week early
from the legislative session and
started hearing doing hearings
on conferees
And then as we've been
finalising background checks in
the rest of the paperwork then
we'll be moving those to the
floor we have twenty two right
now that are being moved to the
All of those I will tell you all
the ones that are being moved to
the floor today were
unanimously.
Recommended for to pass to the
Senate floor for confirmation.
because of M. sing this part and
yielding to the various
different sponsors then at with
each of them will go to the
sponsor the sponsor make the
Things that some of us may know
about these people that.
Are allowed to be said about
talked about on webcast and and
we have one person out right now
which is Senator Kernan we'll be
doing a show of hands.
Are free to the votes are where
the record reflect that all
With two people out okay very
good yeah so both of them then
can do that if if they need to
get our attention any given time
so up with that Mr president
senator Wirth is the process
messages from the governor from
that order of Business messages
from the governor the reader to
read the message.
Senate executive message number
twenty eight the honorable Mimi
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature
second session submission of
Senate bill eight a bill
municipal elections allowing
designation of a tribal
government building as a
qualified electors mailing
address amending voter
registration procedures and
requirements repealing and
expanding online voter
registration opportunities
allowing access to list of
eligible but unregistered
individuals providing that
protect polling place access and
address other election issues
involving voters on Indian
nation tribal employable lamb.
election a legal public holiday
declaring the day of a general
election a school holiday
providing for a transfer from
the electors party providing
requirements for the restoration
of the right to hold an office
of public trust making
conforming and various related
Lujan Grisham governor Senate
executive message number twenty
eight.
The general show the message
from the governor has been
received.
Some of the executive message
fifth legislature second session
submission of Senate bill one
twenty three a bill providing a
new sunset date for the state
racing commission Senate
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
committee reports on that order
of business committee reports
the reader to read the report.
and that's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted Benny Shendo junior
chair.
Senator Shendo.
I move the the committee report
has been a motion to adopt the
committee report Senator I
believe there's more than one
okay just once it has been a
motion about the committee
report any objection.
provide same to be germane
pursuant to Senate executive
message number twenty six and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
journal reflect their acted upon
individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read all the committee
reports Senate bill one fifty
germane and that's referred to
committee Senate bill one sixty
one germane and that's referred
to the Education Committee
Senate bill one sixty two
bill one sixty four germane and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one sixty
five germane and that's referred
committee Senate bill one sixty
seven germane and that's
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
respectfully submitted Mimi
journal show that they were
acted upon individually.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
introduction of legislation on
that order of business
ghosts and others and act
relating to children allowing
persons to leave infants and
safety devices for the surrender
of infants under certain
conditions without criminal
devices requiring the public
education department to
promulgate rules making
appropriations declaring an
Senate bill one sixty eight
Senate bill one sixty nine
introduced by Senator Lopez and
act relating to economics
tasking the University of New
making appropriate procreation
Senate bill one sixty nine
Senate bill one six and I am
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
introduced by Senator Lopez and
act making appropriation to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration to promote
economic development and
to the Senate committees
committee and Senate tax
business the transportation
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill one
seventy.
prepares medical students to
practice in underserved
communities Senate bill one
seventy one Senate bill one
seventy one.
Senate bill one seventy one.
Senate bill one seventy two
introduced by Senator mo nos and
act relating to education
retirement allowing certain
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee that
Senate education events Senate
finance Senate bill one seventy
two.
Senate bill one seventy three
income tax credit Senate bill
one seventy three Senate bill
one seventy three having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee then
introduced by senator Munoz and
others and act relating to motor
vehicles requiring truck
tractors attached to a freight
trailer to drive in the right
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee that
Senate tax business and
transportation committee vents
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one seventy four.
educational plan to address the
for student groups deemed at
risk in the consolidated Yazzie
Martinez V. state of New Mexico
the comprehensive education plan
and compliance with the
constitution of New Mexico to
provide at risk children with
the uniform and sufficient
sent Education Committee that
center memorial twelfth.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent that
our business announcements and
reports are coming down there
close and so we're just gonna
stand in place then we'll get
those Canadian reports made them
in batches since that's how they
seem to be coming out so we just
The same no nonsense SNL stand
in place.
The way.
On our.
if you're wondering what I can't
hear you.
It was the number.
The.
No the four.
Cool.
I'm not sure.
Thank you for your.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so as I said these are
The reader to read the committee
for.
Mr president the rules committee
has had it under consideration
Senate executive letter number
one.
Planning Commission for term
commencing on September
fifteen twenty to twenty twenty
to be served at the pleasure of
the governor your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm disappointment
most of the record reflect that
their act fund individually no
objections the reader to read
all the committee reports.
Samantha single as a member of
the military base Planning
Commission for term commencing
on September fifteenth twenty
twenty to be served at the
pleasure of the governor the
committee recommends that the
one dated April seven twenty
twenty one in which the governor
makes the following appointment
Jennifer Clarke Weller as a
member of the military base
Planning Commission for term
commencing on September
letter number one dated April
seven in which the governor
makes the following appointment
general Eric L. Sanchez as a
member of the military base
Planning Commission for term
Senate executive letter number
one dated April seven twenty
twenty one it what's the
governor makes the following
appointment Sherman McCorkle as
a member of the military base
Planning Commission for a term
commencing on September fifteen
twenty one in which the governor
makes the following appointment
Robert ed bribes and as a member
of the military base Planning
Commission for a term commencing
on September fifteenth twenty
twenty one in which the governor
makes the following appointment
Senator William F. Burt as a
member of the military base
Planning Commission for a term
commencing on September
thirteen dated may twenty seven
twenty twenty one what's the
governor makes the following
appointment Debra L. more as a
member of the military base
Planning Commission for term
commencing on may twenty seven
dated may twenty seven twenty
twenty one what's the governor
makes the following appointment
James A. burns as a member of
the military base Planning
respectfully submitted Daniel A.
Ivey Soto chair.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Seen opposition the committee
for the Medidata in the journal
show that they're active on
individually.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president the unanimous consent
general Eric Sanchez who has
been appointed to the military
base Planning Commission I now
yield to Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond.
confirm the appointment of
general Eric Sanchez to the
military base Planning
Commission.
Seeing no objection Senator
Diamond to explain the conferee.
Commission he has a very long
and impressive resume that I am
not gonna read on on here but
included in here under
negotiations that I thought was
interesting was he in it
with sharing missile defense
data.
Later he led to several success
stories including the department
of armies agreeing to increase
our air defense presence in the
Pacific.
Southern New Mexico and his
education includes the national
security and Strategic Studies
at the Naval War College he also
attended the public
administration degree at the
appointment.
I'm here for the military place
Planning Commission.
Senator debating confirmation of
general Eric L. Sanchez.
appointment of general Eric
Sanchez service we're voting on
the confirmation of general Eric
L. Sanchez.
To your seats.
how are we doing show of hands
for those who are.
Coming in virtually on zoom
those are just I just Senator
the notify us if they wish to
vote now thank you from.
the appointment of general Eric
L. Sanchez is a member of the
military base Planning
Commission for term commencing
on September fifteenth twenty
twenty to be serve at the
Sanchez thank you for your
service to New Mexico thank you
senator.
Madam huh Senator Hotmail Mr
president I hereby submit the
credentials of Sherman McCorkle
to Senate executive letter did
number one dated April seventh
twenty twenty one I move that
the Senate do slide here correct
do hereby confirm the
appointment of Sherman McCorkle
chairman and CEO and co founder
of Sandia science and technology
park development corporation
he's served as lead independent
director if emcore corporation
director for New Mexico bank and
trust and has advised over
hundred twenty five start up
businesses as a co founder of
New Mexico angels Mr McCorkle
pleased to nominate him as
Montoya please Planning
Commission service we're
debating the appointment of
Sherman McCorkle anyone wishing
to debate.
to the mid to military base
Planning Commission.
Senator seeds please we're
voting.
If you wish to vote no please
By a vote of thirty six in the
pleasure of the governor has
been duly confirmed by the New
Mexico state Senate Senator
Diamond thank you president
congratulations Mr McCorkle from
your appointment and thank you
Commission I now yield to
Centerville Centerville thank
you Mr president Mr president to
propose pursuant to Senate
executive letter number one
Sen objection senator bill to
explain conferee.
Mr president miss Weller grew up
primarily in southwestern part
of the United States should be
attended grade school in
Kirtland airforce airbase in New
Mexico.
She attended high school in
Benton city Washington enough
Akron Ohio and she got her BBA
in the universe's out coated
operations officer citizens bank
in Farmington she works for a
great organization and she's
were very involved in the
community she serves in San Juan
medical foundation board
values the life lessons lessons
of military families bring to
the communities as being prices
without estimate the credentials
of Jennifer Clark Wheeler thank
Mr president just a Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
Jennifer Clark Wheeler to the
military base Planning
Commission just for show hands
centers we're voting on the
By a vote of thirty six in the
pleasure of the governor has
been duly confirmed by the
Senate.
Senator bill thank you Mr
president congratulations to
Jennifer Wheeler.
Senator Padilla.
Senator by the thank you very
much Mr president pursuant to
Senate executive letter number
one dated April seventh two
thousand twenty one I move that
I thank you very much Mr
president thank you Senator how
to meal no Samantha for quite
some time Mr president in a
couple of different rules that
she's had within central New
bring with her at doctor of
education degree that she earned
back in two thousand a couple
years ago two thousand twenty a
bachelor business administration
a master of business
started as the director of
development there at the Senate
CNM and has worked her way to
vice president of advancement
and enrollment strategy for
she's made some huge
contributions there in terms of
foundation and UNM libraries I
think that's why she makes such
a great addition and and and
does such great work at that
school Mr president if you've
ever met Samantha she's very
involved in the community as
well all the way to through
she has received multiple honors
in our community to as well
Mister president including the
Jennifer Riordan women of
influence community impact award
in two thousand twenty for two
active in that organization so
with that Mr president I just
Would ask that the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of Samantha single thank you so
much Senator this centers we're
Thank you Mr president I just
that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
cement the single.
Senate vote into your seats
please.
If you wish to vote no please
By a vote of thirty seven the
affirmative zero on the negative
the appointment of cement the
single as a member of the
military base funding commission
for term commencing on September
Center how to mail Mr president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Paul Cassidy who has been
appointed to the military base
Planning Commission I now yield
the seventh twenty twenty one I
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Paul
J. Cassidy to the military base
Thank you very much Mr president
our members of the Senate Mr
Cassidy has over forty two years
of experience and he has been
nineteen ninety four and managed
The New Mexico office until his
retirement Mr Cassidy's
experience includes municipal
Representative all or parts of
the New Mexico local and state
agencies school districts higher
education institutions are all
throughout his career in regard
individual has sent.
Always are high regard in all
that he does I level of ethics
in a person who has represented
that Mr president I do stand for
questions thank you Senator
Campos centers we're debating
the deployment of hall Cassidy.
Senator Lopez.
wishing debate.
See none Senator Campos a close
thank you very much Mr president
I asked that the Senate hereby
raise your hand.
Cassidy is a member of the
military base Planning
Commission for term commencing
on September fifteenth twenty
twenty to be serve at the
pleasure of the governor has
been duly confirmed by the
New Mexico or the highest level
of the state thank you thank you
Senator Campos Senator how to
mail Mr president I hereby
submit the credentials of Robert
drugs and who has been appointed
to Senate the executive letter
number one dated April seventh
twenty twenty one I move that
the Senate now here by can from
the appointment of Robert and
wraps and to the military base
of Brigham Young University he
has a degree in hospitality and
management hospitality
management here is wife Margaret
support for not only Holloman
Air Force base license agency
arrangement all the bases in the
state of New Mexico including a
chairman of the committee fifty
twice he was also past present
On the AT T. C. that's the air
education training command
commanders group is a home and
women and has served on the
military base Planning
we're debating the confirmation
of rubber and Raphson anyone
wishing debate.
Scene and senator Byrd.
Thank you Mr president I just of
the Senate do hereby confirm the
on September fifteenth twenty
twenty to be served at the
pleasure of the governor has
been duly confirmed by the New
Mexico state Senate senator Byrd
thank you Mr president and Mr
senator Byrd center how to meal
thank you Mr president I hereby
submit the credentials of
Deborah Moore who has been
appointed to the military base
Planning Commission I now yield
of Deborah Moore to the military
base Planning Commission.
See no objections Senator
Hamblen to explain the Capri Mr
president Senate colleagues it
know her as Debbie in the
community when Debbie first
moved to Los crucis in two
thousand sixteen with her
husband bill the community
welcomed her with open arms and
hearts it was not difficult for
Southern New Mexico and helping
those who have served our
country demi Moore's immerse
yourself in our community and
our generosity of spirit is seen
in many aspects of our city and
suddenly passed away he was a
good and kind man and that his
service the community filled to
capacity the church that he
Her appointment to the New
Mexico military base commission
by the governor demonstrates her
knowledge and understanding of
those serving our country in
twenty nineteen she graduated
from the national security
is weak it's not as I say in my
best Boston accent compassionate
creative and practical she is
one of the best team players
that I know and is able to draw
confirmation.
Thank you senator Helen centers
we're debating the appointment
of Debra Elmore anyone wishing
debate.
Commission and is very voting to
your seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
as a member of the military base
Planning Commission for term
commencing on may twenty seven
twenty twenty one to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
has been duly confirmed by the
burns has been appointed to the
military base Planning
Commission I now yield to
Senator Ingle Senator Ingle
thank you Mr president thank you
senator.
appointment of James burns to
the military base Planning
Commission.
See no objections Senator Ingle
to explain the conferee.
business there for many many
years.
In a very big part of the.
Support of economic airforce
base and.
very active member of that
committee of fifty still is.
And work very hard work all of
us to make sure that can
therefore Scrase still was part
for that will still be in
operation we have one of the
best bombing ranges in the
United States there and it's all
part of the support that men
him for the military base
Planning Commission.
Thank you senator Senator
debating.
Senator Woods.
I would like to speak in favor
of the district up there and
he's a very much a community
oriented man and devoted
cat and therefore space support
comments there and I know that
Mister burns thanks a lot of him
because he's he has a fifty
dollar credit at one store.
Present I do move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
the negative by show of hands
Senator is more voting tier
seats please.
The rest of on all please raise
your hand.
on may twenty seventh twenty.
Twenty one to be served at the
pleasure of the governor.
Has been doing confirmed by the
Mexico state Senate centering
on.
senator William Burt who has
been appointed to the military
base Planning Commission I now
yield to senator Byrd senator
Byrd to resent Senator Burt
graces my sponsor and because
traveling in scheduling we were
unable to get together on the
some of the confirmation in the
committee and so chairman just
thirty years on a was a former
member the Air Combat Command
commander's group we did that
for about sixteen years at home
and we then have supported not
only the veterans of the state
appointed to this commission
which I've been a member of
since its inception in two
thousand and three as we formed
this through governor Richardson
to protect the military bases in
we first have to put it on
pursuant to.
Finishes up.
just isn't do hereby confirm the
appointment of myself Senator
the fall centerpiece of the
thank you very much and is
present agency present with the
sponsor of the conferee you
senator Byrd deal yes.
The.
A Mister centers of the Senator
Burt
what is your first memory of
William F. Burt.
around the backyard in plain
cavalry's Indians.
Senator so the.
And that Mr president and a
out well in Mr president and
senator
Riding a tricycle which was my
horse was little more difficult
and so I was just happy up and
pretty much the extent of it.
Senator Ivey Soto cannot miss
president Center burnt so the
the tricycle that Willie but was
using this is while he was in
Senator is at the front often
miss president and Senator Burt
what what what's the a military
background of of Mr William F.
Burt.
Well Mister president and a
paychecks is somehow associated
with parliament airforce base
and through the chamber of
commerce and the committee fifty
which is the military bases
base for many many times
actually have gone to Washington
DC Langley Air Force base and
actually force base for the air
the men and women that
Probably where.
The green or the blue.
that support this country every
They may not.
be around to see that first goal
that there some cakes or dollar
kicks in a soccer game they may
not even be there for
To be somewhere else in the
world.
To support.
This country and the freedoms.
That all of us.
why America is so great because
these people.
I would not.
Change amendment.
That I've supported.
thank you Mr president that was
a an unexpectedly
Serious and somber answered my
question but up and appropriate
not it's just my association
with the homeowner for space on
the bases here in New Mexico
that has drawn me to spend so
and and so I appreciate your
willingness to support to to
could not serve.
with the and that but anyway
persons really a good guy.
We do have further debate
Senator Ingle.
his testimony was just you know
to.
Two good so all I will I will
move the call the Senate but I
do appreciate in support of the
basically didn't close and
certainly home and it may need
to be closed either and you know
for some reason sometimes we
have folks in Washington I think
protect ourselves and the world
thank you thanks Santo Domingo
further debate with senator
grids.
to do that as well when you
listen to to Senator Burt talk
about his involvement he really
he really doesn't do gestures to
is is an incredible advocate for
the men and women of Solomon but
also the men and women in the
United States airforce in
military as a whole.
know.
I don't think you mentioned Ivey
Soto asked about his his service
in the military.
from flying the the simulator
for the F. sixteen out at Luke
Air Force base in in Phoenix
Arizona so so Mister president
and and members of the body I
Si no further debate senator
Byrd to close on the contrary
thank you Mr president I
appreciate the words of support
and my apologies for getting
emotional.
But
well so with that Mr president
as the Senate do not here by
confirm the appointment of
senator William F. Burt to the
military base plan commission
Senator voting tier seats
Senator sure voting no.
Senator Baca voting no.
Senator Steinborn voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no.
Senator Munoz voting no.
Senator.
Send a voting no Senator
Rodriguez voting no senator
no.
Senator Campos senator Kernan
you wish to join in.
For calling a call the final
vote count would anyone like to
change your vote.
Moores which is do the same
thing Senator share.
This is well senator Sanchez
we're still changes vote from a
no to a yes Senator Steinborn
center many of us Senator Lopez
Senator Ivey Soto.
Wish to change your vote from no
to yes Senator o'neal does so as
well.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative on the negative the
appointment of Senator million
F. Burt as a member of the
Thank you.
was appointed the Senate size
the only new guy on the on the
block here and I had no idea
this was coming on going what
the heck did I do you know but I
love you guys all to death
Center how to meal it I don't
have any more confirmation since
lives do you have those
sentiments Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that or
letter number thirty eight the
December twenty eight twenty
twenty one it was a governor
makes the following
reappointment Abram are Anaya as
a member of the adult parole
board for a term commencing on
Ivey Soto share Senator Ivey
Soto thank you very much this
president as soon as consenus of
the three to be allowed to read
all the committee reports that
they be acted upon with one vote
which the governor makes the
following reappointment merry so
feel harm meal but I as a as a
member of the adult parole board
for term commencing on December
sixteen twenty twenty one
twenty nineteen which the
governor makes the following
appointment Janet F. Chandler as
a member of the adult parole
board for term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
eight dated December twenty
eight twenty twenty one in which
the governor makes the following
appointment Robert Kenny as a
member of the adult parole board
for a term commencing on June
December twenty eight twenty
twenty one the what's the
governor makes the following
reappointment Amy Y. Lopez as a
member of the adult parole board
re appointment Senate executive
letter number twenty one dated
October ten twenty nineteen in
which the governor makes the
following appointment Ronald M.
Senate confirm disappointment
Senator executive letter number
twenty four dated August twenty
twenty twenty one the what's the
governor makes the following
expiring July one twenty twenty
five your committee recommends
that the Senate confirm
disappointment Senate executive
letter number twenty seven dated
August twenty twenty twenty one
expiring July one twenty twenty
five your committee recommends
that the Senate confirm
disappointment Senate the
member of the adult parole board
for a term commencing upon
confirmation of expiring August
thirteenth twenty twenty five
the committee recommends that
the Senate confirmed
committee report and the
objection.
See no objection the committee
part is been adopted in the
journal show they're acted upon
individually Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president unanimous
the credentials of Ronald lu
settle who has been appointed to
the adult parole board board I
now yield to senator pope
Senator fo thank you Mr
president pursuant to Senate
Senator pope to explain
conferee.
Thank you Mr president Mr Liu
Cerro has.
And a master's degree in public
Advisory Council and is a member
of the New Mexico juvenile
parole board as well.
he was the first jealous
administrative for Sandoval
County.
Mexico adult parole board since
twenty nineteen.
With that Mr president
He will be an excellent board
you Mr president members I stand
in strong support of this
nomination Ron has been a long
time advocate for kids in the
juvenile system
decisions to the dots and you
know I can just say for I can
tell you from first hand
experience these are hard
decisions whether or not to
adult parole boards thank you.
Thank you senator nail any
further debate.
Si no further debate Senator
pope to close.
Thank you Mr president after
that glowing endorsement from
If you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
affirmative on the negative the
appointment of Ronald M. to
settle.
As a member of the adult for all
board.
For term.
has been duly confirmed by the
Senate Senator folk.
Thank you Mr president and
congradulations Mr with several
thank you colleagues thank you
senator pope Center Hotmail Mr
to Senator Stefanics Senator
Stefanics thank you Mr president
Mr president pursuant to Senate
executive letter number thirty
eight dated December twenty
eight twenty twenty one I move
Thank you hear no objection
Senator Stefanics to explain the
conferee thank you Mr president
Raymond Floyd center has already
served three and a half years on
knows the duties of this
responsibility.
Thank you Senator Vanik centers
we're debating the appointment
of Raymond Floyd Santa anyone
Raymond Floyd Senator The New
Mexico adult parole board.
Senator is to your seats please
more voting.
By a vote of thirty four in the
affirmative on the negative the
appointment of Raymond Floyd
Senna as a member the doll
parole board for a term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring August thirteenth
and members of the body thanks
Senator.
Senator bill Mr president I
president pursuant to Senate
executive letter number thirty
eight dated December twenty
eight twenty twenty one I move
that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Janet
will make a fine member of this
board and I move for approval.
Senator is we're debating the
confirmation of Janet F.
Chandler.
The list of all know please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty two in the
affirmative on the negative the
appointment of genitive Chandler
is a member of the dollar parole
board for term commencing upon
confirmation expiring September
this should have our respect
please help me in in the
welcoming Gen Chandler to that
board thank you senator Senator.
Mr president present to the
Senate executive letter number
thirty eight dated December
twenty eighth two thousand
twenty one.
Seeing no objection centers such
as to explain.
Thank you I Lopez graduated UNM
brands requests branch of
for another twelve years an
adult prison Division.
Thank you senator Sanchez anyone
wishing to debate.
why Lopez to the adult parole
board.
Senate reverting to your seats
please.
Anyone wishing to vote no please
raise your hand.
Fuhrman is here on the negative
the appointment of AB why Lopez.
As a member of the doll
peripheral more for term
commencing on September twenty
fifth twenty twenty one and
mail Mr president I hereby
submit the credentials of a
merry how to meal but I was a
who has been appointed to the
adult parole board and I yield
Senate do hereby confirm the
reappointment of merry Sophia hi
to me of what I was us.
To the adult parole board see no
she is
Twenty five years in New Mexico
corrections department as well
she's also served at the City of
Amerisur Hotmail but as a anyone
wishing to bait.
I
see no debate senator Sanchez to
close.
Senator Stewart voting to your
seats please.
Anyone wishing to vote no please
raise your hand.
meal but I was as a member of
the doll parole board for term
commencing on December sixteenth
twenty twenty one and expiring
December fifteenth twenty twenty
six has been duly confirmed by
submit the credentials of of
Anaya who has been appointed to
the adult parole board I now
yield to senator Wirth Senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president pursuant
to Senate executive letter
See no objections senator Wirth
to explain thank you Mr
president Mr Anaya continues
the great class that are coming
forward for the adult parole
service to the state twenty plus
year law enforcement service
experience in a variety of
different positions and has been
serving as the interim chair of
debating the confirmation of a
room are and I.
Senator Wirth I'm sorry Senator
Ingle.
Senator Wirth.
Wirth Mr president I'm just
curious I
What we pay folks to be on the
parole board I'm not against it
I was just curious because I I
get a per diem Is my understand
but I may be wrong let me go
back to thank you thank you Mr
president yes of per diem it's a
per diem I'm not quite sure
exactly how much it's hard to
Mr president and Senegal no
that's been an issue over the
years for sure but the the nice
thing I mentioned this about the
testimony we had the rules
committee is that.
think zoom it's interesting this
is an example of when zoom is
actually helped because they've
been able to do some of those
meetings instead of traveling
but it's a it's a regular job
it's it is a big commitment to
issues here in terms of things
not being lost not be followed
things of that nature and just
got a real good sense from the
folks and Mr Anaya certainly
think there was a little bit of
a helpful there other than per
diem and we all know that that
not exactly a fat pig so anyway
really really I can't imagine
been on all of boards like that
having to make some of those
decisions and
because there's times when you
want to be.
service decisions and sometimes
we all think maybe that they
ought to get just a little more
than per diem thank you thank
you senator Senator o'neill this
and thank you and I really
you do pretty much need to read
all of it so you're only being
reimbursed for the time that
you're actually meeting as a
board so I I totally applaud my
I don't have the yes I yield to
my friend over there thank you
Mr president you senator thank
you for the update on how much
the the per diem was and all
that how much a Senator but
members of the the parole board
and the per diem is state
senator Mike Sorley getting a
paycheck over there that we this
actually have a job finally I
think so I think of that Mr
chairman Senator I think it had
every reason why he left because
getting a fat paycheck now that
he wasn't getting when he was
sitting over there and Senator
Ivy Soto is corner.
Is that Mr president to make you
Wirth to close thank you Mr
president so I did get a little
clarification Senator Ingle on
it is only per diem but it's a
per diem of ninety five dollars
for the day that they actually
discussion to have on the floor
and you know I just would the
state that Mr Anaya is as
stepped up big time and
continues to do this and
certainly things a good
is very voting tier seeds.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
board for a term commencing on
July first twenty twenty one
expiring June thirtieth twenty
twenty seven has been duly
confirmed by the Senate Senator
Wirth.
Thank you ladies and gentleman
Senate.
yield to Senator Hamblen Senator
Hamblen.
Mr presidents and colleagues
pursuant to the Senate executive
letter number thirty eight dated
December twenty eight twenty
twenty one I move that the
is my honor to speak about
Robert Kennedy who was nominated
to serve on the adult parole
board Robert has been an
attorney since nineteen seventy
six originally from Washington
state and having a private
until his retirement in two
thousand fifteen.
His experiences a criminal
defense attorney gives him a
unique perspective into the
eligibility and qualifications
of those seeking parole as well
death penalty cases on the civil
side he was a city attorney and
Representative school district
it was his capital K. experience
which brought him to New Mexico
federal practice Congress
impact of that legislation was
to make the death penalty for a
number of federal crimes and it
also severely restricted appeals
via habeas corpus took awhile to
reach New Mexico but in two
thousand six the federal
ninety five off as a senator I'm
humbled by his service and
dedication to our criminal
justice system and as a sponsor
I'm proud to present to him you
to you for confirmation thanks
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Robert Kenny to
the adult parole board and
appreciate your support Senators
tier seats where voting if you
wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty two in the
affirmative of the navy and the
negative the appointment of
Robert Kinney is a member of the
dollar parole board for a term
commencing on June eighteenth
That is all that I have for the
adult parole board Mr president
thanks and have a meal we do
have to others.
Here.
Mr president I have appointees
are conferees to the state
personnel board left and the law
enforcement academy board no
I hereby submit the credentials
of summer meet of all who has
been appointed to the law
enforcement academy board I now
yield to senator Gonzalez
Senator Gonzalez.
I move that all.
Excuse me.
The senator.
Do hear.
Confirm all the appointment of
you want to go to to debate.
I can explains to president.
AS being no.
Did you go through this right
yes okay.
Is.
that he has also served on the.
As a veteran.
And
Has an associate degree in
criminal justice from UNM tiles
And also served as the chief of
police for the toss Pueblo.
Thank you Senator Gonzales
confirm the appointment of
summer memorable to the New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
board.
By a vote of thirty two in the
affirmative is here on the
July first twenty twenty five
has been duly confirmed by the
New Mexico Senate center
Gonzalez.
Thank you Mr president with the
you know members if you can
please help me welcome
Senator Gonzales Senator
Hemphill Mr president I hereby
submit the credentials of Benny
Roybal who has been appointed to
the law enforcement academy
sorry about that pursuant to
Senate executive letter twenty
seven dated October fifth twenty
twenty one I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
valley Mr president and a well
respected community leader Mr
Roy ball the bachelors of
business administration and has
an impressive resume he's were
to the deputy cabinet secretary
enforcement officers in and
around the Espanola valley and
will be a great addition to the
law enforcement academy board.
Thank.
a close.
I just of the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of any
Roybal says we're voting tier
seats.
If you wish to vote no.
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative zero the negative
Benny Roybal as a member of the
New massive deployment of any
rivals members in Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy board for
Senate thank you senator have
email.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president emphasis
that we're going on our business
committee reports were on that
twenty nine twenty twenty one in
which the governor makes the
following appointment Kristin
Hanes booze lament as a member
of the personnel board for a
term commencing on June twenty
Ivey Soto chair Senator Ivey
Soto thank you very much this
present Mr president moves that
are are asking us some of the
set of the three W. LED read all
number sixteen dated June tenth
twenty twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
appointment David F. Cunningham
as a member of the personnel
board for a term commencing on
seventeen dated June ten twenty
twenty one the which the
governor makes the following
appointment Laura and Liz would
as a member of the personnel
Senator executive letter number
twenty one dated June eighteen
twenty twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
twenty twenty six the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirmed disappointment
respectfully submitted Daniel A.
Ivey Soto chair.
The is there any objection
seeing no objection the
committee report is adopted.
Senator Wirth.
is been referred Senate bill one
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that do pass and then set
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
with one motion and that the
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
will read Senate bill thirty
two.
committee Senate bill thirty
eight do past events referred to
the Judiciary Committee Senate
committee report.
For an adoption of an Education
Committee report.
Seeing no objection the
committee report is adopted.
You don't.
Senator Hotmail madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Laura and Liz would who has
been appointed to the state
personnel board and I yield to
senator Wirth.
appointment of Laura and liquid
for the state personnel board.
Senator Wirth to explain the
confirmation thank you it's Liz
Appropriations nonprofits
universities she co founded the
council of women world leaders
she served in the Washington DC
Metropolitan Police department
as a reserve sergeant for many
any debate on the confirmation.
Seeing none senator Wirth to
close thank you madam president
just a Senate hereby confirm the
appointment of Laura and this
would as for show of hands.
commencing on March tenth twenty
twenty expiring on November
eighteen twenty twenty four has.
And duly confirmed by the
Senate.
Sir Hotmail thank you madam
president I hereby submit the
credentials of David Cunningham
who has been appointed to the
state personnel board I now
yield to senator Wirth.
the point of David Cunningham to
the state personnel board.
Any debate on the confirmation
of this US senator Wirth close.
served in a variety of different
a criminal positions in the in
the New York district attorney's
office also has his work as
conference.
Seeing none Center were to close
thank you I just a Senate
hearing from the point of David
Cunningham to the state
By a vote of thirty one in the
affirmative seer on the negative
the appointment of David S.
passed the Senate.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president thank you to the
Senate and to David Cunningham
congratulations.
Senator Morris thank you members
present president it's good to
see you up there.
Then presidents pursuit to send
executive letter number twenty
confirmation thank you madam
president the very impressive a
resume was an undergrad at UNM
got
her law degree from SMU was
important for you members that
private sector personal
experience to the state
personnel board so with that
then president has them ready
for questions Is there debate on
think very much of Madam
president of agency all kinds of
Bozeman sounds are quite
impressive not just in terms of
work experience but also
volunteerism could you detail
some of the volunteer work that
Mexico as much of Albuquerque
bar association being one of
those I believe you are a member
of that Senator Ivey Soto very
impressive there she also has
worked at the natural history
impressive as also has a sports
background she was part of the
rush soccer team board of
directors so yeah world world
press of volunteer activities
the kind of resume where it's
really not possible to get to
every single thing the person
does but I really appreciate you
bringing this conferee fourth
and looking for having us over
permanent person Bozeman to the
state personnel board and ask
for show hands.
We are voting on the
confirmation of Christian hand
spokeswoman centers to see if
you wish to vote no raise your
By a vote of thirty two in the
twenty three has been duly
confirmed by the Senate.
Center how to meal madam
president I hereby submit the
credentials of Carol A. Parker
Senate executive number twenty
one dated June twenty first
twenty twenty one I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Carol Parker to
the state personnel board.
a business owner and has
executive experience of various
organizations for over twenty
five years she'll be a great
addition thank you very much
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Carol Parker to
the state personnel board we are
voting on the confirmation of
Carol Parker Senators tier seats
By a vote of twenty nine in the
affirmative seer in the negative
the appointment of Carol A.
six has been duly confirmed by
the Senate.
Madam president thank you and
thank you members of the Senate
thank you.
There's to fund X..
miscellaneous senator Wirth.
So I believe that everything up
on the.
Stewart president pro tempore a
and members of the New Mexico
state Senate dear president pro
tempore a Stewart and members of
the Senate.
Soon to article four section
bill one forty four a bill
amending the crime of
intimidation to include acts
against employees and agents of
the secretary of state county
the governor has been received.
business introduction
legislation.
Senate bill one seventy five
introduced by Senator Lopez and
others and act making
Senate bill one seventy five
have been read twice by title is
or printed and referred to the
Senate committees committees the
Senate health of public affairs
sentenced to Senate fine finance
Legislative Council Service at
the legislative finance
committee for contracts staff to
study and report on health
related issues to support policy
referred to the Senate
committees committee that Senate
rules committee fence to Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one seventy six.
thank you madam president so
couple things I just want to
clarify and I think center when
you just may come in as well but
it's the capital outlay
priorities let's not your
submitted and you just need to
go through that packet and no
those that are once you're gonna
consider funding but obviously
we don't have amounts yet so
announcement that we may have
another committee report we're
just waiting we'll see if that
comes down in time or not.
Senator Stefanics thank you
madam president the Senate
governor and then we will hear
about four or five bills thank
you very much thank you Senator
Ortiz the penal thank you madam
president the Senate health and
public affairs committee will
The eight bills of Senator
Sedillo Lopez moon yo's to fund
X. Duhig.
Ortiz Y. Pino and pope have
built we're also going to be in
they've been analyzing and
studying in preparation for
Health Security Act and so any
member of the body who has the
senator bill in the mail thank
you madam president so you're
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee will be
meeting tomorrow at nine o'clock
in room three oh three thank
of bills schedule after a
hearing of the Senate bill
thirteen will be heard that's uh
Senator Lopez missing in New
representative of the county
manager on the MDC of and the
detention center there any
issues with regard to criminal
justice at the detention center
our usual fund and let's call it
the.
Let's call it four o'clock I
think we can get there in time
so let's try and be on time
committee members for class
and and things that I would call
Gimcrack pre where we get real
showing about stuff but I would
like to point out that there's a
relatively small number of
taxpayers that have provided the
paid all of this money that
we're all loving right now so we
just should keep that in mind
and not be so we're showing
about some of the things thank.
interviews for centerman yes I'm
wondering why is yielding.
Madam president Senate finance
would go in if we can get up
there about quarter to fourth
the way they did that they
didn't really tell us you guys
all got she's delivered to your
office with everybody that put
your name on a capital
change from last year nobody
really tells about me and floor
leader about changes all the
sudden they came to us.
So that she that you were
delivered if you just go through
is getting confusing but again
the executive on maybe the the
lieutenant governor went up
there to work on the executive
stuff so we can get it is
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto I
thank very much madam chair so I
just want to make an
announcement about the
scheduling of a couple things in
now and that is a policy of not
hearing bills twice.
And so
there are
two constitutional amendments.
Chandler introduced in the house
center to the panel introduced
in the Senate there's a small
change between the two of them
they cover the exact same issue
then we will not be hearing the
Senate version will wait for the
house version come over.
so that that way we deal with
that issue one time and we're
scheduled in the house it's
already been scheduled for
hearing on Monday and so we will
hear the instead of hearing the
hear only the house version of
the green amendment when it
comes over and and so that way
also it'll gone through a couple
committees eleven analyzed we'll
be able to expedite the hearing
other committee announcements
mines and non committee related
Madam.
A well you've got the floor now
so does it have that thank you
madam president so every day we
an important you'll probably
have that song know in your head
children are the future.
Sorry.
and that we keep their well
being in mind as we passed
insecurity among children is
twenty percent but in New Mexico
that rate is significantly
higher twenty six percent
reflecting our state's major
challenges around hunger many of
Families experiencing food
insecurity may rely on low cost
foods which are generally higher
processed and lacking in
sufficient nutrients for growing
children food insecurity leads
at thirty six percent the
counties with the lowest level
of food insecurity Los Alamos
County at twelve percent and a
life when should your children
or your grandchildren grow
hungry when should our neighbors
children and grand children go
hungry and which children should
go hungry when we have record
revenue in the state of New
bright future this is from the
annual kids count report it's
out and gives us the data for
help children are doing in New
Mexico it's available online the
kids count upward I'd also like
to bring to your attention again
state and make sure that no
resident in New Mexico goes
hungry thank you for your time
and your attention madam
president.
Thank you senator.
introduction of legislation.
Senate bill one seventy seven
introduced by Senator Pinto and
prior to graduation requiring
certain licenses for personal
finance instruction Senate bill
one seventy seven.
seven.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president Ms that we go that our
visit an ounce agency
miscellaneous seeing no
objection were announcements
eleven thirty tomorrow morning
before I take that
so we will have a committees
committee meeting at eleven AM
Seeing no objection the Senate
is in recess inTaos eleven
thirty tomorrow morning.
