Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzales present.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum madam
president.
morning by Senator Brandt.
Senator Hotmail will lead the
pledge in Spanish Senator pope
will lead the salute to New
Mexico flat Senator Brandt.
the lord says stand up and plead
my case before the mountains.
The hills here what you have to
say.
Here You mountains the lord's
Israel my people what have I
done to you.
How have I burden you answer me.
I brought you up out of Egypt
What beylik king of Moab
plotted.
And what Balaam son of bore
Hansard remember your journey.
From Sherman to Galen.
Shelly come before him with
burnt offerings with calves a
year old.
Ward be pleased with that with
The fruit of my body for the sin
of my soul.
He has shown you all mortal what
is good.
And what does the lord require.
Well the god.
We come before you.
And we know.
righteousness is like filthy
rags.
It also says that you love us
and you care about us and you
want to forgive us.
And we would not.
Try to make you something you're
not but we do understand that
yes your loving god but you're
also just god.
In such a way that we the
pleasing before you pleasing
before your eyes.
More that we would set aside.
And that we would do what is
right in your eyes.
For the state of New Mexico.
In Jesus precious name I pray
amen.
From at the lantern.
and everyone as well unanimous
consent we go to that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous there's no
objection or on that order
business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
weekend hours is things run a
little differently not quite on
schedule but I think we did
pretty well today and again
Senator Brandt appreciate you
doing that.
so just.
that I will discuss of the one I
have for and the lights are in
the senior citizens law office
office.
Children's foundation so before
we go to those I would yield
first to Senator Lopez Senator
Lopez.
Thank you very much majority
floor leader in madam president
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Shendo.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you madam president madam
president the Senate has
children's foundation The New
Mexico children's foundation was
founded by Mrs Alice king merry
to governor Bruce king and
Yolanda and Gary king are here
very first year thirty years ago
provided a hundred and ten
thousand dollars worth of
funding to forty seven
organizations now today it has
addresses physical needs of
children such as food security
safety shelter emotional needs
grief counseling suicide
another thirty could we please
give your lawn that Gary king
some gratitude for their work
thank you.
senator Wirth thank you madam
president I also have a
certificate today that I'd like
to just discuss and Ellen lights
all the work they have done over
the years in nineteen eighty
three she and Patricia styles
in our founded the senior
citizens law office for the
this office as Representative
seniors who face traumatizing
challenges from abuse and
neglect financial exploitation
fraud foreclosure eviction a
code and she's responsible for
the do it yourself power of
attorney form that is still used
today in addition she drafted
spousal impoverishment
For many years as executive
director Alan serve on a task
force to curb escalating
financial abuse of a vulnerable
think it is very appropriate
that today we present Allen with
a certificate of appreciation
from the New Mexico state Senate
honored to present the
certificate and Allen is here
with her partner
If the name.
Thank you senator Wirth Senator
someone who is very special to
me and I know she knows many of
the folks here on the floor hi
madam president place the
special birthday in my calendar
every year and I forget every
year that I didn't do it a day
least I wasn't a day late and we
were so busy yesterday madam
president that we're unable to
recognize my system on her
birthday and we all just love
her to death I know Dorothy
Thank you madam president thank
you senator.
US senator Peter Wirth.
up front and then on third
reading the plan is to do items
one two and six but before we go
to third reading the Senate
Democrats are going to do a
we'll be back and jump into
Senate bill eight so with that
madam president Ms Oakes that we
go to our business messages from
the house.
amended by the house house bill
seven as amended by the house
house bill one nineteen house
bill seventy three as amended by
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
The journal so the message from
the house has been received.
Madam president I'm directed to
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
The channel so the message from
the house has been received.
Senator Wirth.
Madam president your tax
business and transportation
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill one ninety
eight has had it under
Shendo junior chair.
Senator
the land.
For hamster and having to go.
adopted.
Mannerisms consent them madam
president of the Senate that
three to be allowed to read all
of the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually.
committee house bill eighty two
as amended to pass house bill
ninety five as amended do pass
report seeing no objection
committee report is adopted and
they will reflect in the journal
direct plan individually.
Madam president your finance
with recommendation that do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted George when you know
those chair etcetera Manulife's
then present us as consider the
Senate that the reader be
bill two forty three do pass
respectfully submitted George my
nose chair Center manuals
reduction the committee report
Madam president your committees
committee to whom is been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty two has had it
under consideration and I seem
thank you madam president ask
unanimous consent a sensory
relapse read all committee
reports we brought them with one
motion and general flecked or
acted upon individually if
there's no objection the reader
will read all the committee
Mimi Stewart chair Senator Wirth
reduction committee reports.
The option of favorable
committee reports is there
objection saying none committee
go to introduction just get that
down down up front unanimous
consent we go to that order of
business.
Introduction of legislation.
House bill sixty two introduced
by Representative Dixon and
Representative are all an act
relating to government creating
the grant opportunities council
House bill sixty two have been
read twice by title is ordered
sent to the Senate finance
committee house bill sixty two.
acting the opportunity
enterprise Act authorizing the
New Mexico finance authority to
provide financing and loans and
to enter into leases with
opportunity enterprise partners
enterprise revolving fund to the
general fund creating the
opportunity enterprise Review
Board providing powers and
duties requiring reports making
Senate finance committee house
bill seven.
House bill sixty introduced by
representative Lente and act
relating to school personnel
also sixty have been read twice
by title is ordered referred to
the Senate Education Committee
scents to Senate finance
committee house bill sixty house
suspension of retirement
benefits house bill seventy
three house bill seventy three
have been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Education
Representative Romero and act
relating to school districts
adjusting amounts to be used in
calculating state distributions
to school districts that impose
a public school capital
of law house bill one nineteen
house bill one nineteen have
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Education
Committee house bill one
nineteen.
committee and act relating to
crime and acting the violence
intervention program act
creating the violence
intervention program fund
establishing application and
Committee sense to Senate
finance committee house bill
ninety six.
House commerce house commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for house
act when promulgating rules and
the provisions of the uniform
licensing act for licensing and
disciplinary matters providing
for expedited licensure for
persons holding professional or
and duties revising certain
licensing requirements
establishing certain fees
extending the sunset date for
the board of body art
substitute for house bill one
ninety one.
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one ninety one
house bill ninety nine
introduced by Representative
Lane Representative lot Hochman
Vigil Representative Martinez
judge creating the crime of
malicious sharing of personal
information of a judge or an
immediate family member of a
judge imposing penalties house
introduced by Representative Eli
and Representative Maestas and
act relating to crime increasing
the statute of limitations for
second degree murder increasing
nine possible seventy nine have
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee house bill seventy
nine.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
Thank you madam president and
good afternoon the.
Democratic office will be having
announcements for miscellaneous
Senator said about this thank
you madam president members were
trying to make up for some lost
ground yesterday in the Senate
Judiciary Committee so we came
we're switching around we're
going back to a regular room
from three eleven we were in
this morning so back to Senate
Judiciary regular room will have
a hard stop about seven o'clock
so we'll try to get some work
We're in recess subject to the
call of the chair hopefully no
more than half an hour.
