need to and and the outdoor rec
will go through economic
development the other money will
go through.
Environment department so that
Then similarly senator there's a
twenty million dollar
appropriation from this foreign
seventy million dollars twenty
million dollars for a homeless
amount of money that would be
appropriated for homeless
assistance and affordable
housing have the locations in
the specific projects and also
has that been determined was
that to be determined.
and associate say the services
for preventing shortening and
the experience of homelessness
and for great developing a
greater in the inventory of
send it to MFA we in the average
of the rear of the match money
we can match that between twenty
nine to thirty to one and so
that they're multiply your money
appropriate ten million dollars
for regional airports has the
has the have the regional
airports or the regional airport
that is going to receive the ten
million dollars has that been
identified Mr brand center
multitude of them they can be
able to use some of that money
to offset their costs to make
repairs if they do it through
the FAA that will not be able to
any idea where the money's going
to go.
So Senator not having any idea
where the money's going to go
with the ten million dollars
presents under he did testify
that there's a bunch of smaller
airports that are needed and I
don't know where their locations
are he didn't say that their
location that are in need of
maintenance and and repairs and
million dollars for road
beautification and cleanup of
highways who will decide how
much of that money goes to given
place for cleanup and
beautification along the
highways and so they had the
contracts in the in place and
they can award them and they can
begin the cleanup I know that
that up.
Well miss present I'm sure you
don't mean to imply that the
that were a lot of glittering
folks down in southern New
Mexico between Las Cruces and
You know when we when we went
past the Supreme Court to
clarify the appropriate
authority one of the arguments
we made.
Is that the legislature is N. as
two member body representing
population equal districts.
The reason that we exist as a
Senate is to ensure that money
is distributed fairly around the
About the approach we have here
today because the governor made
an argument.
That that she and her agencies
projects and that they could
fulfill the appropriating
authority in a superior manner
to the legislature.
And I'm gonna ask myself in
I'm here today is a lot of money
is going to be appropriated but
it's going to be determined
later.
By somebody else in many cases
by agencies.
legislature has this role
responsibility and I'm not
really sure we're doing it.
In the best way we can.
I believe the reason that we're
Decline.
To rush this.
We could decline and wait to
January to give ourselves the
I know the I'm just going to be
made we already did that that
these are LFC racks and we've
been through that process.
When I ask my colleagues is this
I ask for a planned the
proclamation does not give us
any parameters of how the monies
to be spent whatsoever spend a
billion dollars that's it.
and Dr Hickey Senator Hickey and
others.
Three of us felt.
But after what we've been
through the country in the state
and our communities.
The clinics the testing the labs
who were part of the frontline
of the Covid pandemic and many
of us have experienced that
tragedy personally family
members and friends.
Is this the transformative use
of this billion dollars in
response to COVID.
Or are we simply responding to a
When senator Ortiz the piano and
Senator Hickey worked so hard to
come up with a health care plan
alternative it Senate bill nine
a transformative alternative.
It needs more time and needs
more detail it hasn't been
studied.
But senator Munoz has
About where the money's going to
go and how it's going to be
appropriated what parts of the
state what airports what
homeless facilities and programs
put this money into a school of
public health the health care to
doctors to hospitals to treating
pandemic to treating suicide.
disingenuous because what we're
spending here today really.
It's still pretty gray.
Simply because we have a
proclamation in front of us a
week ago or two weeks ago the
says you got to spend your
billion dollars.
And we have to ask ourselves I
believe is the COVID response to
this billion dollars really
about highway beautification.
Is it really about promoting
outdoor recreation.
Is it really about restoring
river habitats.
Is it really about addressing
our homeless crisis.
We can do better than this.
And so Senator with all the
respect for you and your
committee and the LESC I urge
members.
transformative things because
that's what we told the governor
we could do as a legislature.
We told the governor we could do
this.
Because that's what COVID is.
It's about health care.
I love the idea of having my the
I love that there's money here
for broadband and water
projects.
These are all important needs.
That we can fulfill perhaps with
other money maybe coming.
the providers who took us
through this crisis and frankly
are still in the middle of this
crisis.
The suggestion of this behind us
is a fallacy.
Thank you senator agency present
members that.
Senator about this so
informational purposes for the
body will have centers the Lopez
appreciate of.
With Senator savant this is just
said of because my reluctance to
get involved with that lawsuit
was precisely the issue that he
massive amount of funding and
and to deal with it in a timely
way because they're deadlines
they're matching funds I mean it
it seems like a very complex
is whether we have the
flexibility the capacity to deal
with it since we need for such
brief times and our time often
runs out before we're able to do
will of.
Be happening more
which is our job and and and we
should.
With that said I want to
congratulate the the committee
And one of them has to do with
this issue of the of the orphan
wells.
The department estimates that
what I'm reading here is that
the department estimates the
And my confusion in question
about that is aren't there
bonds.
And and I guess I I should ask
of the steam chair of the
committee to yield.
Three hundred million dollars
not only for the mediative and
and and that's important that we
get them covered because they
massive amount senator Munoz
tales Mr president center I I do
not have EMNRD and OCD here to
answer that question
specifically I know it has come
the the money for the orphan
well will be used for a federal
match which they can get a
multiplier and so the they'll be
almost able to double and triple
their money in some places to
have a EMNRD reach out maybe she
could chill taxes if she's
listening.
Thank you I I would be
interested to know that because
what it tells me is our bonding
the bonding requirements for
is the water projects I commend
the committee for the fifty five
point five million for for EMNRD
I think that's excellent has.
question is is the language is
to improve surface water
quality.
And river have it habitats what
are some examples of that and
what is the connection or is
Mr president and senator in
talking to the secondary in in
some of his comments was you
know if we clean up trees along
the river if we put natural
soils back in the waters goes
variety that they agency wants
to do they're going to award
those through grants and awards
and and figure out what section
going to be grants and awards
has the proposed amendment over
the course of the next year.
Mr presents under their there
are things that that little
miss that those city and local
governments want to do to help
restore the river so those
projects are already on the I.
C. I. P. list and so the
secretary will be able to make a
deal with this level of money
and I
I know that it's going to be a
lot of work and I appreciate the
work of the committee in doing
this thank you Mr president.
Thank you Mr president I by two
would like the sponsor to yield
to a couple of questions.
Senator steel yes Senator of I
noticed that there's a million
legislative processing system
what what is the are we the ones
that process legislation Mr
president center so we are
we go up to draft bills we have
the latest greatest programs in
drafting so those staff can be
efficient in their work.
Well that and I think Miss
problems getting legislation
drafted in down to us and so on
and if we spend a million
dollars in its improved I guess
it'll be money well spent but it
nothing really in this bill
that's going to.
New Mexico on a different course
it it it's stuff that we
probably all should have been
able to finance
in the past.
In all likelihood would have
been if we had more money
available we would have spent it
on a general fund
having the opportunity to do
something majority of we might
we might you know this that the
boat we're still going to have
this and use this federal money
for something that that would
have really transformed the
state put lunches on a new
trajectory.
I do have a question about the
the state money going to be used
for.
Other places bill hospitals
locally.
Why is this hospital not using
can actually.
Right a Billboard about there's
there's a community out there
that has never had a hospital
that's passed bonds and and has
We'll help you get one.
I I I know in this community
that prior and I don't know
currently that they used to
transfer people from the
ambulances on the on ramps and
they have been baking for it for
years for that hospital and
there's been a fight here in a
fight there and now the fights
so that is one transformational
thing that that you could put on
your checklist and say this
changes people's lives.
Mr president in center I would
say this may be one of the
larger communities in the state
and alleged defined by large but
ten thousand a greater that
doesn't have any emergency room
where we really need a hospital
it'll help relieve the other
hospitals because everybody's
going to the same place.
Well.
there is another one within
thirty miles.
And there's one there does that
really justify the construction
of an entirely new hospital.
They have to be sustained by bye
bye
It by finding providers by by
It's.
We used to have in this state
Senator the the.
Health planning councils this
Be there weren't less expensive
ways of responding to the need
like an emergency of of what it
called an intensive with urgent
beds.
It's tough to say this no
comment because every hospital
bed in the state is filled with
COVID patients but we were in
the middle of the pandemic we
a big new hospital here in Santa
Fe New.
But it it's almost symptomatic
of what's wrong with our health
care system there is no system
gets this fifty million dollars
to build a new hospital.
That.
That we would have missed out on
the opportunity of doing
planning process determine that
that really they don't need a
full blown and I don't know how
many budget a hundred fifty
million dollars would by the but
know that they does believe have
been asking for this they they.
For whatever reason have an tax
themselves to build their own
spittle and here's a golden
doing more harm than good by
taking this step of telling them
here's fifty million build a
permanent of a full blown
Hospital when there might have
But it just to me it's
symptomatic of what this bill
represents that is it's a whole
bunch it's a Christmas tree it's
a whole bunch of nice things
shiny things.
senator of moon Jooss you you
you work very hard on this and I
want to thank the committee for
the hard work they put in on it
but I still think it is it
represents a missed opportunity
to rethink some of the things we
Thank you Mr president and
Two of.
Argue with the steam the trial
lawyer.
Can you hear me.
hundred million is only seven
percent of what we're going to
get so that's point number one
point number two they think it's
important that we move on
receive and I have a couple of
transformational ideas that I've
presented.
And they're not in this bill but
I'm confident that it's good
we can agree on the on a map you
mentioned how long it would take
if we were here to decide which
parks we're going to get.
The funded which rules we're
going to get funded exactly
going to be located was sure I
can do that and thirty thirty
days we can't wait another year
so I think it's important that
we move on.
And finally point number four
you know our capital outlay
were complaining I want you know
that we're not having all this
input.
Well you have to have a certain
amount of trust in in and like
and prioritize these projects
and so we have thank you we have
an excellent staff to to to do
that so.
Those are the four reasons why
My good friend the Senator
Padilla that's going to cost one
half to one point seven billion
dollars to provide broadband
every household in the state now
And
which incidentally we're getting
no money for electric grid we're
getting no money for.
Hi speed trains running getting
When the recently resigned state
engineer told me he needs to
billion.
So if you don't want to get one
six so what he needs that's one
reason why he resigned early
because he doesn't have the
a hundred million from the
infrastructure bill eleven till
we there's four to five hundred.
Million dollars available from
federal grants so you add that
all up you want to get about a
How we gonna finance the
remainder of the eight hundred
fifty million dollar gap that we
need to provide broadband to
remember from the last session
when broadband was a hot topic
in in the appropriate about a
hundred and thirty three million
to broadband we know that we do
the federal grants program match
million some of this will not be
able to match for federal grants
it'll have to go directly for
services appropriation so we're
getting there the extra hundred
Mexico we'll be able to move
forward rather rapidly because
then we'll know what direction
we should head and whether
shortages and why there's not
shortages.
Thank you Sierra we do have next
with Senator Steinborn thank you
Mr president and I don't have
any questions I just some I'm
fortunate colleagues to sit on
the Senate finance committee
transformative bill this is an
exciting bill for the state of
New Mexico and I'll give you a
few examples why I want to start
off by saying that you know a
lesson I learned a long time ago
community leaders what you
quickly discover is that the
issues yes forty five minutes
away are completely different
their goals are different their
we think of transformation in
New Mexico.
That looks something very
different community community
and what we have in this bill
are things that will touch many
state.
If you can't pay your bills and
put a roof over your head the
housing assistance is
transformative you don't have
broadband having broadband for
your kids and for health
your life that maybe you benefit
from so I think as we think
about this.
You know New Mexico has we come
into a place of financial
abundance.
such as the plan
Click health department which I
think is a wonderful idea but
you know to give you some
bring tourists to New Mexico and
also help us electrify and
reduce our carbon.
Carabinae impact investment in
that unprecedented in the
history of our state it's in
recreation plan our state has to
do every five ten years they
rake trails is number one this
bill has seven million dollars
that'll be competitively given
out all over the state including
And I and I mentioned other
projects so
you know it I I was also very
hard to hear from the agency's
Mr president colleagues about
how they will be following their
like that in this bill it's
going to go through agencies
through America based grant
process and so I think this is a
very transformative bill and and
some of these bigger projects
that are also out there but this
is just a great start and and
from my perspective we should be
nothing but excited for how it's
going to improve all of our
about vetted through the LFC all
throughout the interim and and
really it's very forward looking
and so it makes me feel better
about our LFC to so thank you Mr
First I would like to thank the
chair of finance.
Because he did something that he
didn't have to do.
I'm sorry you weren't all able
to be here for those questions.
Sometimes we got a little bit.
funds in the state of New
Mexico.
The best of our ability.
Others many times that that one
guy in one part of the state.
vote on bills are introduced
bills.
Better benefit to ourselves our
families.
When I read the proclamation of
president.
The first thing that flashed in
my mind.
Was dropped in a bunch of homes
telling me about a project that
needed to be done right now.
We have programs in our state to
fund projects.
But they want to short cut.
So I agree with people when they
say we want to do a big thing.
We want to accomplish big things
in our state.
We need to think about
regulations.
As long along with.
Where you have the most medical
care in the state of New Mexico.
But if you live in broad view.
It's a different story.
out there.
Just give.
In the and let's get on the on
the way to the hospital.
It's a life and death situation
out in the country.
And we have problems getting our
EMTs certified we have problems
with national yes we have
much that they finally quit
serving.
But I'm getting off the subject
here.
We had to resist those projects
that we thought needed further
development.
It is our duty.
Resistance that this committee
show.
You know that we're like I said
before they were many projects
New Mexico right now is in for
has lots of money floating
around and I can prove that to
the.
There are projects being built
right now.
Why did all of the materials go
up so fast you know we can talk
about.
Supply chain issues we can talk
We're pushing out a lot of
money.
Not a projects.
About cars.
Anybody want to correlate.
Sometimes you need to squeeze
the throttle down just a little
bit.
Especially if a project is not
developed.
That in later years we wonder if
we made the right decision.
Some of the projects that my
constituents talk about.
Is the state buying land private
land.
And spend money rationally.
Yes ever project.
It's not pinpointed we're going
to spend Indian but we know
Figure out if it's very.
If there's a place to put that
money and not spend it
frivolously.
Senator Vontaze Senator Ortiz
Senator Hickey brought forward.
Yes a lot of merit.
Fully funded it would been three
I think we need to think about
that a little bit before we
spend that money.
Yeah it's probably a great idea
and I told the Sanchez that.
UNM is down twenty percent
students from their highs.
There are some buildings over
there that probably Bacon enough
we could put this in.
I.
I know I'm getting hot under the
collar.
I need to cool down.
The chairman.
Brought.
The agencies in and gave us an
opportunity to thoroughly
money that's out there right now
if they don't get it spent
because it will revert back to
the general fund.
And that is the best way to
determine.
Mr president thank you very
much.
Thank you senator was Senator
Griggs.
and believe it or not I can hear
you pretty well so I I
appreciate that
Senator did did the legislature
Out of the of the spending bill
wouldn't wouldn't that correct
Mr agency presentation.
Present center yes we did
appropriate all the are both
funds maybe not specifically to
When the executive veto that
because of the executives
believe that it was better spent
spots that we felt at that time
which was appropriate so then we
went through the the issues that
we did which basically gave us
Mr presents under yes.
Thank you Mr president center.
Want to get that one specific
part of the.
senator we may have to both get
some help on this one.
But we amended where it had
talked about orphan well
planning implementation too
When when I heard about this I
contacted Council Service to
determine whether or not in
statute there was a definition
of an active wells.
There is however.
The definition of an act well in
rural.
And so the the question Mr
Do we need to create a
definition for an act well or
We were talking about statute
and rule and are we are we
accurate in our in our bill if
we reference.
in statute and then they come
back and define them even more
in rural and so the reason the
amendment came was to align with
the rule.
issue is because some of the
companies went defunct or there
was no bonding before they they
had when they did the well so
that's answer your question
Senator I hope I answered your
getting what we're trying to do
because if it's I don't know if
it's not defined in statute are
we actually coverage so I I just
President the I want I want talk
about just a moment.
About what we've done in this
bill.
finance and house appropriation
about means they will director
that appropriation.
I think there's kind of a
exact project by project down to
the.
Hundreds of dollars or we going
to the the department to them
look at the bill there's an
amount that set up in here for a
hundred and forty two.
Million five hundred thousand
age nine particular projects in
in the bill now that's not that
way in every part of the bill
but it is in that particular
I thank you Mr Mr president hard
to argue about issues when we
talk about health care and
spending.
And we've talked about hello
this bill may or may not be.
Transformative.
President Senator and and how it
I think this bill does a lot is
billed as a lot.
But I think when we talk about
bills.
They do things that are
transformative.
five which was passed in the
last session.
That bill Mr president and
members of the body I will
So that's genuinely the cage.
If Vance January the case all
the other money we want to throw
New Mexico to find that health
care so I think that bill when
it comes up.
That bill is extraordinarily
important.
With senator Morris.
For a second time thank you this
is the second time appreciate
that Mr president I just want to
follow up with some comments I
made before no the governor's
you Mr president.
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate senator
Munoz to close on the bill thank
nursing program how we all heard
about the crisis is happening in
the nursing program.
Two million dollars for teacher
program have we all heard that
there's a crisis in in the
third through eight were only
twelve percent twelve percent
efficient in math.
Isn't that what we need teachers
isn't there priorities here.
not have the staff and we are
flown out at seventy thousand
dollars a flight for a broken
leg a broken jaw it's a
their body flown back so we need
more hospitals yes we do is that
transformative yes it is it
means a lot to County our city
Mexico I think that really needs
to be said roads every single
road matters in the state you
look up and down I forty and in
my travels to to Gallup could
pay for it now the rules are
very important cross New Mexico.
I think the other thing you need
to really look for is it is the
pre trial services we've heard
about the problems in
yes is a transformative yes we
all see it every day as we walk
around Santa Fe or anything in
your communities the number of
people that are homeless that
do you know how cold it is.
You was one degrees in Gallup
New Mexico.
You think those people don't
deserve help.
Yes they deserve help.
also city and county employees.
That we're picking up their
health care costs.
Because of COVID and so that is
that is transformative no but
come spend money during the
session.
This is where we are.
And I hope I hope that everybody
understands how we put that
together how we trying to
manage.
sometimes that's the best you
can do is is that bills but as
we move forward.
Each and every member in this
body has a responsibility in
their district.
that think about the county the
got the new hospitals that are
probably gonna have the best
Christmas present ever.
Because they got something they
needed.
Think about what has to change
Mexico well we're here think
about the big picture.
Think about the generational
change that sub orbital
satellite or tethered satellite
could get to to students in a
want to make sure the members of
the body think about that
because everybody comes to love
and talk about spending money
and and what makes change.
We work on it.
that house bill two as amended
do now pass and ask Miss consent
of the Senate the record show
that the rules being called and
all those present voted in the
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
this Senator to run there's no
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
DS Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
yes Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey passes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores Senator Moores no
senator Munoz Senator Monero's
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator for the year yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator songes yes senator
smitteez.
Senator street is no senators so
they are Lopez yes Senator
severe Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Gallegos now Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes.
By a vote of thirty six
affirmative for the negative
house bill two is twice amended
has passed the Senate centerman
us thank you Mr president and I
that came out that says we got
to spend this money figure out
our priorities that staff work
through the weekend on Sundays
what we are all watching
football games we were all
get and so with the spotting him
at thank you and and the well
deserved thank you.
New Mexico has an opportunity
and that one opportunity in a
generation to change and think
about what that looks like for
each and every New Mexican no
matter where you live so thank
just for committees that may
make announcements
we will be having a floor
session tomorrow at two o'clock
immediately following the floor
in the Senate lounge thank you
Senator Stewart center so the
very much this president was
president your Senate rules
bit of testimony and input to
the Public Education Commission
maps this is a very hot topic
and a lot of people want to
weigh in on that thank you very
much.
the committees committee meeting
so please don't go too far away
thank you.
Yes.
Centerman yes thank you Mr
president I was remiss in and
thank you my Senate finance
committee members for for
listening it and really in
debating the bill so I want to
Thanks sentiment just.
Any further announcements.
Senator Wirth.
again it's kind of different in
a normal session.
Kind of.
The hugely paste and then we
slow down and so I just wanted
to make sure that we also
And then as the president of the
Legislative Council.
of them up stairs and LFC LFC
are sergeant at arms always we
thank you Building services and
for whoever zoom operators I
missed that one year so if I
And with that Mr president
unanimous consent the Senate
Senate recess until two o'clock
