This will be a year of.
I'm here.
Senator Sanchez excuse seven.
There.
Senator audio here Senator Pinto
you have for.
The.
And
your tickets.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair we're just
getting situated we don't know
that I also wonder if I was
going on for some of us
compliment her just by tax to
get online so the strangers who
is expecting two more years.
but if not we'll try to get in
and okay great.
So
Hi also one thirty five is the
Indian family protection act
this has been a bill that has
been crafted.
Over a couple of years by tribal
leaders tribal orders FOR
workers advocates impacted
families that have all
Had issues with.
Native families being separated
having their children separated.
it's at CYFD accountability bill
we're putting in their
provisions that are taters.
I think a lot of folks are also
very nervous that the supreme
court might eliminate echo as
well so we're wanting to act
fast and yes Sir provisions
within state law so that we can
ensure that certain things like
notifications to tribes within
twenty four hours placement
preferences transfers to tribal
court happen and we have I have
my co sponsors Senator Ivey Soto
and he can say some words and
then we can move to probably
councilman press first and then
Jackie Ellis and David and
Rogers.
Thank you Representative Lewis
thank you madam chair members of
the committee
this build up.
Six not only to as
a representative will say six
not only to implement.
The federal federal provisions
in state law but actually to go
a step further in terms of
sovereignty.
And how when when there are
multiple sovereigns involved.
How we manage the for the
welfare of an Indian child.
What this bill does important
things is it takes many of the
federal well maybe provisions
and makes them shall provisions.
And when dealing with competing
severance what this bill does is
that it recognizes the
sovereignty of the Indian tribe.
And the importance of
maintaining the cultural
contacts for Indian children.
Amber M. and I think it's very
very sophisticated way.
brings forth a product that is
Indian child an Indian family
first and your accuracy second.
Thank you senator and then now
we have a councilman Philip
present hope peace.
Ready.
Yes I think you Representative
Lewis and good morning madam
chair members of the committee
will be Ogbe septimal with all
due respect my name is still a
paper as former governor and
current councilmen of the
publican MBA.
In brief the Indian child
welfare act.
Also known as it was was enacted
to protect the best interests of
Indian children and to promote
the stability of our tribes our
customs and traditions.
It was passed in response to the
widespread removal of Indian
children from their families and
communities.
Ical has provided critical
minimum standards of protection
for Indian children families and
tribes.
What we are witnessing take
place nationally and the
decision by the fifth circuit
which is escalating to the US
Supreme Court threatens who we
are as tribal people and
undermines our tribal
sovereignty.
As a problem leader I am deeply
concerned by what is happening
to guarding it well the straps
present an assault to tribal
sovereignty and the unique
relationship between tribal
nations of the United States
government.
It is for this reason I am proud
to come before you just say that
I have actively supported I will
continue to support the efforts
of the New Mexico Indian family
protection act to ensure that we
garnered so what happened at the
federal level Indian children
remain.
A connected to their tribal
communities and culture.
Since the year twenty twenty
fifteen the pueblo non bay and
many other pueblos tribes or
nations decided to actively work
on codifying federal Inc were in
tune in to New Mexico state
statute.
This was done through our
regular involvement and
participation in Mexico tribal
Indian child welfare consortium
also known as an amendment to it
it is because of this tribally
led process we are here.
Where we are today.
The premise of the state in the
family protection act is based
on lived experiences of our
front line tribal workers and
their desire to not only
codified federal it was.
Go beyond it like many other
pueblos nations tribes the
problem and may have limited
resources and we are not always
able to retain legal
representation on our it what
cases.
Therefore when I was governor I
relied heavily on the tribal if
will chair the advocate for our
tribal children and families who
find themselves caught up in a
state child welfare system.
Such advocacy is aligned with
our tribal customs and
traditions to ensure states are
complying with it well on cases
involving them the children.
I recognize all tribes of have
the same opportunity to
participate and many did at
various levels to provide input
on a draft bill the perspectives
of our tribal workers tribal
families and others we don't
experience were centered in this
process.
The program is forever grateful
to have been given an
opportunity to provide feedback
or recommendations to the
provisions as we had internal
discussions about previous
challenges we encountered with
difficult cases throughout the
years.
Now B. pueblo is also currently
the only tribe who has
incorporated the use of the
cultural compact disagreement
was developed by now made public
to ensure our children will be
able to maintain a poor in
family connections transhipped
and be able to engage in
cultural and traditional
practices now and in the future
this is vital to the future of
my Pueblo and the future of our
tribal children which is
important for them to know who
they are and where they came
from.
It is equally important for the
entire children welfare system
for example state department's
courts resource center drive of
parents and attorneys to
understand to respect.
Encourage and support our
requests to keep our children
connected.
It has truly been an honor to
have collaborated with the other
pueblos tribes or nations with
our tribal workers.
I would also like to thank the
many individuals and groups for
their dedication and
perseverance in particular
Representative Lewis.
Senator Ivey Soto.
New Mexico tribal Indian child
welfare consortium New Mexico
CYFD.
All futures the coalition to
stop violence against native
women and the many other
partners during this process.
Protect our culture our
tradition our language our
communities our families.
Our children.
Our children's children and
those yet to be born.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I thank you all for
your.
I am and I stand for any
questions with the law.
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jacqueline
Elche and I'm the I'm from the
public this letter and the
director of this legislation
services and the current if
current president of the New
Mexico tribal Indian child often
consortium known as and and tech
and entech represents the
nineteen New Mexico problems to
Apache nations Ramon Navajo and
said yes Sir now pass of Texas.
We are tribal if for
representatives who are on the
ground working diligently to
preserve the culture traditions
and identities.
All Indian children who are
protected by the Indian child
welfare.
Act advocacy education and
collaboration with state
agencies.
New Mexico's twenty three tribal
nations have the sovereign
right.
Hours and laws to handle matters
including their members
including their ability to
protect the health safety and
welfare of their children.
Tribes are the experts in their
communities and have challenges
with specific issues with the
what.
The need and development for the
Indian child for the Indian
family protection act is
centered on lived experiences of
Indian children and families.
Previously we're who are
currently in the state system.
The provisions of protection
act will be on federal if.
For the purpose of holding the
state accountable for compliance
if what I can to ensure the
safety and well being of our
Indian children and families.
Keeping children as close as
possible to their culture
extended family and tribes are
extremely important protective
factors for the cultural well
being.
Our children are the ultimate
benefactors the protections of
the Indian family protection act
support that if I say farmers
are children's right to be our
tribal leaders.
In years to come whether they
are traditional healer a
governor other they are our
future leaders.
They will be representing their
families and their children in
their own communities they will
teach our language and
traditions to the younger
generations.
However as beautifully stated I
run fast one of our young
people.
They cannot be what they cannot
see.
Our children will be our
protection and survivors of our
tribal communities.
Without these protections that
are unique to tribal nations
actively reserves the Indian
family.
Maintain extended family
relationships and promote and
provide culture connections I'm
participate and participation
for children in state care we as
Indian people cease to exist.
Madam chair members of the
committee I thank you for your
attention and the opportunity to
come before you.
Chairman and members of the
committee and Rogers.
Okay now we I've been practicing
law since nineteen eighty three
so almost forty years thirty
five of those years have been
spent representing.
Pueblo tribal interests the
writing plays I have also served
as a trial court judge for okay
we came.
And as an appellate judge in the
southwest into tribal court of
appeals and also for you used
of federal administrative court.
I was asked to work on this bill
to go through it and make sure
it's that it was consistent with
our with rules of civil
procedure rules of evidence and
did not raise issues that could
be unconstitutional under the
New Mexico constitution I have
done that work for the past year
and a half.
And while no bill is perfect.
I strongly believe this bill.
Does need all of the required.
And it also gives significant
protection to tribes and their
children.
Without members tribes don't
exist.
And this bill goes a long way to
ensuring there will be tracking
members in the future.
Thank you.
And madam chair we do have an
amendment I don't know when
you'd like to do with that
that was provided to the
committee as well chair will.
Four of them we.
The committee.
The one that I thank you thank
you madam chair yes this is
actually it looks like a lot but
it's not the amendment is.
So that participation discussion
yes okay discussion.
No objections.
Okay thank you madam chair so as
I was mentioning the amendments.
A significant as a pair of many
of the amendments are re
lettering or remembering section
states to small changes so these
were requests from the Office of
excuse me the administrative
office of the court
couple from tribal leaders and
governments and then technical
drafting errors.
On the amendment.
Not sure.
What we do madam chair and and
senator we do have Senator Ivey
Soto as opposed from.
Seven.
On page three
able to testify regarding
whether the committee has
continued to be by the current.
Able to testify or.
Chair for from the amendment yes
funding three yeah.
One of the.
A difficult to stop.
I will.
I don't know that's.
Yes.
Of.
I apologize if we have of.
For this amendment and.
Yeah yeah the result will help
with section.
The.
In the.
Yeah secretary of defense.
Receive.
They're giving the ability to
testify regarding.
And it is section thirteen.
Yeah.
Okay subsection B..
I number two.
The reason I'm asking this for
questions about who was actually
getting the.
Input child that would be the.
They were placed in foster care
or is it getting this player
the.
Is that for has felt that.
Yes I.
That will show workers.
Act.
Computer.
chair I think and answer that
okay is in court proceedings
notice standard of evidence
documentation of a flexibility
and compliance and you were
asking who could testify yes
thank you.
Okay for the purposes of
establishing custody
The court
has to have four of.
Reporter foster care placement.
And less clear and convincing
evidence is presented including
the testimony of one or more
qualified expert witness.
Administrating that the child's
continued custody by the child's
parent guardian or if you're
just starting up it's likely to
result in serious ocean all
physical damage to try.
And then.
That is section two as we have
it and then it's changing the
page for so we're having to okay
yes and that.
And.
Yes this graph.
Is essentially the same of what
I just read.
It says able to testify
regarding whether the Indian
child continued custody by the
parent guardian or Indian
custodian is likely to result in
serious emotional or physical
damage to the child.
So that is what.
So that would be determined by.
Overseeing the case
for if our child well this is
the situation
first in this the way this bill
as written
the department of reviews and
families department works with
the try to identify expert
witnesses and it can be more
than one expert just because
there are two topics that they
have also testified that I thank
both they have to be qualified
these one of those topics if not
both of them.
They attempt to do that any
party has the ability to also
proper expert witness for
qualification by four.
what this is just saying to four
as you can not do this and less
you have good evidence from an
expert witness that you qualify
this this will if necessary
Four of to prevent serious
emotional or physical damage to
the chart.
That cannot be presumed for
speculated on it really requires
having expert testimony.
So in terms.
That.
There are no laws them for the
Walt so there's somebody that's
going to disclose in more so
well then to
verses protecting the child.
It is the court who determines
whether our expertise qualified
to testify.
Not the social workers now see
why the.
No that is not how it works a
court decides to the which is
this qualified as expert
witness.
I think.
Office.
Chair Committee that's actually
a great question so the process
of identifying the queue we W.
is at the onus of CYFD so that
CYFD is responsible for the care
of qualified expert witness
who's able to testify on on the
merits of the the safety and
well being of the child so in
the event that there is from
question on whether or not
cultural practices for anything
regarding cultural is in
question that may have
contributed specifically to the
safety and welfare of the child
what it identifies here is that
the tribe's would like that
person to be either a member
from the tribe or a person
recommended by the child's tribe
that can speak to those from
those cultural connections in
the event that it is not that
the cultural component was not.
The the basis for the injury to
have occurred then that can
still be
Q. we W. from the tribe for one
identified on behalf of the
tribe can still be called in
addition to a perfect a personal
experts such as a medical doctor
or a licensed psychologist thank
you.
So we're not really actually in
this bill disqualifying you.
It will be determined by those
involved with the child at.
In the on the.
I.
If the child is taken because
the fire department department
shall make active efforts to
determine whether there's reason
to love the child an Indian
child and I think that was in
the FY are that it seemed like
it took that away but it's
putting it back in this correct.
For one of these of this bill
does is that it takes it takes a
variety of straight provisions
from the children's program.
And it aggregates of all in a
single act.
So if you look from other parts
of the children's coach I think
for removing certain provisions
over the reorganizing them so
that in the case under FIR.
There's one place to look.
Thank you
there's no question is the the
trilogy.
Madam chair of I don't really
want I have a question I think
the thing Representative Lewis I
was also and everybody that has
worked laughter with that this
is still the best of times this
year is very and go back and
have these meetings throughout
the whole year the trouble users
workers everybody involved a lot
of.
I think I would Soto.
With one in the group.
You know you're on the Senator
for statutes codes is always
very helpful guidance director
recognizing that what we have to
date is of a pretty good bills
I'm hoping that the still have a
enough to get through Judiciary.
Which is never easy but I just
want to thank everybody that has
been involved with the year the
past year to estimate what it is
today.
And I don't have any questions
about it like what we see we
spent many areas were we
solidified
maker stronger than with the
federal law says the tech or
children here in New Mexico so
with that and like the the
global conflict is yes.
I'm sorry your.
This is.
You it's it's somewhat like
you've done to me in the and.
Are not on the okay.
So it's a motion to adopt the
amendment the objections.
The motion is adopted.
Welcome.
Yes back to the bill questions
on the Senator Griggs.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all wish it is obviously a
lot of work and I you know I
commend all of you for working
on coming up with
with the roadside as far be it
from me to tell you that the
approach is inaccurate for show
but I do I do have a couple of
of questions about about the
bill there's some there's some
some concerns have been dropped
in the section fifty three.
Which is
she concerned about the.
Of the of the.
The HSD interview.
However that might might work
and it's my understanding that
there was actually an amendment
for all four Representative
night.
In an attempt to fix that.
Which is not.
so can you guys can give me your
thoughts on that is is that
something that you're
considering doing to the bill
that would.
Rash Representative divers
concerns in the thanks for that
is a much stronger bills that
that yeah but I just dislike
your jobs comments off on that
thank you senator excuse me
thank you madam chair and
senator
yeah so.
The process was very long and we
did invite.
Alternative stakeholders to our
meetings I think we have a total
of seven and that was just
between the interim of last
session and the session and
there are several meetings prior
to that.
And as many of you know it takes
awhile to get the tribe's on
board so what we have is the
implementation of provisions
that the tribes agreed on.
What we're looking at that
provision we have to go back to
the tribe's but I think I'd like
to Jackie two also tell why that
was included.
madam chair and members of the
committee
what was occurring with tribes
is tribes and relatives for
being by passed when it came to
any type of proceedings that
point so the foster parent and
have the child has the higher
authority in the court system to
intervene and act on that
child's behalf without even
hearing from the tribe or
hearing from the biological
families meaning extended family
what this does is it does not
exclude a foster parent from
being part of the entire process
they are still given the right
to notice the state are given
the right to participate and
voice any concerns or strings
that are occurring within that
child's life and in that home it
does not allow any of that at
all what this is doing is giving
that hire standard and
protection for the family after
tried to act on behalf of the
tire.
And I and better care faster
grace this is.
This provision is a provision
you know part of part of this
bill is.
Is it looks from the past to
look to the future.
and certainly in a look from the
past this is essential
provision.
And look to the future we've had
discussions about this provision
we are not in a position however
to recommend a change to this
action without consultation with
the proper tribes
at the same time we also respect
the committee process I hear the
legislature.
and and of respect the work that
a committee my.
And madam chair the
representative and the.
I guess the some of that concern
is you know there's a lot of
work that went into this.
But it does it still mean that
some of that could be a little
little bit better and it it kind
of shows that even with for
innovation she things needed to
be fixed there's there's
questions I guess in this state
deal with.
You know activated circumstances
in I didn't think this
ammendment grocers app but I I
certainly hope that that
something.
Now that you guys are aware of
the state been made somewhere
dispatching issue.
That you can look in and see if
that some of the.
KFA from committee you know of
Lara I looked at it I know but
sometimes even longer I still
don't see
you madam chair one of the.
One of the things again textual
research today and I'm sorry for
our production manager at you
may.
that.
The objections of the tribal
members are experts in their
community and I appreciate that
to questions posed have is the
relationship between the tribal
members and members of the tribe
of the choose not live on or
education to the the reservation
when you go to Alamogordo
questions if if tribal members
and Alamogordo from national
general try you know there's.
The related direct relationship
with tribes is.
You know maybe not age so it's
it's obviously not there's those
who choose to live in Mescalero
trail and I can't say why the
children.
But there's there's Beijing P..
On that Charles you know.
Ability to.
be properly cared for years if
they lived in Alamogordo all
that child's life.
And if you have limited if any
interaction with with tribal
marks in this folder.
yes there's there's there's just
reach out and and say that okay
you have to be.
After inflation with a family
member can stand us live in New
Mexico where which is a complete
change for that child so madam
chair and thank you all hello
with that have you for she that
I was at work the cage I don't
know when to pay you can
probably explain that too is how
many of these issues were
fairly.
Wires were actually or are based
on current issues on the
reservations and how many off
the restrictions
because I I don't know I don't
know if we have a distinction.
There are you know I'm just be
honest out if I had the
opportunity to live with my
grandparents in the in a moment
that not everybody's like that
so madam chair then you guys
just just kind of fill me and
help help me out.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you senator I think I want
to just address one point and
then I'll pass along to others
but you know I I agree I would
love to move home I only moved
off the reservation because I
went to law school and the
commute was way too long
but you know when you look at it
now with the lack of
infrastructure the lack of
housing on the reservation a lot
of time a lot of times people do
live on the reservation you know
I I myself Senator Shendo
majority of my family as my
daughter my my dad my nephew
probably more my family lives.
Authorization and honor a shin
and they're still that
connection and this doesn't
dictate that a child has to go
back to the tribe it's notifying
the tribe within twenty four
hours so that the tribe economic
reach out to them and you know
that the child will likely have
those connections with the
family doesn't necessarily mean
that we're taking them out of an
environment that you know there
I'm familiar with and that and
madam chair process works this
up there's actually nothing in
this act that prefers.
Tribal residence or not trouble
us.
What this act does prefer
however.
Is is protection against the
destruction of the Indian
family.
And the and so and so even when
a child is out of a preferred
placement.
the the the expectation.
And a fostering situation is
that the child will continue to
have contacts of with the truck
I will continue to have contacts
if it's appropriate with the
family.
and so and so it is
whether someone is in a
preferred placement for not for
placement is a more important
issue the month let them whether
or not somebody is on the rise
preservation or not on the
reservation.
And what the ultimate goal here
is to make sure that whatever
the child's place they maintain
of those connections to the
tribe and to their family
efforts in this particular case
we're talking about an Indian
family which is much more
extended them from the many of
us have as a as a concept of
family.
And madam chair thank you thank
you thank you all on the again
this is this is far from my area
of expertise.
What I'm.
What I'm asking is your sister
percentage of hearing and you
know the the one thing I
objections section section fifty
three year and no I know there's
discussion about that hopefully
billion the there we show on
that.
In the the next step would go to
the.
Given that aggravated
circumstances and that
consideration so hello.
To have the under Edward there
are no aggravated circumstances.
So so if you do not dealing with
an Indian child.
Then there's there's an entire
analysis of much of the focus to
whether they're aggravating
circumstances are not.
When you're dealing with any
child we don't enter into the
into the nonsense about
reserves.
Madam chair the dentist sanction
is.
Thanks thank you thank you
Senator Griggs I will go out to
the audience some of those that
are present you
know there is a in section fifty
three.
flawless.
Under line that does not involve
themselves I assume that does
not belong here or does it.
Senator.
So that's that's language rigs
was just talking about okay
innovate and and so we're we're
not in a position without
consulting with the tribe's.
to recommend removing that but
we do respect the committee
process.
Of the committee decided that.
What the audience for those
the four.
If you were I make a motion that
we remove that of.
Section fifty.
The justice.
So we reached the exit out all
the different okay so what lines
are you talking about secretary
of.
One point four under books folks
in line it starts on page one of
twenty three.
Thank you for that three very
good if the.
For.
That does not involve an Indian
child.
This remove that on page one
hundred or not.
I'm sorry.
That won't read our books yes.
Yes.
Why is.
In our books.
You make it a motion motion
second affected to the.
Friendlier on from work were
without consulting with the
tribes were not able to okay
what long are you yeah.
And and madam chair yeah hi
I argued on the house floor that
it was an unfriendly amendment
okay thank you.
So the motion is to strike.
That out.
Any objection.
Really assessors and from over
we're not able
to we're not able to me but we
respect the committee process.
Thought on that.
General questions yes.
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Shendo.
Yes Senator only on the.
Senator Pinto no.
So to to so this is
the house.
But we will go up to the
audience for the public comment
what we.
In addition to the as we need to
stop now.
Madam those that are in support
would you please state your name
and.
That on the record
we have been good yes from the
side of this ammendment.
Jurors in days of those measures
always.
Probation officer was president
of several other both sides.
Support of this.
Supporters.
This is the the low for that
will children and their
families.
Of.
Here we we
No memorable of affirmative
justice and of family here a
person works diligently with.
With the Sanchez of one one of
the.
Programmers forward of Jerry
Lewis and this year I was also
of we we thank them for bringing
this forward and and we just.
The best to the DOD.
If it.
Members of the committee was
aware of what's going back to
track you want to thank
Representative Lewis for working
for over the last few years for
the calibration of our tribes
and nations and organizations
for the developing provide
feedback on this important
legislation.
To our families and the children
of this
as I have yes thank you.
Madam.
Works you know and I and the
rest of this for the proposed
of us on house I thank you madam
chair of good deal of intense
hard work was done during the
interim by Representative Lewis
and senator this Soto along with
the answer that for you and
others and this bill before you
is a much better bill and we are
now in full support of HB one
thirty five as amended
for the reasons that I have been
so submitted to the committee
for consideration
the bill strengthens of the
traffic directions
Should their child ever have to
enter the CYFD system it
strengthens uh case and court
procedures custody proceedings
involved H. over but more than
anything madam chair it dresses
that long standing practice of
automatically placing.
House and act more children and
other children and families and
away from their tribes
This was billed as a manager so
for these reasons we stand.
Thank you.
Not that chair members the
committee my name is Mike in the
sitting at efforts allocations I
work with oil futures and I
support they should be more than
five this bill I believe matter
started to seventies because it
protects and indigenous
communities enhance opportunity
matters because it pulls the
state political status and tries
to retain and generate healthy
children thank you very much Mr
values cultures and language
assisting our communities for
tax authority of this
legislation will honor of
utility culturally image state
that salaries and secretary for
cities and integrates
grandmothers how do those have
just sandy's and children and
and to children's lives thank
you Representative
everybody else bringing this
bill forward for the sport.
Committee chair committee chair
all day this is very and reserve
this reports of us track really
known as sure caller threes
Patsy's other tribe has had
significant issues with these
kinds of things of this bill
addresses we know that this bill
has had significant organization
all the members of this
community our tribal
communities.
We use this supported chairwoman
and shared with.
So anybody else's.
What the hell helpful advise
Education Committee makes the
engine for shock time should I
watch.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Donna Windsor CO and from the
public advice for.
Office of tribal affairs more
importantly whether anti mom to
the grandmother and it is in
this space as a palpable women
right before you to be the end
is how all of that is intact
Indian protection act excuse me
is much needed and final piece
of legislation that will raise
the bar on tribal differences in
New Mexico.
Former governor of the bubble
McCurry I have the honor of
serving during his
administration status also
medical of the eight if your
child welfare Act and that's the
Indian family protection act is
being.
Is to provide an opportunity for
a child to become recognized and
rooted in their identity as a
member of a larger family
they're native people.
It is like to be I continue to
do this work and why we ask you
to vote yes on the Indian family
protection act thank you the
last.
Thank you anybody up to this
point anybody here in
opposition to the bill.
I think that that is
online first we had to kind of
Secretary stories.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Secretary yes Vigil and I have
worked very closely together on
this for the past four months
and she started a job in in fact
for two months before the
starter's job and with that
chairman's permission I'd like
her to speak first.
Yes.
Session.
Senator thank you madam chair
since.
Can you hear me this.
Yes thank you madam thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
It's an honor and privilege to
be here this morning to stand in
full support.
Of this short piece of
legislation.
The Indian family protection act
will protect New Mexico children
Indian children from the long
standing practices of removing
them from their their cultural
home and identity but rather
will reverse those those
longstanding practices and
enable them to creating to
develop and maintain strong ties
to their native families.
The children youth and families
department has worked
collaboratively for many many
months almost two years with the
sponsors of this bill as well as
our tribal partners tribal
leaders governors social workers
throughout New Mexico we believe
that the legislation that you
have before you is something
that will be a premier piece of
legislation nationally and
recognizing the importance of
our Indian families and
maintaining cultural ties.
Between our native families and
the children and the child
welfare system of New Mexico.
I want to thank our sponsors
Representative Georgene Louis
and senator Daniel Ivey Soto for
their leadership in steering
this process forward and in
providing the collaborative
environment that we have had
over the last year or several
months certainly.
And developing a piece of
legislation that is respectful
that is thorough that is
comprehensive and really that is
so away of ensuring that our New
Mexico children are New Mexico
Indian children have every
opportunity to maintain their
cultural ties with their native
families if they are if they are
touched by the child welfare
system I stand in full support
of this legislation I think so
many people too numerous to name
this morning.
For their hard work their
diligence and they're
respectful.
Dialogue with respect to
creating this piece of
legislation I also think it's
very important madam chair
members of the committee that
New Mexico in the act this piece
of legislation because of the
risk of the federal Indian child
welfare act and the likelihood
that our federal court system
might repeal or abolish that act
with this piece of legislation
New Mexico would be protected
from that event and and and
instead ensure that Indian
children in New Mexico have the
same protections that they have
under the federal act but even
more protections and so without
madam chair thank you for your
work your consideration members
of the committee we stand in
full support of this bill and
find that it is key to our work
in moving our child welfare
system forward thank you.
And madam chair and members the
committee if I'm I just had a
very brief comment this bill is
incredibly important also to the
Human Services department and
other department of health for
rural a speech today there's so
many people that have gone into
making this a success I do it
echo our deep thanks to our
sponsors all the tribal inputs
and coming together to fashion a
bill and also
secretary beyond I work closely
with plaintiff attorneys to the
given us lawsuit and they've
been invaluable in giving their
input and opt forward momentum
to this bill as well we think
this is something that this
state needs and actually can
lead the nation and not in
acting and would urge your
support thank you very much.
Thank you.
Eight first and then a number of
people signed up said that we
want to keep their comments
about two minutes at first we
have the Primera.
good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Paul
Quinn Rivera I'm the director of
policy and government relations
for the Indian Affairs
Department the department stands
in full support of HB thirty
five we know that children fare
better when placed with the
family and it could in community
and are connected to their
culture promoting resiliency and
well but the building the Indian
family protection act is another
step towards ensuring that
native children are protected
and that native culture and
families are respected I want to
acknowledge and thank the many
tribal leaders advocates tribal
attorneys allies and especially
Representative Lewis and Senator
Ivey Soto for everyone's
tireless efforts to bring the
fourth this bill I strongly urge
the committee to support H. B.
one thirty five thank you madam
chair members of the committee.
Next.
He came.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
judge Katherine Begay with the
District Court and Bernalillo
county I'm here to convey the
New Mexico judiciary's full
support for the Indian family
protection act house bill one
thirty five this bill is vital
to the future of Indian children
their families and their tribes
the bills purpose is supported
by the judiciary because it will
raise the standard of practice
in child welfare cases and truly
make the Indian family
protection act the gold standard
the judiciary stands ready to
work with justice partners on
administrative and procedural
implementation and we ask Miss
committee's members to vote yes
on house bill one thirty five
thank you.
Next we have parent right off.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen level up with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico's
tractor and we stand strong
support this legislation we like
that this marriage language in
both the federal law and it
makes it stronger this also
reflects language within the
cavernous so which we also.
Children need to be placed with
family if possible and if not
with family that culturally
appropriate placements this law
is a pathway to ensuring the
second.
We thank all the tribes and
pueblos so much effort into
making this legislation that we
also think the sponsor for
bringing this legislation and
there's tireless efforts to make
this legislation thank you.
Max's chairman Massey.
Good morning that amendment good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Carolyn
Massey I am and the Navajo
mother and aunt daughter
granddaughter sister eleven Rio
Rancho New Mexico I am also the
executive director for the
southwest woman's Law Center and
I am a licensed attorney here in
New Mexico and the Navajo
Nation.
I strongly support updating our
state it will last so that is
why I encourage you all to pass
house bill one thirty five we
should support strong connection
to our children negative
American cultures and traditions
and municipalities I have family
members in the child welfare
system.
We were lucky in the sense that
our children were placed with
their extended family during a
time of uncertainty for them the
children during this time the
children were able to
participate and Navajo
traditions and culture and our
culture
I'm also happy to say that I
kids did return to their their
their families
I do think about whether of what
would happen if if the kids were
not place and
and the family so for those
reasons I strongly urge you to
support health but one thirty
five thank you Max dollars.
Good morning chair.
And members of the committee my
name is Jessica cells are and I
am from.
The New Mexico.
I am indigenous leader of both
futures I stand in support of
house bill one thirty five.
Indian family protection act
matters to me because I could
have benefited from it I was
adopted at six months old I was
pulled away from my native
family and my culture my whole
life I've been bonding for
something today I am thirty one
and I still have a hard time
reconnecting with my people and
making up for years of US
culture experiences.
Through the years I have tried
to connect with my native family
sometimes I feel like it's too
late and many times I feel like
an outsider because I need to
earn our native tongue nor did I
follow cultural practices as a
child.
I said I support state Indian
family protection act because I
have three children that deserve
to know their roots their native
culture and deserved to claim
their native identity I strongly
urge you to vote for Indian
family protection act.
How one thirty five and I on our
bill I mean I I undergraduate
heritage tribes and nations
thank you for that.
Next is Clarissa salt.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee my name is
Clarissa salt I am an indigenous
leader with gold futures I am
internet mother and true
believer of cultural identity
and everything it encompasses I
was raised to be proud of who I
am and where I come from it is
important that all children have
a balance while building strong
identity and strong cultural
ties.
If that matters because of my
children and for all native
children I say this because my
need was an item on maybe a
foster home when she was a baby
until she turned for.
Senator was taken she was cut
off from any cultural existence
she did not know her language or
culture or the teachings and
ceremonies.
Due to the separation we cannot
honor or teach vital ceremonies
for each of her milestones
growing up.
Fortunately with my family's
doing efforts with Navajo Nation
if oil workers we successfully
got custody of jade after a four
year battle we were blessed to
have her back with the S. she is
now an eight year old third
grader full of life laughter
love innocence and beauty.
Today she continues to learn her
cultural identity it is
important for all our native
children to know who they are
and where they come from I
strongly they support HB one
three five and urge you to vote
in favor thank you.
Maxes out Sanjay BC Taylor.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Alexandria Taylor and the deputy
director with the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs in the New Mexico
children's alliance we thank the
sponsors for bringing for this
important bills advocates tribal
leaders and tribal if we're
representatives of work so
diligently on this legislation
legislation we stand in full
support and urge the committee
to do the same thank you very
much next we had had a right
Yazzie to the setting.
Good morning Shinhan admitting
chair members of the committee
should have they got sick at the
chain question that's okay I on
insurance which in precious
teen.
Originally from heart Butte New
Mexico which is the community of
a complaint remember the Navajo
Nation and I currently serve as
the vice president of Smith that
chapter and I'm here in support
of H. B. one thirty five the
Indian family protection act.
two months ago maybe community
of Smith thank passed a
resolution in support of of this
act of this bill so I think to
to mention that here when we say
our children are sacred we mean
that.
In our can in our communities
and our ceremonies there's rules
that adults cannot perform those
rules can only be done by our
our children.
And that's because of their
innocence the way that they lost
in the way that their minds are
growing in that way they're
really powerful.
The end of the Indian family
protection act protects that way
of life in our ability to always
continue teaching that to our
children who are really.
Her really important to us.
If the also strengthens that
relationship between New Mexico
state and the twenty three
tribal nations in New Mexico
we've built up.
We need to build that much
needed quality services and
accountability for everybody
that is involved in dealing with
all of our children we need to
take care of our kids I have
Representative Lewis for
sponsoring this legislation I
now ask you to support H. B. one
thirty five.
Mexico is Frank.
Thank good morning good morning
chair and and members of the
committee my name's Lucas Frank
I'm an attorney in New Mexico
and the Navajo Nation and I'm a
proud it will foster parent
an echo foster family is a
family that has at least one
licensed foster parent whose
native American my wife Tonya is
a hundred percent Navajo and we
became that will foster parents
a year four years ago and we had
five placements because on when
we started that process there
were eighty it native kids and
Bernalillo county alone and I
will families you need much more
I'd love to talk to Senator Ivey
Soto anyone else about
recruitment I'm here because to
support the amendment to section
fifty three the the reality is
you'll take my right to
intervene in my wife's right to
intervene to support the kids in
our care and you reduce the
number of Equitas for homes in
the state and you need us you
need way more of us I look
forward to speaking to you on
this further thank you.
Next we act on it that's been.
I think he was the only at the
this is a in the low all of the
global delay.
Good morning madam chair and the
members of the committee.
my name is Donna got to been who
the agenda donor for the total
of payments.
And we are in full support of
house bill one thirty five so I
mean I encourage a legal vote
yes.
And thank you for your time and
have a great day.
Next we have currently not.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Carlene apology and I'm part
of the Navajo Nation I want to
shed light on the voice to the
children who go through the
system I was taken from my
family and place group home the
only thing that kept me going
was receiving a letter from my
family but have claim on to that
letter like nothing else today
is a reminder of how much by
family let the.
Really though I felt so alone.
By sector stock about being
certified provided shelter food
and eating giving a child love
unfortunately that is not enough
I was placed into foster homes
and one group on not one of them
could make me feel loved and
cold like my family does
indigenous children have rights
traditions and connections that
cannot be taught.
During one of my placements I
attended a Navajo I sell only
made me miss my family more I
wish I mean I would come home
and not be able to share
anything I learned or get help
with assignments because no one
understood our culture.
When you truly love a child you
want what is best for them and
for indigenous children that
means having the opportunity to
be our whole selves with culture
traditions and the people you
belong to I support H. B. one
thirty five because I I can't
stand the thought of someone
feeling the way that I did.
Please vote yes on H. B. one
thirty five and protect our
children.
Max offer all.
Good morning chair and committee
my name is Kim Bobroff I'm an
attorney for the representing
the Pueblo Laguna and I
regularly appear on the equity
basis in New Mexico and across
the country the level would like
to express its appreciation to
Senator Ivy Soto and
Representative Lewis for their
work and developing a bill
that it's taken a lot of of
effort
in during this process I've
often said that were drafting of
the bill not sure this CYFD but
for the past CYFD and another
CYFD us it became necessary and
what I mean by that is that it's
important to have a an act like
this a state it go up to hold
the department accountable and
make sure that it doesn't their
efforts don't depend on the good
will of a few people that are
required by law in on an
everyday basis the public to
receives the and benefits from
the hard work for our children
made by the staff of CYFD
so the pueblo strongly in
support of this bill and is
committed to continuing to work
in future sessions to make sure
that it's provisions
are implemented in a positive
way and that other areas for
improvement also addressed so
thank you and I the pueblo urges
sure support for H. B. thirty
one thirty five axis minorities.
Good morning chair committee
members and guests thank you for
the opportunity to thank you to
the sponsors Representative
Lewis and senator Daniel Ivey
Soto for related four.
My name is Melina Ortiz and I am
a registered lobbyist for the
purpose of the letter okay
Ludgate Center we pay and the.
The public Senator strong
support house bill one thirty
five which recognizes and honors
the sovereign powers the pueblo
tribes and nations to make
decisions regarding their
children.
Most notably house bill one
thirty five Representative the
collaborative effort of tribal
leaders it workers tribal
attorneys advocates and affect
the family.
The bill aims to preserve native
children cultural identity and
heritage connections with family
unit Representative native
tradition and culture.
So for these reasons and those
stated earlier the other
supporters we encourage our
support and passage of house
bill one thirty five thank you.
Access Robert often not have.
chair members the money rather
than the rest of this the nature
of the walkable and I will also
send the support of the one
thirty five and thank you for
reading this bill or thank you
very much.
Max Hibernians.
Good morning chair committee
persons are registered lobbyist
for the Navajo Nation council
office of the speaker who
supports house bill one thirty
five fully and recommended do
passed from this committee thank
you then next we had and I are
out there.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Neil
rocker of the policy council and
regional manager of the ACLU of
New Mexico I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this very
important bill the community has
spoken very eloquently on why
this bill is needed right now so
I have nothing else to add other
than the ACLU of New Mexico
strong support of HB one thirty
five we urge this committee to
vote yes on the cell thank you.
Next we had and it average.
Good morning
chair members of the committee
my name is that acron I'm the
social services director for the
couple of Santa Ana now I am
here today on behalf of the
Pueblo and governor Joey Sanchez
we would like you to know that
the public sent Anna fully
supports house bill one thirty
five and we would request that
the committee also support the
bill and provided a do pass
thank you for to Senator Ivey
Soto Representative Lewis for
sponsoring the bill and for all
other fantastic leadership
during this process thank you
right right that.
right yes.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is ray has a beta and I am from
Minnesota Pueblo I am asking you
to support house bill one thirty
five please vote yes thank you.
Next VS on on the border.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Sean
it's important I need tribal
member and public relation
officer for the hickory
pagination inTaos The New
Mexico.
This bill will assist in tribes
and nations collaborating with
CYFD and service a guided
working with native American
families and children within the
C. why at the protective
services systems they create
pagination stands in full
support of house bill one thirty
five thank you to the Sanchez
Representative Lewis and Senator
Ivy Soto fall work you've done
in bringing this bill forward
thank you madam chair members of
the committee actually I think.
Good morning members of the
committee madam chair my name is
Hannah Burling I am president of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico for reasons already
presented the league stands in
full support of this bill and we
urge you to pass thank you.
Next he had Marci star.
My name is Marcy star I'm a
constituent of Senator Ivey Soto
and I'm a member of the Choctaw
nation of Oklahoma I'm at a
preferred sauce to parent and
under a doctor's care to I
amazing children from tried
different than my own I strongly
support the amendment that was
proposed while I support the
spirit reasons for this bill I
believe there are portions of
this bill as currently stands
that would potentially harm
children and especially the
youth and teens that it aims to
protect by delaying and even the
line permanency.
I'm aware of a large number of
children who are placed in state
care who are not with their
families or even an equipment
plant faster.
Their families.
Who for various reasons are
unwilling or unable to take a
child into their care resulting
in the child being placed into a
non relative foster home my five
children fell into that
category.
I think what would have happened
if my children have been placed
on non native home because if
this bill passes that as it
currently is they would likely
be forced to languish and and
and then H. out of the system I
would also ask that if this bill
passes and appropriation being
made to recruit and retain more
night of foster homes I would
ask that the appropriate an
appropriation also being made so
that children who are placed in
foster care are able to take
advantage of culturally
appropriate opportunities I
would love to see native mentors
from each tribe and pueblo
recruited and be assigned to and
then to non that relative foster
homes that care for native child
please support the proposed
amendment thank you thanks.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee and all my
relatives my name is Marsha vaio
and I a member of the Pueblo of
Aqaba I also am a matriarch a
mother a grandmother daughter
and and sister I also service
the child welfare specialists
for my tribe and service the new
and then take vice president I
fully support the and then
family protection act I know the
importance of keeping our
children safe and within their
homes and committees to flourish
and grow communities to flourish
and grow I also recognize the
years some practice of systemic
racism and how it place within
the child welfare system and the
generation in packet has made on
my tribal communities state if
Paul will hold the state
accountable women and then child
is in their custody custody and
ultimately find the tribal
nations the opportunity to
protect their children in
multiple ways cultural ties are
important to our children's
existence our children are
sacred beings who deserve to be
protected protected on all
levels if they're caught up in
the state systems thank you
Representative Lewis for
bringing this important
legislation forward and I urge
the members of this committee to
support this vital piece of
legislation thank you.
That's what we have okay.
Members of the committee my name
is Linda Hawkins.
The whole meditation and I'm
also rather go different the
state travel policy fellow at
New Mexico voices for children.
Our children fully supports the
family protection act.
Children as you want to be
careful there could be
surrounded by other cultures
languages and communities.
The state level protections in
informing actually at this
is best for native children our
families.
unities as well as their tribes
nations of.
We ask you to vote yes on it.
Thank you to the tribal partners
or sponsors.
In all of this and thank you
madam chair committee for your
time.
Next we have the the L..
Good morning
Members of the committee Madam
chairwoman
and.
My name is Gail V. hill the
executive director of the a no
other any public consul also
former governor of just to keep
public and president of the
national in the child welfare
association and as the previous
testimony have been given I
stand with we stand support on
that eight no there any public
council passed resolutions
supporting the.
Axo we also urge you to support
the act but also to at at a
national level to the H. R. well
for actors under attack.
for reasons that are not valid.
but also for the main purpose in
the best interest of the child
that's what this is all about
because the minute the national
in nature while for act it's
still being challenged in court
systems and this would help New
Mexico to protect children that
we are responsible for
a lot of good testimony has been
given but one area that we've
been realize is the children
that have found their way back
home we have had yes the morning
of Feb speaking of their life
with other organizations or
families where they were
mistreated however that's not
always the case some family of
due process the kids too wide
and good good families for
example Hillary time Senator you
remember every Thompson but he
he was the chief of staff for
governor Richard sent she was
adopted out as she was in it put
in a good home but the main
thing was she lost her
traditional identity as a level
lady and so that's the biggest
issue we have with kids that are
remote they lose their
traditional I identity and who
they are and that's that yes the
motor that percent so again
thank you for allowing me to
testify and urge you to support
the bill thank you next we have
Peter here.
Morning our.
My name is a Peter Garcia junior
former governor of okay we get
of tribal councilman and I am
also the president of our board
of education and okay we'll get
is in full support of this house
bill one thirty five the Indian
family protection that and one
thing that it does strengthens
the sovereign authority of
pueblos and tribes and Indian
nations and their main purpose
and priority is to protect their
children.
Which they come from their
original tribes or pueblos and
that's what is being recognized
through this house bill one
thirty five the Indian family
protection act so it's work for
the tribe's it's good for the
state of New Mexico and thank
you very much committee members
and madam chair for.
Considering about to this bill
thank you from okay we.
Thanks for the action alliance.
Hello and thank you chair
committee members they don't
have New Mexico at the eight
they've been no partial by an my
name is ray support I am from
the public payments I serve as a
community programming director
for public action lines as a
mother educator and community
organizer I'm here to share my
support for H. B. one thirty
five.
I have over nine years of
experience in working with
indigenous families I currently
work with public and additions
to to promote cultural integrity
and identity as indigenous
people as a previous home
visitor who provided parent
education on child development I
have witnessed how vital it was
for families to have healthy
relationships with each other
but I also witnessed the lack of
support for resources and
policies that protect our
families.
Indigenous peoples have entered
hundreds of years of violence
and trauma from colonialism that
continues to affect us today
we're urging to listen to the
voice of the people who are most
impacted think about what is
morally and ethically right
percent of continuing the
harmful like to see that federal
and state policies have affected
upon as we rightfully deserve to
thrive in our cultural life ways
please support H. three one
thirty five thank you.
Next year age all sorry.
What's the help of my name is
angel Charlie in a service the
executive director of the
coalition to stop violence
against native women I am a
citizen of the Pueblo of Laguna
and come here today as a mother
and auntie and a person whose
own family has been impacted by
system separations.
The place of Indian children for
far too long has not looked to
our tribes nor our tribal
families when the need for
shelter arises best practice
calls for placement with the
child's family and extended
family to meet their unique
needs when that's not possible
resource families can offer
support the coalition is
currently working on a project
to engage Indian resource
families The New Mexico it will
consortium current and former
tribal leadership to fully
understand recruitment and
retention needs of Indian foster
families to engaging with CYFD
word active partnership with
CYFD because we want to improve
the systems that serve our
families and increase system
accountability we do this
because at long last it is time
to destroy a legacy of Indian
child removals by the state our
children cannot afford to lose a
piece of themselves.
The session New Mexico has an
opportunity to strengthen the
codes and practices that keep
our families together for
generations to come thank you.
Morning chairman and committee
members my name is Vernon Lujan.
I am W. tribal program
administrator here at task
level.
A father grandfather.
The other.
Uncle and my wife.
Was.
A placement related to her use.
And with a good family and
likely issue is able to
reconnect with.
our tribe our our heritage and
our cultural ways.
A lot of children are not able
to do so I was reading through
the legislation I see that
there's new language requiring
the courts state courts.
To try to contact family members
of the children in their
respective nations sometimes
that's not possible I wish that
there was some way we could make
it stronger so that
There would be a good
communication between the tribal
nation of the state courts a lot
of times families are.
Okay part in this manner I
worked also with children.
In a shelter home that was
sponsored by the noted and
publish Council early in my
career and I.
Experience first hand
frustration with trying to
reunite children with their
families and working against the
system that these children that
place them so I appreciate
sponsors of this bill.
Hi to rectify this process and I
think we should keep.
Working forward to.
Keep our children who are sacred
as mentioned earlier to us and
keep
try next Kandace Littlefoot.
Hi can you hear me yes.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Candace little but I'm did after
the Navajo Nation I'm a mother a
sister and aunt and a
granddaughter and I standing I
stand in strong ample support of
house bill one thirty five the
Indian family protection act and
I urge the committee committee
to vote in favor of house bill
one thirty five I want to thank
both Representative Lewis and
Senator Ivy Soto for sponsoring
the bill thank you.
Actually it wrong.
Ron.
All right New Mexico have some
figures.
Yes hello not they have been it.
My name is Sandra playing G. and
I'm yes Pueblo and below the
quota I'm also the vice chair of
the native American democratic
caucus of New Mexico and the
Democrat party of San Juan
County we stand in full support
of house bill one thirty five
and thank you
for the diligence of the Sanchez
and as a as a sister
I can share it.
Thirty second story about how my
sister was able to
receive placement of one of our
nieces and that's not a process
is not an easy process and but
she's working through our
families working through and
able to find her in connector
with services and programs that
she needs to go through the
trauma of what she has
experienced so I commend the
sponsors for their continued
work on on issues of ICWA and
and protection for our secret
children thank you so much and
last we have a writer to Rome.
Hey can you hear me.
Yes.
Wonderful morning chair and
committee members my name is
Argha drone I serve as the
coalition to stop violence
against the women's policy
communications coordinator I'm
here in support of house bill
one thirty five the most of my
life I've met many children and
young adults who've all had
story sitting on top it out of
their communities many of them
being placed with non native
families and I've seen the long
term effects of children being
removed from their communities
no people who struggle to
reconnect not knowing where to
start where the family was who
their family was an intern not
knowing who they were the
stories in placements are
complex but what is clear to see
that they were removed from
their families and communities
lost ties as a result this is
why I believe this Indian family
protection act is by legislation
the protection of Indian
children's connection to their
people and community is vital
for their and their communities
well being thank you.
Thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
I do have a few comments here
about the bill.
And what's going to work
There was I don't know if
there's any provisions in the
bill about extradition the child
is
If there's a warrant out for us
to get guardians and if the
child gets places CYFD custody
and yet the other parent is out
of state and.
Alright that was the
They've American parents did
reach out to their tried and
unfortunately never got anything
back reached out to the state
did not get anything back the
child had to be taken from the
mother and taken into custody
and take it back to the fathers
would she let the domestic
violence situation that was
there to the nation.
And that was very unfortunate
and that's what makes a lot of
questions of why those doors
were not open for her.
And especially flying that
extradition back to her of the
native American guardian out of
the state.
Eventually took a whole year
before everything was resolved
that the child had to go with
the other parent although the
she was awarded custody of the
child and was dismissed because
of the K. what's your favorite.
Is there anything in here that
Because I see that the tribe can
be notified by certified mail
given a certain amount of time
to respond back.
Is there anything in here that
requires the state to respond.
Yes.
Madam chair and Committee
members yes.
And how is that
The.
This bill Madam chair this bill
requires CYFD to take active
efforts and to present to the
court what those active efforts
are.
They cannot just say oh we have
taken active efforts they have
to show what those and efforts
are to get in touch with the
track and to work with it.
Throughout this bill one of the
major portions of it is
strengthening the requirement of
the department to reach out to
the track and take active
efforts to place children in
situations are that are
preferred preferred preference
placements it.
Part of it is there we know all
I think we were all heard the
horror stories.
And.
This bill goes out of its way.
To.
Try and make sure those don't
happen again as best as we can
in reality it always can happen.
But because of the the
requirements for active efforts
for early and often attempts to
end communication.
Our.
We hope to avoid any of those
situations thank you and the
reason for their
not taking the case as far as
the New Mexico as because the
dealership the jurisdictional
issue in which they said well
that's on the reservation we
have nothing to do with that
although she was in New Mexico a
citizen of time and was raised
in New Mexico is there anything
that addresses the
jurisdictional issues yes there
is there's a provision for
tribes and and see why FTE to
enter into cooperative
agreements which address all of
those situations and the
allocation of jurisdiction
between the two transfers of
jurisdiction how they'll go
about it with no go about it and
that's very important because
for every tribe very different
circumstances based on their
funding what they can and can't
do and so it's very important
that we have this opportunity
for the tribe of the department
to reach these agreements first
thank you and when we talk about
rural.
Notifying them by certified
mail.
You like to caution the
reliability of the US PS office
within our rural areas and in
that sense
and you've been making sure as
far as interstate with the
Navajo Nation that that be
addressed especially when we
have the provided a nomination
SO in New Mexico.
There are groups students are
not students a group of children
under eighteen that we're the
Farmington area they were not
receiving any funding from the
state or not being in the one on
the CYFD chair they were
basically on their own it was
really interesting had not been
able to touch base but I was
very surprised that we did have
a gap there in our system in
which we had children that
But basically care client entity
there that fortunately took on
all the funding for them and put
in a good spot.
Is there any
program as far as after the
child is out of the system when
they turn eighteen.
Existing give.
I think there is a funding.
Criteria that should be that
should come out of this
especially on the people that
they talked about recruitment of
the families and I hope that is
explored into the future because
it is an issue
you know in in some sense the
cost of living to has also gone
out and so when the state will
see like FTEs can encourage
costs and might have the
increase into their budget well
that costs also in the cost of
living for the these families to
raise additional state that gets
older you know those costs to
also do yes she ate and state we
get to commute and not.
But the more I guess just state
it that sense so I believe there
is more work to be done I I am
very grateful to all those that
I have spoken to and with my
concerns on that and as we go
for it Preciado work you've done
and I think this is a hard.
Something that does come from
the heart the as far as piece of
legislation care of our children
especially in children terrible
entertain a motion.
For for for the class of that
motion for the past by Senator
Shendo.
The second by senator Munoz
during the objection to the
motion.
No objections you have a do pass
this bill one thirty five.
House Health Human Services
Committee sent to amended.
Members
thank you all for.
We will do all the Florida
eleven o'clock HB fifteen.
I know we don't have a meeting
scheduled until next Tuesday but
to the sponsor we will we can
get something together but you
to that place out on the floor
today thank you don't have that
many members and our committees
I think it would be too harsh
yes that bills thank you in that
sense you know let you know as
soon as we can by the time I
think we now employed and.
