Senator Hotmail.
Senator Pinto.
Senator only Senator Griggs has
not joined us yet and there is
Senator Shendo right now I just
call the roll Senator Shendo.
I think breaks is on finance
isn't he I'm here yeah she she.
Senator good morning everyone
and we have.
Four twenty five and house bill
two fifty six on our agenda and
Sanchez is here Senator Sanchez
I don't know if you have any
expert witnesses that need to be
see if they're online.
John Thompson.
No I don't have any experiences
madam chair.
Thank.
Are you ready to go Senator
Sanchez.
Yes madam chair okay Rebecca are
we okay over there with the
online stuff to get going.
Morning madam chair I'm good to
go.
I still sitting in our and
Rebecca Morgan one more.
Senator we're ready to go okay
all right may begins presenting
a bill senator Sanchez madam
chair Senator Griggs can't get
Ms try twice.
I hope is on the right day.
I just sent him the link again
so he's he's trying to get in as
we speak both areas okay right
your kids well if you're right
there in the the you still can't
get in will you can jump on
Senator Sanchez's a.
I I move your.
Right Mason may need to send me
another link you just I just
can't open it up yes and madam
chair Senator Griggs they can
just send you another link okay
okay Lopez so far will.
Okay
you faster go chase.
Okay Senators and jets.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and
committee for a let me bring
this bill today for twenty five
this bill is and all it's doing
is inserting.
On page six.
Senator true.
R. this is on a salary.
cap on the Conservancy districts
and try to get bring some
transparency here our state
engineer office our state
engineer for all state in New
Mexico you know we have a salary
cap on them at a hundred fifty
six thousand and.
The state engineer takes care of
the whole state of New Mexico
and some of the concerns you
districts are not as large as
that so we have some very high
salary caps on page six were
disconcerting whiny Levin
through thirteen.
A board of directors shall not
fire an employee or issue in
contract for employees service
at a salary level that exceeds
the salary level of the state
engineer as established pursuant
it gives the statute.
So that's.
All I have one for twenty five.
It's just inserting that of
garbage there on page six line
eleven through thirteen.
And with that Madam Cheryl.
Stand for questions.
Yes we can put.
Market yes Senator.
So members of the committee
we have John Thompson
In the soon and he is speaking
in opposition of this bill.
Go ahead Mr Thompson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee can you hear me
OK.
Okay wonderful thank you madam
chair members of the committee
John Thompson registered
lobbyists for the middle Rio
Grande Conservancy district and
I Musta again respectfully
oppose Senator Sanchez hearing
and I promise one of these days
we're gonna find one we can work
on together.
Madam chairman members of the
committee to state engineer is
funded via the general fund
madam chairman and and for
instance the client that I
represent the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district there is
self funded agency additionally
madam chair I'd like to state
that that what this bill would
do if it was enacted madam chair
would be to tie the hands of
future boards and limit their
ability to retain and recruit
top tier talent madam chairman
this is a position specifically
as it pertains to the MRG CD in
the chief engineer position that
requires a very unique skill set
madam chair that that requires
knowledge of federal state local
tribal governance finance
hydrology engineering a call
need to name a few it is a very
very unique position and madam
chairman I'll close with this
comment it's we've seen recently
in the news lately that the
Albuquerque public school
district is is seeking a new
superintendent for the largest
school district in the state and
and we don't see anywhere at
least as far as I know where
that's tied to secretary of
education Stewart salary or the
level salary that he makes Madam
chair so with those madam chair
again we we respectfully oppose
the bill and thank you very much
for your time and and the
ability to comment on that this
morning thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee we also received a
email from a map to Eric on who
is in support of Senate bill for
twenty five.
And
that is all we have in terms of
public participation for this
bill.
Thank you Representative thank
you Morgan committee members do
we have any questions.
The US senator harm you.
Madam chairman members of the
committee good morning I have my
cap off because I'm in between
to committee is to present a
bill and I just want to talk
about this I'm I'm a recruiter
and a chief of staff and so I
pulled salary the thought of the
salaries were well over a
hundred thousand dollars saw
that there were also bonuses
included in these salaries and
also did see
that the rates look like if they
increase here in the and so I
stand in support with this bill
senator Sanchez and questions it
was just a comment based on what
I see as a recruiter and what I
saw when I looked at salaries of
the amount of bonus and the
percentage of of racism.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator any other
questions from committee
members.
Senator Shendo.
I'm sorry okay good thank you
madam chair and
What other positions
Madam chair and senator Sanchez
are tied into cabinet level
posts do you know.
Madam chair.
Senator no I.
I guess I don't understand the
question on this fund there's
any cabinet.
appointees in the Conservancy
districts besides of their hired
by the board of directors
believes.
Madam chairman my questions like
I guess the.
What other positions outside of
the state government or other
municipalities are tied to a
cabinet level posts you're
you're comparing
the state.
Engineer as a reference point
for a salary cap.
Are the other positions within
municipalities that are tied to
as one example was use secretary
of education you know makes a
certain amount I mean all the
and I was a cabinet secretary
and part of the job is
in all public service and so I'm
sure there were other educators
and other folks are doing making
a lot more money than I was when
I was cabinet secretary so my
question is.
are there any other positions.
That are tied to a cabinet
secretary or is similar type
position in state government
that's used as a reference point
for setting in on salary
limitations.
Madam chair Mr Senator at this
time I don't have any are you
just referenced the state
engineer because the state
engineer takes care of the whole
state of New Mexico and on both
of this you know some of the
Conservancy districts are
smaller could increase of
salaries and the ones that are
much larger you know I think we
should have a cap on a.
Madam chair I'm not I'm not too
familiar with the.
The Conservancy district or
mineral grand.
Do they have of technical folks
in I know the state engineer has
is attorney has a dollar just
and and all the various
technical folks that helps him
or her you know of with the
state engineers office
I mean
So I don't know with the middle
Rio Grande folks also have
executive director or CEO or
whatever that person's call
director this year she have also
all of these folks under her
department or is that questions
that person supposed to possess
you know all the knowledge of
the night dollars is the
college's agronomists.
All these things that that you
have to do when you take your
water I don't.
Madam chair Mr Senator
Yes they have those people under
them
like the state engineer I think
possesses a lot of those his
our.
Yes
His expertise fall as a long
list and many pages long and
also but he does say Carol stay
in New Mexico
the.
Yes it's called the chief
engineer of the concerns you
just
mineral Graham's
does have those people that work
under him.
Okay all right thank you madam
chair thank thank you senator.
Thank you any other questions by
the committee Senator Griggs.
Thank you madam chair and
senator how many people at a you
know an executive type or
professional type level work for
the the Conservancy district.
Madam chair R. Senator.
I'm not sure right now how many
the executive type but it has I
think grown quite a bit in the
last few years.
Looking at some of the the
budgets of increased
tremendously.
Salaries have increased
tremendously.
I don't know how many.
At this time.
Okay Mister chair madam chair
and and that and senator
Do you know I mean how many
employees there are in the in
the middle Rio Grande right now.
Madam chair
Senator at the middle ground I
believe now there's about
between two hundred and two
hundred twenty five issue.
I don't know the exact number.
And and madam chair and senator
how many of those working in the
I guess do they have a central
office.
Yes the I believe madam chair Mr
Senator of I believe the central
offices in Albuquerque for the
mill road grand the rather
Conservancy districts like
Artesia and ROS one star I I'm
not so.
They'll have a central office
and then they have divisions
within that central office for
instance a middle ground covers
Mexico City Albuquerque.
R. well let's see County and
support County in the bill
Graham.
Okay and madam chair and and
senator in that in the office I
yes other than the you know the
support staff the the folks that
work there I would gash or
your your if you have engineers
you have geologist for
hydrologist
that's where they would work in
I would should pose in and show.
That would be who I would be
talking about a storage
professional or executive level
people so you think you know
using that criteria can can you
estimate how many how many
people in the in the Conservancy
district are at that at that
level.
I would say about level there's
probably.
Oh sorry madam chair Center at
that level there's probably.
No more than twenty.
Okay maybe fifteen.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator is the is the middle Rio
Grande the largest Conservancy
district we have in the state.
Madam chair research center I
believe so the program is the
largest
Conservancy district in the
state.
Okay so madam chair and senator
they potentially all those guys
are are justifiable employees
ensures that
What is happened recently is
with the middle Rio Grande
you've had a substantial
increase in employees are grants
should financial in creation in
salaries and what your bank in
is that you feel like you need
to cap the the top guys does
your does your cab also affect
all those other professional
folks shortages for the the top
administrator.
Madam chair Mister center that
would be just for the top
administrator none of the other
the boots on the ground any of
the other
Engineers or
Technical people they have there
would not have a cap on there
so.
Thank you madam chair Senator
possible exposure and that in
order to get the best engineers
they could have to pay them more
than they pay the top
administrative.
Yeah I believe that the middle
row grant Conservancy now the
top rate is
sorry madam chair I believe the
top CFO no I Conservancy is
between two fifteen to our
seventy five thousand with the.
Ten thousand a year increase.
And it kind of ties back to the
bill I brought previously for
fifteen where we keep raising
taxes and the top keep getting
these bigger bonuses year after
year.
Thank you madam chair Senator
that sounds like that's probably
about two hundred forty thousand
dollars more than Senator Shendo
which getting when he was a
cabinet secretary.
But
that's just yeah it's pretty
good chunk of change Senator
Shendo maybe we need to apply
for that job but
All right madam chair and
senator thank you for thank you
for all that that that one last
quick question what is the
salary of the state engineer
currently.
Madam chair Senator the salary
of the state engineer currently
is.
One fifty six count and any
assistant and engineers under
him.
Is about one twenty one nineteen
six oh six.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank senator.
Thank you senator are there any
other questions from the
committee.
You have a couple here.
just like sanitation though as
far as knowledge of the
Conservancy and how it says
Hello it is established in that
sense
So we have the directors we know
this is an elected the directors
is an elected.
Position right.
Our.
Or Madam chair of the board of
directors are elected officials
and then they hire
our record.
It hired director and under that
too and we talk about
competency.
Who decides on that competency.
The directors themselves are do
they reference whatever's
happened in the state
department's.
Madam chair I believe the
directors the directors.
The board members madam chair
okay thank you senator and it
from their own knowledge and
experience they make these
decisions and then they vote on
it to bring anything forward
with in the
Conservancy.
I believe so madam chair so when
they do hire a hydraulic
engineer would have to be done
with the approval of the
conservative.
Madam chair no the board hires
the one and then the director
hires everybody after that.
So they hired and we're putting
a restriction on the one.
That the directors decide on or
the yes madam chair yes so it's
a group not just solely held to
just one person within that.
The title it.
The.
Conservancy.
Senator.
Madam chair was a.
So is it just so there's a group
that hires this position we're
trying to restrict the salary
on.
It is not just one person that
the sites.
Yes madam chair this would be a
border directors that would hire
this one and in my bills what I
would do is have the border
directors would be able to hire
anyone they choose and vote on
this and then would have a cap
of a salary cap what they could
eight.
This member.
And.
Senator one of the things I
think we we kind of put a hold
on raising salaries within our
whole state
in that sense haven't we.
Yes madam chair and that's a
good point you bring up
the salary right now is over two
hundred seventy five thousand
and the state engineer salary is
only one fifty six.
Very good point you bring up
master thank you Senator and one
of the other things one that
says competent.
And this is you know I
understand there's not just
gonna be one decision on this or
you know that compared to
government.
I don't want to know that you
called it pure rock she but the
to get hired in the government
you have to have this check off
list saying you know I have this
this this to move up in great
verses this other part of hiring
one person to be versatile in
that manner so you know if we're
going to put a cap on something
is it really justifying that
person's experience and exactly
all the job skills that they are
going to have to take on versus
what a.
State department worker is kind
has their job and duties so some
sense you have a teacher that
signed the contract and they say
well these are all your job
duties and then we get into the
signed a contract and then they
can say well that's not in my
skill set I'm not gonna do that
Because you don't pay me to do
that.
First is this other part of the
concert.
So would you say it is really
alligned that when we talk about
the engineer and whoever that
Conservancy is going to hire our
is it really can we really say
that it is aligned with those
skills and
That duties.
madam chair I believe so because
once you hire this person he
will hire the people under him
to make them shine
not one person can do everything
so that's like Senator Shendo
Shendo product people this is
our other people under and that
help them do this and help them
do that and yes so.
One person can do it all and
that's why they have eighteen.
Madam chair.
Senator McKenna ask for
questions before we move forward
for move of.
Good Senator.
Thank you madam chair good
morning
A good morning senator Sanchez.
That's what I love about this
job every single day I learn
something new I didn't know I
was like this were in statute.
You madam chair and senator
Sanchez I'm curious what's the
impetus of this bill what.
I'm just curious.
What prompted it to too because
of Bill.
Madam.
Senator so as you saw the bill I
brought cards for sacad taxes
the Conservancy keeps raising
the tax rate has gone up forty
percent from a in the last five
years John Thompson at sent me
there.
Half of that going out so taxes
are going up for these keep for
the farmers the people live in
the middle ranked severance you
district and we're there's no
new projects going on but all
the salaries are going up.
In two thousand eighteen our
state auditor do the thing work
they've gone up thirteen point
five percent annually right
increase.
And.
So this would put a cap on the
higher on the one percent higher
up that's making over two
hundred seventy five thousand
with a ten thousand dollar a
year increase.
And so the constituents in my
area the farmers and people live
in the minority I Conservancy
district.
Don't mind paying their taxes
what what their taxes are going
to all salaries on the higher
end of that so that's what
prompted to bring this to bring
a cap on some taxes and to bring
a cap on the on the director
that's.
Making to our Senate five
thousand a year plus a ten
thousand dollar your increase
raised.
And.
Madam chair and senator.
Did I hear correctly the
position earns ten thousand
dollars per year annually if I
miss miss here that.
Madam chair that would be a
bonus.
Madam chair and senator so so if
that.
If the person meets or exceeds
their.
Job.
Wireman strolled then that
person earns ten thousand
dollars a year as a bonus.
Madam chair yes close to five
percent cost of living.
So there is a madam chair
Senator they receive their
salary then they will see a ten
thousand dollar bonus plus a
five percent possibly up to five
percent cost of the.
Chairman Senator.
I'm curious why the position is
tied to the state engineers
position.
So when they Representative the
madam chair.
This Madam chair Senator the
state engineer.
Is in charge of all the water in
the whole state of New Mexico so
that's what I had to tie it with
there's you know when they run
the FY are
they're in charge of the whole
state all the water from the top
to the bottom to east to west
so.
That's how I decided to that.
Madam chair Senator.
Okay thank you
Madam chair and senator does
that position.
I work for the state engineer.
Madam chair Senator now it's our
owned
entity.
Madam chair and senator what
concerns me about.
We are putting such a limitation
in statute.
Is recruitment.
And I'm I'm just thinking about
a scenario where.
The organization finds.
A candidate.
Well qualified is motivated to.
To take the position.
But currently makes a certain
salary.
That's less than what is being
offered him or her.
And so that conundrum is what
bothers me is a perfect eight an
ideal candidate motivated to
take the job and because of the
salary cap.
may back out.
does that resonate madam chair
and senator.
Madam chair sorry yes
Yes.
Right.
Thank you for the conversation
madam chair and senator.
Thank you senator Senator
Sanchez.
On page one line twenty four to
twenty five I'm in the state the
board of directors powers duties
and part of it is to manage and
conduct the affairs and business
up the district make and execute
all necessary contracts.
And this is I'm finding it a bit
some of the conundrum here as
far as so we give that to them
and now it's like we're taking
it back and we say no we're
going to the we're we're not
really allowing you to manage it
or conducted affairs we're going
to say this is how it should be
done.
and it's an elected position.
I'm sure what pages out and
we're on what once started.
Thank you want to believe that.
What I.
Whatever it the hard copy that
was given to me this morning on
my desk so.
Page one yes.
And lines twenty five twenty
four twenty five.
So this under this section is
the section
chapter forty one section
twelve.
And its board of directors power
and duties.
At.
The and this is where it's an
elected position we give them
that power but yet it sounds
like there's an abuse of.
Management in that sense of a so
should we take it back in just
practically next to hold
Conservancy district if it is
not.
Being managed correctly
And that the people are is this
problem with the Conservancy's
they're not transparent enough
so that the public does that
there is a issue.
If there's an issue or is it
just a few people with the
issue.
and I know we don't want to have
taxes raised our have our
farmers suffer in that sense but
I think part of it too is you to
waters.
It's not snowing so.
Madam chair and that's a very
good comments so and it isn't
snowing and we are in a drought
and taxes continue to raise and
salaries continue to raise.
At worst the transparency the
farmers and the people live in
the middle grant district don't
mind paying their taxes if
they're getting taxation with
representation.
But.
Your one hundred percent right
madam chair on it is not snowing
and we are in a drought and we
were told last time by John
Thompson that there be a tax
relief for two years.
I have called and checked there
is no tax relief for the water
service charge I don't know
thousand misstatement on his
point on his part or what but
I've had several people call and
check on it and we have not seen
a two year release of water
service charge.
For the on the taxes.
So with your question madam
chair I read this right here
that you pointed out.
And I still believe that yes
they should be able to hire and
make the decisions that they
should be able to but when it
comes to a salary.
On a district that since four
counties.
You know.
But Senator I and I think that's
one of the things.
I think this is the biggest
district that this person's
going to manage all of that and
yes we're trying to say okay we
have the state engineer we don't
know what they're the end the
culmination of what they're
having to manage but you're
saying whoever they hire is
getting paid this much to manage
something so large.
It would be three times four
times of what the state engineer
has to manage I'm not sure how
you know the organization is and
I think that's what I have
trouble supporting the bill is
where is the communication with
that and the public in where's
the exact problem in the does
support and the opposition to to
address seeing what you are
talking about if there had been
some work done before and if
they can be referenced in state
well this is what they tried to
do before it didn't work and now
we're right here and it's still
escalating
you know can can it be worked on
instead of just passing
something
That.
You know if if we're not
practicing this and all across
the board in the state I don't
think it's fair.
In that sense if we don't have
any other examples that we can
draw from in other parts of the
kind conduct of the business we
do our how we have this board of
directors set up with other
boards of directors within the
state and it follows that are
kind of models it I I think I
would be fine supporting it but
if we don't have any evidence of
that and this is the only.
Only one we're going to single
out I think we're going to be
kind of putting us into us
liability or some sort of.
Something.
Senator.
And that's so we're not saying
we not only for you just so
happen the biggest the other
Conservancy district to raise.
There it all they'll be able to
find these people at the look
with a the other concerns
Judiciary stop in or near
salaries at the the well.
The the director salary.
So the other side the other
Conservancy district will
benefit on this smaller concerts
you Mr.
Thank you thank you senator and.
Any other questions by the
committee and Senator Sanchez
would you like to close on the
are gets more comments before we
go to them.
The pleasure of the committee.
Madam chair I'm I'm good thank
you okay thanks committee madam
chair okay thank you Senator and
what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Question for table in.
We have a motion for table which
isn't available Rebecca would
you please call the roll.
Senator critics.
No.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez no.
Senator Shendo.
Yes.
Senator had a meal.
No.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
We have three yes three knows
for table.
Madam chair members shared thank
you.
Madam chair I move do patch.
You do pass I think you can only
move the past no wreck that be
fine.
But okay Senator Griggs a movie
to pass no rack.
Rebecca could you please call
the roll thank.
Senator great.
Yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Hold on hold on one to.
Could you we calculate that role
from the last vote.
We had three yeses and three no.
Did you read out who loaded
Dolan who voted yes.
Senator Griggs voted no Senator
McKenna voted yes senator
Sanchez voted no Senator Shendo
voted yes Senator Hotmail voted
no and Senator Pinto voted yes
okay.
Okay go ahead I just want to
make sure on that one go ahead
yep okay so back to Senator
McKenna I didn't hear on the
year I do pass without REC.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo.
No and I would like to explain.
Senator Hotmail.
Yes.
Senator Pinto no.
In addition our good record
Senator Shendo explain your vote
thank you madam chair I know
that the two bills have come
into this committee regarding
the middle Rio Grande it seems
very obvious that there's some
real issues down there.
That that that I think you know
if this body could coming from
the water natural resources
committee in terms and explain
the situation it seems like you
know there's a lot of issues and
I think it's for a large number
of people are aware of the
issues that perhaps we could
come up with the bill that take
care of some of these things
that you just seems like it's
happening some happening down
there I'm not familiar with all
the details of it but this
there's some some things that
are of are affecting in the
farmers and that there's some of
it all.
You know some issues that have
to be addressed so my
recommendation is really to
bring this body from the water
natural resource intern
Committee over the summer and
have a larger discussion see
what the real issues are and
maybe out of that conversation
things could be addressed so.
That's really and madam chair
now thank you senator.
Thank you Senator drinks.
Madam chair and I I agree with
Senator Shendo I think that
should there that's where we're
gonna find solutions to to this
issue of and I encourage
senators changes to.
to move in that in that
direction so.
That's all my comments.
Thank you.
So you do have a due pass no
rack and where you headed next
senator Sanchez.
This.
Conservation okay all right so
we move on to
House bill two fifty six.
Check bill is.
Lacy Representative.
Both representatives here
Representative did you need some
expert witnesses
to see if their online are you
good to go good morning madam
chair I do have a couple
I have Rebecca Baca.
And bill Benson.
Okay see Rebecca there and and
okay if.
It is joined now all right thank
you and I'm representatives who
wants to begin but New Mexico
and begin your presentation and
remember we go into session at
eleven.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair members of the committee
glad to be in front of you today
I'm happy to bring house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill two fifty six.
This is an act requiring the
aging and read a long term
Services Department to convene a
task force to determine the
feasibility of launching elder
work workforce development
opportunities in selected.
Rural and tribal communities
madam chair members of the
committee met many of the
services and things that we do
for our elders and and the more
populated areas of the state we
just take for granted our rural
areas many of those are not
available at all also the
quality of living is not as good
I recently lost my father in law
he was ninety three when he
passed away but he he wanted to
stay there on the ranch and and
so the family help support them
to help take care of being but
to get medical care out in a
rural area is really really hard
also one of my neighbor's
husband got Alzheimer's and she
was I was on the board of
directors with her she couldn't
find any place where he could
stay while she did something so
simple as that in the board of
directors meeting or we're out
to lunch with our friends or
anything at all she would just
had the twenty four seven be
right there there was no place
no with that someone trained.
That would be able to take care
of him so what this bill
does require the aging services
to create a task force to
conduct asset mapping in gap
analysis.
So we just see what kind of
services do we have we have some
meals for for older folks
and the some of them delivered
in the home and we look at where
those meals and and support was
available.
Some of the things that we would
be looking at is health services
meals transportation home
maintenance programs just
services and enhanced quality
alive among older adults and
also welder workforce
opportunities what kind of
training could we get for older
folks where they could find
employment
educational training can that
would we be able to have maybe
some computer classes are things
that help them apply for
services
many of the state agencies have
removed their offices from these
very remote rural areas and with
that manager I'd like to turn it
over to my.
Sanchez say a few words.
Madam chairwoman members of this
committee good morning
appreciate the opportunity to
speak.
Without a doubt that the
populations in rural New Mexico
and travel to Mexico those
populations of elders are are
amongst the largest in the state
and so we talk about workforce
development of our senior
citizens.
Many of them in many cases of
those elders just wish to remain
mobile and so their ability to
continue to a lot of thousands
of some type to get out of the
house and go to a job is going
to be extremely important also
to that include that many of our
elders are now grandparents
great grandparents and they have
the responsibility of raising
their grandchildren and so their
ability to re enter the
workforce to become gainfully
employed is even much more
important out to for their
ability to help raise their
their grandchildren or great
grandchildren so for all these
reasons we're happy to partner
with the department of aging
we're happy that they were so
generous in an appropriate
hundred thousand dollars for
this study from the keys to make
a fund to help fund the study so
there's no appropriations needed
and so with this we're looking
forward to the results that come
from the study itself so thank
you miss madam chairman and
members of the committee.
Madam chair of I would like to
allow by expert witness Rebecca
Baca to say a few words.
Good morning madam chair good
morning members of the committee
and thank you for the
opportunity to are at talk with
you today I'm honored to be here
to speak on behalf of our tribal
and rural elders in New Mexico
and the director of the office
of into you know thoroughfares
and I have the opportunity to
work first hand with our tribal
communities across New Mexico
that are challenged so greatly
as they grapple with lack of
training education and economic
opportunity on a daily basis I
witnessed here parts of those
that serve our elders through
sheer grit and determination and
I witness the efforts of those
who give their best even despite
the lack of funding education
training and support so we often
imagine what it what they could
do with they have the resources
and the support to develop their
their skills through it
educational support through
apprenticeship program
certificate degree programs and
the like New Mexico's a
predominately rural state a lot
of our frontier communities lack
resources we we know that
there's many gaps in services we
know that we have to recognize
and and document what assets
they do have however we do have
to find a way to provide
opportunity for them to develop
their their senior services
within those rural and tribal
communities to the extent that
you know we can be on par with
urban communities and
fortunately we're not at that
place
New Mexico is projected to be
the third highest percentage
within that nation's population
of age sixty and over those are
demographics in rural
communities are much more
pronounced we have significant
elders that are that are over
the age of sixty years old and
that.
really grappling with great
grandchildren and and and other
trying to make ends meet and
have the support that they need
to live with dignity through the
rest of their lives
we are very blessed to to work
with true visionaries that see
the potential for how we can
impact empower our rural and
tribal community and we
recognize the importance of
honoring our government to
government relationship with our
twenty twenty three sovereign
nations and we seek to assist
them to address the unique
challenges and our rural
communities that they face in
addressing the needs of our
elder populations
we have a significant amount of
work to do with this that we and
we certainly can can do the work
there has is a commitment from
the secretary to do the work
that I feel that the supports an
effort that is provided by this
legislation will simply
strengthen that initiative and
we look forward to working with
you and we we are deeply honored
to have the opportunity to
present our this information to
you today and I stand for
questions.
Madam chair stand for questions.
We have any public comment.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee first of all we have a
queen read that.
Okay when you have two minutes.
Please and mute yourself.
Can you hear me yes okay madam
chair members of the committee
my name is called queen River on
the director of government
relations for the Indian Affairs
Department thank you
Representative capital than
Monday for bringing this
legislation forward IAD stand in
support of H. B. two fifty six
this bill will help us to
understand the existing services
and identify the gaps in service
at the elders in our community
which in turn will help us
better understand how to further
develop the forces them to care
for elders while empowering our
community members the passage of
this bill will enhance the
quality of life for tribal New
World thank you.
Members of the committee next we
have Jackie Cooper.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Jackie Cooper and the volunteer
advocacy.
Representative for A. R. P. New
Mexico and I want to thank
Representative Chatfield for
bringing forward H. feature
fifty sex that will enhance
workforce opportunities are
rural and tribal communities A.
AARP applauds the amended
additions of the secretary of
Veterans Services The New Mexico
Indian council on aging
strengthens as representative of
this task force thank you so
much.
That concludes our public
participation on this bill.
Thank you Rebecca any questions
from the members of the
committee.
Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam chair and.
Senator I'm sorry Representative
I'm you know I.
After reading through several
bills of this nature.
What I've noticed is that
Whatever allocation is set
forth.
there's always.
Language that indicates whatever
funds do not go up whatever
funds are not used
revert back to the source and so
I'm wondering in this case.
Would it be appropriate to
consider whatever funds are not
used reverts back to the Kiki
survey Trust Fund.
Madam chair I will defer that to
my expert witness Rebecca Baca.
Thank you for the question I
Senator and madam chair I I the
key piece of paper funds have
been okay they actually have a
non reverting option there so
the secretary has committed to a
three year project to to support
this initiative the first year
would certainly be are devoted
towards meeting that that
outlined guidelines of this bill
to make sure that we are we are
doing that asset mapping in the
gas the gap analysis and in that
process and what we finalize the
report ultimately we will lead
into a second year of of funding
that is not necessarily
associated with this bill but it
would continue the work it's
outlined in this bill and that
would be a planning stage where
we actually are developed
programs to support our rural
and tribal communities through
education through apprenticeship
programs and various other
sources are with you know from
recommendations by the task
force and and then the third
year we would actually
implemented direct service
programs so we have a long term
three year commitment to this
through the key piece of paper
funding and we are blessed to
have that opportunity and that's
why we actually removed the
original appropriation this
because the committee the
secretary committed to that
through the kitchen thank you
for signing I hope I answered
your question.
Thank you Mr Becca and Senator
McKenna so we're gonna have this
bill rolled over to the next
committee meeting and I
apologize to the bilingual
multicultural Education Advisory
Council because they were on
standby for presentation and we
will reschedule that for
Thursday so we're going to do a
hard stop here will continue on
Thursday with this bill because
we are due on the floor at
eleven so with that time we'll
see you guys are back here on
Thursday and I appreciate
everybody coming in yes in
addition to a can we finish this
bill.
I have some questions to.
Representative we end at the
conclusion of this particular
bill.
You want to conclude okay yeah
we are not we're almost done
it's been the floor time has
been people are really been
getting there at eleven so we
can be a real yeah okay go ahead
continue Senator McKenna.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair actually I
was.
I was applauding your suggestion
that we continue the
conversation on Thursday.
That's all I have right now.
Yes.
Senator Shendo do you have that
question no but the I don't
think we need to to talk too
much I like to do a motion for
the past well they do have some
questions all right go ahead so
when we get to that point yet
because there's how many members
on this task force.
Madam chair twenty five twenty
five and there was a task force
already and Corona virus kind of
gotten the way of it and nothing
not much was accomplished
because a lot of the
reservations are still shut down
in that manner and closed off
which made it very difficult for
them to even get input from the
tribes nations and published
so when we talk about the timing
of this and moving forward and
having all those members I think
the intent is necessary but as
far as going out into my own
communities during Corona virus
and seeing the needs
I think those should be the
infrastructure needs of really
needed to be addressed instead
of waiting for task force to
come forth to give us these
guidelines in that sense.
Twice a task force a large.
Madam chair a it was a little
bit smaller but the it seems
like this the that there was a
lot of different types of
expertise that we're wanting to
be on the task force or that
we're desire to be on there so
that we can have a look at it
this from everyone's perspective
would of my co sponsors like to
chime in on that a little bit or
my expert witness either.
Madam chair in the interest of
time I go to the the expert
witness thank you.
I'm good morning madam chair
thank you for the question there
will actually be two tracks we
happen Indian track in a rural
track and they have some some
distinct things that would need
to be addressed and then they
would come together as a whole
working with the various
departments to be ensure that we
have the services outlined that
are necessary for education
support for our senior centers.
And thank you Representative and
thank you Mr kaka but is there
anybody from education on this
task force.
Yes secretary yes there is our.
Okay.
Would you like to go ahead
Rebekah very interim yes yes I
mean I see here well I just
think it should be more specific
I see higher ed on here but is
there anybody because of so my
area we don't have any higher at
I mean you have higher ed and
Gallup but as far as in specific
in my rural communities I have
elementary schools and head
start madam chair the secretary
of public education or the
sector is designate.
So we're going to add this to
the plate of all the other task
force the secretary of education
has to be part of and whether
the designees.
Madam chair yes.
Sure I would I would go back on
the secretary of education he is
one of the few
people that as that has came out
to our very very rural area and
spent some time look to our
schools
and and so I'm really really
proud that he took the time to
come out and actually care about
what happens in.
Four million four nobody lives
at thank you Mr Representative
and one of the things
We're supposed to already have
advisory tribal entities that
are liaisons to a lot of these
departments.
That should have already brought
up if there's any issues to
these departments as far as
being a representative of those
areas.
so why do we have to create a
whole task force in order to
when we should already have
someone in that place who's
supposed to already be giving
that input to the state of New
Mexico and all those
departments.
Madam chair I'll defer to my
expert witness.
Madam chair we recognize that
the department is the secretary
as per is is able to actually
create a task force the support
that we have through this
legislation to support the
initiative are you it can be
very valuable to it all those
the department can certainly
create you know the secretary
can certainly requested task
force were asking for a number
of partners to participate with
this project so that we have
commitment from them to follow
through on the set of
recommendations where they can
advise and and ofpercent of
recommendations to to the
initiative.
Sure that we have by and in the
long run because our rural areas
in our tribal areas are really
challenged with that the lack of
access and you just mentioned
one of the things that I think
is really important is that some
of those services do not exist
in tribal communities are added
frontier areas and so part of
this initiative is to provide
some sort of are outlined for
how that education training
apprenticeship support can
happen in those really rural
areas that it's truly a
challenge and I I I appreciate
your your question thank you so
much.
just a little bit about how this
got started from from my from my
side is the secretary of the
secretary of health and Human
Services came to me and said why
in our in a rural community
where you have so many elder
people due to do we not have
more participation and things
like Medicaid etcetera and I
told him you know these it were
Wheatley of there are no
services the H. state agencies
have pulled out for the most
part many of them have had no
longer have an office there
these older folks they can't
drive to to the city and and
participate in the services and
I was told will tell them to get
online and and they can apply
for all of this online I said
they they don't have the skills
to do it on their computer so
we'll have their grandchildren
help them on a I I have to go in
search of Mr secretary I I I
appreciate that but their
grandchildren moved to
Albuquerque to get a job or
Amarillo or somewhere where they
can make a living the what's
left out here is is older folks.
I know the county where I live
of the average ages sixty.
Of madam chair.
Thank you Representative it
provides they're not an
emergency clause on this bill.
I defer to my expert witness.
Madam chair thank you for the
question with regard to an
emergency clause in particular
what I I'm sorry I don't
understand as far as what you're
requesting with reemergence teen
Clause Representative is that
Miss Pollock at.
So our elders are gonna have to
wait three more years before
this task force comes forth with
a report or recommendations.
madam chair that that gap
analysis at asset mapping the
report there will be a
preliminary report that is due
by the end of this year by June
of next year there should be a
set of recommendations for
implementation and we would
break began at implementation
process in the second year.
Thank you.
Pleasure of the committee.
Our motion for the past.
Would you please call us.
Second by Senator Griggs but
would you please call the roll.
Senator creeks yes.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
Hotmail yes Senator Pinto yes.
We have six yes reduce pass okay
thank you Representative and
it's Baca thank you for your you
know the intent of the bill but
I think it's a bit for our
elders to wait that long again
for us to address issues in
which they are already the
pandemic has already taken its
toll for our indigenous
populations and are people that
have kind of weighted in that
sense impatiently and did not
have access and probably so.
Served in the Tel Aviv
contribute to the vitality rates
in which our communities have
suffered through so thank you
Representative and thank you
Miss paca and we will reschedule
the presentation with the
for next Thursday and we'll see
you all next Thursday we'll see
what happens on the floor for as
far as bills coming to this
committee and I will see you on
the floor Senators thank you
madam chair thank you madam
chair.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
