Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzales resident
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Sedillo Lopez here.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
I would like one for court madam
president.
reference Blaine Wimberley
mountainside United Methodist
Church in cedar crest and remain
standing for the pledge of
allegiance to be let this
morning by Senator Hamblen.
Senator Sedillo Lopez will do
the pledge in Spanish and
Senator Rodriguez will do the
salute to the flag.
years have been especially
difficult as we continue to face
fear uncertainty death and loss.
We confess that we frequently
Give us strength to keep working
give us hopeful hearts clarity
and creativity of mind firmness
of purpose and courage to lead
and for the privilege and
responsibility of leading our
state through this time.
We asked not only for hope for
ourselves but that we may be
decisions we make especially
those we make in this place and
at this time affect the lives of
many.
We pray that the hunger will be
said.
body mind or spirit will be
healed.
We seek rest for the weary
courage for the fearful safety
for those at risk and dignity
together into a bright and
beautiful future.
I'm in.
All.
For all.
New Mexico eight five eleven
if that is the step out of
those.
Hello.
All.
Thank you madam president good
afternoon unanimous consent we
go to that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
seeing no objection or on a
nonsense and miscellaneous Peter
I always like to say it's a
chance for us to pause and put
this all in perspective in your
words certainly help with that.
So couple of announcements
council service by five o'clock
this Sunday the thirtieth.
Of the Council services than
gonna prepare those requests
from the lists and email
allocation it's just the list
itself.
I will then get hard copies of
the approved capital outlay
request will come to the chief
clerk for introduction Wednesday
spreadsheets electronically to
all members on February third so
we'll keep updating everyone on
this but I just wanted to pass
along what I have for now also
And then final reminder
Wednesday February second is the
deadline for introducing bills
I know that the.
capitol and with that madam
president I yield the Senator
Lopez Senator Lopez I thank you
madam president New Jersey floor
leader unanimous consent to
Senator Woods.
President just a point of
personal privilege of I want to
thank.
good lord for the moisture that
we received in the capital city.
The it was much appreciated a
little better work this morning
to get the car.
streets and hopefully.
God will give us travel mercies
to look over us and give us
guidance today in Jesus name I
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president thank you Senator
Woods I also very much enjoyed
shovel and some snow this
morning you know it's a it's a
one confirmation of US secretary
soon to be secretary Garcia and
then we will do the bill on
Actually before I go away from
announcements center Neil do you
have an announcement you are you
ready to do your announcement at
this point we can weave it in
when you're ready.
There were some of the first
New Mexico Senate he's a sixteen
year old resident of Los Alamos
and a proud horsemen of fate
might face school he's an honor
student with a four point oh GPA
science and journalism senators
if you could help me welcome a
landed one of my constituents to
the Senate.
excuse Senator Kernan as were
Senator Ingle for today for with
the exception of purpose of the
call.
Thank you.
I any other announcements
Mexicans like my play is sold
out tonight.
But so I mean so you're off the
hook you up to come okay this.
But but they're putting their
attention and I am introverted I
know I full everybody but anyway
I'm going to disassociate for
the next three days and I'll be
the way you know we have one and
you know it's really hard for a
lot of us to know that the house
has had a trophy for over two
years now it's outrageous the
it's canceled we have a game and
I am counting on certain people
first of all Senator Diamond in
my guide here Leo they are going
have our amoebic defense zone
and for those of us who don't
know what is known as you can
ask me I Senator mantas zone
Marcy gymnasium you are welcome
your names on the list we need
Senator pops three point shot we
need quality minutes from
game is on okay so thank you.
Senator pope.
Thank you madam president point
Senator Lopez I thank you madam
president unanimous consent to
excuse Senator when you us until
he returns to the chamber.
Thank you madam president as
senator Wirth said today is
family friendly business day and
the there are two hundred and
fifty organizations that are
this group usually comes to
visit us but I'd like to have
everyone here today recognize
the family friendly workplaces
of the state two hundred and
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go about
our business messages from the
governor.
Stewart president pro tempore a
and members of the New Mexico
state Senate.
Dear president pro tempore a
Stewart and members of the
Senate.
So what to article four section
Service drafting number two two
one five three one a bill
creating the rural hospital
services fund providing payments
for losses incurred at newly
regarding the fund and making an
appropriation respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
Senate executive message number
thirty two the journal show the
section five B. two of the New
Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of Senate bill forty
provision of communication
services throughout the state
requiring notice of the use of
utility easements to the
property owner providing for
optional recording of such
executive message number thirty
three.
The journal show the message
from the governor has been
received Senate executive
message number thirty four
bill during Legislative Council
Service drafting number two two
two two nine three a bill
establishing when a rebuttable
community confirming the
prosecuting authorities burden
of proof in pre trial detention
hearings and declaring it that
emergency respectfully yours
Senator Wirth I thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
reports.
letter number thirty six dated
December twenty eight twenty
twenty one in which the governor
makes the following appointment
John a Garcia has secretary of
respectfully submitted Daniel A.
Ivey Soto chair Senator Ivey
Soto move to table.
I'm sorry.
If there's no objection to read
real right.
Madam president your rules
committee to whom has been
referred Senate joint resolution
three has had it under
Daniel A. Ivey Soto chair.
Mood Representative part Senate
joint resolution ten.
Senate Joint Memorial to.
The rules committee has had it
under consideration reports same
with recommendation that do pass
and that's referred to the
You need.
Senator Ivey Soto if you'll make
the motion to adopt the
committee report reduction.
Their adoption of a committee
Madam president your any in
rural and cultural affairs
committee to whom is been
referred Senate bill thirty nine
has had it under consideration a
report same with consideration
Senator oh now move adoption of
the committee report.
Run adoption of the committee
report from Indian rural
cultural affairs to surjection
seeing none the committee report
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that do pass and dense referred
to the finance committee
respectfully submitted Shannon
Pinto co chair center o'neill
Madam president your tax
business and transportation
committee to whom is been
referred Senate bill fourteen
has had it under consideration
the reports same with
committee respectfully submitted
Benny Shendo junior chair
Senator Hamblen madam president
I move the adoption of the
committee report
the option of a committee
Senate bill eighty four has had
it under consideration a report
same with recommendation that it
to pass and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Benny
committee report is adopted.
Madam president your
conservation committee to home
is been referred Senate bill
fifty three has had it under
chair Senators to phonics madam
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually.
the finance committee Senate
bill fifty nine that do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee Senate bill seventy
eight do pass and that's
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth's to fax chair.
objection saying none committee
report is adopted and the
journal will reflect that we
took action on each
individually.
Senator Wirth.
Seeing no objection we're now on
the order of Business
confirmations Senator how to
meal madam president I hereby
submit the credentials of John
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Hermio and fellow
senators it is my great pleasure
Mr Garcia is definitely an
experienced individual who has
served in various cabinet rules
business of various sorts over
many years and has also helped
many different
organizations in the state work
General Services Department
where there are certainly some
challenges to be addressed and I
think the governor realized that
needed an experienced individual
who knew his way around Santa Fe
the legislature and mostly how
twenty twenty one I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment
or see need to hold off on that
yet because there may be debate
I thank very much madam
president thank you to the
sponsor for bringing the
nomination for the confirmation
I just want to thank Mr Garcia
successful our has always been
successful and was very
instrumental in helping us with
the retire in New Mexico work
that we did a couple years ago
someone acknowledge that and
just thank him for continuing to
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you madam president and a
stand in the a very strong and
the possibility of all for the
tourism and also on the ski
industry which is a big part you
know all of our state and I know
that he will do an excellent job
so thank you again and thank you
madam for the.
you know when we worked together
extensively on a sustainable
building tax credit.
And it was interesting because
home builders and
environmentalists and I just
thank obviously seem to be
secretary Garcia was with home
builders and we put together a
the way he did that and it's
kind of consistent with the way
he handles you know all the job
he's had we heard that from the
testimony this morning so.
Think it's a phenomenal
it's possible for Mr Garcia to
standard not well we're doing
this.
But
The there we go.
You know.
with or serving in a public
position as always serving in a
servant's role.
and and
what people's responsibilities
for didn't assessment of what
needed to be done.
And and and as as as good
spend my time and you know one
of the things about that we can
always count on with job Garcia
when he goes into position is is
he's not going to come at it
governor's willingness to have a
bipartisan cabinet I appreciate
very much the governor's a focus
on keeping competence in that
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez you have the
floor.
Thank you very much madam
president
state government it is the core
of what helps everything else
operate so I hope you keep that
in mind that your role of course
unanimous consent to excuse
senator Shendo until he returns
to the chamber thank you.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez.
willingness to step up to the
plate you're always there when
you needed and always willing to
do your very best and what more
can we ask for I appreciate your
Thank you senator any other
debate on the nominee.
Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr president I rise
and for very strong support this
years and I just can't tell you
there's not a better qualified
person no state government has
well he is he does with the
integrity and the ability to get
things done for the state of New
debate.
I see none Senator Hickey to
close the debate.
Thank you madam president.
to make this nomination of my
constituents.
So madam president pursuant to
Senate executive letter number
thirty six dated December twenty
eight twenty twenty one I move
confirm the appointment of John
A. Garcia thank you.
Thank you senators we are voting
on the confirmation of John A.
I'll remind you if you're not at
your seat your vote will not be
counted.
negative the appointment of John
A. Garcia a secretary of the
General Services Department for
term commencing on November one
twenty twenty one to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
Senator Hickey I think I'm
supposed to let you say thank
congratulations again to the
secretary.
Thank you senator Wirth thank
you madam president unanimous
consent we go to that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
adjourn until twelve or one PM.
The Senator come to order madam
president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the journal show
all those present in this
suspended at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
Judiciary Committee if there is
no objection it is so ordered.
thirteen about Senator Lopez so
with that unanimous consent we
go to that our business third
reading of legislation ideal the
Senator Lopez.
If there's no objection more on
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill thirteen as
amended with an emergency clause
on final passage has been taken
president and members of the
Senate.
The legislation that we have
here in front of us today is a
relatives task force.
madam president what this is
proposing again is to declare a
day in the state of New Mexico
ringing all of them together for
again.
Showing that the state of New
Mexico is here to support and
work with families and madam
you may remember eleven years
ago there is an incident
that was brought to the
constituents at the time along
with her dog group that has the
the doctor since past but found
a look like a human bone
sticking out of the dirt.
I think a very eye openers to
what the state of New Mexico
does not do for murdered persons
especially looking at murdered
women missing murdered women.
some of the colleagues here on
the Senate floor we made some
changes and tweaks to the
missing persons legislation.
The madam president as we
we're talking and and.
Madam president members of the
Senate this is one of the
recommendations from the task
force but this task force is not
state of New Mexico.
And it's just a little bit more
information madam president I
did mention this also.
I'm in Senate judiciary with
and I do have the statistics
now.
I'm New Mexico is first.
in the country.
With the highest numbers of
Alaska fifty two Montana forty
one California forty Nebraska
thirty three you talk twenty
about with regards to how we can
begin to address this very
serious issue.
And madam president one more
point of data that I did mention
that I didn't have the exactly
regards to the MMI W. numbers we
have thirty seven.
Cases that are open the sitting
and Gallup Gallup New Mexico is
at twenty five.
So we have two cities nationally
that are on the top ten list of
course with the highest number
my co sponsor Senator Pinto who
also has some more information
thank you.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you madam president thank
you Senator Lopez I sentenced
wrong support.
justice this is one of them in
which we talk about being fairly
treated and having access to the
system.
It will take a couple more steps
Many aspects go into this of why
that person is missing.
But we miss different things you
can miss your cell phone.
That's like a low level but
in here I'm missing someone
right now.
And those questions hopefully
can get answered.
And with over nine hundred
And hopefully we can get to
zero.
But we know there are many
social issues out there that we
Thank you senator Patel several
of them thank you response or
Senator Pinto madam president
will stand for questions all
bring attention and love passion
and caring to this incredibly
important issue not just here in
New Mexico but really worldwide
we see varying stories in
varying accounts of this issue
I just and with Senator Pinto
when she says let's bring the
number down I want to take that
a step further and I want to say
let's eliminate that number all
together and I think this is one
of the steps to help us with
historic area in New Mexico the
two of us were neighbors and I
will tell you it's a very real
tragedy in our community in a
large way and I can tell you
happening.
But I want to just tell the the
members of this body something
very positive about what came of
that event and what happened
there as awful and horrible and
think you'll agree with that
many of the the children of
these these folks that went
missing.
And I want to highlight one of
them I'm not going to say her
name I want to bring maintain
left to become and Andy.
And that's a very phenomenal
thing she intends to use for M.
D. to work on issues of this
the daughter of one of the folks
that passed away there that that
was that was killed there couple
of us put our money together and
help to buy school books to help
her get through this process and
I'm just very proud of her and I
and making sure they were paying
attention to it thank you madam
president.
Thank you senator Senator
McKenna.
Express my proud how proud I am
of
Senator Lopez and Pinto for this
legislation I think it means a
This crisis in the public eye.
and how strongly it reflects
with our federal delegation are
proud how my former employer and
now secretary of the department
of interior deb Holland has
wonderful foundation and could
that work hard to Senator Lopez
and Senator Pinto.
Thank you Sir McKenna next what
and I really want to compliment
the sponsors of this bill
because it's one of those issues
that unless you stand up and
really force people to see it.
and these women these victims
these people.
Should not be invisible we need
happening in the first place.
One of the things that this is
really shown is how long it took
for people to take this issue
Thank you any further debate.
Etcetera smitteez.
Thank you madam pro tem I had
to to to zero how do we do that.
Well there's there's a of an old
proverb says train up a child in
the way he should go when he is
old he will not depart from it.
few years ago my personal
favorite speech that was given
during our joint session when I
was over the house was from
president just.
outstanding and he basically
said.
Learn to respect yourself first
and then you'll learn to respect
others.
Then you will learn to respect
And I think a lot of our
problems stem from those issues
the president has brought forth
and so I think we need to
objectification of women.
And I think the answer is we're
not paying enough attention to
those issues thank you so much
for this bill thank you members.
bill and I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
I think it draws attention to a
problem that we we definitely
have not just in our state but
works in this field with an
organization I can't remember
the name of the organization but
with messing exploited people
and a lot of people are being
taken and put into the sex
American populations where a
native American people have
disappeared and we have no idea
what's happened to them and we
really need to start paying
attention we really start
taken and in select we we have
got to move beyond that in our
country in our world and so I
appreciate this I appreciate
ringing attention to this and I
I see none Senator Lopez to
close.
Thank you very much miss madam
president and thank you
colleagues for your support and
Madam presentar reading roll
calls yes.
Is to show of in general Madam
chair hands sorry for the agency
in here
Centers we are on a motion to
adopt Senate bill thirteen as
amended with an emergency clause
tier seats of.
Raise your hands for those
I would have thirty four in the
affirmative none of the
negatives Senate bill thirteen
as amended with the emergency
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president a unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
reports if there's no objection
we'll go to committee reports
the reader will agree.
recommendation that do not pass
but that Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill seven
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee
all the committee reports and
that we vote on them with one
motion but that the journal
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill forty five do pass
and that's referred to tax
Senate bill sixty three do pass
events referred to finance
committee Senate bill sixty four
committee Senate bill eighty do
pass and that's referred to
finance committee Senate bill
president I move the adoption of
the committee report we're on
adoption of committee report is
there objection.
As Singh Nanda we've adopted the
introduction legislation there's
no objection were on that order
of business introduction of
legislation reader to read
Senate bill one eighty
introduced by Senator pope an
eighty Senate bill one eighty
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee
sent Senate education the Senate
finance Senate bill one eighty.
allowing personal finance to
count as an elective in sixth
through eighth grades amending
graduation requirements how are
allowing one half unit a
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee sent Senate
education event Senate finance
Senate bill one eighty one.
establishing a time frame for
insurers to load information on
approved providers into their
provider payment systems
requiring insurers to reimburse
bill one eighty two Senate bill
one eighty two have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed.
And referred to the.
Senate.
Senate bill one eighty two
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
and Senator Campos and act
relating to taxation and acting
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate committees
committee Senate.
Conservation committee sent
Senate finance.
and local police officers from
income tax Senate bill one
eighty four.
Senate bill one eighty four have
been read twice by title is
I believe there may have been an
error in Senate bill one eighty
three.
At Senator Wirth.
The second committee is supposed
I know so that we just checked
Senate committees committee
tends to Senate tax business and
transportation and thence to
Senate finance Senate bill one
eighty three.
Senate bill one eighty five
university of New Mexico to
provide a one time salary
increase to current graduate
medical residents Senate bill
one eighty five Senate bill one
eighty five have been read twice
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president members so that's
everything up on the table and
the weekend will be back Monday
and I think the plan is to come
in at one o'clock on Monday so
just for committee chairs to
announce meetings now's the
time.
and the prior announcement was
in within that section.
So we're announcements
miscellaneous for about two and
senator Ortiz the Pino.
through the full agenda we have
built on the agenda Senator
Stefanics Lopez.
prohibiting life without parole
for a child.
And then the retiree health care
contributions are getting a lot
of the play also so that it
should be it should be a good
Niners and also the Senate
judiciary committee will meet at
two o'clock this afternoon we've
got I built to be heard and
we're going to work real hard to
Albuquerque attorney Randy again
of who's going to talk to us
about about her experience with
the criminal justice system so
all members are invited to join
us for I think will be a lively
president Senate finance is
going to go in at one thirty
there's the bills are going to
hear that the big election bill
by a center Ivy Soto Senator
that DOT's going to be there and
they're going to have about four
hundred million in the budget
place roads across the state so
it should be an interesting
conversation Madam.
under court order to improve
educational outcomes for
students through the lawsuit
known as Martinez and jazzy the
lawsuit dealt specifically with
children in their abilities in
reading and math the most recent
data available to the kids count
report shows mixed results the
percentage of New Mexico fourth
graders who are not reading
trend towards more more
proficiency.
But we are well behind the
national average in the number
of students who are proficient.
The US averages sixty seven
percent non proficient New
proficient at both the national
and state levels but more
importantly the data shows the
inequities of outcomes among
specific populations within New
Mexico.
well Hispanic fourth graders are
reading proficient is eighty one
percent are not reading
proficient native fourth graders
not reading provision is eighty
are not proficient at reading
it's up to us to do better by
investing in our schools our
children and communities to
ensure that all of our children
low income students and
investments in evidence based
reading instruction is what will
turn this better for the state
of New Mexico it's incumbent
upon us.
introduce JD institute forum
where we'll talk about healthy
communities and how we can turn
the tide on the horrific child
abuse that occurs in New Mexico
chamber legislators will be
allowed on the floor we will
have public up in the gallery I
think you'll find interesting if
you have not gotten the books
for the at age eight Institute
meeting at nine o'clock room
three eleven as for our regular
Senate education meeting on
Monday thank you madam chair
madam president thank you any
to point out to a to Senator
souls as points there that New
Mexico has vast quantities of
natural resources here and we
and gas we also have coal which
we can now capture all the
carbon and continue to use that
as a resource we have at least
funds for New Mexico and take
care of many of the problems
that Senator souls has pointed
out where we need to invest
greater.
Because the the Martinez Yazzie
Thank you Sir share any other
announcements.
Seeing none Senator Wirth thank
you madam president so that's it
for the week and I think it's
always important at the end of
little list now to make sure of
that our Legislative Council
Service legislative finance
committee legislative education
study committee our building
payroll proofreaders are
sergeant at arms we appreciate
all of you to the committees
including secretaries and zoom
round of applause to thank them
for everything they do.
We appreciate each and everyone
Monday at one we will meet in
committees committee at twelve
forty five we now we're down to
one sheet we didn't get a quorum
today to have a number of bills
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president this everyone a drive
careful get a little down time
because I think we'll probably
be going pretty much straight
Seeing no objection the Senate
will stand in recess until one
PM Monday January thirty first
get your a.
Financial disclosure statements
and that's the deadline we are
