Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator sold to Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
very very on senator Craig
Brandt the pledge of allegiance
to be led today by Senator Woods
the federal agents and Spanish
to be led by Senator Hamblen and
the salute to New Mexico flag to
We know this week for for many
of us is considered holy week.
And.
We will look at the you know we
And then one is Easter where we
celebrate the death and actually
the resurrection of Christ.
And so I I just wonder to read
week merry Matt Dillon.
And the other merry went to look
at the tomb.
There was a violent earthquake
The guards were so afraid of him
that they shook and became like
dead men.
The angel said to the woman do
not be afraid for I know that
Then go quickly and tell his
disciples he is risen from the
dead and is going ahead of you
into Galilee there you will see
him.
Now.
To send your son Jesus.
To become a man.
As we remember what you've done
for us this week and as we go
into Sunday we celebrate the
resurrection.
It is willing to do these things
for us.
Lord I pray that you would help
us as we continue through the
special session that you would
Would be tempered by you.
And that we would.
Work together.
To accomplish the great is good
for our state.
Where we know that we can do
these things with your help with
your guidance and so we ask you
for those things in Jesus name
we pray amen.
Lujan ASEAN on the heels in the
B. C. play currently but if the
eagles DC part of those.
I salute the flag of the state
March and you'll to senator
Wirth to get started today.
Thank you Mr president good
morning to you and to all the
members unanimous consent we go
For sharing your thoughts in the
invocation we appreciate you
doing that as always.
just for the members we are
going to do something a little
bit different this morning.
why we had some challenges
getting that committee report
done and the decision was made
that it made more sense to have
that be in the form of a
committee sub.
gonna do is recess the.
The floor and then Senator
o'neill will kind of run the
Judiciary Committee right here
in place to just adopt that sob
do first is yield to senator.
Lopez regarding some excuses and
I yield Senator Stewart and
Senator o'neill Senator Lopez
president and Mr president
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator serve on this.
Senator Hickey.
business announces this minus
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president.
As women's history month draws
to a close last evening Monna a
in public elective and
appointive offices.
Leaders from across the country
were inducted into the mon a
ring of honor celebrating their
being recognized for her service
to New Mexico in her community
please help me congratulate
senator Linda Lopez on receiving
this prestigious and well
Thank you Senator Stewart
Senator Brandt.
Is present like to excuse
Senator X. committee and senator
time my family is laying my
cousin Dennis Garcia arrest and
although I could be with them my
family said I had a commitment
to New Mexico and New Mexicans
and asked that I come to the
Thank you.
Thank you Mr president as our
leader explained Bob we're not
going to call the Judiciary
our best game would revert it
should have been a committee
seven I apologize you know and
I'm like a you know noted Cherry
in the absence of our elected
leader gentleman serve on to so
the Judiciary Committee into
order we're going to do it all
here on the floor Neil before we
get to that point we do there
are some procedural moves that
we have to do first and I yield
to senator Wirth and then after
I yield back to you and then to
chairman.
O'neill so saying no objection
the Senate will stand in recess
at the call of the chair we will
Senate bill two as a committee
substitute.
And at this moment I would like
to call the Judiciary Committee
into order.
And of course everybody's
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I move a do not pass on
Senate bill two and a do pass on
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two.
Mr chair another we're in
committee just let everybody
gets to watch this make this
bread today is beautiful.
And that's just great to be in a
committee in person thank you.
roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator do it yeah Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator o'neill yes and senator
serve on this.
Given to pass I to to thank you
thank you so on that I'm now
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair so what we're
gonna do is just stand in place
well our committee secretary
Senator Wirth.
announcement about the committee
of the whole and then we'll move
forward so I yield of percent
Ivey Soto Senator so the thank
you very much I miss president
there and and you all may be
getting if you didn't get to
this morning to get the next
couple days a save the date to
events coming up for the
national conference state
legislatures.
fifth of twenty twenty one and
and and everybody can register
for that and the registration is
reimbursed through Legislative
R. in November of this year
normally the in person event is
in July August but they're
they're going to be having an in
person event November third
R. it is not it is in Tampa
Florida it's it's that's a
little bit north of Mar a Lago
inflow and Florida
and but none the less that that
there are a number of different
workshops on a variety of topics
that take place it is a great
opportunity to connect with
people from other states it's a
been I believe the chair of the
Education Committee the standing
committee on education for NCSL
up more than once and that's
also where a number of other
people to be able to get
together and in person
environment.
And be able to further our depth
of knowledge on a variety of
issues as legislators thank you
very much Mr president.
this afternoon we're going to be
in a committee of the whole.
We'll be hearing both house bill
between now and when that
committee starts the public
public is able to register.
You go to the what's happening
tab.
At the top of the page and you
can register to speak for or
against you only have ninety
Senator Lopez.
Mr president unanimous consent
to excuse Senator McKenna.
Hearing no objection.
reports on that order of
business committee reports the
clerk to read.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill to do
pass respectfully submitted
senator bill o'neill for senator
for has been adopted.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
or on that order business
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president having eleven fifty
suspended at the journal show
all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
no objection it is so ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
there's no objection it is so
ordered.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so as I mentioned
we're going to go to third
reading on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Judiciary Committee sub two
percent of bills to provide that
order business serving
legislation centers if you can
just that once again mute put
your phones on vibrate also
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill two on final
passage has been taken and that
from first and foremost I'm
honored to be co sponsoring this
with my fellow lead co sponsors
as senator
Mr president members of the
Senate
here the this whole journey
unexpended mint began back in
two thousand and seven.
And signed
expungement Mr president members
of the Senate was passed finally
in twenty nineteen that was
signed into law by governor
Lujan Grisham.
that all deals only with
cannabis.
And Mr president members of the
Senate
yesterday we spent several hours
in committee.
As the committee substitute that
we have in front of us we did
Amanda Mr president members of
the Senate.
with an amendment that was
in the bill Mr president we did
Mr president after discussion in
committee we did revert remove
some of the language that
Ed omitted other sections
that to us specifically looked
at the court shall dismiss and
expunge the public records of
is also discussion about using
the language of recall of so
that was stricken from the bill.
And of course Mister president
dismissal of sentence dismissal
and expungement and then just
inserted their of dismissal and
expansion.
Mr president.
discussions today as we talk
about how relevant it is for.
many in our communities
especially if we are able to
Of should I say
Within the system to have
cannabis listed with regards to
get rid of it and that is
something that will help many
members in our community Mr
president who have this as a
deterrent for them to be able to
say a few words that you'll to
Senator Ortiz Pena Senator
DiSanto thank you Mr president
and this is a crucial piece of
our of our effort at I'm doing
Ruined by a law on the books
that has made it impossible for
them later to get employment
know now many years of
discriminatory application.
A lot of people who are
the law was not applied equally
it was not applaud equitably and
so what we're trying to do here.
really have an accurate record
of how many lives have been.
D. derailed put on hold for two
totally ruined by the fact that
the record is made it impossible
suffering the consequences years
after that conviction appeared
on the record so that every time
they apply for a job.
You have to admit that yes they
certainly was work done a great
deal yesterday in the Judiciary
Committee we think there and I
think it's Senator doing is
going to propose a little more
cleanup we're still trying to
And that even if people didn't
spend years and years in prison
still.
Negatively affected their lives
and is negatively affected the
economy of the state it's made
Clean up some of that mess make
it possible for them to recover
and and continue on with lives
being able to seek employment
through this through state
That this is not something
that's a there is no record of
my having committed this
offense.
I'm not guilty of of of this
Thank you Mr president and my
seem co sponsors and has really
addressed a lot of the policy
reasons behind this bill I just
want to real quickly run through
what is this bill doesn't it's
provided about past convictions
when someone is applying for
public employment to make sure
that things like
related
and and don't and and don't have
anything to do with the
businesses necessity of that
position.
It also cleans up some of the
language about a petition when
appropriately protecting
people's privacy and then the
the biggest thing that it does
and the thing that is directly
related to the cannabis
regulation act is that it
New Mexico I it also creates a
process for for those who have
been incarcerated for those
offenses or or have serves
completed a sentence for those
the state passes the CRA had the
state has deemed is no longer
crime and so that people who
have completed their sentences
would have to do in order to to
get something off the record
that the state presume that if
if the CRA passes would say it
what is not a crime anymore they
on someone in order to get their
records cleaned out for
something that the state will be
same presumably is no longer a
crime and so that's why we're
that is intrinsically tied to
the cannabis regulation act all
of the language in here is
dependent on that passing so if
for some reason that did not
pass this language would not
unanimous consent that they be
allowed to participate there in
it it is Meghan Dorsey who is
counsel for the speaker and an
attorney in private practice and
you miss present yes that will
be me thank you.
We do have a floor amendment.
Yes the reader will read the
floor amendment and then moving
explain the amendment the reader
to read.
Senator Duhigg Senator to move
explain eminent.
Thank you Mr president I move
floor amendment one to Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
by Senator Ivy Soto in Senate
judiciary but we didn't have the
language at that time and so on
page eight line eight.
It's simply says the supreme
court shall promulgate rules to
implement the provisions of this
section in in our there were
some concerns that there were
the process was not.
what what implementing this
provision does this just make
sure that the Supreme Court will
adoptable promulgate adopt rules
to lay out the process of maybe.
references to notice being given
to the public defender
Department and in both of those
situations we change we're
changing that language to
defense counsel of record in the
And then on page ten we are
striking subsection H. in its
entirety
because this was putting some
obligations on the public
defender's office that would
avoid that conflict we're just
removing that language entirely
and part of what this was
required was the public
defender's office to give the
that obligation on the public
defender's office.
And with that Mr present all
stand for questions on the
amendment so as we're debating
Senate floor amendment number
one anyone wishing to debate.
sponsor you Senator detailed
planning suppressant.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator so.
I'm trying to follow along with
the amendment I think this is
so we still have mistakes in the
bill the one on understanding.
Thank you Mr president Senator
are.
resident and Senator very rarely
do I ever get into Senate
Judiciary Committee no matter
how many bills I have scheduled
their
but is just just the way it is
To implement the provisions of
this section and it is the
provision of the whole bill or
which which portion are they
section five which deals with
the automatic expungement are it
when we're talking about cases
that are outside of someone who
in various areas but it but it
would be appropriate for them to
do that not not the
administrative office of the
courts in this case.
completed their sentences the
where we talk about dismissal of
but here we're we're just
talking about expungement what
that is it is it's removing
public records are from
that means that those records
are are destroyed forever or or
or no one could ever access
those records even from within
government that's not what we're
talking about here it really is
this would not affect that
Thank you Mr president center
per sheet that that kind of gets
counsel.
the public defender's Department
and putting back in the defense
counsel of record what happens
if that.
Defense Council no longer in the
given notice and and and the
truth is Mister president
senator yeah when I was
practicing law I would I would
sometimes get things in the mail
if I didn't then that that would
make my best efforts and and and
that's all I could do and and
that's what that's what would
happen under under this kind of
situation.
Yes Representative thank you Mr
with the expungement of people
who I believe were out or finish
their term maybe not we'll go
into that we get in the bill but
this particular sections dealing
people who are currently
incarcerated that correct.
just to people currently
incarcerated.
Senator Representative thank you
Mr president I'm just trying to
track that because it's in the
section that says dismissal
bill and then section five we've
taken out completely.
is that because we've already
covered that and in page nine on
or you just changed.
because it was placing a a
requirement on the public
defender Department that would
be in conflict with their
originating legislation and and
person who is the defendant in
the underlying case that there
is an extra way for them to get
notice but they're already going
to be getting notice from the
court
what when any of these
Any further debate on Senate
floor member number one we do
have more debate Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I was
For the for bill and for the
guns gun safety and gun violence
a bill they created all of the
forms and they they made the
rules
sure to look at this section and
and make rules as appropriate I
due to some concerns raised in
Senate Judiciary about whether
whether there should have been.
with that language thank you Mr
president that's helpful it just
seems odd to me just the whole
separation of powers and and
amendment thank you Mr president
I move so US floor amendment one
to the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for.
substitute for Senate bill two
centers as been a motion.
The unanimous consent to Senator
pharma number one Representative
is been objection the clerk to
call the roll.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd passes Senator
Campos.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator do hit yes Senator guy
goes no ma'am Senator Gallegos
no Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator economy are
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan now Senator Lopez
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator sold yes Senator
Wirth Senator Wirth DS Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Burt.
Senator Byrd no.
Senator Campos yes.
affirmative fourteen the
negative senator member number
one has been adopted to Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
present a bill to send approach
explains vote.
Thank you Mr president.
So I I hope this isn't the how
the day's gonna go but you know
whenever we have special
sessions the bills need to be
ready to go and this is
amendment number twelve thank
you.
We're back on the bill Senators
bringing that up of that this is
it just indicates something you
know I I think Mr president
senator do is a very capable
Attorney of this this is
I have a question as to those Mr
president who are serving time
for one of these crimes and they
are currently in prison can you
that record expunged and how
would how would that look Mr
president Senator Hey Dale.
Certainly Mr president
and Mr president Senator so for
A hundred twenty days after we
leave the special session
because the effective date of
this bill will be ninety days
after the last day of the
session and then thirty days
after that correctional facility
which they for for everyone who
is in their custody they always
have the the judgment and
sentence there on hand
look through those identify
they'll notify the court
that that person's case needs to
be reopened to consider possible
dismissal
The conviction is legally
invalid meaning that it was for
an offense that is no longer
enough is no longer a crime
and and expunging those records.
And there's also a whole process
for the prosecutors to be able
that really really is no longer
crime under the CRA there's a
whole process for the the
prosecutor to be able to object
and for those objections to be
could they would presumably I
and to their parents on that or
the person could do so per pro
se.
But there's a whole process
built in for court review with
making sure that it's
appropriate for someone to be
released from incarceration
because let's say for and and
and it will always be Mr
president Senator let's say
the CRA that person is not going
to be released from
incarceration because they're
they're on a bunch of other
things that are still crimes and
that they are they're still
tell us for for what happened
then Mr president.
Mister president senator if you
expungement or redesignation
that that would be for for
decriminalization things by July
first of twenty twenty two the
court shall notify the
department of public safety that
the questions the public records
related to the cannabis charge
may be expunged.
Senator Baca thank you Mr
president so in layman's terms
it it terms of no no challenges
remove so they actually have to
go Mr president through the
motion of making the challenge.
Senator had.
they're looking at these files
so if the court sees.
That there.
Yes this is not a legally
invalid.
have have you received any input
from a the prosecutors in the
state district attorneys and
such
have they have they given you an
Mr president Senator let me see
if my my experts have a
different answer than I do on
that if you don't mind.
Mr president I I wouldn't mind
Senator.
Thank you Mr president thank you
center I appreciate your
From all most anyone on this
bill
Farm public safety
why why those groups.
Weren't there last night
But we had if we certainly have
not heard any objections from.
president Senator head.
Mister president senator I think
part of this is the nature of
Tristan last ten days trying to
get legislation ready for
folks we just didn't we didn't
receive any responses to anyone
other than than the AG's office
thank you Mr president thank you
time we have sixty days to do
this but.
you know here we are once again
and so I have one one other
question I wanted to ask the
for other crimes and a cannabis
crime and being incarcerated and
that they would in fact state
and for the other crimes and I
guess the cannabis chargin
a sentence for consecutively for
a cannabis charge of some sort
and another crime and has
the next consecutive sentence
for the other crime whatever
that crime is how does that work
for them Mr president Senator
category of of folks who have
completed their sentence for
that but but even if if they are
there.
Currently incarcerated on
multiple charges.
virtue of the the cannabis
conviction being dismissed and
so.
That that's that Mr president
Senator Baca thank you Mr
consecutive sentence where or
someone who served say five
years for a marijuana related
expense our our offense and and
then is now serving time for the
recourse for that five years
that they're spending that
they've already served for the
marijuana expense offenses are
Senator.
conviction and expungement for
completion of sentences for
offenses that if the C. R. A.
passes would no longer be crimes
person already served time of
four
a cannabis related offense and
of now it's expansion they serve
you Mr president person who's
doing time on a cannabis related
offense and boom they're free
you are doing a consecutive
sentence you serve your cannabis
bill for that.
But there could be in the Civil
Rights Act or there could be
under tort somewhere.
Because I know that if I was
a my contact good attorney.
My come back to the state Mr
president and seek recourse
outside of this bill.
For the time served.
We have limited band with
limited time in such a way that
we're doing twelve amendments
today Mister president and that
this hasn't been fought out in
Not opposed to a lot of this in
past of supported
decriminalization of some of
these offenses.
However this expungement bill is
And take a committee substitute.
That really is half heartedly
written.
job presenting the bill and to
the best of her ability which is
a high level I might say has
repaired a lot of the issues
within it.
But still polishing this thing
Committee did last night did one
heck of a job going through this
bill but when you start with
something that really doesn't
have a foundation what's left at
the end.
Senator many us Senator Woods.
I guess technical question Mr
president are.
Mortar to to the only through
this saying and then the very
last.
Even makes a statement that you
Certainly Mr president and and
this present center I'm sorry I
I wasn't able to to really hear
your question would you mind
repeating that please Senator
You've crossed that out several
places.
That we get the no longer use
madam sponsor Senate.
Thank you yes Mr president
Senator so so this is clean up
we're these ambiguous terms that
that just weren't working well
it for our state and so what
we've done here is we've
disqualifying convictions and
and using more certain criteria
for when we when we want to take
consent take certain path
squishy language of moral torpor
moral turpitude and good
character so it doesn't it
doesn't change any standards it
just it's just.
Getting rid of squishy language
anywhere anymore Mr president.
Senator okay.
Mr president senator I I don't
know if those terms are still
used in other.
these acts that are that are
dictating US employment
eligibility for public
character the same squishy
language Mr president.
Senator.
Mister president senator or
while you were I using that in
provide legal term will often be
squishy language.
Senator what.
Thank you Mr president the
representative.
To find that hard to believe
Senator and the certainly Mr
president
do you got I I'm I'm not an
attorney and I'm just trying to
figure this out and on page two
and it starts online twenty
three.
really means because I I have no
idea and and I found a friend in
nobody's ever heard of business
assessor the in in law anywhere.
Senator.
I believe in the EOC contacts
but but if you don't mind I will
double check with my experts.
of the the nineteen sixty four
Civil Rights Act as amended in
nineteen ninety one initials of
further clarified in the EEOC
regulations are and and we
and a hard place tried to follow
state law and federal law at the
same time.
Senator yes thank you Mr
president and sent maybe just so
I can clarify I'm not a lawyer
again some scenario to
comprehend that I I just can't
comprehend it.
Senator.
Mr president if you don't mind
all all see if my my experts
Senator head Mr president
etcetera so so the EEOC
guidelines actually give an
example of there was an
individual who
record for insurance fraud
because there'd been a storm and
he claim to damage to his home
from the storm that that was not
life.
Trying to get an insurance
payout for a.
First some damage to his roof
was not sufficiently job related
and consistent with business
necessity that he should that
the in center and so in that
scenario because he worked for
one company made a claim in on
insurance claim that was
fraudulent and then he can go
back to work but it wouldn't be
expungement that we're looking
at here with that language on
page two this portion is just
about what records would be used
guilty of that charge.
I don't know if he was what
we're just saying this scenario
he's found guilty of insurance
fraud charge in his next record
that would show up on his
employment records automatically
because this is something that
happened thaw it in his personal
To be R. for some public
employment that they included.
included insurance
for the position in question and
consistent with business
associates on that case those
are records that might be
required to be be looked at in
the proper way and when the the
just has nothing to do with that
job and so so it would not be
something that the public entity
would look at in processing his
application for employment.
have a background check in in by
federal law or whatever because
we do some federal leases and
they have to have that federal
background checks so this will
come up in the federal
background check but.
Mr present me check with my my
expert on that one.
Mr president Senator so.
not make it so that federal
background checks could be
prohibited in any way I also
would not tire board so if the
board.
Is for particular licensure they
required for that licensure and
that information came up
if it fell within a category of
something that the board deems
conviction I require the two
denied licensure but if it fell
outside of what they determine
to be something relevant for the
right if you have a driver and
saying he has a CDL license and
he bills of the the yes.
In the in he's just say is not
just Mississippi maybe say he's
hauling water.
During a drought the business in
the sesame so then can he go
back to the board and say okay
that how it would work.
Senate Mr present centered at no
I don't think so so in that.
was someone who who had his CDL
and he got pulled over and was
convicted of some some violation
in the in the course of driving
that would bear on I the safety
of him alright working as a a
CDL license driver in this
position I think that would
absolutely be something that
Sentiment us misprint it I think
last one last question just to
clarify them and really cloudy
on the section so if if.
marijuana only know what's legal
or not legal how many ounces or
whatever and he's convicted of
that but he's not currently
working.
And so then he decides he's
I wasn't working in my job and
it wasn't business related and
so it's going to get expunged a
certain amount of time I want my
license back is that the way
of all it's it's not the the
applicant who determines that
whether this is job related or
whether there's a business
success today it's it's the
had lost their CDL license due
to a conviction and they were
than us for their CDL license
back I think a conviction that
had lost on their CDL license
looking at here is is totally
separate from the expungement
portion of this bill.
Sentiment us Mr president and I
people are people and and I
don't think marijuana is bad is
alcohol and in and so I I I just
want to make sure.
Because what had come happens is
our insurance companies come
insurance and some I just got to
be clear on that I'll try to
give it some other lawyers to
explain it to me the bank
center.
Any further debate senators.
this bill is and and and and
and.
This bill is an important part
of addressing equity as we move
forward with cannabis
amended to Senate bill two and
ask for a roll call vote.
Senator is where voting tier
seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
serve on this.
Senator Gallegos not Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan noted Senator
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
By a vote of twenty three in the
affirmative thirteen the
Thank you Mr president in good
morning everybody first
unanimous consent Mr president
for members to remove their
coats for the remainder of the
myself represent many New
Mexicans who have availed
themselves of the expungement
Act since it was enacted by this
I make that disclosure and while
I wish a pardon provision was in
the bill the bill is going to do
some really good things for the
people in New Mexico thank you.
Thank you senator had.
order business introduction of
legislation on that order of
business in legislation the
clerk to read.
act exempting certain food sales
from licensure regulation and
inspection requirements allowing
the acquisition of meets
pursuant to ownership of an
tax amended in an acting sectors
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight before in an emergency
Senate bill five.
Representative Brett surgery we
can just pull that right to the
floor to the committee of the
whole and take care of that
right now let's just do it this
is get this thing done it's a
wonderful suggestion I'll go to
Mr president point of personal
privilege and they're going to
light at this prison actually
another disclosure go so make I
do have a client who is suing a
a neighbor his neighbor's cows
creative enough Mr president
don't give up hope yet Senator
Pirtle thank you thank you Sir
god that I do remind the body
that we're on committee reports.
Business and as assistant lane
is senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president if the plan is to take
a recess until about one o'clock
and I'm gonna yield the Senator
Stewart who is going to chair
a committee of the whole.
A do a fifteen minute
presentation by sponsors of
house bill two.
Then fifteen minutes for
Then we will do a fifteen minute
presentation by sponsors of
Senate bill three and the same
fifteen minutes supporters and
opponents.
dot N. M. L. E. G. I. S. dot G.
O. V. E. click the what's
happening tab and sign up you
only have ninety seconds.
from the members of first on
house bill two and then on
Senate bill three and then we
will go to voting on both of
them.
Any further announcements
Senators.
Not a yield to senator Wirth.
for the pair purpose of hearing
the two bills Senate bill to
Senate house bill two and Senate
bill three.
There's no objection.
committee of the whole stand in
recess until one o'clock when
will come back and hear those
two bills.
Senator present I I just want to
process is pretty arborists it's
is not what we're thinking it is
and I don't think we really want
ten point three on the committee
of the whole and have us do the
normal committee rules process
or the rules that were set up by
the president pro tem Senator
Wirth I miss present I
bills committed to the committee
of the whole shall be read by
sections in that committee the
bill should be read by the clerk
and debated by clauses or parts
a separate paper as the same
shall be agreed to by the
committee and so reported back
to the Senate the report shall
state whether or not the bill
has been amended the committee
of the whole the committee the
Senator Brandt has highlighted
something we should do and it
just feels to me this is one of
those rules I think we need to
take a look at because I don't
remember ever doing something
Senator Ivy Soto to make that
explanation.
US president with all due
respect we are in a committed
the whole and I don't believe
you are the presiding officer at
this time.
responsibilities since we have
now resolved into a committee of
the whole that's correct center
in order to thank you for that
clarification so now as we are
the committee the whole you have
the president pro tem of the
Senator Wirth thank you I just
need a back to center Brandt to
make his unanimous consent
request and Senator Brandt.
Madam chair I would ask
Any debate on that motion.
Madam.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you
madam chair.
the section by section
consideration portion of ten
point three the other portion of
ten point three.
report as twenty changes made.
Mr president madam.
Sure.
Well I I would that that's fine.
Seeing none thank you Senator
Brandt for catching that.
Us so we are in Senator Wirth
The any objections seeing none
we are in recess to one o'clock.
