This year Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator on a meal.
Senator one knows.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator committees.
Senator Stefanics.
Okay.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you senator is if you can
please rise for the invocation
to be led today by the Reverend
can Cornelia dean from just for
that fiscal Church and Navajo
and the salute to New Mexico
like to be led today by Senator.
I'm Reverend canon Camelia eat
and.
Let us pray.
The NMAA it's a creator god we
give you thanks for the
Where we are all invited to
share and participate in the
divine wonders of lying and
Services leadership.
I offer prayers in this time and
responding to the needs of the
state doing their best to serve
in ways you have entrusted them
area out your will be done.
More holy presence continue to
All for the well being of
economic and social needs of
your beloved people in whom they
serve in the state.
In in their work let them know
We thank you creator for your
blessings or blessing them and
walking with them especially in
hard decisions Erin out those
important things that matter to
healthy community always keep in
mind for the Providence that
calls them to serve in your name
in our on the beautiful way.
and.
I played.
gonna good afternoon to all the
members unanimous consent to go
that over business announcements
and miscellaneous.
In that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
and focus on sacred beauty and
just thinking about that
gives me good thoughts this
morning I hope it does everyone
else Mr president before I go
through where we're gonna start
I'm still in the other time
clock.
of building just off the floor a
few hours ago.
So Mister president unanimous
to any other members for
announcements and miscellaneous
centers where on that order
business announces the same as
an all star was sent into.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the body.
in a traditional Navajo Hogan
and sawmill Arizona she was
eight years old when an
influenza epidemic struck the
Navajo Nation and forever
One need only suffered a mild
case and return to school after
recovering to help the school
nurse take care of those who are
too sick to be themselves.
Inspired her to pursue a degree
in public health after she
graduated from the Albuquerque
Indian school she soon realized
One echo was the second woman
ever elected to the council
actively new she kept this
position for over twenty five
years.
into Navajo the day after she
observed inadequacies and
translations.
She produced a weekly radio
broadcast in the Navajo language
health problems including better
care for pregnant women and new
babies.
Regular ari.
And your examinations and
alcoholism.
For her work in influence what I
wanted to received and not on
their honorary doctorate in the
humanities from UNM.
The presidential medal of
work in public health social
justice and equality in New
Mexico and part of her work in
the face of the pandemic.
About a council woman.
And what's his position.
And where he worked at the
Navajo Nation was eliminated he
was let go.
For the actions input my
grandfather believed he was
doing for the Navajo people.
Because my grandfather's words.
Many times.
In the stories he told.
That if that was not right.
think so Senator Pinto for
recognizing drive when you get
a.
In nineteen eighty two when I
first moved here and I was
teaching at the university of
in the role of the public health
and the work that she was doing
and I was working with some
students on in the boarding
schools doing summer programs
with the students and she was a
Centers of the.
Thank you very much for the
president's present ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
Certainly that is pharmacy back
the benefit manager reporting.
I see no objection.
health evaluations also we
change from Santo I was such as
senator Ortiz panel.
Seeing no objection so ordered.
bill two sixty six B. change
from Santo Ivey Soto to Senator
Linda office.
Thanks Senator can choose title
president we still have a few
bills in the Senate finance I'd
like to release house bill one
of five electrical generation
project requirements it's the
did you ask unanimous consent
for that us as considerations
bill one of five from Senate
finance.
Saying no debate.
Our objection so ordered
Senator.
for her words this morning and
made me think about her
grandfather and how much we miss
him what an amazing person he
also was in this chamber so I
be number eleven Senator Padilla
on Senate bill ninety three as
amended and I would ask that the
concurrence calendars get passed
out at this time all three.
the substitute for House Bill
ten this the broadband bill and
Senator Hamblen will carry that.
Item number two will be house
bill six.
This is the state equalization
for House Bill to ninety one
that'll be senator Candelaria.
And then the fourth item will do
is item number forty five.
that's house bill two thirty
Session again
although will take probably a
shorter break between.
number two is item thirty three
thirty three house bill six.
And who's the Senate sponsor
Senator Stewart.
With that Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
committee reports on that order
of business committee reports
the retreat.
Mr president.
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Senator Benny Shendo
junior chairman.
Senator Shendo Mr president I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate agree to be allowed to be
all the committee reports there
How state government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill three
hundred do pass.
do pass respectfully submitted
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman Senator Shendo.
Moved up to the committee report
centers we have a motion to
committee to whom has been
referred house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two eighty five as
amended has had it under
consenus and three to be allowed
to read all the committee
approximately one one one one
motion and internal reflector
exact acted upon and.
Say no objection the reader to
read.
Munoz chairman sentiment us move
adoption the committee report
centers we have a motion to
adopt committee report.
Seeing no objection the
committee report has been
adopted a journal show they're
concurrence and ideal to Senator
Padilla for Senate concurrence
calendar number eleven Senate
bill ninety three broadband
access and expansion act.
One that order business in
Senator bill explain what those
amendments were.
Thank you very much Mr president
the broadband access and
expansion act created the office
did a couple of things one is it
did strike the Senate finance
committee amendment which
created a counseling of funding
the reason that this was done Mr
president what's so that we can
legislation and fully supported
that Mr president that that was
an excellent move seconded
excluded the New Mexico
department of transportation
from the right of way
requirements for the office as
for rights of way easement data
for broadband deployment
projects in purposes and then
the last thing you did Mr
president which is also very
important was it revise the
Thank you senator Senator is
ready to meet in the concurrence
the Senate bill's house
amendment to Senate bill ninety
three as amended.
amended.
Seeing no objection the members
of the House of placed on Senate
bill ninety three as I'm as
amended has been concurred by
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Padilla for all your work on
that matter unanimous consent we
rules be suspended and that the
record show that all actions
replacing the committee
substitution for health bill ten
on final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
allowed an expert witness to
join me on the floor.
Senate bill and then I hear
expert witnesses yes Mr
president that a state
representative Natalie Figueroa
who is one of the house sponsors
of this bill seeing no objection
Mr president well expert
witnesses coming on down just
really spring boarding off of
what Senator Padilla just talked
HB ten is amended as a
complementary broadband bill
that together with Senate bill
ninety three in addition to
catapulting us into the twenty
have taken in approaching the
state with internet access the
problem is is a twenty one
percent of New Mexico households
and businesses are not connected
the closer to forty percent in
rural areas New Mexico has no
connectivity like so many of us
have recognized here not having
access to the internet not
having access to the technology
is going to affect our families
is already affecting our
families our kids were trying to
amended provides the framework
and accountability to ensure
that the funds at the state
local federal level and matching
federal relief funds are
targeted toward the goals of the
affairs do it a number of other
ones so that council will
coordinate projects across the
state that are currently
scattered across multiple
departments Senator Padilla has
seven for this fund.
And so at this point Mr
president I look for any
conversation or debate on this
bill.
committee substitute and we'll
start with senator Candelaria of
incentive for the.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president I rise in support of
the house bill and I want to
thank and commend all of the
sponsors in the house for their
their spirit of collaboration
rise Mr president large part I
think we all get thanks as
legislators because you know we
also get the bruises the
sentence we also get the thanks
correct with the committee
really did some amazing heavy
lifting and has left a
tremendous mark on broadband
think need to be recognized and
again I want to thank the house
sponsors for their willingness
to work and being open to
constructive debate and to
making sure that we had a bill
CENIC are a further debate we
have Senator by the.
Thank you very much Mr president
I I also rise and support of
house bill ten I would echo the
crafting a phenomenal piece of
legislation you know we started
out looking just like each
other's pieces of legislation
and we found the absolute best
well I also do want to thank
gentleman when you us and his
committee for the work that they
did aging population heard from
a senator Candelaria did some
nicely with house bill I'm sorry
Senate bill ninety three but but
folks like Adrian this the the
finance committee in the house
Sanchez and all the different
people that introduce broadband
legislation this year that is
especially leading up to the
session Sen wonderful job thank
you Mr president fully fully
support HB to thank you senator
this issue look at page twenty
seven
I would just really love to hear
I I just I don't know what these
words mean and I brought this up
in a variety of other bills I
have not seen them in the
Agency presentation or what
would you mind just it and and
and those words are the top of
the page to.
definition is actually on page
three line I digital equity
means information technology
needed for civic and cultural
participation employment
education business and economic
really addressing Mr president
centers committee people in the
rural communities that don't
have the access to this
technology because of either
where they live how they're able
to make their living or their
this that this actually strength
of this bill because those words
in the eight in the
Legislation I've seen so far
haven't have an undefined so I
employment education
Mr presence and
are there are there any is there
anything to address.
I have concerns that continued
broadband access.
Is leading to increased screen
time increased social media use
because there isn't nothing more
powerful than the human
interactions that we have with
one another especially when it
comes down to being able to meet
the access is issues that people
in rural parts of the state or
having this is really the best
way to go but I don't see this
as like the be all end all Mr
president Senators committee I
feel that this is a way to
That on page two line twelve
this is serve the continuing and
growing needs of New Mexicos
educational systems health care
systems industry in business
out this is addressing the needs
that we are experiencing right
now because of the pandemic and
making sure that people have
access you know as as we've
noticed Mr president and and
senators that you know the
person who is employed and
somebody who is stuck at home
has to go to the doctor's
appointment they are limited
because they don't have the
transportation accessible so
this provides that opportunity I
they're out in rural communities
if there's only one person in
the family who is able to
provide financial support for a
job education and so on so I do
and I really appreciate you I
appreciate your
your approach to economic
development you know we've been
that we've had the opportunity
to serve on committee together
pass Senator I think you know
that but I did want to share
just two things that I I would
like for us to consider I think
Saying broadband access we're
doing it for employment we're
doing it for cultural
participation that's a big one
that I'm I want to comment on
we're doing it for not just for
industries and businesses but
business and just for economic
development this type of of
broadband access and media
access it's it's infiltrating
every aspect of our lives even
it's not just it's it's it's
becoming deeply personal.
And a few things to consider
the use of broadband for teens.
Out of those people whether
usage doubled those teens were
seventy percent more likely to
have suicidal ideation.
I can go down the list with
use social media every day or
nearly every day by twenty
fifteen eighty seven percent of
those that increase their usage
they were fourteen percent more
the that we are treating as a
basic utility now I'm not
convinced is making life better
I'm not an agency is making our
quality of life is better and
I'm not convinced that it is
it's going to be successful for
bill I think this bill is is
well written it's it's extremely
sophisticated in its in its and
that's why I appreciate those
definitions for digital equity
in digital inclusion but I'm
this bill I don't think we can I
don't think it's possible so
it's absolutely no particular
Sanchez just it's going to
happen and what I hear from my
patients in northern New Mexico
for you.
You know how are things going
and they say it's worse and they
talk about this development that
they have not really asked for
that they kind of blame and
everybody okay my district not
up there I'm just telling you
what I hear from my patients
okay I'm just telling you their
stories I can think of at least
a least a dozen of those
in a paved road innocent lives
better because of those things I
just haven't heard that not
saying we shouldn't do those
things I'm just telling you my
experience and I have severe
concerns is not just the social
suicide rates it's tied
indisputably to our mental
health crisis in New Mexico and
so is there gonna be some good
that comes out of this bill.
social problems are health
problems that are gonna company
this type of of of permeation of
broadband throughout our society
me I've designed software for
facial paralysis patients I've
I've developed software for
actually for an in more in a
systems for dot net start ups
and this you know become the
Silicon Valley Boston start ups
and things like that I I love
technology I really do I find it
fascinating did that work before
to increase broadband all
throughout New Mexico like it's
this basic utility that everyone
just has to have I really hope
we can.
it's not just our youth but
that's where the the evidences
of this strong and the CDC has
studied cutting our department
of health is a look at this the
ramifications of what we're
need to work with our own health
and I'm I'm sure the the the the
sponsor grieving on on some of
these things that I'm saying
that that we need to look at
what what are the negative
impacts and how can we minimize
further debate Senator share Mr
president Matt before Senator
sure I'd like to go ahead and
just to address some of the
issues assessment is we able to
Senator Hamblen please
recognize that.
There are other things we can be
doing and spending so much time
on our phones in our computers I
do think that's of the
legislation that we can do to
help promote the outdoors to get
opportunities but I do feel that
this is also one of those
utility needs as unfortunate as
it may be it is now a basic
utility and it is something that
thank you senator Senator
Hamblen we do have Senator share
followed by Senator Pirtle thank
you Mr president I do have a no
but for questions here if the
about standards of service
quality.
So the that confuses me a little
bit what have what kind of
standards are we talking about
how that works president center.
Thank you Mr president this is
these are basic FCC standards
they weren't put in here because
of how they are already
established an FCC guidelines.
Does that mean that we have to
have the same upload and
download speed for everybody in
the state for can that vary from
place to place and and how would
we know what the right quality
to be addressed to the different
unique needs of the areas
throughout the state because as
we know in conversation there
are some areas of the state that
a particular types of broadband
those needs on a unique one by
one basis.
So Mister president thank you
the Senator soul in that kind of
same vein I wish I could
blimps over the Navajo Nation
for exactly this to provide
internet service how does this
bill tie in with that kind of
that and we've also got there's
a couple of others.
All options are on the table
when it comes down to the
opportunities here because of
you know we do have the
because it is more tech neutral
allows that flexibility for
those to be more specific to the
area's particular needs and not
just do a blanket approach a
broadband.
quality than whatever's coming
off of the.
The blimp
so how does if we're just
talking about quality of service
can we say well this this blimp
is not qualified.
The FCC standards that are
addressed in this bill aligned
with federal grant standards
access and and provider ship the
teacher the community's needs.
Okay thank you Mr president
Senator when we do this
when we put this much money into
agency president.
Mr president center sure there's
actually a lot of private ISPs
who are included in this
ahead and customize that service
for those particular areas so
there is that separation Mister
Mister president senator.
Okay thank you Mr president
would that be there and does it
violate the anti donation
clause.
Mr presence in can you point to
All right Mr president.
It HB ten Senator share.
The small Mr president just
reading the FIR there and it
would that that's what it said
so let me
to center Pirtle then come back
to you question Mr president
that's all right.
So Mister president.
or since our first first about
the.
Senator Hamblen.
You Mr president Senator so some
federal dollars that have come
in it started out with eighteen
need before before we think that
we've achieved a.
The quality of service for
everybody that we need to change
thank you for that question Mr
president center sure it's one
the rural parts of our state so
that everybody is up to par with
the rest of the country.
One point three billion dollars
Mr president who as he put money
here in this chamber just right
here in the last few hours how
quickly it is on social media to
to throw out things there and
get people amped up over.
mine and I know that even even
here were all adults so you know
we do that to each other.
but teenagers do it more to each
got to figure out with that one
point three billion dollars.
what we can do because it does
seem to me that we're making
ourselves less civilized not
And also things can be easily
taken out of context quickly.
We can take sound bites what we
said.
Because of what happened on on
on a you know three second sound
bite.
I actually think that more
conversation in fact more
argument on this floor would be
better for all of us.
We would get things out there
And and I I and I'm concerned
that this push for broadband
really makes us.
Less.
Human instead of more human.
this happen in a in a polite
manner than it does right now.
So you know people say things
me because how much will pay
attention.
to all of that.
Anyone somebody else tells me I
gotta who cares.
But our teenagers to hear it.
And they do care.
And we had other things out here
bills about suicide prevention
and things like that I actually
think this technology can be
very very very powerful for
education.
canceled I can get in a few
seconds.
And I can find the information I
want.
But there's the flip side of
that and I wish we could just
whatever he's going to do but I
am concerned with senators
committee.
But I also like the idea that
we're trying to connect people
but can we connect people
Thank you Mr president will the
sponsor please shield Center
Hamlin yes Mr president I yield.
And thank you Mr president
Senator how long do we estimate
Mister president senator what it
what is the cost per year of
adding this division.
Mr president I'm Senator Pirtle
that's in Senate bill ninety
three that is part of the the
department of IT's budget
already it's already included.
five hundred thousand.
And and Mr president and and
sponsor
With the development of
broadband throughout the state.
the state require prices or
price fixing or any types of of
those things especially for for
people in my area that that you
know we have a very high poverty
helps with infrastructure Mr
president Senator Hamblen Mr
president center for all this
the money actually goes to the
local entities it doesn't go to
a private company it's up to the
money or allowing bids from
those private companies that
were really allowing the
autonomy to be in the local
municipalities and governments
and agencies that are going to
be focusing on that that proceed
experiences if we don't keep a
close eye on it is really just
corporate welfare for a lot of
these businesses that that make
a lot of money for basically
so if the government the state
is going to be you know
subsidizing some of these
projects we just have to be
times so to round it off
broadband broadband broadband
broadband.
Thanks in part or we do have
further debate Senator Woods.
We had a.
Presentation and finance
committee.
the conversation of this kind
round table talk Mr president
was.
You tell us the area you want
broadband in.
Mr president and and.
Sponsor Senator is that how this
is going to be done.
This president's and with so
what happens is that the local
local governments and local
entities will work with these.
develop the roll out of that
plan.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president.
Center how to.
Mr president I just stand in
support of this bill as somebody
who has a district that
might be too many times of
students and teenagers using
devices but there are so many
who don't even have that
opportunity now in order to
catch up those students that
the virtual classroom we will
continue to fall behind and
continue to on that cycle of
poverty with that I stand in
rise and support this bill Mr
legislation is to decrease
duplication increase efficiency
leverage state assets imposition
New Mexico to maximize the
federal matching relief dollars
I think we all can agree that
funds at the state local and
federal level are targeted
toward the goals of the
statewide broadband plan of SB
ninety three so with that Mr
president I move the committee
substitution for house bill ten
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca no
Senator Brandt.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
serve on this yes Senator savant
yes Senator Diamond Senator
Diamond yes Senator Duhigg
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator o'neil yes senator to
subpoena.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla Senator Stewart
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
senator senator senator Sanchez
now Senators maybe he's.
Senators maybe now Senator I'm
at the office.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator shows yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Woods yes.
For health.
Because the public works in
capital proven Committee
substitute for House Bill ten as
amended has passed the Senate
Representative thank you we're
going on to the next item we got
item number thirty three and
that's house bill six as amended
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I ask
see no objections Senator to
explain the bill.
I thank you very much Mr
president house bill six is
about removal of impacted Aid
Of having to bills about this
issue that were quite different
a again Representative Lundstrom
and myself chance to merge our
outlay measure that we had a lot
of input on from the districts
to make that better.
I believe that we made her
and I think we're both proud of
where we are now.
So house bill six.
Of the accountability measures
at school districts and charter
plans and report to the PED on
how these funds improve student
outcomes or condition of school
buildings school districts and
charter schools receiving impact
The capital outlay state and
local match I think we've come
to a really great place.
capital outlay Council along
with the districts L. E. S. C.
PED and LFC we'll look at what
we're calling on restricted
districts and then we will start
an adjustment to the local match
so they'll be a fiveyear phase
in so this centrally in eight
put into capital outlay.
So we've we've dealt with also
it to be used with capital
outlay of funds.
So now what we going to assist
school districts in the
leveraging all of the capital
obligation bonds public so
capital improvements act and the
public school buildings Act.
so Mister president this retains
aid Force reserve and half mill
levy.
In addition we have ensured that
all districts will be held
will stand for questions thank
you Senator and we do have
debate we're debating will have
Senator
ones all as followed by Senator
Kernan center Moores re raising
your hand to be on this debate.
Our sponsor to yield I just want
to make a couple comments.
All.
Mr president members this is
something that has been way
overdue.
probably one of the remedies
that really might even be what
take a takes us out of all the
Martinez Yazzie also.
But all one component that is
very important.
attract you know the kind of
teachers that you wanna have you
know in place for in this areas
and I know the for myself that I
units you know and you know when
when you look at that you know
all.
That part is you know extremely
important I'm glad that it's
addressing the than we really
something that is a big plus for
state the table thank you Mr
president thank you sponsors.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president and I
and work to to make sure that
those two bills we took the best
from both and I think that's
what happened in this piece of
legislation but I just want to
clarify if the sponsor will
to how the funds are spent I I
feel comfortable I hope in this
bill that that that's been
changed to to reflect the fact
that with the mill levy money
could be spent in that would not
have worked for money my
districts that are going to no
longer take credit for for the
male levy so can you confirm for
to to be used the way best fits
our students Senator this
present and center current thank
you for that that was certainly
something that jumped out to me
idea which was a good one and
that is to.
Required that that districts use
this of funding.
And I'll just read it to you
the Indian Education Act the
public school capital outlay act
public school capital
improvements act public school
buildings Act or.
to use what was the seventy five
percent just for these purposes
and it really was not flexible
enough and not expensive enough
So we still I believe we still
have the parameters everybody
needs but we have enough
flexibility that it will lead to
all of districts needs could be
next year's budget we are
holding harmless because it is a
pretty big hit to to the SCG
when you don't take that credit
for for both the impact aid and
just need to understand that if
revenues down the road.
Collapse or or fall off that
that's in the base and there's
not going to be any help with
It is in the base and it it
fully of funds all of those
three credits that were taken
that won't be now so I think
that's eighteen million dollars
that spread out among the
districts it half mill generates
about twenty four million
dollars and we were using six to
about futures funding but I'm
I'm confident that this is
solidly in the base and it
should remain there thank you Mr
president thank you and I I
Thanks Senator Kernan Senator
Pinto.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the body and thank
you madam pro tem I don't need
Thank you just Senator Shendo
and senator Morris center
Shendo.
Thank you Mr president of.
Talking about impact a for for
many years and the formula and
so forth and I think we I making
the right kind of changes to
make sure that that our our
school districts to generate the
things that we we need to teach
our children particularly LFC
tribal communities of the
majority of this money will
affect them.
will sponsor you for.
us through I know also served as
a impact the district member of
the public schools Cappelli Task
Force can the Mr president
Senator can you walk us through
Mr president yes let me get to
the place where it really talks
about it more.
So.
funding for capital have a very
low state match we have some
districts that have that are at
We have some districts like
SUNY.
And their state match is hundred
percent.
unrestricted capital outlay
spending.
And then over the next five
years from two thousand twenty
capital outlay we've heard from
districts and I just wanna shout
out for the Gallup district
they called us and told us the
Lundstrom through the L. E. S.
C. work we've come up with this
formula so that we are all
looking at unrestricted the PED
public school capital outlay
see if we can capture
unrestricted capital accurately.
So that the districts that still
need to go to the state to the
public so capital outlay council
fifteen years ago our equitable
and still work for everyone are
flexible enough so that these
districts that are going to get
district needs but we always
with an eye on the equitable
nature of our state funding for
capital so I believe this is a
Thank you thank you Mr president
thank you senator of I think
that's good I know it's a it's
an experiment and and and we'll
learn as we move forward and
make those adjustments but I
a long time but I'm glad we're
finally making the fix that will
impact our tribal communities in
a very positive way thank you Mr
president thank you senator
detailed yes I will thank you Mr
president you madam pro tempore
I like the drill this down into
APS and specifically my district
and what it would mean to our
also have the students from.
too harshly and I believe this
letter Mister president senator
proton off how would that affect
us in our home district of AP us
date of the General impacted
from Kirtland Air Force base.
they generate some impact aid
going to be neutral because we
have put the eighty three
million into the base of the SCG
to ensure that all districts are
because APS does generate
funding through their bonding
through SB nine HB thirty three
there half mill levy there at
it will not really affect them
very much if at all.
case that APS still has the
highest number of native
American students it with the
urban population I'm not sure if
that's still the case or not
this is have will this help
benefit those students who are
living on tribal lands but so
living and urban settings is
there any part of the formula to
new unrestricted funding is
that.
school buildings Act we have so
many of these our at risk
student inventions so if they
they can use their more of their
Meryl mill levy for capital they
have a fair number of native
American students and.
You know I believe most of our
districts.
Need to do a better job.
Good curriculum and to but as
essentially.
Embrace other cultures and
certainly could use these funds
for those purposes.
Senator Representative Senator
Moores.
Thank you Mr president thank you
at one time we had the highest
or second highest after Phoenix
population of native American
students within within a set in
have critical needs for native
American students are not just
on tribal lands but also within.
Albuquerque house and so many of
them come to Albuquerque for
economic opportunities and jobs
Bernalillo schools or
Albuquerque public schools so
I'm glad to hear that there will
be able to continue to serve
those students so thank you Mr
president thank you madam
program.
center I just I guess I'm.
I struggle with this one and and
quite frankly because I like
yours better.
and I just want to thank you for
happened with your bills it the
the the house here it or where's
that at right now.
Senator.
Mr president I don't I know it's
The service me was very honest
with you.
all that happens to be a lot in
this chamber
I would have to calculate these
legislative days you know that
math is kind of magical so it
actually what happens so it was
a while ago thank you Mr
president in Syria we don't roll
the clock very often so it is
hard to know
That we will deal with those
issues going forward in the
coming years where one of our
bills.
when it comes to this bill and I
know you've worked with the
sponsor of this bill to try to
make this bill better but this
I don't think that that's the
right way to do
Legislation until the that's the
right.
the way that they should be and
so but I do think I I still like
your bill better I'm not sure I
will support this bill because I
think yours was the right
approach I think yours was the
right answer.
have further debate centerman
us.
Thank you Mr president and I may
not need the sponsor yield yet
they're living and once they do
that then they gotta go the
chapter house which is like a
small municipality find the
registration and then make sure
child.
The reimbursement rate is is not
that great it's like ten cents
for every dollar and and to put
all that work in all that effort
in to collect the data every
kids so does affect Alamogordo
coral this in those school
districts and so they go collect
the information and then maybe a
year two years later they get
the impact the money.
I wasn't here when this
we are making the right because
I I live there Representative
three or four I'm trying to
think if you count any
separately of the affects a
school districts and this is
because of the dollars and
fixing the problem on the last
couple years we've kind of had
the money and we begin that
discussion this been a long
journey for everybody from
H. R. one was passed yesterday.
We don't care about the credit
just get our kids educated.
Given our kids help give our
kids support they need.
and I were one time called put
the two dogs on a leash over
impact aid.
By by somebody and that
will be watching the school
district to make sure they spend
their dollars on the kids.
Not on a fleet of vehicles not
on
a new
doors and their cement blocks.
Are you going to another school
and and and the Albuquerque or
whatever you want to go and they
have individual stalls I have
tax base in order to do it we
have we can we can never meet
some of the matches and PS
you'll see in through the time
and gave us wave things and
hard.
Prove to me.
As your senator and
representative San Juan McKinley
Cibola and school district is
any that you're gonna put the
a long long haul for you and and
for all of us that that done
this.
Appreciate it I appreciate the
sponsor Representative
Lundstrom.
But at the end of the day.
Senator souls.
Thank you Mr president and I
really want to thank the R.
Senate pro tem she's worked on
this for a long time she
important provisions in it to
ensure that children would be
getting the money that the money
would be well spent and just the
effort and her ability to to
that she brings as far as the
financing the history of the
impact aid and then also how to
solve it so that it benefits our
Si no further debate Senator to
close on the bill thank you Mr
president thank you for the
comments.
You know I I will say that the
spill had problematic passages
and so the money.
And us working together enabled
us to fix my bill to fix her
work like that with the house
and without.
I move that house bill six as
amended do now pass and ask for
rural call vote centers we're
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Ingle.
yes Senator Lopez Senator Lopez
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
McKenna yes senator Morris.
Senator Morris yes senator one
knows.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator Stewart I yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senators movies.
Senator committees passes
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sylvia Senator for
planning.
Senator budget Senator Steinborn
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Steinborn Senator
twenties Senator Schmidt is yes.
Who.
Senator Hickey.
By a vote.
Four in the affirmative one the
negative house bill six as
explaining about thank you Mr
president and thank you madam
pro tempore this has made the
top ten list of the most
important votes the session
Senator Pinto Representative
Lundstrom there've been so many
that have tried to pass this
bill so thank the Senate today.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the Senate Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended and that the
final passage have been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or to
substitution.
I see no objections Sierra a lot
of texting the bill.
been here the most significant
investment that this legislature
will make in terms of our tax
code in using our tax code to
First it increases.
The New Mexico working families
tax credit from seventeen
percent of the earned income tax
That twenty percent will be
applied again in.
Twenty two.
Sorry I.
Seven paper moving around the
up to twenty five percent of the
federal earned income tax credit
in addition to making these
increased investments in working
First it extends the
availability of the working
families tax credit.
To I. ten filers those are
We would be the first state in
the country Mr president to take
such an action and I think it is
a testament to the commitment
this legislature in
collaboration with governor
availability of the working
families tax credit to tax
filers between the ages of
eighteen and twenty four who
themselves are not dependence of
and so this bill makes our
working families tax credit
available to them this is
consistent with revisions that
have just been made to the
tax relief for these individuals
many of whom has been testified
to.
Tend to be former foster youths
who have aged out of system.
the annual notice requirements
for W. twos.
It will require a disclosure to
be added to that annual
discuss which is the low income
comprehensive tax rebate.
House Bill to ninety one as
amended by the Senate finance
committee keeps in place the low
mechanism by which we compensate
low income working families and
small businesses quite frankly
for the regressive effects of
probably the year two thousand
to my recollection as I
understand it and Mister
president through that time we
have successively increased the
gross receipts tax and so the
both increasing the state share
but also granting additional
authority local governments to
increase gross receipts tax has
resulted in elector losing its
power but I think with this
Most importantly Mr president
for the information of the body.
The Senate finance committee
amendments to house bill ninety
Any and all sections regarding
the corporate income tax.
And the finance committee
amendment.
Furthermore removed all
sections.
maybe put it in we can beings or
maybe Ariel there is no tax
increase in this bill.
What we are doing here is a
significant structural reforms
Mr president and again in
closing it is in the time I've
been here the most significant
investment I've seen this
legislature possibly make in
Thank you senator Candelaria we
do have a floor amendment.
Reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
Thank you Mr chair I move
Senator excuse me has taxed
revenue committee substitute the
house bill two ninety one as
three times amended amended.
good points in his in his
discussion but we need to go
back and we need to talk about
some things that happened in the
in the mid nineties.
legislature delivered on.
The elimination of the tax on
food.
When that happened.
The legislature agreed as a
compromise.
state a hundred and fifty
million dollars annually.
In twenty thirteen.
The legislature realized making
this payment was unsustainable.
The legislature also gave cities
and counties the right to impose
three one eight increments.
L. offset this loss of revenues.
some cities and some counties
have imposed some or all of
these increments.
These increments are paid on
At the time under the guise
basically of helping the poorest
of the poor.
By not taxing that motion
honestly the people sending
Senator Candelaria is talking
about.
Due to the assistance they
receive.
They.
Because we don't have to pay the
tax on food either.
Show here's what this amendment
that.
it gives counties one and it
gives the state of New Mexico
half of one percent.
The income tax on military
retirement.
It stops the state for making.
Payments on those hold harmless.
Which hasn't hasn't been heard
in committee.
Was held in committee.
What that does is it shows.
retirement and the income tax on
social security.
But if you choose to do that.
You choose to adopt this
amendment.
And what this is this is not an
eight percent tax on food is a
four percent tax on for.
So what we've done and I want to
But they paid on diapers.
They paid it on clothes they
paid on every other expansion
possible.
We made all of all pay tax on
those other things so Mister
president with that bench my.
Presentation of the amendment
with that I'll stand for
Mr president first let me say I
appreciate greatly the
opportunity to actually have a
Our gross receipts tax structure
and its policy
Mr president unfortunately
though I do look forward to that
discussion I have to say.
body to and I will argue the
body if not adopted.
but I do look forward to the
discussion if anyone would like
to yield to me I I do what do
want had joined in because I
from Alamogordo is raising and
certainly has the absolute right
to do.
Mr present the one thing that I
did want to mention for the
bodies information as we engage
To Senator Hickey is bill center
Steinborn is built to add the
premium tax increase.
Is something north of a hundred
specifically a revenue increase.
There is a significant question
coming to the body soon that
will involve revenue generation
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield.
Mr president I'd be happy to
yield thank you Mr president I
also certainly appreciate the
Would so reimposing.
A four percent food tax how much
money would that bring in for
the state.
The the hold harmless payment if
you well okay well hold on which
I mean if you limited it.
Save the state in fiscal year
twenty twenty two.
Would raised one hundred and
thirty two million for local
governments.
and the counties and the local
governments cities and counties
are able to avoid the continued
reduction in hold harmless
because they now can impose the
clarification so Mister
president the other two items
you mentioned in here the social
security.
Our
ammendment.
This presentation the cost of
eliminating social security in
fiscal year twenty twenty two is
eighty three million.
Basically then with the.
If I hear you correctly it's
we're looking at about a hundred
million dollar fiscal impact
looking at is when the state no
longer has to have paid the hold
harmless payments at shaves the
state revenue when the state.
Get rid of the income tax on
Some of the presence of really
that's the that's the
philosophical question we have
here I we have debated the food
tax every year since it was
G. R. T. that was put in place
and I tried to carry bill this
session well part of this bill
at one point a proposed
amendment to reduce the G. R. T.
on everything else toilet paper
all those essential services.
And so that's just a lot of
really challenged.
History and what we did way back
then I just think that that the
Because I just think taxing
again taxing.
Food we've been through this
debates and and well certainly
there are some coming going to
moral decision really about
taxing food and and really the
the the gist of senator
Candelaria is.
Bill here is to focus on.
legitimate philosophical
disagreement I would just
suggest to you that three other
taxes we looked at the session
Corporate tax hits these are C.
corporations the big boxes not
New Mexico businesses this hits
basically about one half of one
percent of the biggest
to have a conversation about the
cigarette tax and we did the
session I appreciate having a
conversation that could raise
some money and then putting some
progressivity back into the
operand I think originally this
bill had that in it and so this
is a good.
Philosophical discussion because
I do think there are things we
and it's a discussion worth
having it's how we do it and I
just personally don't think the
food tax as a standalone
discussion about comprehensive
tax reform you know what we're
seeing in this bill are two
incredibly important pieces.
That I believe and I can't
command center Candelaria not
respect you for for putting us
perfect proposal forward so we
can have this debate I just I
just respectfully you know
propose the amendment because I
Thank you Mr president of a
little history lesson if I could
you know Senator Griggs and I
debate food tax and have have
happened we were not senators at
the time and we were just forced
to live with and
What happened and I want
everybody to really pay
attention what happened has
And that's happened because when
we impose the food the hold
harmless situation to take away
the food tax the state didn't
have enough money to afford it
had the of they were low income
they had a little thing in their
pocket called a snap card just
call and food stamps they don't
pay tax on food when you have a
card benefits you go pay your
rent by your underwear your
shampoo that Walmart and your
poor you still pay more tax so
the people that we're trying to
forty eight percent in some
counties and cities actually is
imposed twice within the city
limits in some communities of
the county has imposed creates
and the city is imposed three
pretty high tax so we've greatly
increased our G. R. T. X. taxed
the pyramid Inc situation that
we were all concerned about is
situation isn't we've created a
situation where many of our
communities clothing line are
three eights was thought to be
enough to take care of the whole
harmless problem they were
supposed to impose it slowly as
time went on but many cities and
counties did it all at once so
So I don't know if this is the
best solution but it's gonna be
an improvement so I support the
amendment and I hope everybody
least takes a minute to to talk
We have further debate on the
amendment Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I I'll
start with the the the the
only problem is is I would only
support it for up to a certain
income group this one is
unlimited so it's not it's not
of.
of having of not having our tax
system the regressive and then
the other thing I like about it
is of course the exemption for
social security but I do want to
people who could really benefit
from help and that would be the
low the people who are only
making twenty five thirty thirty
thousand a year so again I would
what senator Wirth pointed out
the cuts would be.
And now for the parts I don't
like about the bill.
Food taxes are the most
hope that the state never goes
back to that so for that I have
to propose the amendment but
thank you for the dialogue.
talking for for years about real
tax reform.
And the snow had my two percent
tax plan which I still think
it's a pretty decent.
talk about that we can't think
about this.
We can have real tax reform
unless we actually.
Can put things on the table and
Then we stifle ideas and we just
make it harder to figure out how
to do this.
Our tax code Mr president is is
so confusing.
time I use the acronym a sea
change.
First of all our tax code gonna
be simple enough for everybody
to understand if it's not simple
enough.
Been talking about how to do
services more wisely absolutely.
But it's going to raise enough
money so simple enough and then
economy for decades we've talked
about that decades before I got
here and we'll talk about a
decade after I leave.
And right now.
sense can we do this.
Is it help does it hurt.
Instead of just throwing off the
table because what food is is
The people that we use in the
snap Carter the food stamps or
whatever you call it then.
We're not paying tax on food.
More progressive.
Doesn't make sense to me.
To just throw this out without
thinking about it.
food if you talk about food I'm
gonna put you on their on
whatever it is so talk about
about your I'm sure the people
that are doing that already have
me on their homes no doubt about
that and I don't care.
We need tax reform.
And I think.
Senator Griggs fought an awful
not taxed the bottom of the the
income scale were taxed the top
of the income scale the bottom
still doesn't pay tax.
On food.
But
I think this is at least a sound
first step this isn't the tax
reform that we need this doesn't
do everything.
What happened in Senate finance.
Was very good.
I like what what what happened
And I think it's at least worth
talking about at least worst
inventing the idea that we can
actually help the lower income.
Well this is exactly how to do
that.
Exactly how to do that.
But what we've done.
That's we raise the taxes on.
We raise the taxes on toilet
paper.
All of the really essential
things that we need.
And so we've raised taxes.
On things that people need.
And we raised them again and
Not even a little bit.
We've harm to those people.
And the people we have helped
other people on the upper end.
Ground beef.
We hurt them.
So Mister president instead of
just taking things off the table
**** nilly because of some.
I think it's just bad tax policy
where at least give ourselves a
chance to think out loud.
Do not think on Twitter.
You Mr president.
Mister president I'll be happy
to yield.
Thank you Mr president and and
just for members of the body I
often talk about this subject
with the sponsor of the
with that person or whatever I
have no idea I'm gonna pick
something up on the learn
something and it just helps me
to I think be a better
legislators and so I thank him
for his quest to to get this
complete reform and all of our
tax policy.
But I'm gonna ask the sponsor of
the amendment Mr president what
is a what's the median salary
medium wage or income in New
Mexico.
exactly but I I imagine that you
do
show I'm gonna guess reach
somewhere in the mid twenty.
It's somewhere in that
neighborhood Mr president I
don't know that that's why I
thought I would ask internally
to ask questions I don't know
just what I don't know about it
somewhere between you know mid
to high thirties and and and and
the low forties somewhere in
there changes all the time and
so what is the percentage Mr
I just wanted to let the sponsor
the amendment No that I have a
real struggle with this
particular tax on food in the
reason I do is because the
conversation that we typically
that have a snap card and the
median or average wage median or
average wage in New Mexico
there's that section and that's
a large part of New Mexico and
to be aware of there is a large
part of New Mexico it's below
the average wage but
But above the individuals that
may have a snap card.
tax because if the folks that
are above that average or above
that median whatever that's half
the tax that those individuals I
just referenced are paying
they're paying double the tax
about thirty days longer than I
have.
That's the key reason I can't
support of Tax Mr president
thank you.
Think centre by there we do have
Senator.
Ingle is back in the chamber
question for the sponsor but
just a little history on or
where this came from and the
food tax I was here during those
years when the.
Did away with food tax.
money coming in.
That we did away with those
things there were questions then
can we really do it.
And I remember John Arthur Smith
saying well.
natural gas goes to six or seven
dollars in MCF will still have
this much well in eighteen
months later.
It was under ten dollars for a
that we couldn't couldn't figure
out how we're going to fix it
but course we did we made
several adjustments everything
in New Mexico so much of what we
amendment because it does tax
those that can pay at the ones
that can't won't.
And shouldn't try it.
But the thing about it is users
less than thirty percent of the
We have a source of revenue here
from the oil and gas industry in
our mining industry that is on
server unsurpassed.
But it to goes up and down.
Anyway the thing of it is if
we've got to make sure where
we're going when we do these
things we don't need to raise
taxes on anyone.
or four years we may have to
raise some taxes but let's be
very careful what we're doing
here now.
Either way.
Mexico.
What other states have that.
License tags are about seventy
dollars a year lash.
In Texas there three to four
hundred.
to be seven when you had the
cities and counties on nearly
eight in many counties.
We made up that difference.
That's a hundred and twenty
We need to be careful because
down the road we will have to
raise some things because this
money flow will fall off.
Let's not do it now.
yield Senator Griggs need of.
Mr president I'd be happy you
Senator so the thank you very
much I miss president missed out
of how much agency president and
senator in fiscal year twenty
twenty two the hold harmless
payment is expected to be one
hundred and twelve million seven
hundred thousand dollars.
And senator that.
So Mister president senator
grace this just to understand
New Mexico is that correct
Senator Griggs Mr president
center what it what it does is
if the state doesn't have to pay
the money to the municipalities
this president Senator Griggs if
if it's okay for me to keep
passing couple more questions.
the this takes off the tax on
Senator so the this amendment
takes off the tax on social
security income is that correct.
Senator that.
Is one thousand.
Five hundred and forty three
dollars a month.
Senator
approximately fifteen hundred
dollars a month that's about
maybe if they're so stiff if
they what they depend upon so
security is about eighteen
thousand dollars a year these
people would no longer have to
And our agency president and
Senator Griggs people are making
eighteen thousand dollars a year
as far as I can tell and these
people would no longer have to
pay income tax is that correct
Senator Griggs agency
presentation that's that's
correct and I I just received
I think this president of the
average selling price was more a
little more than forty seven
thousand is that what you seven
of the severance Mr president
center that's the information I
Who what they get if they live
on so security is less than half
of the average income in the
state of New Mexico.
This would potentially relieve
And Senator Griggs if I may if
it's okay for me to continue
advocating that appreciate the
opportunity to do so.
and so this also removes the
Senator Ivey Soto and Mister
president Senator Griggs
is that my understanding is that
that is one of the issues that
president senator Senator Griggs
this presentation that is how I
understand it as well.
Senator so the and Mr president
is this president and Senator
Griggs.
that's is that the full amount
of the gross receipts tax.
Senator so the this president
Senator
percent of which the
nationalities would get two
point five counties one percent
and the state of New Mexico one
half of one percent.
concerned about reapplying gross
receipts tax on.
On on food gross receipts tax.
All right now I think the range
is that correct Senator Griggs
Mr president and and senator in
some county areas and some
municipalities are still below
seven in other other
Mr president a center right so
then the tax on food that would
be putting on their.
I think this president and
Center grace I I I appreciate
your willingness to to answer
questions if.
Let me just say before sitting
So that we can spend the state
resources where we need them.
by plugging a hundred million
dollar hole.
And our state budget.
And by making sure that that any
tax on food is a tax that is a
moderate tax and and this
presents Center grades one of
had is is a a G. R. T. card for
those people the working poor
that are just above the snap
level.
below the median income.
this and as we get more data but
G. R. T. has spiraled as a
result of that policy G. R. T.
has raised significantly as a
result of the policy.
And what it's also done this
And every time we give an
exemption Mr president center
requests we we end up raising
the G. R. T. on the rest of us.
And one of the death spiral on
G. R. T..
I'm not sure poor people are
actually saving money.
As a result of removing the tax
on food.
chances of passing if I say that
I plan to support it.
It is
I think this is part of what
gets us out of that spiral.
Military retirees are
entrepreneurial by nature
and tend to create jobs or they
go.
And people who subsist on social
security.
living on eighteen thousand
dollars a year.
Having to send.
Four percent of that to the
state.
Pino.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president and with the sponsor
of the bill.
Senator condylar your yield for
some questions on this amendment
You know
It seems like the G. R. T. tax
that we remove from food and you
people who buy food with
Snap benefits have to pay taxes
in in other states where they
have the food tax before we took
Mr president certainly going
back to the two when that
decision was made.
By the legislature but I I do
have some information you want
to provided the body at least as
of today.
a from a consumption tax rate
some states impose a sales tax.
some some states impose a gross
receipts tax I venture to say
Missouri Tennessee Utah
Virginia.
Tax have sort of a split system
they tax groceries.
data sort of broken out by that
must present apologized Center
rent Mr president thank you and
I and I think and I'm trying to
remember correctly but I I
believe that the federal
what I've heard and and trying
to remember
so could could you talk a little
bit about the gross receipts tax
and and you know it seems like
you know it's it's kind of
especially this four percent.
but it.
No we.
We will have a little bit more
than the the average New Mexican
what what the debate since I've
joined the legislature must
present center Brandt.
I'm has.
It is feasible to extend the
gross receipts tax to food.
even at a lower rate to join
perhaps some of those six states
collaborative and back and forth
and amendments and things are
flying right.
But I I do recognize semester
president I think what's come
out on this debate is this.
good is this kind of complicated
the gross receipts tax structure
itself is far more complicated
than the personal income tax
refundable tax credits for low
income people.
that's pretty straightforward
there's not a lot of you you
know you do that there's a lot
of reverberations right.
In our function to tax people
and so I think this debate is
incredibly important Mr
president because I submit to
the body respectfully there's
Republic Republican legislature
then to tax and spend.
Right but I I I do recognize
just the complications it's
because it's because for the
For the cities and counties will
have not have those payments
those are gonna sunset under
current law.
This present I did want to say
since the Senator I appreciate
feel sort of I recognize that
every time I go to whole foods.
You know and and especially
during session to sort of deal
with.
The process of taking on baking
So I think I think what we're
talking about here is really
what are we learning from a very
cautionary tale I tend to think
it's a good idea as a matter of
policy not to tax food.
Very blunt it's very hard to go
in there and to fine tune things
so what have we done we just
create these broad exemptions.
the answer your question well it
depends what your question is
thank you Mr president.
Senator Brandt thank you so much
Senator and I really appreciate
your your sharing with us you
had to be very very careful
about how I spend at the grocery
store but now that we have an
empty nest
So much about the same amount of
income have three less miles to
feed.
know more things we want to eat
and not have to
eat ground beef and make
something out of it every day
and so you know it just seems
like is one way that that we
approach on this whole issue
would be for us to maybe put
together small team that would
really look through the tax code
and really come back with a real
of when I first came the
legislature as a as the LFC
staff for.
It was a few years at that point
maybe wanted to.
submit to the body Mr president
respectfully I mean and that was
great work in a lot of people
invested a ton of time and those
are challenging questions.
I think that the the fundamental
choices before us are
To start pushing those issues to
the forefront of the debate so
you know I think one clear
example is just New Mexico just
president and I'll submit to
Senator brands question.
That another option we need to
seriously look at is perhaps not
necessarily raising the rate of
Arizona right.
All radical does not.
Well Colorado imposes a flat
tax.
Reiser hard to compare to but
Texas where they don't have as
much federal land is we do
and and so the picture becomes
complicated but I think the
fundamental questions are clear
so much present in closing right
restructuring of the income tax
two years right and a lot of the
assumptions we make behind those
and I think we need to really
that those through the interim
let's just all sort of committed
to it and I'm certainly
committed on a bipartisan basis
to do that Mr president.
Thank you Mr president Center I
couldn't agree more no more task
but I guess that's kind of like
a sub Task Force of with the
sponsor of the amendment yield
Senator Griggs deal.
Mr president I'd be happy you
but has we're talking about
putting the the
The exempting the social
security income.
That someone can receive on
school security do not your alms
laser maximum payment do you
know.
Senator Griggs.
Mister Mister president senator
I don't get the normal social
security income yet but
Senator
As we're looking at the military
retirement I know there's
another bill.
That's been going around we've
years
The is this one have a cap in
their of you know the next
dollar amount of military
retirement pay that would be
exempt to do you know I mean
Mr president Senator the the
issue with our military primer
some of the bills that have been
discussed around.
Some cap it at a level.
been introduced it remove the
tax from social security in the
tax for military retirement that
gives you away or shows you way
that you can pay for that Mr
question on school security
actually one of our colleagues
got me the answers or course and
and actually if if you wait
until you're seventy the maximum
so this would only though your
memory here would only simple
portion of the income that's
from social security correct
this kind of thing thing the
military wouldn't exempt all of
retirement income there's no.
Capping of that.
Mr president center so it
doesn't exempt all income.
learn something a couple months
ago
is there a age at which you
reach in the state of New Mexico
that you no longer pay personal
income tax.
Senator Griggs.
In state New Mexico you no
longer have to pay so any tax
any personal income taxes so all
of us that are getting closer
and closer to that age that is
if you reach a hundred the taxes
portion is not sure life anymore
so that's kind of an interesting
thing about our tax code
income after seventy or
anything.
Senator.
Mr president center could you
repeat that question this
presents Senator maybe we could
that.
Thank you Mr president Center I
appreciate it I was hoping to
get a little more information to
to ask you a couple of the
questions but it's been delayed
discuss we really need to have
a real look at our tire Tax Code
you and I've talked many many
times about the Swiss cheese the
fact that we have in our state.
thank you etcetera disciplina.
Thank you Mr president I just
had a couple of quick comments
and I think Senator Griggs for
doesn't mean you're not paying
you wouldn't be paying taxes.
If we restored the food tax
because the snap benefit card
really gets a family about
Most of the benefit of our food
tax elimination does go to the
higher income families as
Senator Candelaria pointed out
the ones that are that are
taxes second thing I think
because I looked at the social
security
limiting the tax on social
security a few years ago because
so my constituents are saying
this to be a great thing it
dollars a year of taxable
income.
And so the vast majority of
social security recipients are
getting twenty seven thousand
dollars of of of social security
benefit for eliminating the
social security tax would
largely the fault of those who
were.
Pretty wealthy who are already
you know up in the in the upper
you're on to something with this
with this bill and I think you
know as you refine it for the
future we ought to keep a couple
things in mind thank you Mr
president.
President the sponsor you.
Senator Griggs deals.
Income is New Mexico's evolution
comes forty seven thousand the
average household income is
forty seven thousand the average
So.
The question is.
Maybe I missed the first part of
this discussion and if you add
up all the.
The social security a military
and then the savings from the
whole harms will is it a plus or
minus or is it a wash.
twelve million seven hundred
thousand dollars for fiscal year
twenty twenty two.
The numbers for social security
for the same time eighty three
Thank you for that information I
agree with senator Candelaria.
Who says unfortunately we have
of possibilities during the the
year around so
Hi certainly with the.
This I think is interesting and
for bringing this forward
Senator thank you Mr president
thanks Sierra Sierra Lara.
things with the body just
briefly
You know in terms of the income
tax.
That the rest do sixty some
percent.
Right.
the deaths of the discussion
we've had today.
On this particular issue I'm a
I'm I'm unable to support it
Of the amendment that.
In the first.
Years.
becomes a net negative of
approximately twenty two
million.
And so you know I I do agree
We've come a long way in the
discussion on on on those
particular components Mr
president.
just how important and
significant and transformative.
Essentially this restructuring
of the income tax we are doing
today is and it's such an
important component of that
become an revenue negative once
it is phased out so thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Griggs for a second time with
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much was present with the
sponsor of the bill you'll
and and pass a couple of these
questions and and I'll be happy
to supplement some information
if you need but as president
senator Candelaria you
Senator you're that hot hold
I certainly I certainly want the
right information to come out
today so if we need to clarify
that Mister president welcome
that was present Senator Ivey
Soto that was present Senator
in New Mexico except for city's
under ten thousand in
population.
Cities under ten thousand
population we have a hundred and
six cities.
Counties under forty eight
thousand.
Hold harmless remains permanent.
Of our of our thirty three
counties.
Of the forty thousand so twenty
one of our thirty three counties
hold harmless remains permanent.
This presents senator Candelaria
On hold harmless payments unless
we do something different.
This president Senator
Candelaria I don't I don't know
if you have any thoughts on that
I will we get back to the bill I
will ask an expert witness I
just Rick rude realize are
referred to.
someone as an expert but they're
not qualified yet but his body
phrase unintended consequence.
But I'm gonna use the phrase
unintended consequences that
stem from that policy action as
a senator I was through is
Sir Senator thank you Mr
president and the with the
sponsor of the amendment you
know that that's okay Senator
cedar county.
Senator Griggs Mr president
center.
On to my bill we stop the hold
harmless payments.
completely in and impose the tax
you.
I
no further debate on the
amendment Senator Griggs to
close on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Mexico right now is it the hold
harmless payments that are being
made by the state of New Mexico
to municipalities and counties.
that loss in revenue is to
impose additional taxes on other
things.
Show whether it's food that gets
challenge that we as the
Legislature.
In twenty thirteen.
about unintended consequences.
Here we are.
Mr president members of the body
what that means what that means
children's toys when they by any
number of things they pay more
tax on that today.
Because municipalities and
But I understand to as being a
mayor from Schmidt size
community.
Where we're headed what we've
called and Mr president and
to the issue that's forthcoming
Mr president members of the body
I hope you can maybe find that
past taxation and revenue
committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety one as three
times amended do now pass and I
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg no Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos Now Senator
Gonzalez.
one Senator Hamblen now Senator
Hemphill no Senator Hemphill now
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Kernan.
Senator Kernan now Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez now Senator
Senator Neville yes senator
Neal.
Senator D. should be no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
Senator Pirtle no senator Paul.
Senator pope no Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez no senator
Sanchez.
Lopez now Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator.
sold.
Stewart Senator Stewart no
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman no senator Wirth
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Seven thirty three.
Senate we do have another
important Senator Griggs of them
go to you.
Would you have another floor
amendment the retreat.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house taxation and
explained eminent thank you Mr
president I moved Senate floor
amendment number one to house
taxed revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill two
ninety one has three times
separation of the question here.
As during the first day we talk
a lot about the social security
tax and think there's a lot of
is the second harshest.
Social security was created in
nineteen thirty five to list
seniors out of poverty FDR did
not if they are in Congress more
tax social security until
nineteen ninety the state's
taxed so security was enacted as
a single line on page twenty
nine of a comprehensive tax bill
attention the most in a fence
around the building at the time
Mr president our current and
And until the seniors income tax
bills are due the following
year.
No other benefits such as
Medicare.
Medicaid TANF benefits snap or
food stamps are subject to such
are taxed just once either when
a person puts the money in such
as a Roth IRA Mr president or
when they take it out such as
the traditional IRA or four oh
one K..
state taxes taxes the money that
is taken out of their paychecks.
For instance your paycheck Mr
president he defer be lieutenant
governor you pay your source
unfair because a majority of
seniors are trying to survive on
social security alone nearly two
thirds of Americans have nothing
saved for their retirement and
what a percent of New Mexicans
Mexicans paying taxes from
security benefits have incomes
under seventy five thousand
dollars.
The tax particular person on the
outliving their own personal
savings Mr president.
Seniors have suffered this
portion we from the impact of
the pandemic over the past year
and this tax is an added burden
New Mexico's economy because of
security benefits have an
economic multiplier effect every
dollar from social security
benefits generates about one
The social benefits that go to
New Mexicans every year already
help support over fifty two
thousand jobs in New Mexico was
president.
statewide supporting more jobs
and generate additional G. R. T.
revenue for our state.
Along with increased net income
for seniors who are already
According to the twenty sixteen
analysis by US news and World
Report New Mexico ranks
favorably on many of the seniors
that seniors look for when
they're considering where to
both cherish our cultural
heritage here in the state.
In our recreational
opportunities just talking as
senator of our to do senator
stands as a as a negative way
for staff friendliness the fact
that New Mexico heavily taxed so
security benefits as a major
reasons why Kiplinger is money
magazine Yahoo finance what hope
among the others considered
benefits with that Mr president
I stand ready for questions
Senator debating senator ma'am
number one and all you'll to the
sponsor senator Candelaria.
I I do not support the amendment
is on friendly at this time.
For a few reasons first a change
of this nature just one
technical step perspective would
internal structures and none of
that's been accounted for in
house bill two secondly house
bill two is just been concurred
to by the house.
And the cost of this though
at the closing hours of our
session with the budget having
passed and I just think it's
important for the body to
consider.
Not necessarily as a critique of
perhaps approve senator Morris
points in far.
Right but but we hear the costs
in FY twenty two it would be
eighty three million FY twenty
impossible to find an
appropriate solution right I I
don't think that that sends
anyone away from the discussion
table but because of where we
Mr president.
Thank you to have further debate
senator for the.
Thank you for merry much Mr
president need the sponsor to
supportive by the way I am fully
sort of introduce legislation on
this myself to to resent so
security but again we're at the
point where the eleventh you
know our here and we're going to
Senator Candelaria Mr president
I think if we were to do this
now quite frankly would put the
if this were added to the bill
and or signed into law.
sort of adjustments even to take
money from reserves to cover
this kind of shortfall that's
not just an automatic process.
Preparation contingency fund
those so I think it would quite
frankly put us it the budget out
of balance by.
I probably the full amount by
between eighty to ninety million
topic and and the last time we
did it was seventy two million
dollars to hear that it's gone
up ten million dollars that's
that's something but that's the
only reason I can't supported
just because of the threat to
the place where we're at right
Is present will the sponsor the
meal please.
Mr president I yield.
Thank you Mr president and
senator first elected chair
But what I've noticed is there
has been just in my short time
there is clearly been
opportunity to get this passed
even in my short time.
So I I hear people on both sides
we can't get it done what we're
not getting it done.
I just think that's a fact some
you know I don't know what's
going on that's beyond the scope
of of this conversation but I
just wanna be clear for the
exempted we would get it done.
If there wasn't some sort of
obstacle out there.
Some sort of members of this
body either in the house and or
the Senate that don't like this
idea.
help help G. R. T. at some point
could you could you elaborate on
on how that would work senator
Morris thank you Mr president
opening is that the
social security a budget in the
house that actual economic
multiplier of one point seventy
one dollars for every dollar in
reasons for that for our budget
process.
We're all aware that there is
definitely economic impacts of
this so that was scored a three
every dollar that we're not
taxed would be spent in our
local retail stores our mom
pause of for shops in around New
Mexico and on the internet Mr
state's somewhere around sixty
to sixty to sixty to seventy
million like Senator Padilla
mention in his office
legislation he did a couple
years ago was senator whites are
with G. R. T. so that we do
scored at eighty three million
just because that's the way we
do our budget Mr president but
they're they're true cost will
haven't done a lot of tax work
but maybe maybe you can help me
understand that what I hear you
saying is we're doing a very
simple calculation with the
eighty two eighty three million
dollars are going to be kept by
these retirees in those retirees
are gonna go out and and spend
those dollars in our our local
economy is that kind of what
you're you're saying that we're
not taking that into account.
of the state of New Mexico the
legislative process.
To not to do dynamics are
financial scorn and there's a
lot of reasons for that the the
can be played a lot more into
things but we do know economic
theory the invisible hand that
Senator Candelaria just read
about recently and he started
making how can I make choices of
our baskets of goods that they
choose in New Mexico of course
there will be spent elsewhere on
vacations and internet shopping
know what bills like this that
it on there is a positive
economic effects of eighty three
million dollars what was scored
at but we know the economic
activity generated from that a
that's why the the economist
users say for every dollar
sentence so security benefits
house a local multiplier effect
seventy one so it's really good
return on a return on that money
circulated in the economy.
Thank you thank you Mr president
center he if you and if you
don't have the answer to this
Out of state to New Mexico does
it take into account the fact
that will just to give an
example both my my for house
district my current sent
district hello retirees center
And some of the things that are
on people's minds are of course
taxation they they wanna make
sure that around a money in the
in their older years and then
health care of course
security and I'm moving to you
know wherever moving to some
other state that does that I am
exploring taken to that add that
into account as well as someone
retirees I'm gonna move there
and then they move and then they
they pay G. R. T. so are there
those dynamic scoring things it
does that take into the into
the huge benefits of this
amendment is that.
Currently since we do tax this
and seniors looking at where to
retire and seniors including
where they're going to retire of
course family were their
grandchildren live on the
quality of life is important or
unique history and culture and
museums and haul the things that
many of us enjoy so that is part
of the equation of course in
your field press presents your
field agency presidents present
your field doctors committee
health care is very important to
And in the over the there's a
number of questions but without
question one of the part of
that.
Matrix but people are looking at
when they're looking at retiring
would be with the tax load is
need to be able to be able have
income coming in for twenty five
to thirty years if you have a
plan out the rest of your life
to make sure we have those
resources.
fortunate to have that home paid
off and you're able sell it and
downsize as you're going to
retirement.
So that tax on social security
benefits as part of that matrix
Picasso Utah Colorado if they
want errors on if they want this
culture and sunshine in our part
of the state of the country.
So so what's were competing for
added burden of missions are
burdensome present one or the
other cost of paying for
children's education and those
keeping retirees in the state
you know I know Mr president's
our doctor that we have lost
people who when they retire
moved to Phoenix or Tucson or
the health care looking at tax
structure want to make sure
their income and there are
resources lasts longer in the
constructs that out and have a
high quality of life in Arizona
much better than theirs in our
cultural diversity in the things
we charge about New Mexico are
much greater.
And the legislative to the west.
Thank you Mr president I like to
all the way through what's in
our zone a to a now so not
Nevada.
So it's a scrimmaging at the
succeeded from Australia
economically because it had
better Path tax policies over
is better tax policy.
Thing is present center you know
I I and unfortunately you have
to forgive me for this I believe
you have made a major mistake
in your argument.
that is in the list of retirees
probably well I don't know foods
the fifth food food so so we're
just I'm of the tax but however
they they had to move out of
state because they couldn't get
the healthcare they need for
their family and they moved
Arizona had a cancer patient who
further care that he needed and
couldn't get it and we tried and
tried and tried and tried I made
phone calls texts emails
whatever it was we couldn't get
so certainly going to be tough
to compete for retirees and and
I think it's time that we start
to become a little more friendly
like Denny's I I love I love
going to Denny's so you guys can
make fun of me for that but just
some of the you know me a place
where me and my my son like to
go every now and then I like to
know just so you know we're just
going to charge you less money I
don't think it's out of the
kindness of their heart I think
it's a calculated financial move
they know that you know if they
actually make more money and
that's kinda what I hear you
saying Senator is there's a lot
of benefits to to showing some
breaks for our seniors we can
boil it down of the that's kind
of I I just think of the the
senior discount at a place like
that
you know that that some of our
you know stores and other places
strong signal to our seniors
and and I think it the the
financial impact just as you
said Senator I agree it's not
going to be just the flat
analisis multiply the number of
And lastly I would say this is
probably little little deeper
than we need to go but I don't
believe that taxation is moral
is a moral issue I just think
it's a something that should be
my thoughts on taxation.
And it's it's not a it's not a
moral issue I think for some
it's become a moral issue about
you know redistribution of
wealth and the sort of things
how are we as a society viewing
of old old people are we are we
doing what I think are native
American cultures do well and we
them and I think in in a more
traditional American culture
we're we're losing that for some
reason you know it's like bad to
get older you're just you know
that one of the reasons that we
I just that you know that we're
we have this problem one of the
reasons were one of the only
states that still do this is I I
think we have a problem with how
face the reality that I feel
like our society's doesn't
doesn't value that group of
people the way we should.
And then we look we look at all
moral issue but I think it's a
reflection upon New Mexico that
we haven't done anything about
this and I think it's it shows
where our values are so I think
it's really time to to really
more in society when you talk to
people you look at.
Contemporary movies and TV shows
and things like that it's just I
just feel like we're we're
losing it a little bit with
wisdom on part of I'm kind of
lonely in here to have a quorum.
Our chief clerk there's been a
request.
Call the roll.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Your.
Senator serve on this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Hamblen.
You.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Lopez.
You.
Senator Lopez my Senator
McKenna.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez.
You're here.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo
Senator sold.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
There is a quorum present madam
president.
for you suppress madam president
as US doctors committee had for
okay thank you Sir committees
thank you madam president and
that that's about where I was
just going to finish up that
text messages during the the
quorum check of.
One one person I guess really
likes what I'm saying the other
person didn't the personalized
there some seniors watching I
think we need to take that into
account.
The other person that that sent
me a text didn't like what I was
saying you said basically that
seniors response hold rich
people.
I just I just you know it if
that's an and that's one of the
concerns Mr madam president and
senator what when I let off in
my line of questioning for your
amendment.
stereotype that that I am that
that that's holding us back for
people that for some reason.
That we haven't got this done
and I I would suspect that it's
know how those two go together I
mean I do know some some older
older folks that have you know
work for a long time they saved
up money and and and and they
of fixed fixed income or pension
or whatever it may be and these
folks are very tight with their
with their budgets Senator and
And these are folks that are
kind of paycheck to paycheck
there on like I said they're on
a fixed income they're having
worsening health problems is the
agent thank you to treat these
present center I am in support
of this amendment because I do
think it shows value to our our
seniors I think it's good tax
policy thank you know we seem to
having to support the amendment
thank you ma'am present.
Thank you next on the menace
Senator Brandt.
He's not okay with the sponsor
of the amendment yield madam
president Senator Brandt I
yield.
That actually did what you're
doing.
you know happen to those bills.
right now in center guy a goes
actually had a bipartisan bill
on this issue so madam president
I could commit double you'll to
need to of question repeated.
Members we can start over again
if you'd like a jam so then
present senators to phonics you
are available just applauding
present around president centers
of arts what happened to the
legislature can you give us a
history of the Legislative.
Process that happen on the so
security bill that you Senator
good point thanks for bringing
that up you wanted to also
history of what's ever happened
to this this proposal madam
president center so madam
president center I couldn't tell
you the reason nation of the
discuss this topic and the one.
Avenue madam president Senator I
don't think we've traveled down
I can't tell you madam president
and senator how many years.
Members and maybe Center Geiger.
Senator I don't see a sponsor of
hearing but I could be wrong
with that I know when we
introduce our one Senator white
was service presence Senator
Brandt it's a never never got a
hearing during his last term
transportation yield.
Senator Shendo to yield for a
question.
Madam madam president the U. S.
so you feel madam president
The.
The so security tax exclusion
Bill.
now discussing matters about
bill referrals I would
respectfully.
rise and a half point of order
thank you request a ruling of
the chair.
Is.
Roger.
hearing on or not yes
Hold on.
Hi my other chart with me of I I
know we held all the
about almost twenty one bills
back that may have been one of
them but I don't recall the
Senator Coleman who's a sponsor
can remember.
Thank you madam president and
committees I appreciate yielding
So madam president Senator so we
have a bill in the house and the
and revenue.
And in the center I can't refer
it was actually heard and just
held there or if it was never
Madam president servers.
On chairman president no he was
really back to me
yes they could have had and I
think that's the issue that I
in a lot of us signed on to his
bipartisan effort madam
president Senator and it that
year his last year in this
chamber it was never heard Madam
as you just mentioned Mr amount
have here that who's actually
ever heard this year so my
presence is important debate
that we should have and I'm glad
we're talking about this on the
floor madam president Senator.
Thank you madam president thank
As a tax committee as to whether
the policy should be that we
submit to the finance committee
and that we recommend that this
be done and yeah we have
madam president we've had sixty
days to decide whether or not we
believe it's the right thing to
Yeah there's a lot of bills that
you know a lot of tax bills this
year.
When we looked at UNM and then
we held we never made a
decision.
good policy maybe for a couple
weeks to hold those bills in the
committee why we talk about it
and decide which ones you want
to do but at some point we have
to make a decision.
which bills come out of the
committee or not as a matter
present that really concerns me
and I think that's one of the
reasons were bringing this
ammendment today.
Is because we have heard very
then present center how many
states to do so you in your
opening still to Axel security.
Madam president senator I
believe it's thirteen states
across the country actually
support this amendment I think
is the right thing to do for
senior citizens I have yeah I
don't hear a ton.
Of your time emails I don't get
taxing social security and how
we're one of the only states
that doesn't why are we doing
that to our seniors have a lot
of senior citizens the that
We taxable for now and then were
taxed a second time.
And I think it's time and since
we can't seem to have the
Senator for bringing this
ammendment.
Thank you any other a.
A Senator share your turn.
Mr president Mr president I I do
have a a question for the
sponsor if he's willing to yield
here are you willing to you
in how that would affect it in
in the what we could do about
that have you thought about any
kind of income cap on this madam
president Senator.
unique it's social and security
so it's
a unique program because you
gotta remember madam president
that and so it is part of the
social safety network on program
that FDR set up it is not our
cap all of income only up to a
your career at the higher level
you don't actually get more
money back for so security for
so then present so for instance
so that there is a progressive
nature wants you to hit below
that cap so it doesn't actually
cap on on income in the the Max
benefit I believe as was talked
that's what your benefit is
calculated at your Max benefit
is going to be about three three
one hundred dollars
month so there is that cap there
madam president Senator one
factor of the the nature so
security is it's not a true
Appreciate the comments earlier
about to the wealthy.
A more if there you know that
they have other you know what's
important buffered or decided to
move here by
social security security being
tax for that so if you are a
high wage earners you're paying
that tax at a percentage in your
limit so you are paying more
into social security and then
you're being taxed afterwards
when you're pulling the money
out and so you are being double
twelve other states don't do
that because I get the the
social issue of taxing the rich
but the nature of the taxation
and makes us less competitive
we're trying to recruit our
seniors who lived in New Mexico
our state in New Mexico and
quite frankly take away
Senator.
So
madam president Senator.
I know that will open again and
talk about diversifying our our
economy
does Florida tax social security
agency president or madam
madam chair we see if that's the
service on my form.
Knowing maybe of my expert
the list in front of me hope the
other states I just know that
there's twelve other states are
currently do it.
So madam president Senator while
his trying to get a an expert
It was it was the kickstart for
the strong economy of Florida
when when retirees start to move
down there and part of that was
that stuff I think that that
right there started there
economic growth now of course
they have all kinds of
industries down there but just
they actually had some
disposable income.
I think that was a great start
and as we talk about new
industry every day new
industries but then every day we
be beneficial to New Mexico if
we had the higher earner.
Retiree coming because then they
would buy houses and they would
And so the very cap on this I
think would be if if we're even
considering I think would be
counterproductive to the
this is not an industry this
isn't mining although mining I
think is a pretty useful this
isn't.
Any kind of manufacturing that's
And I think helping those small
New Mexico on businesses is
exactly what we're looking for.
And so I know that there was the
talk about this cap.
new industry to really get
things going to really set us
off on some other industries and
this would certainly be a more
stable.
Sustainable.
make sense to use that work out
for you.
make sure it's alright with you
first all right ahead thank you
we'll say hello to whoever was
on the phone.
Yes Representative.
going to go to your question
right there madam president.
His Colorado Connecticut Kansas
Minnesota Missouri Montana
those of the thirteen hopefully
twelve plus New Mexico so I find
it interesting then present
center that what you were just
referring to Colorado and Utah
you know I think there's a lot
going into the matrix of where
people choose to live
retirees might go to you to
offer different decisions on
them I want to go to Colorado
issues it is definitely a
competitive disadvantage Amanda
present this is actually coming
from the A. R. P. as the source
for the told you that beginning
think it's real important for a
competitive advantage that we
someone who is looking to return
the southwest that we're not
tying our hands and actually
gives us a competitive advantage
you to all agency then present
Senator.
Thank you madam president
Senator I noticed that most of
those states except for Utah and
Colorado were states that were
cold.
you look at some of those those
places around Phoenix
beautiful places that that
people just want to go to and
just a minute ago and we could
tap into that.
Because frankly met madam
president Senator.
We're nicer than Arizona I mean
mix of of people in the exact
same natural resources and.
And yet somehow Arizona.
Has has really bloomed and we
have not.
Again I think that that's just
to kickstart that we need to get
our economy going because once
you have that then you do have
other industries.
Because even though I love oil
and gas madam president you know
with I also know and you know
this too that we need other
We have started a new industry
right here right now right
today.
We can do it.
So madam president thank you for
Thank you senator so.
We have Senator Baca that's
supposed to be next I don't know
if the Senator would like to
date.
The amendment.
experience has been madam
president and you know Senator
Brandt stated correctly earlier
we had opportunities this year
both in the house and in the
senator Candelaria bring set up
about the budget he's correct in
a lot of respects it it probably
is too late to do anything with
this without impacting reserves
practice I do bankruptcies madam
chair so I get to see real real
real life and first hand the
seniors madam chair that come
monthly I mean take home seven
seventy take home eight fifty
take call nine hundred if
they're lucky some of them a
our necessities such as clothing
we're not talking any
extravagances madam chair we're
talking about the most basic of
needs so if they have even one
can come put a lien on their
house over over a car madam
chair that has been repossessed
store or some credit issue that
they've had and so you know
you know that might be the case
for some people madam chair
maybe their social security is a
supplemental type of income for
them because they have either
really just so they could do
something extra that month or or
so they can have some of some
extravagance maybe a little
better food or or maybe a a trip
is tragic and and really hurtful
to some of these people that
haven't had the benefit of other
retirement programs or maybe
along the way have a have had
so that the rent payment will be
affordable can you imagine madam
chair and body aware of where
you're receiving nine hundred
dollars and your first payment
kind of apartment does that get
you I know you can get something
where I live that's livable it's
certainly did not going to be
full of amenities or anything
going to be something with newer
appliances if you have a
disability and you're that age
it's not going to be something
that is equipped for disabled
person in fact it's going to be
miss madam chair three hundred
fifty dollars go ahead and
divide that over thirty days and
figure out what your food cost
is for three meals.
About ten dollars a day.
Ten dollars a day can you
maybe looking for a ride to food
pantry to get extra meals so
that you can be and that's what
we're looking at we're looking
at social security.
So there are those again more
happens when you have three
hundred dollars left after you
pay your rent though you don't
have Christmas you don't have
holidays you don't have even the
money to buy food for those
get by on entitlement programs
and really what's the reason for
that white flight require we
enable to pass these bills I've
been here a short time compared
many of my colleagues but
for some reason so I looked up
the bills this year.
I saw the house had a bill that
bill got shut down well didn't
get shut down it was politely
went through one committee for
three narrowly escaped it never
sought second committee never
saw the light of day again there
was another one on this side I
hurt and they didn't get heard
because we don't care.
We don't care enough about our
elders to treat them correctly
expensive things but enough to
eat how about that just enough
to eat.
We went through the we will now
through.
The the rant and the food the
all the time you still need to
go buy your groceries you still
need to get out to your doctor's
appointments some people don't
have sons and daughters and
family to take them around so
and purchase a vehicle somewhere
that maybe isn't within their
budget now they have a very
small car payment think about
what we pay madam chair we K.
some people four hundred five
you put gas in the car when
you're getting a thousand
dollars a month you need at
least three hundred fifty for
food a single person that's with
iris standard state.
You're making a car payment of
Madam chair of you ever seen a a
a person of advanced stage
trying to change the oil.
You know that that that's that
just doesn't work if you're
eighty years old I'm sorry for
can't even have a pet because
really can't afford pet food.
These people many of them have
no family they have no one to
turn to and the state is
This state is unable to make a
choice between its elders and
that and that money that ninety
million.
Madam chair I called on this
body as we come in next year and
this is the very basic this is a
very basic of needs for people
we need to commit ourselves
madam chair to finding that
money somewhere else surely
ninety million dollars to all
the senior citizens of the state
that's not what's happening
madam chair.
Instead we're just allowing them
to keep it so we're not mailing
out cheques were not
discipline ourselves to part
with that money I'm alright with
it for those people that are the
most important in our lives the
people that raised us the people
that race does others.
allow them to keep so I don't
need the sponsor to yield I just
wanted to point that out and I
will support this amendment
today based on that just for the
discussion purposes if nothing
close thank you madam president
and I just want to close with
some statements earlier talking
about Arizona won't belabor it
about equal in size and that's
actually not true madam
president
we were actually we be New
Mexico when we came state six
weeks before sona was twice the
and and what's happened since
and is backed with remarkable on
Arizona's basically had a fresh
start much better
food as was mentioned earlier
our culture our history this is
where my family has been since
the sixteen nineties have more
grandmother so side of the
where a lot of this is where my
family is there for ten twelve
generations it's hard to tell
sometimes we look at our
history.
we are also the average middle
class family is doing better
and is one of the more our New
Mexico in the population
obviously has skyrocketed for as
long as economic opportunities
you look at how our towns around
Arizona Tucson and elsewhere
home for the average family is
and better access to schools and
opportunities for jobs and
money in those communities and
then you don't have to have the
expenditure of raising the
spending on schools for their
children because our children
resources on law enforcement and
community services and go to
many of these towns like Tucson
ariz elsewhere they have really
nice so Community
profitability's sports
fairness of it madam president.
Your pain is taxed twice will
pay it
Hana retire after sixty five or
sixty seven I'll pay that tax
accepting timing issues.
Principal wise your tech double
taxation
Because it's just a doesn't work
when you're paying paying and
twice and so you can make the
decision you're paying and in
New Mexico this this income tax
not the entire the question on a
president or stand that was a
lot of parts of that equation
tax is one of those parts and
there are two people that we
lose in New Mexico then present
for House Bill two ninety one as
three times hopefully four times
amended and ask for a roll call
vote then president.
We aren't final passage of
Senate floor amendment number
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
senator Brandis senator Byrd
Senator syringes noted Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen no
Senator Hemphill Senator
Hemphill now Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey passes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez now Senator
McKenna no Senator McKenna no.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
for the year.
Senator probe no Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez no Senator
songes.
Senator Sweetser yes Senator
twenties.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator sold.
Senator shows no Senator
Stefanics.
Tallman.
No explainable Senator Tallman
our senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth Now Senator Woods.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gonzalez no
Senator Gonzales no Senator
Hickey.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics no.
My vote of sixteen in the
affirmative twenty two in the
negative Senate floor amendment
you madam president thank you
members of the state Senate
you're welcome no are debated
the bill actually first let's go
to.
Get out.
Sir Tom.
All right.
Churton suite.
support of the bill
And if I'm incorrect center if
you correctly I appreciate it
but I I don't believe there's
any tax increases left in this
bill at all this bill literally
thank you madam president center
and I I just thank you for that
I thank you for working on this
bill for making sure this bill
and then the tax increases and I
fully support the bill fully
support the measure but I just
president thank you thank you
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr presidents
presented rule twenty madam.
Pursuant to rule twenty dash one
debate anyway so Senator
Candelaria to close thank you Mr
president I truly appreciate the
depth and breadth of the
discussion we've had today but I
want to kind of bring us back
undertake that will benefit
ordinary hard working New
Mexicans not folks who can
afford teams of lobbyists to
come here and get credit Sen
Income we have a lot of
discussion yet to undertake.
I do want to point out for the
body that the bill before you.
In its increases to elector the
to deductions under elector and
their benefit will be greatest
by passing this bill.
Ultimately Mr madam president.
the other thing I just want
income is actually never subject
to transit to taxation not in
traditional sense double tax.
But in closing madam president
on the bill before you.
I truly believe that is
something that we on a
bipartisan basis can truly be
proud of and with that miss
madam president I move that
We are final passage of house
taxation revenue may substitute
for House Bill to ninety one as
far as amended and the secretary
will clerk will call the roll.
Wirth.
Senator Byrd yes senator combos
Senator combos yes senator
Candelaria Senator Candelaria
yes senators about this Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hermio.
Senator Emelia Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
Neville.
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator Bob yes Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator songes.
Yes.
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gallegos yes.
amended has passed the Senate
senator Candelaria.
Senator monastics thing thank
you Mr president I I mean that
Correct I will say next year we
are going to begin that process
we're going to start setting
aside money plan for future M.
and lay a good plan and get an
agreement and get everybody in
increase thank you.
Sierra Lara Mr president thank
you thank you to the members of
the New Mexico state Senate.
given for built up front we will
come back to item forty five but
we do have the capital outlay
bill which we need to do next
I'm handing out Senate
these so the duplicate house
bill those are the two bills on
the supplemental calendar so
Mister president.
Thank you Mr president and and I
didn't have an opportunity to do
this earlier and I don't want to
wait until we were here late at
night but today is actually my
parents birthday both of them
and my dad turned eighty years
birthday so I just want to you
know just the body to to join me
in wishing my parents a happy
birthday.
Thank you Mr president nabbing
eleven fifty nine AM I move we
adjourn until twelve or one PM
the Senate will come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
Judiciary Committee there is no
adjourn until twelve or one PM
the Senate will come order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show that all those present in
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee.
There's no objection it is so
ordered thank you Senate office.
The Senate will come order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in this
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee
there's no objection it is so
ordered.
consent of the Senate that
sponsorship of Senate bills the
committee substitute for Senate
bill fifteen and one ninety nine
be changed from Santo Ivey Soto
Center I'm notice is coming so
yeah sounds cool seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
Thank you.
Senator Wirth.
Rodriguez or item number one on
Senate supplemental counter
number one house taxation
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two eighty five as
amended with emergency cost
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two eighty five as
amended with the emergency
clause on final passage has been
taken and that it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution.
here we no objection welcome Mr
Abbey.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
president this is the capital
outlay bill we do every year
following funds four hundred
seventy seven point one million
from the severance tax bonds
eighteen point six million from
the general fund and twenty two
statewide for higher education
institutions and special schools
and so on the bill also includes
thirty million for tribal
projects statewide.
projects statewide such as roads
water systems health and public
safety facilities cultural
facilities and other community
house bill two eighty five as
amended with emergency clause.
I see no debate Senator
Rodriguez to close thank you Mr
president I move the give me a
senators we're voting to your
seats raise.
Senator Brandt give senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
How do you vote yes thank you
I'm sorry Senator chevron does
yes Senator Diamond.
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
Senator I was there.
Senator had a meal.
Senator how to me are yes
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator pope yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator said the our lovers yes
Senator souls yes senator should
panic Senator Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Steinborn is Senator
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of thirty nine of the
Fuhrman is here on the negative
the Senate thank you but I also
be for if you might I may be
allowed to thank our staff
primarily David Abbey Linda key
hole in Stevie Olson and the
do so I just want to thank the
finance committee and the
governor's office and the house
my counterpart in the house and
all appropriations and the
I thank you Mr president so
let's go to item number two on
Senate supplemental calendar one
this is house bill one of five
and that'll be senator Neville
action for placing a house bill
one oh five as amended without
the emergency clause do now pass
is now subject debate amendment
or substation.
here identical to when I had
this over on the house side
it's a bill that allows a county
or city to negotiate an
industrial revenue revenue bond
county on a proportional basis
based on their tax base within
the county.
In essence that's the concept
and I would stand for questions
Senator the main house bill one
of five.
passed by the house Senator.
Mr president it's on the house
calendar.
Senator Brandt this presents
Senator so can you explain to me
we're changing the money that
goes to the school districts
could you please explain that to
us
thank you Mr president it's a
formula if you have a county
that has say three school
they're typically out in the
Boondocks somewhere where
there's not any kids this would
allow the county to negotiate a
payment in lieu they don't have
school districts based on the
basically the millage of the
school districts within each
county so one school district
might have a fifty dollars and
millage known might have thirty
balance and so it would also
allow them to appropriate at the
dollars as opposed to maybe
being out in the Boondocks
provision that any students this
would allow the county to move
go to the school district that.
Doesn't have the students within
that county.
Mr president Sir I appreciate
that you know I I was called
risk of making him mad at me I
am
I have concerns about how it's
done normally compared to how
we're doing it now.
be the case that
and it these are different kinds
of projects in the typical IRB's
program if you look at Facebook
for example it's sitting in the
populated area of Valencia
benefit to some degree maybe not
in a fair manner but they would
benefit to sum greater degree
these transmission facilities
and generation facilities are
looking into transmission line
it goes up with is not a single
student so this would allow the
dollars that are generated from
the payment in lieu to the as
opposed to the just basic
them to move the money to the
areas in the county that
actually have students.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president and
etcetera so so this only counts
exactly.
Types of.
taxes are the.
I don't know if you're if I make
you much in general wind
typically they have not been in
the higher be statute we Adam in
there and now some of these
counties on the side that have a
significant amount of this type
of activity want to be able to
when it comes to you know used
to be that the school districts
would approve the school board
would vote on it and approved
the county or the city that is
issuing the R. B..
Of of program they would make
the decision I'm sure incomes
consultation of the schools I
don't know the legal procedure
that we change the law I guess
it was just in twenty twenty
according to the FIR
I think that we actually.
correctly today so and so it.
Really probably have more of an
issue with the previous bill
than I do with this bill thank
you.
Thank you Mr president center.
sorry house bill one of five is
amended
Without emergency clause do now
pass as for a roll call vote
Senator voting tier seats.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator surround this senators
have on does yes Senator Diamond
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
meal yes Senator Kernan.
I'm sorry.
Senator Kernan no.
Senator love this.
Senator Moores no senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator by the a yes Senator
Pinto so Senator Pinto now
Senator Pirtle.
Senator probe.
yes senator smitteez.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator severance yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes.
Mr president.
Senator souls.
Senator sold yes.
Madam curva just wanted
clarification.
clarified in the in the.
By a vote of thirty five the
affirmative three in the
of the body Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president Ms that we got
our business announcements and
miscellaneous and that order
business Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president so we're gonna go
until six o'clock and take a
one of the house will be number
seventeen House Bill fifteen
that will be me item number two
will go back to item forty five
which is Center TV Pino.
number four is item twenty house
bill two seventy Senator
Padilla.
And item number five is house
bill one ninety six regional
number two item number two is
the one I mention this morning
number forty five.
And that's Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
go to item number seventeen I
ask unanimous consent that the
record show all action for
placing House.
Taxation revenue Committee
president this bill makes
amendments to the sustainable
building tax credit with me here
as an expert is Representative
Michael Cohen people corn who's
on the phone if necessary see no
objection welcomed to the
chamber Representative.
Thank you Mr president so this
is a tax credit that's been
thirteen and twenty fifteen it's
been a collaborative project of
with a whole range of groups and
this year based on changes made
So the existing sustainable tax
credits will continue for
another.
Two years under this bill and
then there's a new twenty twenty
credits for existing buildings
and homes that install energy
star heat pumps energy star heat
pump water heaters energy star
it's got some transferability
provisions in lowincome
provisions it's been a
tremendous inducement to
came up with this so with that I
would stand for questions
Senator is very demanding house
taxidermy Committee substitute
for House Bill fifteen as
amended Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president I almost
qualify for these tax credits
but the builder already took
them so I'm not going to be
getting them so but that's okay
the they reduce the price of the
and then we looked at it and I
didn't realize until we really
got down to doing the contract
that it was a a of so over.
about the the fact that I'm
buying
That that home
so the tax credit we're changing
a little bit more removing the
and senator can you kind of give
us a rundown of why we're doing
that.
Mr president the reason we're
doing that is because our
building code has been updated
there's a transition period as a
number of different factors
under the current program that
also has bill green New Mexico
and so working with home
builders that's where we could
that the transition is happening
and the technology has improved
in the building code is changed.
Senator Brandt so much president
is basically standard that you
have to build to.
To what the silver level is that
there's rich really not a big
that's true when it comes to you
know some of the
mechanicals you know your
conditioning units your your
thank was hot water heaters
that's the new code basically
has upped the pers requirements
and so again there's and you're
right there's there's a silvers
what I think is tremendous I
really appreciate the work that
the Representative did here is
also the twenty twenty one tax
credit is for existing buildings
that there are so many homes
where you can do he Thompson
water heaters and windows and
doors inside and so that's
transition home builders want a
little more time to do it about
every three to do it and and
again tracks the the The New
Mexico.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president and I appreciate that
bring them up
to being a little bit more
energy efficient you know it
allows for you know putting in
new insulation which can be just
a huge.
Energy saver for actually a
get the biggest bang for your
Buck when it comes to
you know more energy efficiency
would you agree with that.
Senator Wirth Thomas present
of of savings and then of course
this also applies to new homes
and I think you're you're
exhibit a and I and I really
appreciated you sharing your
the home builder you know was
aware of it and that's why you
got your house for a little less
than you might otherwise have
and that's that's this program.
San Matteo and Candelario we
bought a house right in that
neighborhood and how old.
Those really old single pane
windows and really bad
insulation and they have this
stucco completely re done and it
really made our home a lot more
energy efficient and so it's one
of those things that I would
recommend people do recommend
and so if you're living in an
older home and haven't done
things to update it and I do
this not because of a claim you
know the the the green energy
Senator smitteez.
Senator it is thank you Mr
present with the sponsor you'll
please for federal to yield I do
thank you senator and you know I
is it are there any drugs or
We column.
Appliances that use water that
are involved in in this
legislation besides the I guess
this is a water heater what
Mr president etcetera the only
item that would use water is a
heat pump water heater but
some of the subsidies I've seen
end up using more water use more
electricity and I think I've
come back far but that's all
this legislation does then I
assuming that's just that.
I mean I guess it isn't I guess
the outside of the commercial
building they have look up some
plug ins to charge
working in like an office
building for their cars.
So Mister president it's just
regular cars it's not loaders I
mean it's could be people
because this does apply to
Who is is it the owner I guess
the owner of the building that
is paying for the electricity in
with they have the ability to to
think it'll work exactly as it
current status quo so if you've
got a commercial building I know
there's a there's a lawyer up
inTaos who's got a solar panel
with a plugin right underneath
for clients but the general
public couldn't come in as I
understand it under this okay
thank you and Mister president
and senator
you know once again
when we're defining what is zero
carbon.
What's frustrating for me is we
are just looking at the end
ethanol fuel and is warning of
the ninety to special in general
that sort of thing and once
again it it's kind of local how
many carbon emissions that it
takes to.
bill it's frustrating to me that
we just look at the end product
and not the entire process of of
carbon emissions and I think
everyone in this chamber is
would would agree with me on
footprint I feel like we are
under estimating but I'll move
on to the to my final point I
had a question a lot of pay
sixty six sixty five thirty
to have an inspector make that
that call like they come in and
say yes you did the thirty
percent you cross that line
how's that work.
are hers inspectors currently
that have to come in and do that
certification and like I said
this is a program that's been in
place since two thousand seven
the credit funds thank you Mr
president and the reason
bringing up is my neighbor catty
corner to me is one of those
inspectors I had a lot of
legislations with with him on
some cases where just
financially we we seem to do it
on these it it tends to be I
don't think residential my from
my understanding but it's the
big commercial projects that end
right thing to do very on
scientifically and we end up
actually spending more money and
to to actually
get the benefit even from a
numbers are real numbers but to
actually get in efficiency and a
bang for your Buck the the
lighting and the LED lighting
and everything else has to last
like you know seventy five years
it but I do have the privilege
of having a neighbor that that
does this these times of
inspections and so I I do think
it it makes a little more sense
and I kinda like this some of
the residential stuff I don't
like the commercial stuff
and so that that's just the
ongoing concern of mine but
I guess the question I have is
and I'm not sure that I can
actually explain.
What I assume.
Mr president and and Senator
Wirth that I'm I'm pretty sure
that's way that works so.
liability you're able to
transfer these to someone that
does have a tax liability.
Are these are are these just
pretty well.
private treaty deals.
is this a is this a known
market.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I'm happy to and
actually this is something that
I think is is a really.
Exciting option in the tax code
home who doesn't have the income
on the on the low income level
they're able to take advantage
of tax credit seniors that don't
have the income they're able to
take advantage of it and the way
have that tent track tax credit
transfer my guess is that
Senator Brandt contractor
probably marketed the fee and
so I think it just it helps.
A manufactured home producer who
selling homes because then they
can actually take advantage of
the tax credit lower the price
to seniors those who don't have
the income to offset because it
is an income tax credit.
In Mr.
And they built some low income
housing.
And they issued tax credits to
help finance that.
some people in Clovis there.
And she came across a gentleman
that says that total races will
Think about that in a minute.
The market is eighty cents on
the dollar and I don't have any
idea what the market is
million dollar project and I
don't remember how much the tax
credits were but you know that
was that was hundred thousand
dollars with tax credit you're
it what did that hundred
thousand dollar tax credit do
for him.
It offset.
A hundred thousand dollars worth
of taxes.
this but then you senator.
This is this is the deal but I
want you to think about now why
wouldn't it if we want to help
Instead of given.
The risk that the breadth.
that one of the changes in this
in this new version it is it is
refundable for low income folks
so there is a provision in there
for that but I'll just say that
saved immense amounts of land in
this state because folks that
own a ranch that don't have the
money to put it in put an
being able to keep the land and
not and so that's been very
successful and had a whole bunch
of support so it's it's a
broker's taking some small
outweighs that slight reduction
by opening this up to a whole
range of people that otherwise
could participate and so
broadening this for folks that
homes to be built.
You know using the standards and
that's that's saves saves it
saves energy which is why
Senator Brandt once the to buy
it's giving the broker.
Is making money off of the New
Mexico tax payer.
But you see what I mean this is
taxpayers money we're talking
about.
being.
Rated.
deal and and I understand very
well that
this is where a lot of ranches
are are traded today.
And and they are
And it's simply a policy
decision to that we think
there's a great benefit put them
under conservation easement so
they can't be developed in the
there shouldn't be any reason in
the world not to have a a a new
better energy efficient home and
appliances and and and if it if
Mr president it is if the
sponsor will yield Senator Theo
yes Mr president the am I
reading this right that says the
Mr president that's just for the
low income folks there's a
little extra benefit for the
upper lower income folks but
this is available to everyone so
hundred percent so again it's a
it's a it's an effort and that
that's a new new provision that
that's different than has been
there before but that's what you
that's the language you're
president.
Senator Senator Wirth.
Miss resume check my expert I
don't know off the top of my
head.
So Mister presidents
this the experts said she
believes it's fifty five
thousand dollars was not sure so
I wanna be careful with that I I
two thousand four hundred
dollars so so pretty close to a
but.
Always got a fact check Google.
so the median income for
Bernalillo county is forty seven
thousand four hundred of for
Lincoln County forty three
New Mexico qualifies for the
double credit.
Is that correct Mr president
center.
Senator residents are yet it is
we passed it in twenty fifteen
ran through twenty twenty five
at five million dollars a year
so there is Mr president issue I
believe about two million dollar
So Mister president senator yeah
it looks like we we've got a a
one seven million one hundred
fifty thousand dollar cap on it
this year of that cap this is
instance everybody qualifies in
New Mexico except no maybe you I
don't know but everybody else
here qualifies.
there's a double credit for that
lower level so we're all in and
this program has been in place
and and it does reach the cap
and the cap is one of those good
this one over the years has had
different lanes commercial multi
family manufactured housing and
that's been part of the the huge
they run out of money that's it
for that year.
Thank you Mr president senator
why do we put commercial
buildings in this why not just
residential.
Senator.
Alright Mister president it just
seems to me if we're going to
try to help the the pier people
in the lower income with double
credits.
The in you know that kind of
So I'm just curious is why we
decided to do something for
business after.
After a whole litany of let's be
businesses to death but thank
Thank you Mr president and more
of COVID so let's do a Senator
would like to yield and the
members of the body.
Senator.
lower income when these credits
are available and they can sell
it and if they do sell it in the
long run.
You know that with your real
those credits in the long run
they end up not owning the home
because they end up having to
move again.
So that in goal of homeownership
for those that do want to stay
where they are but yet the their
income being low does not
increase as quickly as possible
homes and that's just one thing
I've observed thank you Mr
president and senator.
Senator Wirth.
So Mister president I think the
home itself if you go ahead and
transfer the tax credit then
you're gonna have extra income
that you can use cell I think
the key thing is that.
You know the tax credit comes
referring to but that that I
think is a separate lane in the
in the actual credit itself.
Any further debate senators.
transportation committee sub
Task transportation committee
substitute for House Bill
fifteen as amended do now pass
after roll call vote senators
we're voting tier seats.
Senator Byrd dance Senator
Campos Senator Campos yes
senator Graham an audio.
Senator sure on this.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hotmail yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator pro yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Wirth is yes senator
Senator sure.
Senator sure no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator socio Senator Stefanics.
The woman as senator Wirth
Senator Stewart this Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Baca.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes.
fifteen as amended has passed
the Senate Senator Wirth.
Thank you ladies and gentleman
sent and I want to thank
Representative Ortez although I
think it's our second bill so
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president so I think what we're
gonna do is do the work up on
about that but I do think
there's some meetings and things
happening so unanimous consent
we go that order of business
committee reports.
Run that order of business
has made newly enrolled in gross
prepare Torrez signing by the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted senator
Pete Campos Senator care Carrie
a motion to the committee
report.
See no objection the committee
fort has been adopted and I'd
like to announce to the members
of the body that the officers of
Senate bill twenty seven with
emergency clause and Senate bill
three oh three has had them
under consideration in reports
that same have been duly
enrolled in grossed prepare
The general show the message
from the house has been
received.
Excuse me that the committee
reports.
Senator Hamblen th Mr president
this is the Senate have signed
an open session Senate bill
twenty seven with emergency
clause and Senate bill three oh
three.
president I'm directed to inform
the Senate that the house has
concurred in the Senate
amendments to house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has concurred in
the Senate amendments to house
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety six as amended by the
received Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business announces
miscellaneous senator Wirth.
seven PM.
