Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Hermio.
Senator Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator probe.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator songes.
Senator souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
president.
Please stand for the invocation
pledge of allegiance this
morning to be led by Senator
Burt.
Lech and Spanish to be let this
morning by Senator Lopez and the
honored by the opportunity to do
this today I'd like to share
prayer that is one of his
holiness the Dalai Lama's
favorite prayers composed by the
happiness and joy by virtue of
our good deeds may no living
creature suffer committee evil
or ever fall L. may no one be
bodies are worn with toil the
restored on finding repose.
And then they could find closing
the hungry provide food thirsty
provide hope constant happiness
and prosperity.
May there be timely rains and
bountiful harvests may all
medicines be effective and whole
again.
The frightened cease to be
afraid and those bound to be
freed the power less provide
Until then may we all assist to
dispel the mysteries of the
world a man.
Members of the Senate honored
guests and staff would you
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
stands one nation under god
Good morning everyone Senator
Peter Wirth to get us started.
There's no objection or on that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous Senators maybe
it's.
Thank you madam president
Members of the body I'm I'm very
about it's my wife's birthday
today.
My Brive seventeen years and I
took her out for breakfast in
about two minutes after he left
when I figured to be a federal
police car and that's when I
knew something really bad was
going on.
As a very heavy police presence
a hospital and is in stable
condition at least according to
the New Mexico state police so
madam president if you find
appropriate I would appreciate a
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president and thank you senator
smitteez for letting us know
where things stand and just for
up on the zoom and we're honored
to have him here and that was a
beautiful prayer to start us off
so many thanks to him also for
with his family situation and he
hopes to be here this weekend so
again has been following us of
the.
Via the web and he's where he
Senator Lopez and any other
announcements and can let us but
everyone know what we're gonna
do Senator Lopez thank you Mr
majority floor leader and madam
president unanimous consent to
What else Shendo Ivey Soto.
Thoman serve on this and
Steinborn until they return to
there's a T. shirt and a hat and
and then present would Senator
more shields.
But senator Morris yield.
prank on him this morning I was
gonna have a model the T. shirt.
For everybody watching at home
so I appreciate him doing that
but this last year this last
athletic director of Jose Barone
with us today some certificates
unfortunately you know once you
when you go to start working to
we're able to move on to bigger
and better things the of I guess
aged out of juco and they're
good they're moving on in the
the star player Anthony grant
was the player of the game and
recruiting local students to
play for them and then the coach
Kurt the I also was named south
west conference coach of the
round of applause on such a
great feat.
Over the last two years since
our last session.
We have lost two greats in legal
education here in New Mexico we
lost friend hard
he looked around the state and
he looked at the faculty any
look at the students and he said
there's something wrong here.
This school and this faculty
doesn't look like New Mexico so
His loss the other thing that he
did was he started a summer
program for incoming indigenous
law students and he was solely
responsible for increasing the
certificate to extend sincere
heartfelt heartfelt condolences
and sympathy to the bereaved
family and friends of Frederick
M. hard.
hired by Fred hard at the law
school and he worked very hard
to integrate the law school and
record and recruited many
Continue to teach at the
university of New Mexico until
he was appointed to serve on
California's third District
Court of appeal and then he got
an additional appointment to the
Angeles but always maintained as
a very strong relationship with
New Mexico and with the school
of law New Mexico and we also
Cruz Reynoso Justice I'd like to
column justice Cruz Reynoso
thank you madam madam president.
Thank you senator.
Are there other announcements.
through four and seven and eight
when we get to that point we do
have confirmations this morning
and I believe the committee
messages from the house of the
reader all right.
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill forty two
consumer and public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill forty six house joint
resolution one as amended by the
house and request the
concurrence of the Senate
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill one sixty
seven house bill one twelve as
amended by the house with
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk the
channel show the message from
the house has been received.
Madam president I'm directed to
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
The journal so the message from
the house has been received.
Senator Wirth.
reports the reader will re madam
president your finance committee
to whom is been referred Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill eight
Saying no chair or vice chair
Senator Gonzales will you move
adoption.
Madam president your tax
business and transportation
committee to whom is been
referred Senate bills I forty
four forty nine and one oh eight
has had it under consideration
and one oh eight do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Benny Shendo junior chair.
Senator Shendo.
I just ma'am senator Senator
three to be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
the federal reflected they were
bill twenty one to pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee Senate bill one eighty
three do pass and that's
referred to the finance
that's referred to the finance
committee house bill thirty nine
do pass and that's referred to
the finance committee house bill
chair Senator Shendo I move it
up to the committee report.
On a favorable committee report
adoptions seeing no objection
the committee report is adopted
and the journal of reflecting
message number thirty five dated
February for twenty twenty two
in which the governor makes the
following appointment Michael
our third Hammond P. E. state
respectfully submitted Daniel A.
Ivey Soto chair Senator had a
meal madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the committee
all the committee reports
Senator executive message number
thirty six dated February for
twenty twenty two in which the
governor makes the following
twenty twenty six the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirmed this re appointment
Senate executive letter number
forty one dated January twelve
commencing on December six
twenty twenty one and expiring
December six twenty twenty six
your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
Committee report.
We're on adoption of the
favorable committee report.
Seeing no objection committee
report is adopted in the journal
will reflect that was acted upon
not pass but that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill two thirty one
is reported without
recommendation and further
recommends that I'll be referred
Joe's of savant as chair Senator
Duhigg.
I move adoption the committee
report for now I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate agree to
be allowed to read all the
committee put reports that we
vote on them with one motion at
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
forty two is reported without
recommendation and further
recommends that it not be
referred to the committees
committee report adoption is
there objections seeing none of
the committee report is adopted
in the General reflect that we
acted upon individually.
to be germane pursuant to Senate
executive message number thirty
four and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Mimi Stewart chair
saying none the committee report
is adopted.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president Ms because that we go
about our business announcements
and miscellaneous.
No objections were back on no
Thank us madam president I'd
like to introduce guests on the
Senate floor today and I just
want to start being in the house
for eight years my wife was used
to the.
The court in the house and just
They also have my boss Donna
Martinez and husband Albert
Martinez from American sons had
asked the the.
Chamber to make welcome thank
you.
Thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go to yet
you numbers that we go to
senator Ortiz Pino at.
the other day I asked a Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino to join me for
dinner we could make that happen
but today I would like to extend
a personal invitation for brunch
and Senator Duhigg.
We're gonna get you a written
invitation here in a little bit
but personally come and join
freshman.
but you're not a freshman no no
but I'm the one that arranged
for the for the food.
Well I guess you think of that.
You know thank you madam
Senators diamond Sanchez.
Committees.
And guy a ghosts it's hard to
think of you as a freshman but
eleven fifteen
with we were we were going to
have our bromance dinner earlier
but we just could not.
going to be one on one
conversation but we thought to
be good to have all the freshmen
join us so I want to thank
senator share for putting this
all together.
I had arranged to have some
Thank you now that we all know
where it is you could have some
pressures.
Center how to meal.
Madam president I hereby.
madam president having some fun
this morning unanimous consent
with this afternoon you know
because that we go about our
business confirmations and I
would yield back to senator
Hermio.
the credentials of Dr Arsenio
Romero who has been reappointed
regent to the university to that
New Mexico State University
board of regents I now yield to
hereby confirm the appointment
of Arsenio Romero.
To the university of New
Mexico's board of regents.
Senator Diamond to discuss the
our doctor Romero is not in fact
Senator Hotmail being appointed
to the you New Mexico University
of New Mexico but the New Mexico
Madam president is my honor to
welcome Dr Romero here his wife
amber to the Senate chambers
they are familiar faces here in
Deming schools I want to thank
you for reaching out to all of
your elected officials there
within days after election
results in my case to to make
sure that we understood the
time when they were seeing great
challenges and leadership there
so he is displayed leadership in
his and his role in education
from ROZ will to dimming now in
board and serving on a board and
you have been actively engaged I
want to thank you for your
engagement with students on
campus you don't just show up in
the good times at basketball
decisions and so thank you for
the leadership there I will give
others a moment but but thank
you for your service and we're
excited to have you here today.
Thank you senator there's debate
see this in two years ago when
this happened and very excited
for a New Mexico State
University now and the you know
everything that this individual
gets involved in just seems to
may not know this but I'm a
graduate of Los Lunas high
school and I attended law school
in the schools for a large part
of my my upbringing and I was.
A little concerned a couple
still attend there and go there
a lot of my nieces and nephews
are going to the schools and
they go there still so thank you
very much for your work and
thank you for being so flexible
with the types of roles that
you've agreed to take on I fully
selection by the governor and Mr
meadows appointment he really
you know he's one of those
special teachers and people
passionate about education that
kind of a person public servant
into a position where you're
overseeing University is exactly
the kind of regions that we want
something I've been working for
of course I fully support the
nomination so thank you madam
president thank you.
Thank you of further debate on
the confirmation.
Senator Baca.
have one of our own from below
in Los Lunas area that a we'll
continue to represent us well as
well as supporting a regents at
Thank you any other a debate on
the confirmation.
Senator Hotmail madam president
you know I stand and support
individual said that this
position has not changed who he
is but as revealed who he is and
that was amazing quote and I
think by your passion on what
Any other debate on the
confirmation.
Seeing none Senator Diamond to
close.
The madam president I asked the
Senate do hereby confirm the
Romero tier seats if you wish to
vote no please raise your hands.
By a vote of thirty seven in the
affirmative zero on the negative
three appointment of Dr Arsenio
Romero is a member of the New
Senator Diamond thank you madam
president Dr Romero
congratulations amber
congratulations New Mexico
Aggies.
Senator Hotmail madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Michael Arthur Hammond who
has been appointed the state
president pursuant to Senate
executive message number thirty
five dated February for twenty
twenty two I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Michael Arthur
than thirty eight years of
engineering and water resources
management experience primarily
here in our New Mexico with a
office as senior water adviser
on January third
where he previously he has
served as the chief executive
So madam president to I guess he
changed his mind and here we
have a now in being in front of
this body madam president for
served of course and worked with
the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district and during
his tenure he has brought a
different communities the
different interest and actually
having a group of us sit down
and talk and madam president
president as we talk about water
I believe Mr Hammond has a gift
that he can bring us together
different parts of the state and
Just a madam president I could
go on but I just think his
praises and knowing that he's
gonna do a darn good job for our
state I will stand for
questions.
Is there debate on the
support of this nomination I've
seen Mr Hammond's in the ditch
I've seen him in a board room
I've seen him
you talk about Johnny on the
spot getting things done I mean
I I am thrilled with the fact
that the the governor made
sure if you got the call the day
of but we were eating it but I
lost seven some teacher on is in
a great meal and and that he's
just such a all around New
Mexican and I'm just so thankful
that he agreed to come back with
that wealth of knowledge and
continue to work in this
with the other half second and
green chili.
Third floor today.
A next will hear from us Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you madam president I rise
the state it is now but has we
enter into this time of climate
change
Water is going to be what we
need to focus on most and I have
attended meetings get every time
I hear him speak I am just in
awe of everything he knows and I
again I just want to commend the
thank you madam president.
Thank you senator next we'll
hear from Santo McKenna.
Thank you madam president I am
in my district that needed
remedy and so I was really proud
to help with capital outlay this
year I was so impressed and
grateful to hit he and his
It's really incredible but I am
just so proud that he has
stepped up to the plate and I
know if my boss Representative
Melanie Stansbury we're we're
have senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president and I
apologize I wasn't able to be in
the rules committee this morning
who's looking at really
proactive Water policy not just
reactive this is a tough
position because all the
resources and giving this
department the resources they
need to do all of those things.
And so I think what's happened
is that unfortunately you get
away was hear someone who's.
Looking at the big picture and I
think that's what we have to
have in the state moving forward
this but is stepping up to do
this public service so very much
appreciate it and thank you for
your service and look forward to
the vote.
northern New Mexico and a proud
alumnus of Taos high school who
truly understands our staff is
in our great state somebody from
a district to has a large number
of a second I'm excited to know
Clara and okay we get along with
a number of more the almost and
president this from my staff as
who also rise and support of
this confirmation thank you
madam president thank you next
individual who is grassroots
when you talk to him he can talk
to you about the acidic as is
already been mentioned the
president this he talked about
people in small communities and
so for that I fully stand in
favor of this confirmation thank
you thank you senator next we'll
hear from senator what's.
have had some good discussions
we we have we do agree that
The different parts of the state
Worry about.
Your section your agency so to
speak that.
you're going to have to do is
going to be tremendous so you
know we're looking for great
things that are you great
Thank you madam president rise
in full support of this
conferee had a great
conversation with him recently
and and you know it his approach
working with each individual
area
because let's be honest you
can't be an expert in water in
every part of New Mexico there's
with that conversation that
we're going to work from the
experts and in the local areas
let's work together to come up
with ways we can use water that
to do what we can to help the
community and to the more the
more
crops we grow in southeast New
Mexico the more money that comes
in and that benefits everybody
the confirmation saying on
Senator Lopez to close.
Thank you madam president but
before I close if I could ask
unanimous consent to excuse
So madam president I asked at
the Senate do buy here do hereby
confirm the appointment of
Michael Arthur Hammond and I
asked for a show of hands.
Senators we're voting on the
I would of thirty two in the
expiring February sixth twenty
twenty four has been duly
confirmed by the Senate Senator
Lopez thank you madam president
Mr Hammond please stand please.
Center how to me madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Robert Doucette junior who
has been appointed to the
workers compensation
twenty two I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Robert to set
junior has director to the
workers compensation
ministration.
Mister Doucette has over a
decade of experience in workers
compensation issues he is the
current our secretary and
treasurer for the international
agencies
and I understand in two years he
will be only the second New
Mexican to ever be the president
of that association as well.
with me which was that Mr
Doucette had never come to him
with the problem where he was
also providing a solution at the
same time and that's the kind of
approach that is going to really
all those that he works with and
his willingness to to really
take a team an inclusive
approach on issues so madam
Seeing none.
you wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
By a vote of thirty one in the
affirmative seer in the negative
the appointment of Robert Edwin
Doucette junior as director of
confirmed by the Senate Senator
Duhigg thank you madam president
and congratulations director
descent.
Senator Hotmail madam president
I yield to senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent
within our business
three and four and then seven
and eight so with that unanimous
consent we go about our business
third reading of legislation and
item one Senator Shendo thank
you madam president.
Yes nine percent of the Senate
that the record show that all
actions for placing.
Senate Joint a committee
Thank thank you miss madam
president of.
transportation to create of
construction manager general
contractor at in this statute
utilize transportation contract
management injectoral contract
procurement when it is in the
state's best interests.
It also allowed the secretary to
Services preconstruction
participation design cost
control and value engineering.
Allow for optimal second phase
contract for can construction
criteria for selecting procuring
contracting projects using this
method.
Retains all purposes provided by
law New Mexico based businesses.
than twenty five percent of the
time.
The this committee set us up is
supported by DOT and industry
and just has no of public
opposition.
And who are those expert witness
David can Tana chief engineer
and Justice Justin Reese deputy
secretary of DOT.
All right is there debate on
Neil Senator madam president I I
a U. P. L.'s.
Madam president senator
And and also another question
there is our host our state
highway commission still have.
first question is yes to the
second question yes.
Present center for other states
and I have used this type of
construction and madam president
Colorado Texas Arizona are using
this model.
Dues.
To our local contractors do they
New Mexico and it also has the
of the of provision to
preference we just passed for in
state of preferences.
Madam president to send their
limiting instead contractor does
have this does have an advantage
versus an out of state
contractor on this bid process.
Up madam president correct.
The independent cost estimate
shall remain confidential until
the award of the contract
construction contract
of the independent cost estimate
the bed contract an independent
bid contract if there's a
difference there who makes the
decision whether to go ahead
with the work.
cost estimate bidding in our
construction before.
I'm sure madam president center
I've the phone was ringing I had
to stop it so I apologize I
didn't hear your answer madam
president you have two ears both
of the work independently.
president of previous question
of this particular type of math
that has not been useful your
question in terms of the
necessarily oppose this but it
certainly seems like an
impression we're going are
taking a pretty large staff in
another direction and I I do
Madam president there is no
minimum but it's important to
understand that the that the
And then you also have currently
the design build.
This will be the new the third
method in according to deal T.
five percent of the time all
those other benefits the two
previous methods that I mention
will be used.
Thank you madam president center
I
Thank you there's further debate
Senator Padilla.
Thank you very much madam
president thank you the chairman
dollars available to do right
now some pretty significant
projects here in New Mexico so I
think this is actually gonna be
very very important to utilizing
those dollars in the most
dollars are available now we're
gonna see some speed get get get
some spend these done these
projects done a little faster
than we normally would sometimes
when we have projects that
linger out there for a really
forgetting this and bringing
this of four I'm sure it wasn't
easy and I'm sure he went
through all the paces of getting
it right and I I really
appreciate that so I think we
should go to see some efficiency
some modernization and some
Madam president
You know as far as I can tell we
need to the efficiencies in the
Far as I can tell that's what
I'm trying to do to support
right there madam president.
Thank you other debate on the
bill.
Senator Shendo to close madam
president.
I move that.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
Senator is we are voting on
Senate Joint Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty four.
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative is here in the
negative Senate Judiciary
number two Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
Thank you madam president.
This is a bill that raises the
minimum wage of state employees
in New Mexico and we and I want
of the Senate who co signed his
additional Sanchez.
This is the right thing to do.
Our employer we have a voice of
work for the state who have
worked for the state for twenty
It is also important not only
because it's the right thing to
do for these employees who were
percent in the state and part of
the problem is we're not paying
enough.
One of the things that happened
in working on this bill is that
The universities of of the
throughout the state are
interested in ensuring that none
of their employees make make up
less than fifteen dollars an
Thank you the first two debates
bill Senator Pirtle and thank
you madam president will the
sponsor please yield.
What do you Senator love Sedillo
increase of pay included within
the budget.
Yes madam president it is
included within the budget.
The cost for raising the the
salaries this year under the the
under the LFC analysis
apparently there are one
Eight point four million LFC
estimates of the cost for higher
education institutions would be
approximately eight point three
president and senator I do have
a question looks like on the
agenda there's a another bill
that has a similar title what's
the difference between the two
bills.
minimum wage SFC amended.
I don't believe there's any
thought created this bill to
look exactly like his.
So madam president and senator
to the the other chamber to put
to your bill back I was
originally written or do you
think madam president senator
that you know in its current
form is the best pop public
policy for the state.
I have committed to the chair to
oppose any modifications if it
went over to the house.
is home I really do appreciate
you up there doing a fantastic
job it that fits you well madam
president but the I I don't like
it I want to be in my seat down
commitment in the house I do
find it strange that we're
running two identical bills from
one chamber but anyway we'll see
where it goes thank you madam
president.
president I yield details.
Madam president I was going to
speak on this bill with the
sponsor came over and said that
she really wanted to pay this
bill for a long time so I'm just
trying to.
I saw that there was a response
on the FIR but it doesn't really
give the details specifically or
Medicaid program
then presents under would you
mind
Thank you madam president of
that part of the bill was taken
out that was a provision that
would require contractors with
the original bill was to try to
prevent the state from evading
the fifteen dollar amount
minimum wage and hiring
with of HSD contracts is they
Those contracts are set.
And.
provision was taken out of the
bill.
Thank you madam presence Andor
the so.
And now held I'll let you know
why I'm I'm so concerned about
If there is a madam president if
there is anyone that in in HSD
makes fifth less than fifteen
dollars an hour I believe
if there's anybody in that
Costs are going to go up.
That information should have
been provided to our finance
committee is that correct.
madam president etcetera I
really eight you're you're
telling me this only costs eight
million dollars a year is is
that correct.
That is the information that I
got from the report that was on
million a year.
For.
Higher ed perhaps.
million so is it could you would
you mind clearing that up for
me.
Excuse me I apologize someone
of Mr chair of finances said
that he can help me.
So if you repeat the question
and then Senator would use the
chair finance will help me thank
impact of this would be about
twenty seven million a year
total to the state across all
the departments affected is that
correct.
Madam presence Senator no that's
not correct that's just one
to bring those employees up to
the minimum of fifteen right and
then and then increases after
that and it it helps with the
We're getting that answer madam
chair I just.
Etcetera so we're getting that
anything nowadays and so when we
do that it compacts the the
bottom and so we move those up
with the seven percent in in the
compaction right so everybody
and hire him at fifteen and the
guy that's been there I you five
years we'll get moved ahead to
and so that's part of the
compaction and it moves up all
the way up through the top tiers
Mechanical engineer the right
right so we can and those are
of.
Those compressions on those
payments so we can get those
FTEs filled in the department.
Thank you madam president and
wouldn't want to do is is given
some folks a raise and then
someone that's been making.
Fifteen seventy five an hour for
five years and they they say
well where you know how it how
going with the HSD in Medicaid
concern because a lot of these
home health workers.
Social workers kind of direct
I I think that it needs to be
funded at a higher per capita
basis.
And but we also need to be
aiming to get people off of
Medicaid.
Lopez bring up about the
contractors and there be a huge
huge you know if we didn't if we
said Hey.
You you've already committed to
for really the the people that
are depending on Medicaid to
receive their health care and if
we squeeze their funding it
could cause a lot of problems
think that's fair a fair way to
treat people when we're when
we're bringing to the bottom
wage up so I'm glad that those
have been taking care of.
so you're telling me that the
door basically the direct HSD
employees some of them will be
receiving a raise but some but
on but.
Madam president to my sadness
that is correct.
Thank you will then present
center I I love to work with you
on that issue because I I think
And unfortunately I think I
think these workers really it's
not that I don't think our
society and people to put
together these programs are are
devaluing those workers it
the bill doesn't address that
problem I know it's very
complicated and like I said in a
couple of a lot of dollar signs
and
and and madam president I look
forward to listening to the
remainder of the debate thank
you.
Thank you next will have debate
from senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Sedillo Lopez would you yield to
some questions.
Yes madam president I yield I'm
madam president Senator I've
been trying to compare the two
bills dealing with the same
topic and the only difference I
can see in them is that Senator
moon Jooss bill one twenty five
a difference in the two.
Madam president it's.
I have not studied
Senator Munoz is bill since it
know inspect the required a few
differences however in order to
address the problems with the
bill I took out the the section
And then the other provision
that was taken out and of.
In finance was a provision that
would have applied to fifteen
association of university
presidents were concerned about
that requirement because it
would affect their plans to deal
with contacting and
became came before me before
committee it any committee I
would ask specifically what they
did for the lower paid workers
because in the past sometimes
when we've given average wages
earned eleven dollars and fifty
cents an hour so that was that
was the difference in the
original bill I am not familiar
bill we're not going to be
hearing a sermon else's bill
after this.
We're not going to okay thank
you madam chair and then that
helps does your bills madam
chair madam president and
increase Mr president I mean
this madam president Senator no
it was not okay thank you thank
you madam president.
Thank you next we'll hear from
you may have already answered
this and I did hear some
discussion about higher
education and how that's going
to be covered in house bill two
the finance committee
The the.
My understanding is the fifteen
dollars an hour was certainly
included in house bill two that
have been added later thank you
madam president Senator and just
for because I don't understand
how that flows
With regard to language in house
impact to community colleges and
universities that
maybe that amount that's in the
bill might not cover everything
covered completely with this
additional cost.
Thank you madam president there
is always a problem with
universities because our
to make a raise by a certain
amount they have to find money
to cover those employees are not
covered by I NG so that's always
a problem I again I'm not in
So thank you madam president
thank you senator so I guess I'm
saying that would be.
within the formula or outside we
we just don't know is there
finance I noticed that he may
not be.
Paying attention but I will ask
him to yield an answer that
question madam president.
Senator could you.
flow to the colleges and
universities make sure that
they're fully covered with this
requirement to increase the
minimum wage.
they are covered with them you
know the mandate of the fifteen
hours fifteen dollars an hour
madam president the DFA will
make that that transferred for
the employees in in the scale
and I haven't quite got the
breakdown yet.
I thank you madam president and
Senator then yes and Senator
Sedillo Lopez just just want to
make sure that and and I
certainly support a fifteen
you very much that's all I have
thank you next what Senator
Ingle.
Thank you madam president then
speaking with our wages in New
Mexico average around forty four
cents of every dollar so if your
roof of wages are a dollar there
actually a dollar forty four and
pertain to him.
Of the retirement packages
medical benefits social security
that the state you know pays
there's different there's their
I will madam president and
center I was listening to your
question you know on on the
pension side the the employees a
pay their share the state will
pension plans any at all but
when you come to budget for
health currently we in this last
two years we picked up the
increase for state workers a lot
picked up and they haven't seen
those increases but when the
state can no longer do that
anymore a guarantee is gonna be
a day of reckoning for those
people have the policy and we
subsidize them for three years
Madam president thank you.
Sen Ron Jooss but is there a
figure that is associated with
this increased support the stage
of what this additional salaries
will cost the state of New
Mexico who this bill applies to.
Madam president and etcetera we
percent or thirteen percent I
can member which one it is so
that those percentages are
calculated you know those an
employee employer costs of the
employee cost that comes in the
SCG through their budgeting so
that's not included in this just
the raises included the money to
Thank you thank you for entering
your for madam president
basically we have a cost here
that we haven't really defined
is that correct on what this
that we're paying employer
employer shared what that cost
differences we have a broken
down that far.
Madam president center that's
that's my point I'm I'm getting
as there is a cost here that we
Thank you US senator Munoz thank
you madam president you know if
Inflation is passed surpassed
what we're paying people.
And people that are making
eleven dollars are starting at
the minimum wage of I think what
the minimum wage now is ten
fifty in the state it's almost
And try to help them we have
been given an state employees
pay raises in I don't know how
long we've budget
we should fix this problem and
move forward and understand that
this is the new market that we
can't claim please under a
Thank you Sir other debate on
the bill.
Seeing none Senator Sedillo
Lopez to close.
Senate that the record show that
the role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands.
Senator is we are voting on
wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
Senator Gallegos is voting no
I'd like to explain.
All right Senator Moores is
voting no Senator Pirtle is
voting no Senator Diamond is
voting no.
Five of twenty six in the
affirmative eleven in the
Thank you madam president and
thank you members of the body.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
there certainly cost in the.
For for all of us in in our
wages and things like that and
I've been here in the Senate for
many many years and we have we
have raise salaries and we need
Thank you and I apologize again
Senator.
Senator Wirth.
Improve thank us and got
apologize again madam president
apology later but the reason I
voted against this is I was
wanting one the topics I wanted
to ask is what this bill would
inflation is is in on the rise I
just want to be part of the
actual increase with that I
think thank you nailed.
Thank you senator I apologize
again for missing you anyone
there's no objection were on
that order business
announcements miscellaneous
Peter Wirth thank you madam
president so we are not going to
do item number three and with
some language so we'll go down
to the final two items seven and
eight that'll be Senator Correa
Hemphill on item seven and then
Senator Gonzales and item eight.
Senator Lopez thank you madam
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go that our business third
reading of legislation and ideal
to Senator qureia have built for
item number seven seven memorial
one.
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate
memorial one on final passage
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
solutions department can create
a task force that will finish
the work of recommending
legislation for paid family and
will report to the legislative
interim committees and the
governor by October first twenty
twenty two and the task force
will bring together diverse
organizations and labor unions
thank you madam president and I
stand for questions.
Is there debate Senator Pirtle.
president senator
when determining the membership
of the task force were these
ideas of yours or or where did
each individual what are the
question so the the purpose
behind choosing those
stakeholders was to keep it very
balanced so for people who will
have business interests for
senator please point me to the
the business interest groups.
Senator Hemphill.
if you look on page four there
is a list of who the task force
members will include.
Madam preserves it.
Senator Hemphill.
identify the four groups.
interests for advocates to
neutral parties WSD and bureau
or neutral.
And and madam president thank
could madam president just
identify what groups those will
be I would appreciate it thank
you.
So madam president and senator
New Mexico Public Health
Association statewide nonprofits
with legal and policy expertise
for people who are older
native American tribal
government representatives
American Indian chamber of
commerce in New Mexico New
Mexico chamber of commerce also
but normally how these go is is
they'll specifically name out
state New Mexico counties for
example or the Albuquerque
chamber of commerce or specific
I know the intent is to keep it
balanced but really the way it's
written it could be one hundred
percent one sided we all know
what the the did the termination
is going to be of this task
force we don't need to beat
the findings will be from the
task force before we don't even
have to convene in spend the
money to do so but usually how
these are done madam president
senators is we name those out
So madam president and senator
it will be workforce solutions
this as well we don't.
Given our authority as a
legislative body to the
executive to create a task force
to then tell us what type of
one the majority floor leader
picks one the pro tem gets to
pick one the speaker of the
house the minority floor leader
of the house majority floor
legislation we should pass.
So madam president and senator
workforce will set up the task
force and a half of the task
named out and this is usually
how it works.
Well matter present center I've
been here ten years of set on
rules for ten years and this is
definitely not how it usually
appointments coming from the
leaders and members of this body
so again why why would we give
that authority to the executive
whenever we have members of this
body that could make those
We've set up task force like
this all the time and we give a
thirty all the time to state
agencies.
And madam president center can
comfortable if I knew that the
statewide agencies we're going
to be you know Albuquerque
business coalition or New Mexico
I don't remember what the New
Mexico chamber of commerce I
believe is what they call
counties are the municipal
league some of those
organizations that have lots of
great resources with regard to
this issue.
way and every effort was made to
make sure that this was a
balance task force and that we
included people who were
stakeholders will be well
represented in this memorial.
Madam president and senators it
will be a balanced group.
pick to be to be included in
this memorial.
Madam president senator can you
repeat repeat your question
please page five subparagraph in
Madam president and senator
because they're a state agency
provided issue that we're hoping
to move forward with the medical
paid medical leave.
real balance that the minority
floor leader of each house would
be able to appoint somebody is
there there specific reason why
it why they were left out of the
possible including those
interests people with business
interests people with paid
family leave interests and to
neutral parties.
come to turn into legislation in
the past and it's not always the
best legislation that needs to
be moved forward.
why Dale was my floor leader
left out of the appointment
coming from the legislative
branch of government but why why
was my minority floor leader
explicitly left out of the
nomination process.
business interests are
represented and also
We want to make sure that.
The Legislative Council doesn't
specifically name organizations
because they have to be generic.
balances it will be very set
easily manipulated in a way that
you know actual businesses and
and business interests will be
left out of this discussion
this floor that's extremely one
sided and doesn't take into
account all the interested
parties and so I think that will
be a huge mistake if this body
is put on this task force so I I
think that's a mistake we've
already seated enough of our
power to the governor and the
executive branch already as a
but how many times have we
passed just a memorial and comes
back as legislation and we end
up with bad list legislation on
the books so it is something
here that I think we need to
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Thank you madam president to no
debate but unanimous consent to
excuse Senator Pinto.
return to the chamber.
There's no objection it is so
ordered.
Thanks.
for premiums for the US you know
from reading this
And I am I'm here in the whole
language that this is going to
be a balanced memorial then
president would center and field
Thank you thank you thank you
madam president you senator I
keep hearing that but I'm
looking at this in my math as
I'm going through here looks
like there will be eighteen
that's my understanding yes.
Madam president looks like three
people get to a point members to
this task force you better
members of this eighteen member
of the task force will be
appointed by one person over a
two workforce solutions
department is that correct madam
People with business interests
are businesses eight people with
pets paid family leave interests
and then to neutral parties
person the secretary workforce
solution department gets to pick
who represents all those
subgroups you've just mentioned
correct madam president Senator
for so sixteen out of the
eighteen will be picked by one
person on the secretary
workforce solution correct.
task force and that these people
that are chosen have expertise
to be able to adequately
represent their respective areas
of interest and workforce
Members and senator that's
that's the point the workforce
solution doesn't come together
because it's one person who gets
a look at through these resumes
one person gets to make these
decide who won statewide
nonprofit organization that
provides legal services and
policy expertise for women and
children.
That seems a pretty specifically
written organization who did you
introduced during interim
committees so there will be more
than adequate opportunities for
I have a son who was born with a
rare genetic syndrome who was
diagnosed with bone cancer when
he was four years old had his
left leg amputated a year of
exhausted my paid sick leave
people assume that when you have
a new born baby that you have
transferred in and out of bed on
and off the toilet and there are
many families many mothers many
be able to vet the best possible
legislation to make sure that we
are supporting our working
families in New Mexico
improving their morale.
Madam presence Senator I I that
is I mean I'm I really
appreciate you sharing that
testimony with us of the
for women's and girls the very
specifically written exams who
is that and compass what
organization madam president.
organizations are not named.
Then present center can give an
example of a statewide order
nonprofit organization that
provides legal services and
my head but I'm sure they exist.
And can you tell me who is
statewide nonprofit organization
repeat that you were mumbling on
that stupid mask Judy now six
and we get rid of these faced
jackets so I can talk and the
mobile.
policy expertise on the interest
of children can give us an
example of what organization
that might be.
Madam president and senator on
the task are the.
organizations to the members of
the task task force.
Madam president appreciate your
answers on a and B. those are
incredibly generically written
Health Association are your
first two years just said that
we couldn't specifically say who
was on this task force but
section see says in New Mexico
the reason it's written that way
is that we want to make sure
that we have people with
expertise in those areas.
verses your answer to the first
two categories was that we could
not specifically name and I ask
for it who that Representative
represents because I do think
there's probably to
Organizations a name be but see
very specifically says one
specific organization in the
state so a contradicts what the
testimony before about a and B.
So madam president and senator
that the pardon point to rip
remember is that we want to have
representatives from those areas
that was determined to be an
important
organization to make sure they
have their representation on the
task force.
Thank you madam president thing
specifically included in this
task force server going to
specifically include the public
health association.
So madam president and senator
they can certainly attends
legislation that can
be well vetted and support
working families across New
Mexico.
elder rights that seems also
very narrowly written to
identify one specific group then
president senator communities
apple please if you would if you
workforce solutions will look
and see what nonprofit
surveillance bill if who have
able to have membership in the
task force and to contribute
meaningful discussions to
creating this legislation madam
president I think you understand
language these categories
probably in the statewide to
follow these definitions.
And probably more
honest madam president if we
for instance the listening a
statewide nonprofit organization
with legal and policy expertise
so we just talk about the older
home all the rights the
To statewide organizations
representing labor.
And at least one of those
representing health care
employees madam president
Senator.
My experience in this building
that means the nurses who you
are and probably honorable men
manager which what are labor
organizations specifically going
to be added to this group in
create a balance task force
again this is supported by the
New Mexico chamber and the
workforce solutions will look
for people with in those areas
create legislation that will
Properly address the issue that
we're trying to solve which is
representation.
So madam president and senator
often unions are the ones who
will who have the expertise
medical leave so they're an
important stakeholder as well.
Then president we're going
through this I just realized my
actually too so those so far as
going through the server was
very attentive are there's
nineteen members to this task
force only two of them not
one and I applaud the one native
American tribal government but
I'm confused about that this
this this the family leave act
have yet to create the task
force and the legislation so
that's what this memorial will
do is create a task force so
madam president and we have
passed laws in the cost here
that really had significant
impact on small businesses I do
not believe they apply to tribal
lands I could be mistaken but I
apply to tribal lands so madam
president and senator.
What I envision is a relevant
the task force will be
presenting.
your opinion is not a relevant
to this body here one of forty
two senators and only one of
forty two so I are are going to
defend you on that you're your
opinion is very relevant and
the point is that they will have
representation on this task
force and the legislation has
not been created yet this is a
for the legislation.
Look forward to seeing that
clause on see how that could be
constitutional the mega Bucks
names are but then also we say
the American Indian chamber of
commerce of New Mexico
you mentioned earlier there for
business
So madam president and senator
there eight people with business
interests eight people with paid
family leave interests and to
neutral parties.
Members are just getting my
point that the that's not
neutral one person that's all
these people.
And then you talk then you have
to statewide organization
opposition to this memorial but
I find it's interesting that the
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
has concerns about this memorial
and since are not a statewide
but they're not they're excluded
if they so chose to be part of
this task force and they have
expressed concerns about this
task force and the specifically
from participation in this task
force.
So madam president and senator
again I'll reiterate that the
New Mexico chamber publicly
supports this memorial and
individuals who are working
across New Mexico and not every
single entity could possibly be
included in the task force so it
make sure that we get this
legislation correct.
Then president center and I
think we're being we're beating
this horse pretty hard here this
did say that there likely cause
undue burden on small businesses
may have concerns with our can
be able to participate in this
on New Mexico how Konami
coalition or business coalition
statewide organizations
Representative businesses of the
seventeen members at secretary
gets a paycheck because won't be
balance I think this is written
in a way that there's one
would be the New Mexico Espinal
business chamber of commerce
correct then president.
Madam president and senator
workforce solutions will be.
the fact that a statewide
organization Representative has
been a business owners will be
allowed the Albuquerque in
Spanish chamber of commerce will
not be allowed to participate in
and it's not open up to local
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce.
number of hello a statewide
organization representing
lesbian bisexual transgender
miss read that Representative
eight minutes but came bisexual
trans as persons so there is a
few organizations like to
possibly participate on to that
one category.
are number their number were
familiar with so there would be
some opening so that a statewide
organization statewide
organization representing
African American business owners
Representative African American
business owners in the statewide
organization madam president and
senator again this will be work
to make sure that this is a
balance task force that includes
eight people with business
interests eight people with paid
family leave interests and to
work with you and try to find a
real small business owner in the
state that could provide some
balance of the so I'm sure we
could come up with some ideas
your political position you that
might actually be opposed to
this legislation to find that
balance that this one hundred
nineteen will need because a
seventy to be appointed by the
executive has an agenda this
task force.
The executive.
Once this piece legislation
executable did pick everyone on
this task force except for two.
So the bill will be written by
the executive by workforce
of the nineteen around the table
it's gonna be a big table by the
way nineteen people those views
are going to be drowned out
those views of the small
restaurant association of all
the groups that were listed in
this bill.
Are you go through all eighteen
of again nineteen of again.
We all know who that would
within the restaurants
association.
They have taken it on the chin
they will take it on the chin
with the laws that we passed
last year.
stark about the direction this
task force and the pre
determined outcomes that voices
like to restaurants so she
Isshin I'm sure we can go
through a lot of different
president they're very vocal on
the restaurant's Association and
others they would make sure that
their voice was heard the right
organization representing
businesses while we are you know
one of them is going to go to
the Albuquerque one of the now
the call the old AC I
what do they think they call
restaurants associations
practice pretty mill in for they
were packed that's one of the
nineteen let's course then
present you point a restaurant
owner there's a couple I think
usually has was brought up by
Senator portal when we point
these.
Morals and task force their
minority floor leader of the
Senate one member by the
minority leader of the house
it's like standard we do that
all the time for ten years and
in rules wasn't included in
here.
That was purposeful madam
president.
That those voices the minority
Senator of Senate floor leader
to a race without those two
sentences from this paragraph
there was to cut and paste that
into it.
And that starts so this task
The very prescriptive list and
everyone of those list I read
our senses are read occurring to
the already know who is going to
be representing what
the chin will not be here I
guarantee the New Mexico
business coalition will be
included.
Call me call me naive maybe they
will be Hope online if but I
strongly doubt it and then to
passing legislation prescriptive
memorials this memorial isn't
about going out and getting a
balanced view Susan about trying
to come up with good legislation
is going to help out small
task force save her once and
come by our this is what we
want.
we are that all the time we put
together a task force to come
back the next year with report
have significant harm to small
businesses in our state madam
president and I encourage you to
make sure when this task force
comes back to us and says Hey we
be driven there will be rain
probably by one or two or these
advocacy groups are there in
this list.
Supported by workforce solutions
picked nineteen seventeen of
those nineteen and pick them to
come up with a solution
madam president our verses body
to reject this memorial because
voices on purpose it has been
written so that voices that
would oppose this legislation
can't get their foot in the
door.
Or even if they did get their
it on the chin during the COVID
a lot of them closed the ones
that have survived hopefully
next year can not come back but
we keep adding more more
president thank you members of
the body percent.
Thank you we do have an
amendment the reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
And Sir pearl to explain the
amendment.
Thank you madam president this
is the Senate memorial it's not
a Joint Memorial so there's no
simply remove the speaker and
insert in lieu there of Senator
Baca the Senate minority floor
leader and bring at least a
shred of balance to this
memorial.
And senator I appreciate your
amendment
I am going to.
Say that this is an unfriendly
amendments however but I do
Senator Morris thank you madam
president that the Senate
memorial I don't think we can
order the speaker.
legislative drama moral this is
us this is the forty two people
that are elected to this chamber
and Google over pointed.
That's what this is about we're
another branch of government
other constitutional branch
their leader to appoint someone
to our task force our task force
they came over here the other
our task force come on come on
bass ball players stand up for
this chamber.
Any other debate on the
amendment.
Senator Brandt.
would happily yield emails
then president and a senator.
How many people are gonna be on
this task force again.
Senate minority leader be able
to point.
One.
Madam president center in that a
five percent of the task force
which is not that much it's just
going to ensure that at least
one of the
Most present center that sounds
very balanced to me.
At.
Sir further debate on the
amendment.
A saying none Center pearl to
and there's just such a simple
change to the memorial that I
guess makes too much sense.
You know I guess maybe it's too
And yet of course no surprise
it's unfriendly.
I wasn't holding my breath.
you know normally we can work
together and ensure because this
is a a memorial from the entire
Senate this is supposed to be a
message from the Senate body not
directive of one part of the
body to
The governor of the branch of
government on the fourth floor.
And you know we're left out but
unbalanced as this memorial
and it is it is truly
disheartening that we can't even
remove the speaker of the house
It it's really.
Something that I don't
understand we we've legislative
amendments on other bills that
We have a lot to offer as
Republicans.
We have good perspective on
certain issues.
And a lot of times we get to
stand on the floor said told you
signed by the governor and it
hurts real people.
And so I would move Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
A two year seats if you wish to
vote no please raise your hands.
Sedillo Lopez voting no Senator
Tallman voting no Senator Hickey
voting no Senator Gonzales
Senator Hamblen voting no
Senator Rodriguez voting no
Senator souls voting no Senator
I would of twelve in the
members of the body thank you
senator we have another
amendment.
Reader to read Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
foreman number one to some moral
one Senator needs to explain the
memorial I think the amendment
thank you madam president I was
waiting to see if the first
members from there not that was
in this chamber.
And in the house obviously.
The previous floor amendment
would have given one Democrat
and one Republican.
give them complete and absolute
partisanship over this memorial
but that's just you know let's
just do that so so what this
does instead of a one one to
respect the majority.
for New real New Mexicans and
quite a lot of them let's give
them at least something and so
instead of striking the the
And then as.
The minority leaders of both
chambers so that way you'd get
three Democrats and two
Republicans instead of the prior
more to respect their major but
once again to respect the
minority does give some
representation so just want to
see what the sponsor would think
about this one.
I I think that you often have
good ideas but this one I'm
going to say is on friendly as
well.
Debate on the amendment.
So madam president.
In this in this chamber at this
time in this in this milieu this
environment that we're in today.
It doesn't need to be.
It's just it's it's just
troubling we so much madam
isn't a house memorial this
isn't the Joint Memorial.
This is the Senate memorial and
we ought to a take ourselves
into consideration but we also
Except Senator Tallman freaked
me out yesterday.
Completely had to start a new a
new vote count.
I know it's twenty six fifty but
it doesn't have to be.
It doesn't have to be.
We can accept one of the
Simplemente it's the simply says
the other parts of New Mexico.
We can talk to each other.
And the reality is about forty
six percent of New Mexicans
out of the conversation.
And we don't need to do that.
Frankly I preferred Senator
portals.
But this doesn't have to be that
way.
It doesn't have to be.
The vote has to be twenty six
fifteen.
We don't have to have contempt
for each other.
Not partisan at least not on
everything including the Senate
memorial.
Thank you madam president.
Thank you senator Morris thank
It doesn't make any sense we
we've were put into a house
member on there on this the
majority has this taken so.
Now this memorial has some
significant flaws this moment
would add to members of this
nineteen for task force so that
It's silly madam president it's
very very silly that here we are
talking for an hour on memorial
that was obviously written.
With a predetermined existence
Was a nine apercent ninety
percent of the board the
commission is gonna be working
on legislation a task force to a
look of legislation is going to
this memorial as a show of
bipartisan if you change your
opinion and so this is a
friendly amendment madam
president Senator will you do
that we change your opinion and
but I do not answer you'll thank
you ma'am seneschal we have your
mask remain up properly lately
the solicitor have built you
yield.
states friendly not going to
give us time apercent
representation on this task
force or the stolen from one I
will vote for this memorial if
you give us a line at percent.
representatives who have
business interests and this
legislation will be debated in
senator will be able to vote on
the substance of the policy and
give their input.
Some are present Senator is that
a no.
see in front of you is standard
boilerplate language that we put
in memorials ad nauseam when we
bunch of these already this year
and is Brooks coming out in
less.
They're being ordered officers
to remove a Republican from
these task force this is for the
up
of seventeen out of nineteen
forty one person appointed this
is a standard everyday language
that we use in the state Senate
all the time.
to make sure that the people who
wrote this memorial realize that
it's not seen as by balanced
that the voices are being
excluded and that whatever they
on scene as a realistic honest
task force because of this
partisanship in this pre
determination just had an offer
to allow us to the point two of
twenty one members with
really hope the majority starts
thinking about this.
How silly it looks how it's bad
for government staff for the
people New Mexico.
Further debate on the amendment.
Seeing none Center sweeties to
close thank you very much madam
As I close and then present
address some debate on this on
this bill but also to the
amendment for now I would
encourage members to think about
just a couple of things.
Why do you think so.
I'll tell you why.
It is Republicans fault.
And it's Democrats fault.
When Republicans disrespect the
minority and in blue states when
Democrats this respect the
minority.
So please consider that consider
second thing.
Consider why you ran for office
and if you're committed to
Committed to that.
They want a democratic
representative form of
government yes understand we're
constitutional public is no one
talking about.
is honest even if they're not
gonna say it out loud they know
this memorials not balanced and
I know that it's not not fair
even on a partisanship when when
you get to Democrats and zero
Republicans.
very similar debate last year on
this in this chamber.
On a constitutional commission
that we
formed.
Representation.
Of that commission recommending
changes to our constitution.
It was very interesting debate.
Let's let's give diversity of
thought.
Diversity of thought to that
constitutional commission.
to hear what we want to hear do
we want to continue to fuel the
fire of people saying I'm fed up
with this I'm fed up with
Republicans and Democrats and I
I would like to move.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate memorial one.
raise your hand.
Senator font this voting no
Senator McKenna this voting no
Senator Antoinette Sedillo Lopez
voting no Senator Hickey voting
now Sir Thoman voting no Senator
Hemphill Hemphill folks know
Senator Wirth photo no Senator
Shendo votes no Senator red
folks now Senator Stewart
vocational.
I wrote of a eleven in the
affirmative twenty two in the
negative Senate foreman number
one fails to pass.
one to Senate memorial one
amendment sponsored by Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle to move his
been a long standing tradition
at least in the rules committee
when we see task force such as
this that we add in some
language that will ensure that
this will be the Bernalillo
solutions has to include members
from across the state so we
don't just get a one sided
opinion from one county within
the state of New Mexico.
and input I.
Am going to say unfortunately
that this is also unfriendly.
Senator share.
Thank you madam president.
Why.
Why.
Why.
Senator do you yep thank you
madam president I yield the
deals.
Thank you madam president
senator.
So.
We've gone through this a couple
Well madam president senator you
know this has nothing to do with
with partisan politics this
amendment is language that we've
we've
force and started doing a little
research on where members of
task force were from and noticed
an inherent problem that
Albuquerque is not the entire
usually hard with the geo
diversity clause that that I put
in is when you have multiple
people appointing it's hard for
them to get on the same page but
we've established that one
come from the same New Mexico
County.
So.
Madam president Senator.
I agree so right now so much
But half the state doesn't live
in that bubble.
The state lives in small towns.
Have the state lives in rural
communities.
They have different issues
different policies different
things that are going on around
them different industries.
almost any group of any
commission any council any
anything unless we have forced.
I understand half the state once
again.
But once again we're going to
ignore half the state once
again.
Is more akin to what happens in
Farmington that happens in Santa
Fe.
And yet we've made a decision
over and over and over again
twenty six fifteen.
We wanted nor have the state's
voters now we want to add more
half the state geographically.
In I don't understand why.
Senator Hemphill do you yield to
senator share madam president
nailed Senator share thank you
madam president Senator.
Lordsburg to to be part of this.
So madam president and senator I
really appreciate the question
experts from the same county
from different counties and we
want to make every effort to get
as many expertise from all over
working people who have to
provide care giving support for
their families who are the ones
who frequent small businesses
expertise and data so that we
are properly vetting this
legislation that all senators
are going to have an opportunity
to give their input on.
Because apparently that's the
only full we noted thank and you
did say madam president Senator.
That we wanted people with
The most of it's going to be
Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
you might throw somebody in
there from Tallahassee said you
did.
But that's where it's going to
maybe we want to be in our own
little bubble and we don't care
what happens outside Albuquerque
in Sanford madam president I
would think that you of all the
Senators.
law certainly affect what
happens in your district.
And there are certainly people
are going what the world really
thinking up there.
At least let's give people a
voice.
and feels the same way.
Why do we continue to want to
ignore half of the state.
Now whether this is good for
small business or not that's a
Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
These are simple amendments
these are simple amendments
Of the rest of New Mexico.
We'll have experts will have
experts from UNM they will tell
us that everybody gets better if
But we won't read any other
studies.
Because no one will bring them
up.
And in the slide it knowledge
meant that there are other
people.
Is all anybody over here to us
for.
That's all we're asking for.
A few minutes.
Most Senate memorials that I've
been around here for.
Our unanimous passed on a voice
We don't need this kind of
controversy.
On a Senate memorial.
We also don't need to have the
Which I don't understand but Hey
in all.
Twenty six fifteen twenty six A.
yep the speaker should be the
most important person on here
We talk about diversity and then
we shut it down as soon as
diversity indicates.
A different font.
And I don't understand why.
Nothing that we've asked for
that one
that would harm this memorial.
Nothing.
And that's the thing that I'm
hoping that we can get over.
We can get over that this.
To be that way.
A little bit a little bit of
consideration.
For the rest of the state.
Would be appreciated.
Thank you madam president.
Thank you madam president and
members of the body you know
after that last vote everybody
everybody on the left of me had
a look at each other to see how
to vote and you know that should
happened because they had to
look around the madam president.
To know how to vote because it
was common sense amendment.
about diversity but when it
comes to.
G. I. G. O. diversity all the
sudden now it's an unfriendly
amendment.
We want to ensure that all
On this issue.
Albuquerque's already taken this
issue up and it was voted down.
concerns of of a lighted New
Mexico perhaps.
It's a speed trap by the way
don't speed through Alaina.
You know we have thirty three
counties in this of this great
state of New Mexico.
And there's eighteen members on
the board so it could still be
heard and I I find it quite
laughable.
That no matter what amendments
brought up it's going to be
unfriendly it reminds me of an
That was gonna put undue burden
on on people with a certain
disability I I I believe it
would have left out the
not thirty seconds later my
friend the good senator Jerry
Ortiz Y. Pino essentially
introduce the exact same
amendment.
result I wasn't upset about it
but it's just kind of funny
that.
No equipment to a to a memorial.
For partisan politics we're
putting people over party.
You can join me if you like.
The water's fine.
Might be the stinger to hear
their.
But you know that happens
whenever you try to do what's
best for the state of New Mexico
The opportunity to do it again.
Pretty sure how the vote is I
was thinking about doing
unanimous consent that.
All Democrats be shown voting in
the negative and Republicans in
the deposit but I won't do that.
Put in something that brings in
another layer of diversity.
Ensures that the entire state is
heard on an issue of this
importance of this importance.
so I I have a few more ideas
floating around in my head the
longer I I stand up and speak on
this issue.
And madam president.
You know it's unfortunate.
amendments and they'll be on
friendly even though they make
sense.
But the point has to be made
that we can help make good
legislation good memorials if we
asked for a show of hands.
Centers we are voting on Senate
floor amendment number one to
send a memorial one tier seats
Senator pope voting no Senator
Campos photo no Senator Ortiz
Pino voting no Senator McKenna
Senator Duhigg voting no Senator
Sedillo Lopez voting no Senator
Padilla voting no Senator
Senator Rodriguez voting no
Senator Lopez voting no Senator
Stefanics voting no Senators
souls voting no Senator Ivey
And unanimous consent to excuse
Senator how to meal who has left
the building ill.
By a vote of thirteen in the
affirmative and twenty four in
being done on party line it
appears that way I think this is
a good idea and I would normally
supported I think the idea of
trying to have geographic
diversity on any task force or
our hands in a way that
sometimes there are some
excellent people more maybe more
than one from a given county and
so I think the spirit is right I
think that is right I struggle a
little bit with the idea of
memorial one amendment sponsored
by Senator Pirtle.
Move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate memorial
one Senator Pirtle to explain
the amendment.
And madam president sit on my
desk can you tell me which one
it is.
to the task force to ensure that
we do have a a true diverse
group from across the state with
the the different interests
think this amendment looks great
thank you for your suggestion I
would say that's just friendly.
Madam president I do have
something to say but I I believe
a proper.
Chamber manners would be to go
to debate.
You have any debate.
Senator Pirtle the you yield you
madam president Madam presence
Senator you in shock right now
and we we can get an ambulance.
most well thought out amendment
that I put forward
but I am excited that we might
actually have somebody appointed
to this task force with a little
bit different point of view than
can you explain where they're at
and and how that would make this
more a more diverse group.
And madam president Senator I'd
be happy to so they're located
to grow food and they share
their water with each other and
have been in place for for many
years.
here.
And this part of the country and
so I appreciate you help me
understand a little bit more of
what they are and that they're
actually throughout the state
not just in the
back in college at university
Mexico was a political science
major and I think was my junior
year in poly sci
one of the classes I wrote a
on northern New Mexico coral to
Youngsville Rio Arriba county
area has been very active in
safety isn't for a long long
form of democracy and what is
now the United States of America
is a very unique organizations
and elect their officials and to
the state more dome also we all
those was with North New Mexico
right from
ancestry are very familiar with
fascinating that really could be
one of the first forms of the
democratic process United States
that didn't come from the
English tradition from the west
Spanish empire and I think
that's always been a fascinating
a little tidbit of history and
so I rise in support of that of
Senator Dale madam president I
yield
Madam presents under Pirtle why
why do you why Justice AQ
Association and so many other
great northern New Mexico
associations and organizations
why just this one particular
were rejected also morals we
have have that balance of
political representation and I
know most of morals we do also
include the acequia association
did you just see this Madam
believe it it adds a little bit
of of rural diversity to this
group and really I I just know
that this body cannot say no to
the acequia association.
the make sure their voices heard
so I think it's very important
that we include them in this so
I really appreciate you stepping
forward in getting this
bipartisan for meminta added to
pirtle to close move Senate
floor amendment number one to
Senate memorial one ask
unanimous consent or on a
unanimous consent for a friendly
amendment number one to send a
moral one has been adopted.
We have another amendment three
to all right.
Senate floor amendment number
memorial the amendment thank you
madam president and forgive my
shock members that I wrote
amendment number one on the top
so will I don't know if we need
to correct that hopefully we can
great thank you thank you madam
president
so you have to move it first
thank you thank you
madam president like to move
Senate foreman number two to
hopefully as the debate
continues we'll continue to make
this a better memorial and work
our way toward bipartisanship
and perhaps unanimous vote I
would I would hope to see that
for my debate in the first
committee that this more move
through my my comments were
about to the partisanship in the
actual therefore clauses but
about and so this is about
fatherhood and paternity leave.
where do I get this language
well.
I didn't want to introduce
something that was on the right
labor website you'll find this
language.
And I'll just read it's very
brief madam president says
paternity leave can promote
parent child bonding improve
a real advantage to working
families.
Now madam president this came up
because of my wife and I before
we had children we lived in
Sweden for a short time well my
leave after women ever after
couples have have children.
And the father has to take one
month it's mandatory.
And that's what they'll
typically do is they'll take
know kind of rough winters and
so the the father's will be
outside with their children
they'll take them their month
off of paternity leave I think
it's some of that if we put in
single mother I mean we we we
kind of stereotype we can Sir
type anything right we can
stereotype single moms again Sir
it's up in the typical you know
nuclear family unit but this is
something that I think often
should at least consider
bringing to the table during
this discussion and so I would I
would hope this would be from
the moment members.
Thank you Senator Hemphill
really appreciate your inside
and your suggestion and I think
this is friendly my husband was
really appreciate your
suggestion in your amendment I
think it makes this memorial
even better.
Debate on the amendment.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Griggs saved Senator
Wirth marriage and I'm afraid
you're trying to ruin mine.
you know there's only one vote
concerned that if I support your
amendment I'm not gonna be able
to go home.
And the you know so are are you
purposely trying to stronger
Sir.
there is a really fascinating
book written fairly recently by.
a.
A Jewish woman from New York
lot of attention for this but
actually was was measuring how
very young kids before they go
into school years how they
having you know some of those
and interestingly I won't I
won't belabor this man present
there is actually quite a lot of
controversy over that shaped
website in a in a report for you
know family leave and all that
stuff.
Thank you madam president and
senator I I really appreciate
that because I I tried to you
We don't think about the fathers
in the situations and and these
families.
And we know that
you know.
And so it is important that both
parents in the household be able
to take that time and bond with
their with their newborns and
I think this one is well written
and if we ever get back on the
bill all have some of the
questions I have on the
warehouses thank you.
For further debate on the
amendment.
And can we have a debate on the
one just keeps falling off or
something it's one of those if
they want to start an arms could
do that would probably not get
in trouble with you in the
future.
Thanks thank you
And as a father I read I
remember reading that and that's
a lot of the research was
talking about the different
roles that male parents and
female parents play of the
You know like for instance
dollars a little more Rolf
implant have our play with their
children and so it is such an
important role to have both
parents if possible in involved
time off madam president and
spend time with my daughter and
maybe a better father I think
that interaction on a daily
basis but that's different type
shows that it's very positive
and so the the way this memorial
is written in prescriptive way
to include certain groups
and also to exclude certain
correct is now twenty.
Members of this task force
correct then president Senator.
Madam president and there was a
a question for me and not the
task force was at nineteen on
what's so that will be twenty
correct and present Senator and
if you ask him to yield first
I'm sorry members I thought I
Thank you madam president as I
was talking I was asking about
is
this task force was at nineteen
I think now it's going to be a
twenty correct madam president
senator.
your question and I'm not a
great multi Tasker
Senator but I believe you're
correct although this ammendment
I just wanna be clear this
William weld all this all this
in ended that madam president.
The representative I want to add
a the and another letter here
the secretary workforce
development can this can include
because right now there's no one
on this task force that the
secretary will point that comes
be from the amendment since this
languages friendly maybe that'll
include someone twentieth member
how this task force that would
represent a statewide
organization doing with fathers
and maybe they can get some mini
vans to travel around the state
so I applaud you for doing this
Senator and.
Thank you madam president I
thought of present.
Senator Pirtle thank you I was
raising my hand the debate the
house and just didn't see you
take into account have a really
good.
Friend of mine who he's a blue
collar guy works as a lineman
and his spouse is actually the a
because she's been scheduled to
be in the hospital or at the
office doing surgery with this
help him in his situation that
that he finds himself in the
consider you know to consider
any sort of situation regarding
paternal leave so so yes
potentially
over but I I would think they're
going to just kind of.
Check off all the whereas
clauses and make sure they
discuss all those issues.
And madam president center think
that's important because he he's
the different situations and all
the family dynamics that we have
a across the state thank you
madam president.
Is there further debate on the
amendment.
senders may have suggested
another
change you know given that we're
going to look at paternity leave
and I think that's a very
interesting.
amended and ask for well if it's
friendly ask unanimous consent.
them.
Sen amendment number two to send
a moral one.
We have another amendment the
reader will read.
Senate floor amendment number
floor amendment number three to
Senate memorial I'm sorry Senate
floor amendment number three to
Center Morial on number one as
twice amended Senator Moores to
appreciate that this is for you
madam president and I think this
would be a friendly amendment
this is the Senate memorial as
we talked about earlier in our
debate and this amendment is
force so it's strike on page
three line twenty was struck
workforce solution Department
and Lou therefore would add you
twenty one and also remove the
house as we have that debate
earlier that the this is our
task force our Senate that that
doesn't turn this over to the
executive and allows you to go
through these list of
organizations does not allow on
president so I think you might
think it's a friendly but I will
Senator Hempfield to our yield
and.
that workforce solutions
department has the expertise
that's really needed to lead
this task force however so this
appreciate those kind words but
but.
so madam president I have
already moved this I stand ready
for debate why I think you are
president again this is one of
those things is just seems
logical to me Senate amendment.
I mean memorial set up by the
So the you know in this case it
just it just that's another one
of these common sense things
here.
if we're going to have the
speaker of the house in here we
sure that that we in this body
are are properly represented you
know madam president the speaker
is a very very powerful person
in the house.
why would we seed anything to
them if we're going to if we're
gonna include on that so I guess
that's okay but but certainly we
In in any kind of saying
operations that have happened
and and in this round house for
a long time.
And so it just makes sense to me
is you the one that I can think
about things and can look at
across this room and say you
know what we can solve a lot of
the problems that we talked
about because you madam
The the ratio of how this.
This council should be set up.
Or task force should be set up.
So I I would I would feel
comfortable.
Would be the most the second
most powerful person in the
state.
would were defending the
integrity of the Senate.
for doing it right you're also
looking after the state so I
think this is a very very
valuable amendment.
I wish I thought of it but to.
considering you in fact we
should we as a body should be
ashamed that we didn't consider
you earlier.
powerful that seat can be.
And the so I I want to thank him
for at least thinking about us
as a body I think that's so
Thank you madam president with
the sponsor of the.
Bill of the amendment yield
please always checking the time
to see if this Madam was fully
president center so it is it is
it is this a separation of
powers issue is how you came up
with this amendment.
I absolutely madam president
senator this is a Senate
on her own it's in order the
workforce solutions department
to create this task force and do
it on ourselves as a need as our
statement of the body in this
case the body building the
Senate and so it makes sense
that the state ahead of our
Senate who by the way is fourth
Senator was mentioned on the
server that two staff with our
governor often we were the
approach acting president thanks
secretary state speaker of the
house and are pro tem um in
one who's appointed because she
will you know when she will look
around the chamber will ask for
import much more likely than the
secretary workforce solutions I
I strongly doubt the secretary
me but the that that's what are
this idea was coming really was
a separation of power This Is us
telling us to do something as
opposed to us trying to all the
executive do something when the
is cleans it up its operational
power issue where this is our
task force our memorial and
we're gonna.
I have to make it ask a sponsor
of the memorial to yield an
answer the question of the house
is doing this on their own to
thank you presents are.
Madam president thank you thank
you etcetera so you know I I've
do that you know to the best of
my ability I'm not going to
continue to blur the lines of
the separation of powers of our
three branches of government
And and so so then present
center would you say that this
memorial has is is it taking us
a direction towards the
into a long term policy so I
want to one conversation which
would be happy to do it then I
many times on dog of different
political systems.
Choirs that every state B. R. ha
Republic form of government I
know we have a democratic
principles our system of
government is a Republic in as a
Republic we have clear
Italy in the renaissance area
and all the times to talk about
the differences between
Republican representative
democracy but as our
constitution specifically says
would happen is that in the
Republic Representative branch
would have their vested interest
in it would push back against
the other branches to create
that that balance of power in
know we we learn about that in
the cartoons is growing up.
So things were really important
Senator that as a body as half
of the legislative branch of the
three branches of government
turn it over to the executive
isn't part of that Republican
I'm using Republican a
Republican Republic lower case
are
of the two different sources in
the government but I think it's
real important that we do that
as a body since this is the
Senate memorial we're not
ordering the executive to do
something that they can do quite
we were empowered by the
founders of the people of New
Mexico and we the people United
States of America to form this
Republic in the state of New
Mexico and as a nation and who's
principles as in our former
government our principles are
we're going to set up this task
force we're going to appoint the
members ourselves work on this
ourselves and not order the
appropriateness case either so
that that's really what this is
about to summon as about
protecting our Republic form of
government and our institutional
certainly support this cause
specifically.
it is going to take us away from
advocating our legislative
authority to the executive where
I can go back and tell my
Then present if this amendment
is adopted
I would vote.
for this memorial and I fail to
quite give me there because of
the actual meat and potatoes of
the of the memorial you know it
didn't really change that.
And on opening day last session
number ten gave a very good
address to this chamber.
And she said it is not a winner
take all.
She has already said it's not a
winner take all and so we don't
necessarily need to I I would
like to put where we don't have
to Democrats written on here in
pro tem of that represents all
the members of the Senate who
has made a pledge that it's not
a winner take all that I do
believe she would do the right
debate thank you madam present
you're welcome.
Any other debate on the
amendment.
Saying none of the Center
marched close from four go to
then I will ask her to you Sir
Senator it's isn't Senator.
I'm going to go to Senator Lopez
Seeing no objection so ordered
Senator Hemphill do you yield to
senator Morris.
Madam pro tem I'd be happy to.
Thank you madam on pro
the same offer I think I feel
more comfortable and would vote
for this if this became a
friendly amendment so now you
have to Republicans willing to
she Senator smitteez madam
president so I just said on the
floor he would vote for final
passage to and that will get you
closer to a bipartisanship
cancer occurrence before the
amendment Senator Hemphill so
madam Proterra I mean Madam
president and senator I do
really appreciate all the debate
believe that this is and will
continue to be unfriendly.
Madam president take offense
that I mean having debate about
a piece of legislation is
attacking you is been very
legislation so making a some
kind of other thing that it is I
I take offense of everything
we've been talking about a very
important
about legislation we try to work
with legislation they were going
to be silence and accused of of
things I I find that very
on the amendment is is that
please I'm and I'm I'm sorry
thank you for Senate president
pro tem explaining that to me.
So madam president
I now move Senate floor member
number three to send a memorial
as twice already amended and ask
for a roll call.
Senate memorial one that there's
been asked for a roll call I'm
gonna wait just a few minutes.
To let people come into the
Our clinical call the roll
but let me just explain a vote
of yes and we will adopted the
amendment number three from
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales now
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen now Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill now Senator
Hickey.
wrong.
Senator Ivey Soto passes Senator
how to meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Senator renewable yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
Senator pope now Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez now Senator
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator souls know Senator
Senator Tallman now senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth now Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
I have a to fifteen the
affirmative twenty in the
negative.
Senate floor amendment number
three has failed to pass.
There's a strong position of
power in this chamber and when
you're in the majority you have
a position of power and being
debate on a piece of ma'am on by
going out with a personal attack
I think this disheartening
because people know Psy.D I'll
have the power.
So you can you can Democrats
power so please as we move
forward as a body don't try to
silence people with the personal
attacks because you don't like
being question when your
for those of us who don't have
the spots powers you do thank
you madam president.
Thank you further debate on the
bill Senator Baca I thank you
now that is sexist term has been
directed from two Democrat
senators to two Republican
senators in that way and I would
like a commitment from the other
side to dispense with those
and it lacks any sort of class
thank you madam president.
Thank you in a to further debate
on some memorial.
Yes.
Senator Burt Sierra echo Senator
Brandt.
Sergeev arms around everyone up.
Search maintenance.
Is this a time where would be
appropriate to ask Senator
Okay thanks to o'neill otherwise
I would ask thank you.
Representative.
Senator Moores hi I make a
motion that we remove resolve
the call.
I think we have to have
Search committee.
Senator share.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Separate yes ma'am Senator think
Senator Morial won.
The never ending Senate memorial
one.
This is our the call a software
back on Senate memorial one I'm
trying to remember where we were
Present Senator Baca madam
president we have a floor
amendment it's of been handed in
in anyway so.
of that amendment.
Let me see.
No.
So the is the amendment from you
Senate floor amendment number
three to seven memorial one as
amended amendment sponsored by
Senator Pirtle.
Sir pearl to move the amendment.
president to members of the body
this amendment does very similar
to what an amendment would have
done three hours ago and would
strike the speaker of the house
I'm madam president and Senator
Pirtle I appreciate your your
amendment and I will say that
this is a friendly amendment.
twice amended and I ask for
unanimous consent.
So we have a request for
unanimous consent for a friendly
Back on the date of the bill.
Anyone want to debate now.
Members and senator Morris yeah
just this is what waste of time
it's an absolutely it was time
for those you sent out tweets
that the majority wasted three
hours the Senate time for a
silly memorial but you all have
power to close down long time
memorial.
I see none Senator Hemphill to
close.
Thank you madam president this
worker shortage and New Mexican
families whether Republican or
Democrat we all face those care
giver in responsibilities
and by investing in the state
administered paid family and
medical leave programs we can
level the playing field and
amended do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
role is been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
Show Senator Brandt voting no
Senator Pirtle voting no Senator
center guy Ecosse voting no
Senator Neville voting no
senator Sanchez voting no
Senator Diamond voting no
Voting no.
I'm the same height that the
same problem.
Explainable.
By a vote of twenty five in the
voted yes on because I the
accepted meminta told a long
time ago three hours ago that if
accepted this would make a
bipartisan side I R. of hope
those who have power in this
majority party this session the
last ten years all continue to
work with the majority party
just ask for a little respect in
return madam president thank you
objections messages from the
house the reader to read.
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill sixty as
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president Ms
sent over that our business
committee reports.
There's no objection from that
reports same with recommendation
that do pass as amended and
that's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Shannon Pinto co chair Senator
Thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go about
our business introduction
legislation there's no objection
more on introduction of
legislation the reader to read
Mexico to require a person to be
at least eighteen years of age
to hold elected public office
except as otherwise provided in
the constitution of New Mexico
Senate joint resolution sixteen.
Seven memorial twenty nine
introduced by senator Hart meal
a memorial recognizing the
significant contributions of Los
Senator twenty nine having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed not preferred
committing prep placed on the
president's table Senate
memorial twenty nine Senate
the growth of administrative
expenditures by school districts
and charter schools and develop
proposed legislation to limit
that growth Senate memorial
thirty cent moral thirty have
Gonzalez a memorial requesting
the legislative education study
committee to study the
feasibility study the
feasibility of establishing a
flat per diem rate of no less
other gatherings Senator Morial
thirty one Senator moral thirty
one have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
sent to the Senate Education
of criminal damage to property
by theft or attempted theft of
regulated material prohibiting a
secondhand metal dealer from
purchasing a receiving regulated
material not lawfully possessed
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee house bill sixty nine.
House bill thirteen introduced
by Representative Sarinana an
referred to the Senate Education
Committee house bill thirteen.
House for substitute for house
consumer and public affairs
advocacy establishing duties of
the director creating the family
representation and advocacy
commission house floor
substitute for house consumer
and public affairs committee
House bill forty six.
read twice by title is ordered
printed and sent to the Senate
Judiciary Committee.
Although subs for House Bill
forty six.
finance authorizing the New
Mexico finance authority to make
loans for public projects from
the public project revolving
fund declaring it an emergency
representative Garcia and act
making appropriation to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration to fund the
improvement and renovation of a
read twice by title is ordered.
Referred to the Senate finance
committee house bill one twelfth
house bill one twenty four
introduced by Representative
making appropriations house bill
one twenty four house bill one
twenty four have been read twice
by title is referred to the
Senate finance committee house
bill one twenty four house bill
reduction grant to be made house
bill eighty four also eighty
four have been read twice by
title is.
Referred to the Senate Judiciary
finance adjusting school
districts and charter schools
fiscal year twenty twenty three
transportation distribution
calculations for effects of the
Corona virus disease twenty
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate Education
Committee house bill fifty seven
house bill one eighty introduced
by Representative Ellie and act
declaring an emergency house
bill one eighty house bill one
eighty have been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
Judiciary Committee house bill
the constitution of New Mexico
to allow public assistance to
provide accessibility to
essential household services
primarily for residential use
elected to each house of the
legislature house joint
resolution one.
House resolution one.
This referred to the Senate
Lewis and act relating to
taxation providing a credit
against the motor vehicle excise
tax for a similar tax rate to an
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
Sir Peter Wirth.
miscellaneous Peter Wirth thank
you madam president so the plan
tomorrow is to come in at one
o'clock so now's the time for
committees to make their
announcements.
Senator manuals thank you madam
bills etcetera Stewart Senate
bill two forty three and senator
Kerns bill one thirty seven
Republicans have to leave pretty
quickly so we'll need to get up
the floor schedules like this
weekend so just one of our one
of our okay fair enough.
Senator committee will be
meeting Monday morning.
We'll have a conversation bills
I was scheduled to meet today we
only had three bills we're going
to roll those over till Monday
and then we'll we'll hear them
on Monday along with whatever
Judiciary the person we get
there let's say fifteen minutes
after we're off the floor so by
five fifteen one of the bills
that were scheduled for this
afternoon or not going to get
rolled into the weekend so plan
On harm reduction act amendments
house bill fifty two will try to
get those two done in
recognition of the six o'clock a
hard stop thank you madam
president will and then we'll
room is that in tomorrow at ten
I believe the two o'clock we
reserve room three eleven so
please make note of that will
put some announcements out on
the on the intercom shortly
before that but but we were
start off with Senate bill one
ninety eight senator Neville and
then we also go through house
bill forty seven house bill
eighty two house bill ninety
five and house bill seventy one
Senator Wirth.
me also say before we leave that
we will have committees
committee at twelve forty five
tomorrow in room three twenty
six.
So thank you so much we're in
recess.
