Senator to run this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
And senator Candelaria the rest
of the day to you.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Moores.
Senator my nose.
Senator until.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Woods you have a quorum
is the president thank you all
the members please rise for the
for the pledge of allegiance to
be led today by Senator crystal
diamond the pledge allegiance in
Spanish to be late today by
Good morning and happy Saint
paddy's day to you all I'm gonna
play for you a little Irish
blessing but first let us pray.
and souls and guide us to write
action this day and so it is.
In
day.
This.
We.
To.
love on data the Los estados
Unidos that medic at the letter
politica get a present that will
Once again when I think about
the Senator Steinborn and a
order business announcements and
miscellaneous on that order
business Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you to bishop Calvert's that
music was beautiful.
Appreciating where we are and
where we're going
So Mister president before yield
other members unanimous consent
to allow cameras on the floor
Mr president for Senator share I
will make that unanimous consent
request thank you senator Wirth
seeing no objection Senator
return.
The no objection.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president at this time I would
like to yield to any other
members perhaps starting with
Mr president I know and I I
really appreciate Senator all
worth company in here early in
the morning.
You know Mr president.
It was an Irishman who is
Suddenly the clouds part the sun
shines and empty in a parking
space empties without hesitation
The Irish money says never mind
incident in Ireland themselves.
St Patrick's day started out as
a just a regular St state but
when the Irish came to America.
That certainly settled
everything down.
But you know Mr president.
The fighting Irish that's true
so first you have drinking the
drink good beer.
prepared to do both today.
Thank you for joining us on St
Patrick's day Representative day
session Senator Kernan.
birthday in so St Patrick's day
means a lot to me.
So well.
Just just to go on and mention
it was quite a challenge for him
he even ran for the state Senate
he lost to Matt easily if those
of you who know who Mackey's
Leah's are was but the thing
his birthday because means a lot
to me thank you thank you Mr
Senator.
Today for women's history month
I want to honor Dr Evelyn Fisher
frisbee a widely respected
Albuquerque obstetrician and
gynecologist who practice
her parents homestead in wagon
mound near mora she set up
practice there and travel by
horseback to reach patients and
qaatay almost twenty five miles
Albuquerque metropolitan area
consisting of twenty thousand
people at the time.
Dr frisbee practice medicine in
New Mexico again for fifty four
years first is the general
fellow physicians who in
nineteen sixteen elected her
president of the New Mexico
Medical Society she was the
I also want to note that this is
a very personal for me is my
wife is an OBGYN who has
practiced in New Mexico thank
rural areas of the state
providing medical care often for
free and without many basic
necessities such as running
water electricity or telephones.
and human rights.
She demonstrated leadership not
only in her profession that in
the community as well by serving
as an educator to women around
Mr president.
Senator Diamond followed by
Senator community sentiment
development organization here in
our state at four H. is a
division of NMSU cooperative
extension service and can be
found in every single one of our
hands to larger service and my
health to better living as loyal
servants of New Mexico I think
we can all appreciate that so
thank you New Mexico for H. and
happy Saint Patrick's day and Mr
then Senator committee thank you
Mr president I'm not to get too
off the festivities this morning
but I've been meaning to just
provide an announcement on the
floor I think at some point we
important decision rendered by
the Supreme Court two days ago.
there had been a case two years
ago decided in Albuquerque but
that the cap on damages that our
current medical malpractice act
places on non medical non
trial by jury that only a jury
could decide the amount of
damages.
The case was appealed to the
court of appeals and was then
decided by our Supreme Court and
a trial by jury and of medical
malpractice action that's never
really been decided New Mexico
but now we have that decided but
more importantly the court
the damages cap was
unconstitutional so for purposes
of our debates this session the
Supreme Court has not given us
the answer that the caps that
members present my be so bold as
to say that you look quite good
in that green tie
and I just want to wish the the
Saint Patrick was born and
raised in Britain.
to pretty well to do family he
was kidnapped Mr president as a
teenager.
was known locally as an
evangelist he finally escaped
and was able to convince a ship
that was going back to Britain
to take him free of charge and
he was going to have his parents
having been slated in that
situation for so long during his
formative years he may have held
some.
Moores perhaps.
But I think this is why we
Britain and was reunited with
his family he went back to
school got some theology
training.
And then went back to Ireland
the place that had.
And I think that's the thing
that I like to remember and
teach my kids about Saint
Patrick is how much grace's life
was filled with and that he was
willing to go back to people
sentiment is echoed Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president and you know just the
third Wednesday in March so we
all know what that means right
that means you have until five
reminder Senator Pirtle I
appreciate that.
Any further announcements.
Senator o'neill.
Thank you Mr president point of
Patrick's day to me is all about
my friend from college who I
think I was I was assuming there
we go that's not me that's my
His name is Aiman mac Committee.
And.
When I was like I want to this
Ivy League school but I was from
a small town in Ohio.
and this guy amendment.
it I'm gonna read the poem but I
just want to set the contacts
eman was a legendary lacrosse
player some people say he was
national championships so
Haman was was quite a quite an
athlete and I say was because.
want me and all of us to
celebrate life today and I just
have to do this so that I can
laid back into the festive
but that wasn't his best friend
or anything but he had a
tremendous impact on my life and
and I was in his world and I'm
always struck by how people that
had a family was a lot of my my
friends I tended to have run
with the CA athletic kind of
jock itch crowd and they all
they all from Long Island they
you know the top investment firm
in L. it in New York City so
here we go and I'm gonna you
know try not to get too
emotional but obviously it's
emotional I'm emotional I'm from
okay so here we go.
Right.
Amen.
For Ayman mat Committee.
His voice somersaults to me in
the parking lot on my car radio
The rhythm of classes practice
parties in our Jack commune on
the icy expanse of Varna New
York.
We would run together in the
M. and bringing the ball up in
this not even his sport
basketball he's football and
across that happy skip move of
his the sort of Gallup.
Was it snowing the day he asked
me if I had any idea what it
meant to be Irish.
It's in your genes Palfrey said
with that damn voice of his.
How they would tease me about my
Everything was passed the power
of.
House Saturday night fever rules
are campus parties that year it
was there in this beautiful
are holding them back always.
This T. for missing front five
foot nine maybe and that
otherworldly lunatics smile of
it being St Patrick's day and
the singer Lucy with her nearly
perfect strains of Danny boy.
Decades later I find his name on
I think of him on that day one
hundred and fourth floor.
I am lost in imagine box and
he's been cold nights in the
and beauty and kindness just
waiting to come into your life.
Thank you to send Senator mail.
Si no further announcements
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you Senator o'neill and senator
excuse Senator Pinto.
I see no objections Senator
Wirth just for the members
apparently I twenty five is
number thirteen that is the
capital outlay re authorization
bill that'll be Senator
Rodriguez house bill two ninety
unanimous consent we go to that
our business committee reports
on that order of business
committee reports the reader to
read.
house bill twenty as amended has
had it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
to that it do pass as amended
respectfully submitted Senator
Joseph Cervantes chairman
individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read.
There's only one so I with only
one I move the adoption of the
committee report.
Mr president your tax business
and transportation committee to
whom has been referred Senate
bill one thirteen as amended has
had it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
the committee reports and that
we act the that we vote on them
one time at the journal reflect
that we acted upon them
individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
seven is amended do pass and
it's referred to the finance
committee.
House bill one twelve is amended
to pass.
thirty I do pass and house bill
two forty eight as amended to
pass respectfully submitted
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman.
I see no objections the credit
for has been adopted in the
journal show that they were
acted upon individually.
Mr president your rules
committee has had under
consideration amended Senate
higher education department for
term commencing on July one two
thousand twenty to be served at
the pleasure of the governor
your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
consent of the Senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and the
journal reflected their action
plan individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read.
House floor substitute for house
joint resolution thirteen to
pass.
And house joint memorial I do
I see no objections the
committee report has been
adopted in the journal so they
were acted upon individually.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
that'll be Senator Duhigg Senate
concurrence counter number seven
and then I want to assuming
Senator Moores is listening he
has the confirmation this
morning and since that committee
unanimous consent we go to that
order of concurrence and I would
yield the center doing for
Senate concurrence counter
number seventy one that order of
Business concurrence and all
you'll to Senator Duhigg Mr
what those amendments have done.
Yes thank you Mr president so
these don't make substantive
changes all they do the first
amendment make sure that when
facility type and science and
then the floor amendment I just
put in a simplified definition
of health care facility it
actually covers all of the same
licensing rather than the naming
them individually.
Thank you senator Senator as
we're debating the concurrence
to Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Judiciary
Committee says two percent of
Thank you Mr Senator us thank
you Mr president I move that the
Senate concurrent have the house
amendments to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for senator
As amended thank you senator
Senator requesting manage
consent.
The house amendments the Senate
Judiciary Committee substate for
CENIC it it districts committee
Senator Bob.
Senator Brandt.
On the lady AS Senator serve on
this yes.
There's a wrong Senator Diamond.
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
geo Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen Senator Hamblen
yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator on a meal.
Senator Morris knows Senator my
nose.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no senator Paul.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez now Senators
committees.
Senator now Senator so they'll
Senator souls Senator sold yes
Senators depending.
Senator Senator Steinborn.
Yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond now.
By a vote of twenty six in the
affirmative eight in the
negative the Senate has
concurred with the Senate
members Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go to that order business
confirmations and ideal to
Senator Duhigg.
now yield to senator Morris
present the conferee.
Senator Morris thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Duhigg Mr president percent to
Stephanie M. Rodriguez a
secretary of the New Mexico
department of higher education.
Thank you senator go ahead and
explain the conference thing was
different issues are excited
about her being there yes ball
part of education and so Mister
president stand ready for
questions Senator is we're
debating the confirmation and
in strong support of this.
Dynamite secretary of higher
education you know I've worked
with the really closely on this
opportunity scholarship and if
a question that she didn't
gracefully and not defensively
in any way shape or form she
knew the answer to all these
questions and I was just pretty
amazing because we went through
was a lot of work with what we
just lot of amendments and just
getting people's feedback from
on Senate finance and other
other senators and advocates and
students and so forth and
through it all she is just
know or all before before the
session so I just rise in strong
support of this really promising
secretary designate Rodriguez
until two years ago when we
began creating the early
childhood education and care
department and I was just really
impressed with the detail the
since has been a very good one
as well I think we're gonna be
served very well by this
particular confirmation thank
you Mr president think centre by
their we have further debate
Senator Campos thanks very much
move forward when it comes to
education and.
To the hopefully incoming
secretary Stephanie Emma
Rodriguez.
what I call pristine education
because of her work ethic
because of her wisdom and her
ability to go ahead and call on
to ensure that not only with
policy but with the expenditure
of resources but it's all put
together for the benefit of our
adult learners and those people
thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate thank you
Senator Campos any further
debate senators.
Si no further debate senator
what will work in a bipartisan
manner and also with some of
those universities in the shape
so Mister president I ask that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Stephanie M.
appointment for secretary of
higher education to your seats
please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Campos Senator Campos yes
Senator from Latvia.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Cervantes yes Senator surrounded
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill Senator
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan Senator Kernan yes
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator by
the.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
senator Senator songes yes
Senator sold Senator sold yes
Senators defending.
Senator suspended this Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Stewart yes senator
Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
three is to the as secretary of
higher education fraternal
commencing on July first twenty
twenty to serve at the pleasure
of the governor has been duly
there yes.
number thirteen house bill two
ninety six run that order
business third reading of
legislation again Senator just a
reminder to please me you turn
off your or put your phones on
placing House taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill to ninety six as
amended with an emergency costs
on fine the price on final
Thank you Mr president the house
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety six re authorizes ninety
agency or the original purpose
of the project extending the
reversion date or expanding the
original projects purpose as of
January twenty twenty one the
costs and this is the annual the
capital outlay annual re
authorization bill that we do it
does not have a fiscal impact
and contains re authorizations
Anyone with the right.
Mr president as I Senator stand
work Senator Steinborn go ahead
Mr president I'm just looking at
the bill the last version of the
bill it's online it's stated
three ten and I'm looking at the
amendment.
where that sat in the bill.
Yes thank you very much for
asking Mr president Senator
Steinborn that is let me just
hundred and fifty thousand of a
two thousand nineteen
appropriation for operating
expenses that's what it does and
then the other two sections that
deleted from the bill because
both sections are not are deemed
unnecessary once we changed the
first one.
Senator Steinborn.
amendments were made so.
perhaps we can just we'll just
connect offline there.
Madam senator thank you Mr
president.
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety six as amended with an
emergency costs do now pass and
give me a second here because I
that I'm sorry a roll call is
what I meant thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Senator seed we're voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Hotmail.
Senator Amelio Senator Kernan.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator songes yes Senators
Senator souls yes senators the
phony.
Senator confronted yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of thirty four the
Fuhrman is there on the
negative.
Will move on to the next I'll go
to senator Wirth thank you Mr
president next up we're going to
item fourteen house bill two
general appropriation act yield
Yes present ask Miss consent
dissent the record show that all
action for placing House
appropriation and finance
committee for house bill two and
three as amended on final
Agency present what rules and
there we spending on this.
We ask unanimous consent for.
Sen ominous.
Present here the question.
What are we suspending said the
us set to suspend the rules for
for placing House appropriation
and finance committee substitute
house House appropriation and
finance committee for house bill
two and three as amended on
well.
Well final passage and and we're
not following the.
Procedures that are required.
Mr president I don't know what
you're not following all yield
to the good senator from
Bernalillo Mr present I think
just as a point of parliamentary
procedure of the senator has
objected we're not on a point of
and I think the proper motion is
that we go to a roll call vote I
think the rule that's being
suspended is actually the third
reading of the bill in full and
if we want to abuse our return
Loria's comments there.
I actually talk to the reader he
doesn't feel like it's an abuse.
and so I would object under
Mr president it is just if the
good center once the bill read
then I would ask him that and
the reader by unanimous consent
that the him and the reader go
read that in the corner Mr
president I would submit I would
They were really nice and slow
to.
Senator Brandt you had a
requests but you had put that
into motion.
For the reader to read is that
correct.
bills be read in in full.
By Senator we have a reader that
we pay to do that.
Senator rand just to be clear C.
You can put that in motion form.
is presently requires motion
form.
In just consent to suspend the
rules.
The objective to the unanimous
consent motion recollecting to
suspending the roll Hey read in
the bill.
Do you want to cause
constitutional requirement is
Mr present to the rules require
that that the real the real be
read out loud and to the entire
body or just to Center Brandt
parliamentarian maybe we could
yield their
I think it does require a motion
of this body if we are going to
And it's not automatic but I
would yield to my betters in the
chamber and the parliamentarian
whomever on that point I just.
I just think it requires a vote
This from the constitution
clearly says.
The.
The bill shall become law no
bills will become law unless it
It's pretty clear.
Center Brandi able to Senator
consent to suspend the rules.
There was an objection to that.
So procedurally the first issue
is whether or not Senator
withdraw the US.
But I have for the last several
years.
Asked that we receive the budget
head of time and we do have the
time to read it.
And so I do ask as I have a
house for the last several
years.
That we as a chamber have the
opportunity.
the budget on the floor I would
prefer not to I prefer our
readers not to I think it's
actually very boring reading and
maybe I'm one of the only people
that read it.
But I do.
haven't had even an hour to read
budget let alone.
The three or four hours that it
takes me.
So I would appreciate it if we
I would yield to the Majority
Leader.
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
And so and we didn't I mean as
you know I think I I share the
there's been frustration that
With an ear marked dogeared.
Copy that he had been through
and ready to go and again he's
changed and and and it's better
I hear I hear what you're saying
I think the concern is just
given the timing of where we are
And so again I would just.
Request I understand we're all.
We're all fired and and.
anything other than you know
delay just for the day and and I
just I do think that because
this was put up with twenty four
hours notice.
You know we go ahead and proceed
with the budget this morning and
then.
I think this is an ongoing.
Process of.
When we're back in a year.
You know what will make sure
that there's more.
More time so everyone gets a
try to get on yesterday it was
not online right away.
I have asked for copies I was
given the house.
By mistake given the house
That many of us were not invited
to.
For a lot of appropriation and
here I would like to look at the
find out where we are spending
the people's money.
But I respectfully request.
If we're gonna have an afternoon
session today.
That I be allowed that time.
I understand that I'm not on the
finance committee I've fought
tooth and nail with the previous
chair of finance.
and so I would request.
That I be given time to look
over this bill.
are session will be later this
evening and quite frankly it
just feels to me like having a
discussion about the budget
should happen.
bills here if you want to do
that
and that would give you a chance
to read section I I just I I
really think I don't want to do
this in the middle of the night
that that would be great.
And senator rand senator Wirth
thank you Mr president so we
Next is yield to senator Thoman
Center common.
Our item number twenty house
Would you like.
This can earmarked that little
spot with posted.
Okay Senator AUMENT thank you Mr
president
in order.
bill.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president members of the Senate
they ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
substitution say no objections
Sierra objections.
Objection.
Senator Ivey Soto I believe this
has an emergency clause on it.
there's no emergency clause just
to to amendments that were added
to it.
Could we just double check well
word for it and before final
passage if we could just double
floor amendment so go ahead Mr
Senator Tallman going explain
the bill.
Thank you Mr president the.
This bill
projects list show include the
capital budget the amount
authorized by the legislature.
The appropriation or bond
authorization amount that is
allocated to each legislator.
amendment that was placed on
house bill fifty I did have the
emergency clause so it's house
bill fifty five EST by amended
with emergency clause we do have
a floor amendment.
senator William Tom.
Madam move and explain them in.
Mr president I move a.
twice amended this is simple a
amendment doesn't change the
subject substance of the of the
bill with this clarifies.
simply inserts the word.
The.
Centers we're debating Senator
member number one anyone wishing
to debate.
we unfortunately had a slight
drafting here in the rules
committee amendment this was
done in the rules committee we
missed align when we did that so
amendment Sierra gonna close on
the amendment.
Centers is been a motion.
As for enhancing Center dot
senator member number one.
I see no objections senator
and senator I don't need you to
yield on this rising to support
this long overdue legislation.
And
You know
number one Mister president it's
public money so the public
absolutely has a right to know.
Who appropriated and as public
officials they have a right to
now.
is us who have made those
appropriations come into
existence.
Number two it prevents of fraud.
name isn't associated with the
project.
number three it will result in
money being better spent by the
public.
I just as a body there was a
time colleagues who may not know
And I think it's like eighty
five thousand dollars and it got
vetoed this is by the previous
governor.
But but of course no one knows
all by by having this
information mission public I
think it'll help us do a better
job of really thinking about how
we're appropriating these
dollars making sure we're
putting them into our district
A lot of money that we get asked
to appropriate which is an
awesome.
Awesome opportunity but awesome
responsibility as well to get it
right so I just think this is
this is incredible piece of good
We have further debate senators
senator Neville.
Thank you Mr president I just
wanted to say is a I'm one of
the co sponsors of this bill and
I wanted to mention that in San
Juan County we don't
good project we throw our money
all in one bucket and look at
the county and decide where we
need to spend the money and
every year I get a call from
somebody saying would you
release your capital outlay
money if I authorize it and
senator share authorizes it on
the same project I think the
project speaks for itself in the
public can look at and say
whether it's good or not thank
public needs to understand is is
the difference between
rural New Mexico in urban and
I'm not being critical it's just
a fact that in rural New Mexico
metering things like that and we
do some other things as well but
I know in the urban area in
Albuquerque I think it's really
difficult to find those kinds of
area all the legislators get
together from any lien and
Travis county and we sit down
and we try to complete the top
one or two projects so my name
think it's a collaborative
spirit that legislators can do
to make sure they're really
meeting the needs of their
communities so I don't know if
you know I don't mind at all
part or take a project it's hard
to get a real view but I support
this and I think that it's
important for us to make sure
the public knows where those
dollars are going the other
the session are counties or
cities are school districts if
they choose to make a request
that all submit their request we
actually visit with them about.
think it's just different around
the state and the public needs
to understand when these reports
come out.
That I may have collaborated
with a couple of other
legislators to complete a
a different kinds of projects to
do that we do in rural New
Mexico and I think it's
important to note that and we're
all trying to help our
communities but I support this
bill thank you.
want to thank senator Tom and
since he's been here he's been
on this quest for quite some
time but I have to tell you just
a small little story Mister
president you know when I came
to the legislature I was
surprised that this wasn't
appropriating what I'm trying to
do here and I agree with
everyone that has spoken before
me on let's actually get things
done and I think that this is
going to help to motivate
legislators to come together and
things wind up costing more
money significantly more money
sometimes because it takes so
long to get them done because
ripping apart sling small
amounts here and there just to
make a particular constituency
dollars getting it done faster
actually wants of costing us
less money so thank you very
much Mr president fully
supportive and I just want to
shine as much line as much
Out of the budget this year
Thank you for the question your
question is why do we eliminate
the that was standing.
Is that your question yes Mr
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate I'm sorry
senator many us.
what what did you find in
capital outlay that that was so
disturbing that you wanted
everything published.
Sierra so the question is if I
The Santo she you.
Wondering why what I found so
disturbing.
This information wasn't public
so I just someone will how come
somebody hasn't sued to get this
information and they said well.
It would cost a lot of money and
information nobody can argue
that is not the restores trust
and.
In the in the government so
thank you for the question.
Centerman yes thank you Mr
live in a district that has
thirteen chapters all my
chapters are all infrastructure
projects water parking lots
you know anything like that but
I I do believe that capital
outlay could needs to completely
change.
I think that it is a hard system
dollars and your capital request
Sir in the hundreds of millions
and you don't even know where to
start I do believe that we
Representative a wide area and
this may be the only downfall of
this bill is thirteen chapters
what they need exactly it is on
who has allowed us and this week
yes we are and how you do that
and it's always been a tough
issue for me to take a power
Where do we start and so I
really like to just.
Change the capital outlay
process.
And make them get scored on a
sheet and then come back to us
is what is going to hurt the
body making those decisions
because you're gonna have
outside groups saying I want all
your capital for this and if you
don't.
And we're going to run an ad
the way it was done but some
other centers that the good
senator that said next to
lieutenant governor
Representative so many counties
and you can't even say about
maybe seven or eight counties
Thomas.
Like to make a.
Quick comment follow up to and
senator Munoz Sierra does
the support of US senator Munoz
Senator for thank you.
Thanks thank you Sierra any
further debate.
Senator Griggs.
an interesting thing to me and I
haven't I haven't supported this
bill in the past and this
presentation and I'll let you
know why.
senator Byrd my shelf and
Representative black.
We all go to hearings to discuss
capital outlay opportunities
those hearings are all open to
the public we know what that
point what helped that the
communities in the county or are
asking for.
determine how to utilize the
limited funding we have because
we always have more requests
then we have funding.
city of Alamogordo ask for.
Senator Burton I will have
funded you know some other
projects around but not in
given the third and racial black
could have given a third we
should turn let the
representative give a hundred
percent.
But we're doing it in such a way
that if people want to argue
over well Senator Griggs never
funded any projects in
Alamogordo it becomes then a
willing if somebody wanted to
see what I put money toward to
allow that to occur I just never
supported this approach because
Well I agree in in principle I
think there's that's fine.
I think what you're gonna she.
Potentially and and that and the
folks who are in.
than for.
Senator Burton I.
But it potentially is an issue
and that's the reason why we
could be discussed in ways that
might improve the process.
And that might be that next year
The next year the only thing
that would be funded with
capital outlay dollars would be
quality of life issue.
I thank you Mr president senator
we could we could start looking
wouldn't be such small amounts
of money being allocated to
to projects and you know I think
and.
smaller projects to get funded
because of.
You've got the same amount of
capital outlay dollars to fund
we have because we're funding
for the most part large
infrastructure projects
throughout our our district
because of the
Blackwell and I will be at a
place where we'll get to talk to
two different people and tell
them just exactly what we did
this approach is trying to do
could.
Could affect you the next time
you have an opportunity to run
for election so thank you Mr
on the floor and there was an
amazing debate and probably one
of the craziest votes we've ever
seen with adopting an amendment
and it actually ended up with
something that looked like this.
understand that as a senator I
receive almost twice as much as
the house members all they would
see the way that it was written
before is is that Senator Pirtle
show and brings the perfect
amount of sunshine to the
capital outlay process that of
which legislators donated or
don't have spent their money on
approve of but I do think that
this is the perfect compromise
unfortunately two years ago
after the amendment was put on
the the bill was pulled or we
would have this for the last two
many clothes on the bill.
thank you Mr president and
Thank want to quickly respond to
Senator Griggs hope you can
overwhelmingly supports this
bill no one can argue this is
not public information is the
right thing to do it helps
restore trust in government.
And Mister president I've been
thank you senator Clemente if
you're going to put it on final
passage.
Close.
Mr president I move this Senate
except those voting for in a
negative by a roll call vote I
ask for a roll call vote thank
you thank you Sierra so just to
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator from the body is yes
Senator serve on this Senator
surrounded yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Griggs.
Yes Senator Senator Hamblen
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator yes Senator huh meal
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator to
subpoena.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator.
Senator Shendo Unser.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman yes Senator Tallman yes
senator Wirth.
Senator after a long explanation
By a vote of forty in the
affirmative zero on the negative
house bill fifty five is three
times amended with emergency
clause has passed the Senate
Senator AUMENT.
bill two hundred water trust
board and Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
Senator Stewart to explain the
bill.
I thank you Mr president house
bill two hundred is a fiscal
responsibility bill it clears
the way to invest eighty million
In two thousand for the federal
government pass there's on water
settlements Act we got three
things without the right to use
money if we figure out how to
build a diversion by that
deadline.
We spent the next fifteen years
and fifteen million dollars
trying to figure out how to
because we ran a time there
simply is no economically viable
way to divert thank you we spent
fifteen years and fifteen
That's what this bill that.
So fourteen thousand acre feet
is not New Mexico's water rights
the rights are federally owned
Mexico unit fund only for the
Hewlett diversion but we can use
other water projects in the
southwest region.
So this bill.
all communities and introduce in
the southwest region.
Including those not
representative right now on the
cap and state the governor has
The Interstate Stream Commission
and the water trust board will
both help invest this money
wisely.
A so Mister president I would
you Mr president as a resident
and senator representing Katrin
Grant and Sikora counties where
my family's lived for hundreds
communities and livelihoods and
it's important it's important
that we use the remaining funds
from the Arizona water
settlement act for local water
So the eighty million dollars in
the New Mexico unit fund can go
a long way toward improving
equipment to pull water systems
helping farmers improve
irrigation systems and
federal money that we can use to
stimulate our economy and help
so many people in our district
and this Climent
this bill is a balanced solution
generations so funding these
water projects will create jobs
and facilitate economic
development in the greater he
law.
committed to doing and I've
advocated to have formal
presentations on the water trust
board application process in
position to help with technical
assistance thank you Mr
president.
Miss present ways restaurants.
We're debating house bill two
Wirth deal yes I'd be happy to.
Thank you Mr president and
senator I have received this is
this represents my district so
personal question is without
appropriation of two hundred
fifty thousand why was this not
heard in House Appropriations or
Senate finance Senator Stewart.
is federal dollars so we can't
really decide how to spend that
we can certainly put money in
the budget like we've done for
the cost.
Senator Diamond thank you thank
you senator for the answer I
also want to address I I do
appreciate the appointment of
representation on the water
trust board which is mentioned
representation from those four
counties.
Senator so Mister president the
water trust board is really the
counties and they had already
done two million so they're up
to five billion just in the last
few years so.
expertise that work with them so
if we can get someone from the
southwestern part on that trust
board it'll only add to their
ability to advocate for their
area.
the trust board well our locally
elected officials still have a
voice in this process.
Senator Stewart Mr present
absolutely let me see here.
So if we have a member and
because they can help those
representatives in those areas
prepare present presentation for
Spent fifteen years and fifteen
million dollars to try to divert
the heel at that we can't do
they've all wanted to use the
federal money for their own
to the water trust board make
those presentations they'll get
caught to help them so this will
be driven by the local
representation.
opposition of this but all the
other counties and cities and
municipalities still still
continue to oppose this my
question then would be where the
So the supporting membership is
the Grant County commission.
the heel of conservation
coalition.
Hillary sources information
wildlife federation.
No extra data Amigos bravos
trout unlimited.
And Fort Sill Apache who
commented that.
and smaller local businesses
that support it it's it's a
change.
From what they've been thinking
of they will get as they move
forward.
They have to finally go to the
Interstate Stream Commission so
the bill directs the water trust
board to do all of the work that
they do.
they're the ones that can
approve the eighty million
dollars for these four counties
Senator Diamond thank you Mr
president senator and I
understand there are a number of
Senator.
so Mister president there's also
They keep the other folks
municipal water systems mutual
domestic water system and the
conservation community so there
is the you know it's been a.
who wanted to go for water
projects in those four counties
we think we're coming to an end
of that fight because.
difficult to divert we couldn't
figure out who was going to pay
for the diversion you know we
couldn't figure out.
Who would get the water so and
the captain to do down there so
that whole process is really
ground to a halt.
This is an attempt to have that
eighty million put into those
Senator Diamond thank you Mr
president senator speaking
directly moving the money could
you address the concern that
moving authority from the New
Mexico unit fund to the water
The secretary shall deposit the
amounts made available.
Into the New Mexico unit fund a
state of New Mexico fund
costs of the New Mexico unit and
that means they feel a
diversion.
The New Mexico unit was designed
only for the healer diverse.
Or
As determined.
By the New Mexico Interstate
Stream Commission in
consultation with the southwest
the water trust board be that
body and they are set up to do
that.
Senator Diamond thank you Mr
president and so the Arizona
water settlement act did give
cap entity and then would
replace that with water
transport correct Senator
Stewart Mr president it does
because the New Mexico cap
entity is only for a Hewlett the
assure the people of southwest
New Mexico they will have
representation and input into
what we do down there with their
water.
And this present it's a good
that the water trust board has
determined these are the areas
that need water now.
They have the expertise and they
that want to have funding for
their water project and they're
ready to go.
We've been hearing about these
projects for years every time we
water for this and the cap into
the has refused to fund any of
those because their focus has
been the heel of diversion which
to deal with that imposes a lot
of requirements on our local
smaller and entities that
they're not able to meet without
the resources including lawyers
Well Mr president there they've
really got a leg up because they
already have these water
projects vetted and ready to go
so really all they have to do is
make the presentation but.
projects go to the Water
TrustPort.
Water trust board meets
regularly.
Every year they have a bill to
Senator thank you Mr president
and and senator I want to first
of all thank you for including
that F. T. we're going to need
it there's still a lot of
concern about dealing with the
have some concerns even moving
this over
I I just wanted to to make clear
though that our our communities
down there are still very much
in opposition I'm concerned that
thank you.
Thank you Senator Diamond we do
have for the debate will have
Senator Woods followed by
Senator Hamblen then Senator
about this Senator Woods.
Remember one of the first
controversial bills ever heard
when I came to the Senate was
this very issue.
the state we had hearing right
That's been happening for the
last thirty minutes in.
And wasting time as it was
described this.
And I remember many lawsuits and
many requirements that were.
Put on these committees that
come up with the place.
They would go to that and start
doing that can get close to the
end and get rejected.
Representative Randy Crowder but
he was on Interstate Stream
committee at that time.
And you know he told me some of
the history that was going on
Four.
gallant.
Fourteen hundred acre foot of
water.
So funny about that.
Lawsuits with taxes.
About water.
Now this particular river.
Is a Colorado.
And I'm sure the good senator
knows all the information on the
his on the caller at a where the
Colorado River it goes from out
to LA.
Can you believe that.
Some kids that water goes delay.
Now you're telling me that
fourteen hundred acre for waters
golly.
We're gonna let that flow on
down the river.
I wonder sometimes if you feel
the same way.
cued damn.
Are the hearing them.
of auto.
You're telling me today.
The fourteen hundred acres of
water.
It's not a big deal.
doing what certain groups don't
want to do.
The groups that have took suits.
I'm I'm I'm of.
Can echo what senator chair says
Bailey.
You know we should hear in argue
who said you're trying to make a
point.
going to influence our one of
you the vote with me I know
that.
This issue has been going for
eight years I remember.
And stared down a room full of
people.
Bused in from several different
states.
This issue.
That their position was that we
in New Mexico didn't know what
we needed to do with our water
that they knew best.
Dared in the eyes of those
people.
And voted.
The whole the place in New
Mexico the water in New Mexico.
acre food water.
Mexico can't lose one drop of
water.
It's a funny thing.
To you said an office with norm
came.
And let him tell you the history
as he saw it.
Or hired Hutchison.
But you learn a lot.
When you listen to both sides.
And that's the time to make your
opinion.
After you hear what you're
The votes are in your favor.
The vote during your favorite to
do whatever the heck you want to
do in this state this year.
This is one clause that you're
going to give up water from New
Mexico.
To Arizona.
Our weather so more much more
prosperous in Arizona the New
Mexico.
Water.
Is economic development.
Willing to give it up.
Mr president.
I appreciate the opportunity to
say my piece today thank you.
Sanchez to yield one is more of
a committee on this as head of
the Las Cruces green chamber of
commerce I know how intertwined
protected public lands are with
businesses and communities we've
seen that simple with the organ
throughout the country the list
of supporters that were read by
both Center stored and Senator
create Hemphill may include a
lot of no names to some of us
here in the chambers however
protecting our open spaces.
And when we talk about this the
groups that you madam they
represent a coalition of strong
local support whether it be from
nonprofits are advocacy
importance of the outdoor
recreation economy Senator
Steinborn and I've talked about
that a great deal in this
chamber and I remember when I
was a kid camping in the he left
this was right after my father
passed away and my mom took us
out there to get distracted from
life and I remember I was the
only one at the age of twelve we
friends laughing and cooking and
breakfast.
Many of you may remember like
you know breakfast potatoes and
bill in a couple of things that
I'm appreciative about is that.
The sponsors of the bill the
governor heard there needs to be
a local person on the water
transport.
Mexico because of protecting the
beloved he will revert this is a
cornerstone of tourism in
southwest New Mexico and we
don't want this to become a
solution to it and we have
wasted millions of dollars on
this so I am proud to stand in
support of this bill that will
help this community access eight
hundred million dollars in
our public lands and supporting
jobs so I think the senators for
bringing this bill forward I
look forward to supporting it
thank you Mr president.
Thanks Center Hamlin we do have
the Senate and my colleague from
seeing this is a partisan issue
because I just don't see that.
On the suggestion here that this
vote is going to be lined up
based on an election in November
that that's just completely
past years the committee members
of my family look at all of you
in this room because I think
everybody the legislature's on
that committee I I think we had
about forty members on that
committee forty or fifty
members.
the heel of the money and the
water that's at issue here was
so important and because I
wanted that local input.
And we would always go to
Silvercity we would always hear
from the county commissioners
ceiling cap entity and there was
want bears on water Madam at.
Another concern that and that
and that we had and all of you
will recall that were on there
progress they were spending tens
and tens of millions of dollars
they had hundreds of meetings
they had engineers and lawyers
and they were and they were
spending money.
seven years to the deadline six
years five years every year we
go down the summer city Donna
you're not making progress you
getting close your deadline and
every year that tell us that
things were great.
those meetings all that work.
Came to nothing.
I got to tell you that in all of
the things that I've
participated in in the twenty
making no progress at all with
no direction and that's really
the best way to say this we had
no direction at all.
When I spoke about the healer
and and the efforts over the
wreck and it was just slow
motion year after year.
This is not a partisan issue.
Good government waste
mismanagement misspending is not
partisan.
is important this is going to
put the responsibility into the
water trust board.
And I think that's probably a
good body as we have right now
to do so when I understand some
board justice center Wirth has
been trying to change the
composition of the Interstate
Stream Commission because the
water trust board is a sixteen
What happened between all of
those years the nothing was
happening no progress will be
made we had a different
administration we had a
different governor.
During many of those years.
current governor was elected we
suddenly then had a new state
engineer and we had a new water
trust board and the governor
took an entirely different
direction from the last
governor.
And issues were resolved very
promptly in a way to the
satisfaction of this
planning to be subject to the
whims of different
administrations.
We can't have one water policy
under governor Richardson
changed by a different water
So I support the legislation I
think the water transport is
about as good as we can do right
now for an independent body who
knows how to manage water
projects well we reform their
ready projects in good projects
the right body.
Let's keep in mind we need to
change the water trust board so
that it does not change
administration to
administration.
So I support the legislation and
I asked members not to think of
this as a partisan issue but
it's a good government issue an
important water issue thank you
Mr president thank you so this
month as we do have further
Center program I heard this in
committee and I've got a few
more questions I actually like
Senator about this point that
should not be partisan it should
So Mister president I think that
is something that's
misunderstood all healer river
water rights are owned by
Senior water rights holders are
in Arizona that's why if we had
done a diversion we would have
to pay Arizona for it every
year.
So you know we we get the river
we get all the economic benefits
that of Senator Hamblen
mentioned we have outdoor
recreation.
had to portage had to pull those
kayaks of the river and drag
them around trees so it benefits
they're at the farmers the
It's very seasonal you've got to
get your boat in the Sheila in
March and it's cold because then
it doesn't have enough to float
them to begin with.
Mr president in center that the
because my next question I've
got Popp propping Colorado and
penas river because I had the
second indication rights.
In Colorado it was New Mexico
water but it came in and paid my
understand how if the Arizona
tribes has first right to the
top I'm just wondering how we
use and have it all even for
floating or in any other uses
has water rights I'm just trying
to understand the agency present
so the Mr president we certainly
have plenty of people all along
the healer river in New Mexico
beautiful Ruiloba wilderness.
Note down to other towns farms
the Conservancy at the
There's there's a conservation
on the heal up but then it goes
into Arizona and frankly.
Within a hundred miles in
Arizona it's it's bone dry
because it's used soon as it
gets to Arizona it's used by
fifteen million dollars and we
missed the deadline and the
money is gone and we can no
longer down.
And frankly we just couldn't do
million dollars at a minimum.
And the money from the Feds was
fifty six million.
That how do you divvy up two
hundred fifty million a month
the poor farmers and people that
proposed action at least five
times throughout the need for
process they delayed schedules
and increasing costs.
so we've got eighty million for
these four counties and we ought
to be spending at we have to let
them decide and it will be those
president in center I I guess
I'm trying to now understand
what's the difference between
a damning the diversion would
you be able to explain that to
river so it gets to your peach
tree.
Mispronounce your shorter ride
and version is access only but I
Had a use it or lose it
opportunity so the property I
had as long as I use my car for
a judge on my property it would
center I went to Las Vegas
Nevada probably four years ago
to talk to people about the
Colorado River and do I
there's anything left in it
down at the border between
Mexico near California.
So they Sheila although it joins
And and I guess I was getting to
my next point of what we're
there other expecting explained
to us that the end users New
Mexico that always had one of
but the real beneficiaries of
the our waters that come down
from New Mexico to them for
those that had the options to be
as well in the house for the
last eight years we prioritize
what our values are we put money
to a lot of different
opportunities you know we can
with this as president center I
guess my point is we will be
fighting for water one drop at a
time.
and center at some point in
time.
Maybe not now maybe my grandkids
or my great grandkids will be
wishing the we had reserve the
committee thing is present
This really manifested debate
and and I I just want to chime
in on a couple things that
hopefully be helpful.
And if you've ever been to
Phoenix they have a really
engineering Marvel.
Of how they have diverted water
began with the indigenous people
in Arizona.
you you look at the prosperity
there.
this a lot issues go into that.
Or Democrat can say this is not
partisan but if we have a
partisan vote or if the other
party just disagree as well it
is partisan I don't have the
ride as Republicans just
maybe break down some of the
barriers of partisanship over
this bill as I.
And.
Guessing this is going to be
pretty much a party line vote.
Why is that what what is as a
the most helpful and insightful
comment that I've heard and and
we did hear this bill in
committee and I have discussed
it with my constituents even on
on in the area as well as other
the river at as it is and the
the outdoor recreation and
tourism and and people floating
down the river it's cetera that
helps me know that helps me as a
senator is comments from people
I know quite well that'll that
you know looked at all the
articles in the newspaper and
all these millions are non
trying to you know of the the
you know messed with the water I
just can't believe that.
It's just this emotional.
Kind of visceral reaction.
course you can't dam up the
river how could you.
What what what else are we
coming what can we not.
Bill and do any sort of of
It's a major issue and so what
is not partisan is the idea of
development there are some
people on either side that that
one.
That's my constituents Mister
president those are not partisan
issues.
But what is partisan is when we
hear from people over here from
talk about this in in terms of
what what what are we actually
But clearly this is a very
unsettled matter.
And so I'll close with this is I
I do hope we can continue to
listen to each other and hear
And then finally what I'm really
that this is my my overall
concern here is present members
of body is what is actually
this violates what what Congress
did.
And there is there possibly
gonna say this to federal court
and so the the what I hear is is
well we you know we wasted a
partisanship in the intense
fighting.
Are you just gonna stop
listening to each other and just
say see you in court better
lawyer up and who's gonna pay
for that.
waste money over this issue and
I do believe there is some
degree or a possibility of some
partisan of some bipartisanship
anywhere and
And I'm not going to listen to
the potential benefits of a damn
because I'm just morally opposed
federal court
that's also bad and I I just
have a concern that if that
happens we're we're shooting
ourselves in the foot because
we've just draw and draw lines
battle for years and years and
years thing is present.
Further debate Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president and and I
don't need the Sanchez sealed
other than the thank you for
this to.
landscapes not just in the state
of New Mexico but in the entire
country.
We have the native healer trial.
It is considered one of the last
wild rivers of the state of New
Mexico.
And so from the very beginning
yes.
First one is started a billion
dollar project something that
would fundamentally alter this
river and threaten the landscape
of course people were opposed to
that.
And we talk about economics the
outdoor industry in the state
and Mr president about
alternative visions over.
What to do with water and I
needs that.
To give it to another purpose.
So.
I think this bill.
And and where the evolution or
The water by keeping in this
landscape colleagues we preserve
something so treasured.
That when you destroy it you can
not get it back.
cannibalization project.
It was intentionally
straightened out the banks of
the river mow down it is about
traveled up by talus from Santa
Fe to tells I was blown away Mr
president colleagues by the
cottonwoods and by this wild
river.
Same river.
The Rio Grande river is actually
got the highest protection of
the wild and scenic river.
Got a major outdoor recreation
industry that goes there.
nature to try to plant some
native cottonwoods.
So it is worth fighting for.
It is worth fighting to protect
these most wild places.
fighting about that's what's at
stake in in and
In the healer and and I wanted
to say that the out it is an
extraordinary place if any of
you have not been a Silvercity.
Jim this is a wonderful
industry there's just blooming.
So I think.
The water in keeping it in the
system that's what this is about
unfortunately the cap.
leads me to the money and water
Mr president colleagues which is
the money.
And the caps plan that this bill
would fundamentally finally
alternative Congress gave us to
use that money to benefit tens
of thousands of people.
So.
And I will say.
Colleagues that.
and the rest of our community by
the way.
So we have an opportunity to
help tens of thousands of people
which I think is the best
financial decision we have an
opportunity to protect the most
while the eco system in New
think it it is bipartisan along
those value line's not all.
Proud to support the bill is
present thank you Centers for
listening.
Thank you Mr president thank you
madam pro tem um it was
mentioned earlier that the Hilo
The Sheila can't be down to now
using the federal money because
we've missed the deadline we
spent fifteen years and fifteen
Basically tried to take over the
other projects.
So it could in the future I mean
this bill says nothing about
feasible it's too expensive
there's not enough people to pay
for it we don't know where to
get the money and they try to
get three hundred million from
the legislature.
because we couldn't figure out a
way to do it what's left is
eighty million that we can use
for water projects and there's
They have a diverse
representation they have an
organizational infrastructure
that's designed to rapidly look
at projects.
couldn't do it economically.
Them.
Senator protester president
and farming you know I'm minor
little diversions all along but
I feel a like like we do with
other rivers in New Mexico.
Mr president is there any
And I'm sure we can yield to my
co sponsor Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill the old.
Thank you Mr president I yield.
Mr president and senator out yes
there are and the point of the
bill.
Is really not about damning the
the heart of this bill is really
freeing up the money so that we
can use it for local water
projects and the four counties
which is the only place that
Mr president Sanchez.
We keep saying that we missed
the deadline who filed this up
who who who was in involved that
The the cap into T. R. was
supposed to be the one that
would approve a diversion and
It costs too much they couldn't
figure out where to put it what
to do with that they've stopped
and started for fifteen years
Senator Mr president there's no
one person that felt that that I
think from the beginning it was
doomed just because it's
difficult to damn the heal up.
thought from the beginning I
wasn't going to work but you
know we kept trying for fifteen
years study after study and
they've just finally didn't meet
heard from a few people from
that area and and the story I'm
hearing is a little bit of a
different story and it's a story
more along the lines of too many
cooks in the kitchen and so you
because there's there's too many
people trying to give their
input when their input is.
Not necessary and and usually
not really pertinent to to the
There was money granted in a
plan and everything went into
expanding the forest will then
all the all the environmental
great projects that would be
great economic drivers and then
these environmental groups come
in and sell it all up for the
rest of the state thank you Mr
president.
appreciate all the comments I
just want to remind us that this
bill is really about spending
money and four counties on water
projects that are ready to go
good environmental efforts to
look at those projects many of
the projects have already been
vetted but this will give those
four counties the ability to
really improve their water
transport projects in New Mexico
unit provide.
Senator said the chamber.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senator
Senator Gallegos not Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
nos.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pro.
Senator street is now Senator
severe Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes.
By a vote of twenty six in the
affirmative fifteen the negative
house bill two hundred has
did the fish say when he swam
into the wall.
Damn thank you for that bring
some levity to to the debate
gonna go back to item number
fourteen House Bill to the
general appropriation act on
you'll Center millions.
Centamin yes to moving explained
two and three as amended on
front final passage and is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
Say no objection sentiment also
explained the bill.
come back to us to decide make
decision on the floor.
Mr president members of the
Senate
and the Senate finance committee
house bill two by itself is a
most important investment in New
Mexico.
Semenya's proceed.
I'm sorry the other George.
seven point four billion dollar
budget and a four point nine
percent increase and we grew
reserves to twenty three point
eight percent.
COVID relief and one million for
five million for GSTN covertly
support for individuals and one
million for the general services
department for the shortfall
our investment on the workplace
of the future including eleven
mission million dollars for
opportunity scholarships
priority for the executive and
raising the lottery scholarships
to ninety percent.
finance public school supporters
at three point three five
billion a five percent five
point eight percent increase in
New Mexico.
In the area of health care and
million dollar contingent pro
for the short approval for the
shortfall Medicaid.
Senate finance committee also
provide an additional six
hundred thirty three thousand
projects in our state and one
million to the Department
information to improve cyber
cyber Department department of
information technology for cyber
security.
Mr president.
When the work of the Senate
finance committee and the
session is done these the
results will be this.
pandemic increase our reserves.
Your provided a hundred thirty
three million dollars for
broadband service.
Access in every corner of New
Mexico.
general fund to shore up our
unemployment insurance program
with another six hundred million
in federal stimulus is set aside
in that fund.
Mr president colleagues.
Anyone who remembers the
previous process will agree that
it was at least is one of the
least transparent.
In the legislature.
Currency the Cappelli process
consider and pass important
broadband legislation tax relief
for low income and working
families.
This is down which means our
from our own Senator Diamond
who's now a wall so we won't
think for yet because he's not
here.
Mr present.
Sentiment us with our internet
provider.
Mr president I think from here
on out we should have our
internet providers names on on
on the webcast.
we're back up where we left off
was Center share on Senate floor
member number one we're debating
that so we're back up for all
Si no further debate and senator
member number one Senator share
to close thank you Mr president
services.
Twenty million dollars actually
little more than twenty million
dollars.
That's in contractual services
Mister president.
And according to the Department
especially the chair what we
have in our hand here is in fact
an amendment to house bill two.
But the amendment starts out.
On pages five one one.
This ammendment is on page four.
So we're not in fact amending an
amendment we're amending the
rich the original bill on this
We certainly made it legal in
New Mexico to fund to have
abortions up to the very last
second birth.
But why do the taxpayers have to
committee substitute for house
bill two and three as amended
and ask for the roll call vote
centers we're voting on Senate
floor member number one all
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Senator Duhigg now Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gallegos
yes Senator Gonzalez no Senator
Gonzales now Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal.
McKenna no Senator McKenna no
Senator Moores Senator Moores
yes Senator my nose.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
Padilla.
Senator Padilla now Senator
Pinto.
No Senator Pinto no Senator
Pirtle.
Sanchez senator Sanchez yes
Senators committees.
Senator street is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator souls no Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
For.
By a vote of fourteen the
affirmative twenty three in the
negative senator member number
one has failed to pass Senate.
Senator.
I would have never guessed that
focused president.
amended amendment sponsored by
senator William E. Scherer
Senator to move in explaining
them in thank you Mr president I
now move Senate floor amendment
can just get the the board we
got to get the number correct we
can just hold on before we
explained that.
amendment thank you Mr president
I know the confusion there was a
Senator Pirtle of war my bowler
for a few minutes in a confused
everybody.
Hard to tell us apart people so
young and all.
that we can amend without
amending amendment this is part
of the original a substitute
bill which we can then.
But all it says is that
Sixty eight to seventy percent
of the state of those polled
sixty eight seventy percent of
the New Mexicans are not in
favor of late term abortions.
that at some point.
This is in fact a human child.
And that twenty week seems to be
the the point that the citizens
of New Mexico have drawn.
But I would also like to point
out.
In our previous discussions when
there was the question about
We were told no no no no no no
no that would never happen.
Never happened but today we're
saying if we do not adopt this
amendment today we're saying the
a late term abortion if if we do
not adopt this as it sits today
that money that twenty million
dollars in the department of
health.
And they can use it for
abortions if they wish.
not be required to participate.
Yet the citizens who pay taxes
are forced to participate.
will also make the health care
providers.
And I think that that is a
serious problem Mr president so
with that I'm open for debate
centers we're debating Senate
Thing is present will the
sponsor the amount you'll
Senator kneeled absolutely Mr
president thank you Mr president
etcetera thank you for reading
pluralistic society we have to
try to figure out how to live
with each other.
And there are certain things
that because a lot about well a
lot of people in fact about two
I I I the reason I like this
ammendment.
Being put in the budget like
this it's it's protecting where
public money goes Mr president
and center is that is that
you're you're into the billing
Absolutely Mr president and
senator it's only to protect
taxpayer money it doesn't change
the legal status of abortion one
By protecting the taxpayers
money from being used in this
manner.
Thank you thank you Mr presentar
so
you know what what what what do
you think kind of their their
thoughts are have you had any
discussions with with them on on
this particular issue about
unique DNA in a heartbeat about
you know four weeks it's such a
have you had any of those kinds
of conversations to try to come
to a.
discussions about is this a
human being.
So the child in the womb at
twenty weeks certainly feels
pain.
The only difference between that
child and you Mr president is
size.
There's some growth that needs
to happen.
And I think this is a very
important place to draw a line.
Again I'm not saying that it
can't be done in by state law
people want to force taxpayers
into this because they think
that the taxpayers have a right.
Or the person of.
The woman getting an abortion
that are you owe me anything
Mister president.
My right to liberty does not
cost anybody else anything else.
But when we get to these other
A rate is built into what I can
do.
What I'm allowed to do.
Without the help of others.
But eventually my right to life
is my right to life.
And it doesn't cost anybody else
for me to live.
So from that perspective making
Thank you Mr president of the
that's really interesting
because I I've heard some
extremely intelligent people
debate that precise issue of
called right to an abortion
that's based on this right to
privacy that came up on the
Supreme Court in the seventies
that that somehow.
C. in this ammendment.
Try to avoid that what would you
ever suggest The New Mexicans
to bear arms as does everybody
in this in this country.
But to have taxpayers by NMED a
firearm would certainly be
beyond the pale.
But to have the taxpayers who do
not want firearms who fear
firearms being forced to pay for
our firearms in our training no
that's.
Thank you Mr president center
I'm glad that you don't hold
that position because if so this
would be a hypocritical
amendment the the other issue
amendment or the you know the
the kind of have the same
political views in simply a a
private school or private church
children's park
which meant a lot of litigation
and then was finally they they
were successful in the United
the taxpayer funded your rights
that you kind of like but then
you're gonna go in and block
someone else's
You know right and say well no I
don't want my taxpayer dollars
going to that.
farm just like with freedom of
religion you know no one's
asking anybody to you know pay
for someone else's.
Ability to go to church or on a
You know I try not to do this Mr
president sometimes we run
amendments to make just make
bills better and we're opposed
to them and I try to communicate
that when I do so but really
miss present members of the body
this this bill HB two.
Is probably looking at a
straight party line vote
however I will just say right
big deal for some of the folks
over on the left side of the
aisle that's okay appreciate you
in building is here that's how
important it is.
morally egregious.
And I think we need to come up
with better solutions in order
to really live with each other
Mr president I wanted to be
respectful both sides and say
or or you know it over other
things income of a lot of
examples.
So that this is really a
fundamental issue about.
their farm or.
Access to decent road so they
can.
Drive around it while in a
library here in there they got
access to public safety.
for those services that's good
government but this is this is
not good government because it
leaves a lot of people out in
the dust.
on either side of of the issues
to force people to even.
Remotely participate in
something that they find to be
extremely immoral.
Any further debate senators
Santo Domingo's.
Of the Mr president with the
misprision and etcetera.
Appreciate your amendment and I
just wanted to clarify of your
amendment does not stop
the mix anybody else can pay for
it including a taxpayer but just
not with tax dollars.
Mr president and senator would
here will stop.
with that what your amendment
stop that so Mister president.
Yes because that's where the
money's coming from to do this
currently do New Mexicans have.
The input on where that money
goes the way it is in statute
right now.
after twenty weeks so nothing
else changes.
Thank you Mr president I just
wanted to clarify because I
think the process would still
happen the just the text version
some level that is some of a
moral decision you decide
whether you're going to eat
salad or steak if you're
vegetarian eating steak is a
moral and we should not force
center are there other programs
would that would help them.
Fund the abortions a would not
be taxpayer dollars.
So Mister president yes there's
can do that of there's all kinds
of things that can happen out
there that would fund abortions
this only says the taxpayers of
New Mexico should not be in the
middle of that.
hotel the abortion everything
except personal care from
doctors so with that all yield
thank you for your amendment and
clothes and senator member
number one so thank you Mr
president in those the debated
so I've been told frequently
that this is a moral document
what we Fund in here.
for education there's money for
the department of health there's
money for courts money for a lot
of things in in this budget Mr
president.
And all of those we've made a
One tiny piece.
Should not be used.
To abort babies.
I'm not I understand that these
things happen.
I do think there's better ways
to deal with the with what we
No late term elective abortions
should be funded by the citizens
of New Mexico.
And with that Mr president I now
move Senate floor amendment
number one to house
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Candelaria Senator Candelaria
motion picture show run this.
Senator syringes no Senator
Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Hamblen no Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez no Senator McKenna
no Senator McKenna no senator
Senator my nose now senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator probe Now Senator
Rodriguez.
No.
Senator sincere lovers know
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Stefanics now Senator
Steinborn.
So Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart noted Senator
Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Baca yes.
Who.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes.
We need to by a vote of thirteen
affirmative twenty to the
negative senator member number
one has failed to pass Senator
thank you Mr president I
appreciate the debate and I hope
one to house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bills two and three as
amended amendment sponsored by
senator cliff R. Pirtle center
See no objections center field
explain tremendous thank you Mr
president in in mind nine short
years here nine sessions in the
budget we see over and over all
exist on the books and so if
after two years it's not filled
the HSD is running provide the
services are going great that
debating said apartment number
one and I'll go to the Sanchez
sentiment us thank you Mr
president father time to look
back to last fall he was saying
that DFA and RT accomplish this
stand for questions and is on
friendly but it doesn't matter
Senators we're debating senator
member number one.
Senator share.
We don't know what that's for a
particularly but what we do know
we look at things is is that
there are unfilled positions
there.
And then they use that money for
other things that they want to
use certainly still within the.
The letter of the law but it's
certainly not to pay for.
budget and helps us to put money
where the public can't see it is
to put it in that particular
category.
So that they don't so that
people reading the budget they
think all of the sponsor the
amendment is trying to do is
make sure that our money our
money the taxpayers of New
Mexicos money.
not having a slight of hand here
and putting money in places
where cannot be spent on that
but it can be spent on other
things.
So with that Mr president I
fully support this man.
In center yes thank you Mr
president procedure description
earlier of what DFA has been
doing is that a normal course of
business Mr president is that
something's gonna happen every
right track and and we don't
need this ammendment.
Senator Padilla I thank you Mr
president what I was hoping
you'd say in that as being a
regular course of business now
should eliminate the need for
this ammendment thank you and I
Say no further debate center
part of the clothes on the
amendment and thank you Mr
president I'm glad that we're
pretty sure that DFA will
probably continue Lee may be.
talking about the year starting
July first to to June thirtieth.
and so this will just ensure
that we continue that policies
that these agencies don't blow
Senators tier seats phase where
voting a senator member number
one.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Campos now senator
Candelaria.
Senator Graham the let them know
senators about this.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales now
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator had a meal now Senator
Kernan.
McKenna no Senator McKenna and
no Senator Moores.
Senator Moores yes Senator manos
senator Munoz now senator
Neville.
Padilla.
Senator Stewart and no Senator
Pinto.
No Senator Pinto now Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Sanchez passes Senators
committees.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
so they're Lopez.
No.
Senator Shendo no Senator souls
Senator souls no senator should
for annex.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Wirth Now Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of thirteen in the
affirmative twenty five the
native Senate floor member
number one has failed to pass
the Senate Senator Pirtle thank
you Mr president.
We have.
finance committee substitute for
House Bills two and three as
amended amendment sponsored by
senator cliff R. Pirtle.
Senator moving explained the
committee substitute for house
bill two and three is amended
thank you senator feel explain
your amendment thank you Mr
president this is the New Mexico
true amendment Mr president New
important that if we're going to
do those types of things we're
gonna use public money.
What better way to use that
money than to promote New Mexico
cattle ranchers New Mexico
promoting New Mexico products
thank you Mr president.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator among us thank you Mr
president have we seen this is
produced in New Mexico that we'd
be able to you can zoom in the
governor's office and not miss
one we may.
Look at.
MMS Sanchez you'll for quick
question.
That part of the world Mr
president I yield thank you Mr
president H. R. understanding
remember probably this is only
Senator Pirtle Mr president
Senator that's correct and and
if you look at the
the bill online it tracks
perfectly it's in the exact
the
Israeli ambassador to the U. S.
is really really good and and I
think they did a good job
he.
He came because he was finishing
up his term he said I just never
been in New Mexico and I really
want to come here and just
experience what New Mexico's
I I I collected and sauce for
your main thing.
Any further debate senators.
See none Senator Pirtle to close
on the amendment.
lives in a district that has
forty two thousand voting or
forty two thousand people
residing in it and I bet he has
two hundred thousand cattle in
his will in that one Senate
it needs to be New Mexico beef
and hopefully could be from
Senator Woods district.
That there's gonna be beverages
served you know I think one of
the the things that caught my
Mexico plenty of craft breweries
that make amazing beers and
spirits but not just them we
have the people raising lamb we
have onions down and hatch green
Chile all of these great
at the governor's mansion and I
think that's just really
strengthens it up to say if you
are going to host one of these
dinners if you're going to have
a dignitary or somebody from
outside of the state of New
committees for House Bill two
and three as amended as for roll
call centers where voting a
senator member number one.
To your seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos no senator
Candelaria.
Senators have on this Senator
yes Senator Gonzalez no Senator
Gonzales now Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen now Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator meal now Senator Kernan.
Senator Moores CS Senator one
knows.
Senator one is now Senator
Neville.
Pinto.
Senator Pinto now Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator is what is yes senators
of the Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez now
Senator share.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
Ten twenty.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes.
Thank you Mr president all the
ranchers and Senator Woods
district that raise wagyu be for
very disappointed thank you we
do have another floor amendment
the reader to read.
Ingle I'm fortunate to I
certainly
What of support this amendment
had I thought it was it at all
enforceable or had any real of
going to happen here and wishes
of this is a very serious body
here and we need to make sure
where we're going here and I
certainly support everything in
to know what if somebody wanted
to have sit down have a Cup of
coffee with the governor that
would not be available at the
governor's mansion and the other
thing it didn't include was
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three as amended
amendment sponsored by senator
Craig W. Brandt centre read to
committee substitute house bill
two and three.
I see no objection avail explain
what the member the senator
I think this presents it's it's
very simple amendment on page
dollars last year we increased
the contingency fund from
seventy two thousand and ninety
six thousand for the governor we
kind of saw how that worked out
Thank you Mr president thanks
Center Brandt we are debating
senator member number one will
you'll to Santo Domingo us.
Mr present we see this is on
friendly amendment.
Of first I have to admit to
terrible sin forgot to bring the
audit that I had from the
governor's expense account here
but I do know that there were
thing that's that's government
furniture that we she didn't buy
that for herself will hope not
anyway.
But that's alright furniture
just like this chair.
On finding wines and foods there
were things like that in there
as well and so I think that if
Not saying that the mansion
doesn't need patio furniture the
mansion is used.
For.
Activities there that are
appropriate for the governor.
The furniture for that might be
absolutely perfect and
legitimate.
Not from this fund.
From this fund.
this is not a significant change
in the budget but it does try to
take the amount of money that we
that we believe.
That you spent.
didn't touch with this amendment
which just those.
Oddities Mr president so
therefore I support this man.
Senator is we are debating
senator member number one.
Say no more I do have senator
Morris who would like to debate
center Mars for you is present
with the sponsor of the
amendment yield center Randy
yield yes Sir course we got to
governor's mansion to build a
fence last summer was that
included in this budgets
money set aside to do repairs
and maintenance on the mansion
and that would have come through
the the proper channel in the
what that half million dollars
of fence was you for.
I mean why what what it was half
million dollar fence built
around the governor's mansion do
we have any idea.
building and so those didn't
exist then so we really don't
know
it's one of the issues that that
I think the state auditor needs
body you're making sure that
money is being spent correctly
Mr president Senator was there
anything in last year's budget
we passed that said that hundred
half million dollars was going
to go to the governor's
budget that was specifically to
build a fence around the
governor's mansion.
Mister Mister president senator
another all state owned
facility.
Mr president Senator honestly I
can only guess I'm not sure if
if the sponsor of the bill or
center Marcin thank you Mr
president senator Munoz German
you know so I'm sure you heard
the question was there any how
preparation that this body made
last year to build a half
they for capital improvements
that the government can use and
the fence was built to keep
center share at.
Senator Moores agency presidents
it put in just a it had to come
from somewhere course came from
the taxpayers but who
transferred the money from GST a
more pro or what building
build this spans of the
governor's mansion sentiment us
Mr president center in the board
of finance to get twelve million
dollars annually and the board
from the governor's mansion
fence
and we don't did who are chairs
of the board of finance Mister
president senator.
Mr president present the
governor lieutenant governor the
treasure and some appointees
including one former senator
that sat below me.
this half million dollars to
build a fence around on her
property and so she actually
controls the border control this
twelve million dollars to
pointed to members and she
sentiment us this presents enter
I do can answer that question I
really don't know what what the
board of finance can improve
what's and then their
limitations if it's security if
it's not security and what can
can veto this twelve million
dollars of the governor's our
board can appropriate for any
reason is there any veto message
message of that or any oversight
over this big slush fund
it is authorized thank you Mr
president so the only overseeing
body over this twelve million
dollar fund that the governor
used to build a fence around her
own property she is the only one
what I do know that we did not
appropriated we do not vetted we
did not know why it was done on
the governor decided spent a
half million dollars on this
take a look at that we are the
legislature appropriated bodies
in for us to advocate more power
to any executive I think is
We do have further debate
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
Mr president I was struck by a
US senator Morris questioning
and is reference to the
governor's property that's not
the governor's property that's
governor's mansion even if it's
one of our current of
legislators who by fire to
higher office and run for the
governorship yeah you would be
and if you really want to get
into the the penny ante stuff
they were getting into a Senator
brands amendment Mr president I
suggest we start looking at the
dollars out of her operations we
can we can say that much and
paper clips will just gather
ours up and hang them up to her
after the session thank you Mr
president.
colleagues to the windows open
to the public and even the
legislature's I've gone up there
twice is here to be turned
around by the state police
Saying then Senator Brandt to
close on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president and and I
think server Ortiz Y. Pino for
letting us all know these
planned to run for governor I
endeavor
also I I guess to some people
you know miss spending.
ninety six thousand dollars is
It has been clear through the
reports is agency spending this
contingency fund.
It was raised last year.
hear back from the auditor but
the the law is very clear on
what this money can be spent on.
I'm not really sure why it needs
to be ninety six thousand
To spend it on.
Alcohol to spend it on of
groceries.
And when she's not having anyone
at the mansion.
It is clearly not allowed to be
used to supplement.
yeah wait another year see how
it's actually being spent take a
look at it and come back maybe
next year with that with a
better idea of what it should
To the Senate finance committee
amendment to House
appropriations and finance
committee substitute to house
I'll send this to the chamber.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Candelaria now senators
have on this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen no
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator economy on most Senator
Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez now Senator
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pro.
Senators ratings yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
No Senator Sedillo version of
Senator share.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart no Senator
Tallman.
Senator Pinto no Mr chair.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator Sweetser yes.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you members of the Senate
we do have another floor
amendment.
amended amendment sponsored by
Senator Antoinette Sedillo
Lopez.
Senator Lopez to move and
explain the amendment.
Thank you Mr president I move
amendment number one to house
Jackson going to explain which
amendment as.
Thank you Mr president with this
amendment does.
five percent raise if they were
earning under twenty five
thousand and four percent if
they were over twenty five
thousand.
We changed it to one percent if
under fifty thousand and zero
percent if over fifty thousand.
Increase anyone saw was about
five hundred dollars.
This of the I'm two thousand
cities two hundred eight.
I need to take a breath.
If you'll turn to.
Two two hundred eight.
hundred and thirty nine thousand
dollars.
Well that.
To what I suggest one hundred
and twenty four eight hundred
seventy eight million dollars.
The rest of the amendment simply
adjust the numbers I want to
point out the number I in that
section of three million dollars
to provide salary increase in
untouched that three million of
special appropriation.
And so that's all this amendment
does Mr president.
essential services through the
pandemic.
While also being asked to step
into roles not normally their
work responsibility.
For the last six six of the last
twelve years Mr president state
employees but no raise at all.
This is a time when.
We have a six reserve and the
governor and the legislature
pay R. or two give a small race
three percent is not a huge race
but to give a modest raise to
our state employees.
We could also reduce by eighty
five million the amount being
appropriated to pay down the
unemployment fund.
This is paying nine million on
honor last year's promise for
Sarah Rees.
We are investing in a recovery
plan Mr president and the
can't wait around to see what
happens we need to invest in our
employees Mr president.
The first year I was here.
That was similar to this which
she and and you'll see an
amendment legislators she was
she was just trying to get the
lowest rate among us among our
employees to get paid a fair
I voted against that amendment
Mister president.
Because I thought the John
Arthur Smith was correct.
at the time we were sitting on a
twenty eight percent reserve.
So why do we save money when our
The legislative finance
committee recommended a three
percent raise.
like it was taking.
They compromised at one and a
half percent and then they never
did anything about that to look
at this question again.
ones that we are responsible
for.
So with that Mr president.
I move amendment amendment
number one to house
the chairman sentiment us.
Thank you Mr president it's not
that we don't see this is an on
from the amendment but it is it
was never put it in the budget
we do have a one and a half
appreciate their work but it
doesn't work that way sometimes
we only have a limited amount of
money and this would actually we
would be spending over our
budget and we have to build that
budget to be balanced if
nobody's ever read it maybe they
should but in order to pass a
budget we have to it has to be a
balanced budget by constitution.
do you want us to begin to cut.
Once again the cut in higher ed
you want to begin to cut in
education you want us to begin
you Mr president I I want to
kind of address some issues with
the body from a financial
perspective first and then I do
have some questions for the
sponsor.
actually look at all this budget
is doing and all this
legislature has done for low
income folks folks making under
hypothetical let's assume your
single mother.
And you make twelve dollars and
fifty cents working a full time
job and you have one child.
Let's assume then that this that
that same person was a state
And and what troubles me about
this ammendment Mr president in
the debate thus far.
Is it it implies that the
legislature and the governor
Sedillo Lopez is amendment seeks
to help.
Remember that fifty two hundred
dollar number.
That same mother with a child
for this here Mister president
before the Biden increase goes
into effect so already at two
thousand eight hundred and
thirty three of that fifty two
hundred.
New Mexico in this body at the
In addition to that Mr president
the financial package in this
budget contemplates an increase
in to New Mexico working
families tax credit to twenty
just signed into law the Biden
recover your cares three.
So what what are single mother
under the current scenario how
would she benefit under that.
child.
So if you factor in all of the
investments this budget is
making.
hypothetically under Senator
Sedillo Lopez is amendment.
The current budget for for you
taking into account federal
funds actually generates about
eight thousand three hundred and
ninety nine dollars.
important to understand a bit of
the history that brought us
here.
So during the special session of
last year.
people engage in the process and
attended LESC meetings attended
Senate finance committee
meetings submitted amendments to
the budget talk to the chairman
into the fundamental budget
we're presenting to the people
of New Mexico.
So I do take exception Mr
president to the argument that
One hundred million dollars in
Senate bill one expansion of
literature and working families
tax credit.
What Senator Sedillo Lopez is
claiming is necessary in the
coming fiscal year.
So this argument that somehow
the budget is unfair.
Simply false.
yield Senator offers detailed
yes Mr president I yield Senator
Sedillo Lopez and Senate bill
three seventy seven each
legislator in this body.
Was given two hundred ninety
seven thousand dollars to
About sixty workers that we're
talking about here to get a
raise up to fifteen dollars an
hour.
So my question is Mister
president I reviewed Senate bill
three seventy seven.
And not a single member of this
important priority for you did
you submit any of your junior
money and Senate bill three
seventy seven for this
compensation increase.
is it's anything existing in the
budget.
Now if you all pull out your
high level general fund
appropriation sheet.
You'll see the compensation is a
is a line item.
of time and money trying to get
a fiscal stimulus program right.
And we can't lift all boats all
at the same time the point is
doing our best but Mister
president.
There's a difference between
building policy to work for
working people and simply making
a political point.
point thank you I urge the body
to reject we do have further
debate we'll have senator Wirth
followed by Senator gave us and
Senator Lopez Mr president
Mr president thank you Mr
president I don't need to
Senator to yield I also of rise
You know in opposition to the
amendment and I think it's
Three percent raise proposal for
state employees you know my
immediate reaction was if I come
down here and done this
ammendment it would have been
You know we've talked about the
environment department and we
worked really hard this session
to get that budget fully funded.
You know that's something that.
You know if I want to do do it
this way I could walk down here
and make that argument I think
have darn good reasons for doing
it and.
you know we have worked really
hard to try and back fill and
get our way back in the budget
that's been done.
And I couldn't agree more with
about poverty and working
families those that have
suffered the most and we're
actually doing something about
it and that's what this budget.
I'm gonna vote no.
I don't like voting no but
that's the process.
And there's a way to do this and
that's during the interim we
have a legislative finance
money for the judiciary more
money for education.
And you know we've got a new
finance chair and then there's
member can stand up and present
any amendment they want to
presents but I just wanna make
sure of the folks that are
listening understand why I'm not
going to vote for this because I
believe in the process and
yield I was just going to echo
the floor leader rarely do he
and I agree on a point that I
will be voting with Florida
thank you.
Senator Lopez.
I've I've heard of brought this
ammendment similar not the same
amount of money Mr president
presentations that we always
have to keep in mind.
Of those that also work for the
state that those in our
communities who don't earn a
living wage.
we have with a new of Senate
finance committee I think we
have an opportunity in which to
begin looking a little bit more
are not making a living wage.
what we pay.
Mr president members of the
Senate I've introduced and you
can go back amendments dealing
with of those who work in our
school systems.
in our schools you know we don't
exist we need to pay them also.
Mr president members of the
Senate
And as a good senator Candelaria
did mention Mr president yes we
we have put some money and we
have made some in roads for a
short period of time to help
that lower economic bracket
there are some extra money's
coming in this year which may
help us to make up for what we
lost this past fiscal year two.
I've been a single mom for
twenty and a half years it makes
it difficult sometimes for us.
I don't have a trust fund I
don't have a lot of other stuff
And I think when we used to talk
about single moms.
We do a lot of good work in our
communities Mr president we do a
having the slight discussion
that it's notice for this next
coming interim which is coming
up very shortly time is fine Mr
seats are provided state budget
originates to let's really have
a good heart to heart discussion
about what we are doing to pay
our state employees who are
making less than a
This is the reality of what many
people that I represent in my
district of what they go through
on a daily basis it's making
persons who live in Santa Fe who
So Mister president again I
applaud senator said the office
for bringing this forward I've
done it before.
And kind of bring it back to the
attention of everybody here that
we have to also think of those
who earn less than a living
wage.
The president fighting has also
try to bring that to the point
Thank you Mr president and and I
stand in support of city a
little this is a amendment.
I understand the process and I
And and that is that.
If you look at the at the budget
that we have.
It is based on caring forward
budgets in excess of but with
reserves in excess of ten
percent.
All of a sudden this is the new
normal we've got to maintain
twenty three for the that's
If we did with Senator Lopez is
suggesting that twenty three
point eight percent would be
hammered it would be reduced all
We're talking about sharing some
of the benefits of what has been
done over the last few years
with the people that work in
forward to twenty three point
eight percent reserve.
Well they get a one point one
point five percent raise.
But I'm I'm hard pressed to
the twenty one percent reserves.
And I know that we see the doom
coming down the line but.
No let me say something about
the process.
I understand the that we have a
process and I also understand
that it started long before we
A different philosophy let's
say.
I would hope that this is a
message.
To the LFC.
Members.
percent reserves and that maybe
we should be using some of that
at least to pay the people who
do the work in this state the
public servants the ones that
have put themselves on the line.
the ball rolling for a different
attitude about how to spend the
revenues of the state next year.
Knowing that the people to do
their insurance so the take home
is not a whole lot and I know
senator Candelaria said all
they're getting well a lot of
what they're getting is only if
you have kids and a lot of our
in Washington thank you Mr
president.
Any further debate Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs.
paid
will or as well as we can afford
the thing I guess it troubles me
about some of the discussion.
Is it we're talking about
generation of oil and gas the
revenues we receive from oil and
gas.
And yet we've stayed here this
Banning fracking in hydraulic
and for Donald reeling destroys
warning gash in New Mexico.
we talk about that there's a
direct relationship right here.
Absolutely direct relationship
you have to have one to be able
to do the other.
It's because we as a body have
forgotten.
What it would cost us without
voiding dash chair Mister
president members of the body
need to think about that part is
proposed amendment so thank you
Mr president members of the
body.
Say no for the Sierra and idea
for a second time Sierra Lara
number strategist by some
for state employees so it leaves
out all the teachers that have
been battling COVID all this
year so if we're gonna be fair I
find it curious Mister president
but I I just want to give a
parting note on process process
works when when everybody
engages in.
LFC meets over the interim I
never heard this issue raised.
advocate no nobody came to our
committee.
This is the second time I've
been here where this sort of
attempt is brought to the Senate
floor at the eleventh hour to
arguing your case I wasn't on
finance for seven years now go
to committee and sit there and
go to the Mark ups so if you
show up and you actually do the
another's to sit there for hours
and hours and hours sifting
through all of this.
Representative this is the
second time I've been here
enough to take a vote of no on
this and I would students
the committee hearings we're
presenting these.
You know it's one thing to do
the hard work it's another thing
to try to be the hero and put
credit and everything else but
because it's election season.
We're gonna have to vote on this
thank you Mr president.
Senator say no further debate
start by making correction.
The amendment does not leave out
of this is for all public
employees it's for state
employees Public Education ploys
Three percent sixty three
million dollars.
That's not even one percent of
our budget.
offered three percent.
Has a compromise and and and it
was under changed circumstances.
That's the governor.
next in the middle of a pandemic
with oil and gas it's a stopped
up pumping they were not only
not getting to permits but they
stopped and they were closing
rigs.
None of the none of the fierce.
Across across the aisle have
come to pass.
We.
Amendment that would allow the
people to speak on the
importance of air land and water
We have one point six billion
dollars coming in from the
federal government.
This only cost sixty three
million dollars.
the costs that we've imposed on
them.
Two three percent which is at
least.
And then the rest of the time we
said we figure out which are yes
whether I guess was correct.
For the last three years our
test is not been correct we have
point five and giving our state
employees a three percent raise
is not an unreasonable thing to
do.
about the need to compensate are
essential workers and how
important it was every single
person in the chamber.
But six hundred dollars was one
Six hundred dollars adds up to
twenty eight cents an hour.
It was something and I know
With that Mr president I move
the Senate floor amendment
number one to house
appropriations and finance
one all senators to the chamber.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos now senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria amounts
Senator serve on this no Senator
Senator Gallegos Now Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales now
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan noted Senator
Lopez.
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator nail now Senator do
should be now.
Senator pope.
Senator Paul yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez now senator
senator.
Senator shared no Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stewart now senator dole
money.
Yes explain my vote Senator
Tallman yes senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
On the vote thank you Mr Senator
Lopez.
I have a nine in the affirmative
And the reason I voted to test
is because I promise to Senator
Sedillo Lopez I would but I
didn't have the benefit of
testimony from senator Munoz
Thank you Mr president thank you
members of the body thank you
senator we do have another floor
amendment.
The reader to read Senate floor
amendment number one to house
appropriations and finance
and then.
Thank you thank you Mr president
I move up amendment number one
to house appropriations and
Mr president this just brings
up.
It brings their wages up to
fifteen dollars an hour.
This is very much on the lines
along the lines of the amendment
workers what we need what we
need to do.
I'm going to read some state
workers sort of reset their
I worked extra over time because
my husband is out of work due to
COVID and my regular take home
pay is nine hundred thirty five
dollars by weekly after taxes.
This is from an essential state
employee Los crucis.
I have no quality of life I've
given twenty years of my life to
This is from Louis Ortiz from
the department of cultural
affairs.
I'm a single mom who makes
twelve dollars and fifty cents
an hour I cannot afford to raise
Mr president.
State workers.
We are responsible for.
There are about four thousand
employees in the state of New
Mexico.
We could lift out of poverty
provide public level wages.
Parking lot attendants.
Clinical assistance.
Grounds grounds maintenance
workers custodians.
clerks cooks security guards
home health care workers
legislative assistance social
and Human Services assistance
switchboard operators claim
assistance bailiffs purchasing
agents records manages managers
medical assistance data entry
operators.
Archaeology crew members patient
Carpenters plumbers electrical
HVAC HVAC assistance enrollment
assistance labors and Mr
persons.
About four thousand public
employees are paid poverty wages
by our government by us we are
Which is less than half of one
percent of our budget.
To bring all these workers to an
above poverty wage.
at local stores are do auto
dealerships hardware stores in
their neighbourhoods.
This can be part of economic
recovery.
And again.
We can reduce by a tiny little
bit the amount being
appropriated to pay down the
unemployment fund.
I gave my money to the
environmental Department because
as you know.
Thank they don't have enough
resources to do their job.
And if we don't share that it's
unconscionable if we don't
share.
And while we thank them a lot.
And we do and I know the
appreciate that thanks.
That that she couldn't raise her
daughter in Santa Fe that you
had to have her daughter living
with relatives.
We could target four thousand
people and lift them above over
above the poverty rate.
This ammendment.
Because the cost is so minimal.
And the potential benefit is so
great.
And the people that we hire to
do the work and to implement the
policies and to keep our
government running.
And we cannot afford.
To pay.
Our workers fifteen dollars an
hour.
senator when the US.
Thank you Mr president and I
wish we could do this but I will
tell you that at the spa state
functioning so we talk about
ways raising raising wages you
start receive person some
agencies have the flexibility
increase that above maybe that
did discussion with the the
look at that and then there look
at that so we see this in on
from the amendment.
Further debate senator
Candelaria I move to table
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill two and three.
Mister chairman Senator Senator
Steinborn.
Mr chair I I II respectfully
and they just be on and so I I
It's something I've done some
research on and and Mason's
clearly calls for.
standpoint don't like the trend
of.
Of of using it that way and and
so I I I'm just kind of
objecting if there are other
So as difficult as we work here
in the Senate there was nobody
on the on the last four debate
we'll go to Senator Sedillo
amendment yes.
We're now voting on the motion
to table.
Senator there was nobody else on
the list.
things clear thank you thank you
Sierra again on the floor has we
give the respect for legislators
to have the opportunity to go
into state their point because
there's nobody on the list
Thank you Mr president there's
there's no one to to react to
I think I'll just I'll just
repeat.
With that.
I'm amendment number one to
Centers where voting a senator
member number one.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Campos no senator
Candelaria Senator Candelaria no
senators about this no Senator
Cervantes no Senator Diamond
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales no
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen no Senator
Hemphill.
Soto.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan noted Senator
Lopez.
Senator Munoz.
Senator one knows no senator
Neville.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
songes senator Sanchez no
Senator Swedish.
Senator right is no Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics passes Senator
Steinborn.
yes.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes.
Senator Griggs.
Welcome back.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no.
By a vote of ten in the
affirmative twenty seven the
negative senator member number
one.
Has failed to pass the Senate
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
On the list for the bill we have
senator Morris followed by
Senator Kernan then Senator
share and Senator Brandt.
Senator Morris thank you Mr
chairman really confuse is this
version with the blue cover the
latest version of the budget if
you can see me hope you stand up
maybe consider.
Maybe I'll hold a higher.
Higher.
the word notwithstanding
anywhere.
In the two hundred twenty nine
pages can you point to me were
word and we we know doesn't
exist in the budget we thought
we might have to put in for the
waiver but we did not so you
will not see that word anymore
that is a priority for you.
approximately means the same
thing.
In lieu of or.
Any other such language on
missing and I think you know
this is the president this
going on after nine years of
asking the question about what
the notwithstanding clause in
the street two hundred to three
came over a period seven times
this presents senator and you
guys struggle seven that correct
Mr presence enter yes it did
come over with the not
withstanding language and it was
either seven or nine not
hard passing legislation how we
work at the legislative process
we had a government assignment
and then the finance committee
clause I just want to thank you
Mr chairman I'm not been riding
you hard this session to do that
and I just want to thank you for
getting that done Mr because
that is an issue of mine for the
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield.
Yes I will thank you Mr
president and senator on page
one sixty six in that top
paragraph it addresses how
me how many students we have
lost over this current school
year.
Cinnamon yes Mr presence in that
districts are going to be
allowed to budget for that and
How that's going to work because
we know some of them will come
back and so we need to make sure
Mr presence inter a could we ask
Senator shares expert witness to
answer that question Mr
president Senator share could
senators.
so the funding formula would it
would account for them as
enrollment growth in so that's
when they would be funded in
Well thank you Mr president
thank you senator and I probably
should just walked over and
invest with your expert earlier
and I may do that anyway at just
home schooled many of them in my
area if left the state and so
they're going to school in in
Texas and I'm not sure if they
will come back that any any of
that I just wanna make sure
harmed but evidently they've got
a lot of federal money coming in
and so I think they're going to
be just fine but I do want to
keep a real close on that and
see how many of those kids we
and we know many school buses
didn't travel very many miles
and they're they're funded on
that so
Will they be held harmless at
We believe there's a hold
harmless language for
transportation and in the budget
I do believe I've seen something
thank you Mr president thank you
senator and one last topic that
I just want to touch on with
regard to at the bottom of page
one seventy one.
it's going to address the
concerns that that we've had
over the last few years and and
it also includes the local mill
levy and I wanna make sure
address given school districts
some flexibility in how those
dollars are spent because not
every school district of fits
into one particular box so I'm
that that's all I have and thank
you very much thank you senator
and we do have for informational
purposes for the body we have
center share followed by Senator
Brandt and Senator Griggs and
changes in how we did things I
think the transparency certainly
grew of I think that the the
whole process is no different
than it has been and I want to
But there are some things that I
want to address about about this
budget when we came into the
session.
We thought that there was going
Muscle metals.
So that's a ten point swing Mr
president.
We thought that we could live.
But then things changed a lot
because of federal money a lot
because the price of oil has
increased dramatically in the
last few months.
Three hundred and seventy five
million extra dollars put into
this budget.
Because we have it so we put it
in here.
Mr president about a twenty
percent increase about a one
point two billion dollar
increase in our budget in the
last few years.
Let's talk about what's going
on.
For the feast and famine cycle
is not unusual to New Mexico.
got a one point six billion.
Federal dollars.
We know what's coming.
Appealed to the president said
please don't destroy oil and gas
in New Mexico.
She takes this seriously.
We passed it which gives.
Our Environment Department the
governor.
But I'm not sure that that's
really going to stop the
governor any governor that wants
to shut down any industry in the
seventy five million extra
dollars on top of the two
billion they already give us.
We passed Senate bill eleven.
Which pay the bills.
Then last night we passed Senate
bill seventy six.
Yet we think that this this
feast is going to continue.
The chair of finance has
be careful because our actions
in this room in the last couple
of weeks have said that this
budget is unsustainable.
Unsustainable by our own
actions.
the one agency that really got a
boost with the environment
agency twenty one percent
increase.
Twenty one percent increase in
the environment department.
spigot of oil and gas turn off
the revenue to the state of New
Mexico.
And while I agree in a voice
agreed that we need another
industry.
You can't turn off the speak it
I applaud the.
The chair and the LFC staff for
working this out this was this
was her role work work.
Famine is coming and it's coming
because of the actions of this
body mist president.
Can't support a budget.
We do have further debate
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president and I don't see the
Majority Leader in the floor.
LFC director coming into my
office and help me go through
some of the stuff
and so I want to say thank you
item twenty six.
we have a two million dollars
for house bill twelve.
Senator steel Mr president
senator yes and we are looking
at page one eighty one for house
bill twelve.
Well Mister president senator
has finance committee seeing
because we can't seem to find
it.
San Juan no word is.
They don't know what it is.
So yeah we're we're messing
this is cannabis bill.
I think think the Majority
Leader said standing over by the
door now wanted him to know and
eight so just so he knows that
the on so that is in there.
pretty close there on that and
we have the General Services
Department of.
seven point six million for
state employees but city local
county university employees
health care premiums were not
raised and the cost of GST
of COVID so they didn't receive
their health care increases that
supply that eight point six is
in that section of the bill
thank you Mr president
Appropriated to the educational
retirement fund
is that the similar situation
that we didn't have the increase
in the budget and so we're just
retirement spreads and
calculations can be correct.
Thank you Mr president and then
I I see an item forty we have
CD one and so that the election
looks like it's going to cost
about three million dollars on
enough everyone realize that's
that's in there.
there for PRC can you
I I know that they're moving
but.
Why are they moving and and have
a found a new home yet.
Mister Mister president so when
they were in the para building
across the street CYFD took over
that building for the early
childhood and they moved out and
thing I was wondering about is
on page one eighty seven and I
have a lot more but Mr Abbey and
and Mr Saly help me so I don't
and not just in the the regular
recurring budget because my
sense this is kind of a
nonrecurring areas that just to
get an kickstarted since we just
put that in place last year.
department is one time money
that went to five million for
tribal institutions of higher
education for the from the
endowment fund says one time
about an hour to skim through
this and and I really appreciate
that thank you.
We do have further debate
Senator Griggs.
his ma'am implemented things
she's done I want to you know to
ask him as they move forward in
that process to look at things
know we may or may not need it
defined in each individual one
but Mr Mr president and and
senator I think it would be
we're talking about other
expansions
I think it would be helpful we
went through that that same
process in the in the city of
and while you don't necessarily
always want to be NIT picking up
on some of that some of it is is
something that people need to
know that you're looking at in
Mr president in and senator you
may have mentioned this to to
Senator Kernan but I got a
A text message from one of the
people one of the business
And then I guess there's a table
be article about
Thomas cedars where he's
indicating that and in
Albuquerque that his in
unemployment insurance costs
I believe we've heard that we
were intending to or going to
replenish the fund to some
degree so we would not in
so Mister Mister president
center can you address that and
kind of tell us what we're gonna
do show these business owners.
that's a tremendous expense so
Mister president and and senator
and and would love to hear what
what you know about those so
hopefully we can.
We can protect these cash.
increases until occurring in
July twenty twenty to twenty
twenty one and so that those
would be illegal of the
departments and I'm out and they
seventy seven who will have the
the concurrence calendar and but
did in their we also put
hundred ninety million and so
that should take care that well
when we met with the executive
they agreed that they would take
a six hundred million of the new
hard hit increase on them when
they did that in the budget you
will account for a scenario in
the back of the budget of the
federal stimulus money and how
prior to comment prior to where
we were roughly that fund was in
the seven hundred million dollar
range for you I have fluctuated
depend on the number of claims
and so what we think we can do
across the state are not hit
with those absorbent
unemployment increases.
Agency presentation and and I
know I know that you're
Yeah we're gonna come out of
this.
And and it be just it just be
really.
And I I'm I'm counting on that
to to happen.
Because you know if his is going
up five times the individual and
know workforce solutions is
already moving that direction so
I I would and for the you you
work with the executive to be
At the sheet right here which is
the.
One it compares last year to
this year to make sure we've got
that Mr president senators at
the federal dollars right there
or is that a combination of
stuff.
twenty cents special session on
reoccurring nine hundred million
is what came in from the prior
cares Act.
Thank you Mr president the just
is any of that.
Sentiment us.
Mr president center with the way
we accounted that that for that
Thank you Mr president and and
senator that I mean I'm.
We're gonna have we're we're
gonna have a lot of federal
dollars coming in and I and my
increase where we thought we had
a five percent decrease we have
a ten percent Schwank.
And I'm guessing we probably
spent most of that
stabilize will be here and.
Of.
And we won't have to deal with a
dramatic drop like we like we
I don't know as I look at staff
I don't know that this
particular budget is is
sustainable.
And I'm I'm concerned that.
some of those things.
in your comments.
Moving away moving away from oil
and gas is a.
certainly a viable one but at
the same time I realize it's
going to be one we're gonna have
to debate and discuss and see if
it really is something that New
Mexico should consider.
We continue to see or will see
reduction in oil and gas
production.
Now if prices continue to go up
within production can go down a
drops in production and drops in
prices and it just.
Really hurt New Mexico we have
to be prepared for that chair
In order to to protect New
Mexico or what are we what are
we thinking about as far as
haven't come out yet and I'm
looking at the the floor leader
kind and what he's thinking
about over there but
revenue enhancements for New
Mexico sure we can we can start
talking about those percent.
Agency presentation early I can
I can hear pretty well sometimes
but sometimes I don't hear as
well as I would write for I
didn't I didn't hear your
comment.
Mr president you are asking me
trying to see you know your
crystal ball.
Order what are you shame because
you get to work at their stuff I
don't get to work with it.
And a and m's president center
What the what the thought
process she is in order to
generate.
What.
How we gonna continue an upward
lived through COVID I don't
think anybody in this chamber
and Miss World has lived through
COVID.
We didn't know what was coming
we know what has come and the
unexpected is just been dealt
million in twenty twenty two and
eight hundred sixty eight
million in the crystal ball.
But according to most revenue
streams in most news reports and
were so volatile in the oil and
gas industry were so volatile in
the stock markets our pension
investments are there were
volatile cross that the one
thing is proven true during
one thing is true is G. R. T. is
increased throughout the COVID
and so.
I can tell you but I can tell
you one thing.
our economy recovers and that's
what we try to do the session
make sure that we put money
where businesses need money make
sure that we gave relief for
relief as needed and so the
numbers but this is how we
budget New Mexico and this is
how most other states budget
they get their estimated revenue
their economists going to rural
with a number and that number is
what it is today
and so that's how we budget I
wish I could tell you we're
gonna be back full steam like we
about second strain and there's
no way to account for that and
there's no way to add stability
to the market when we hear so
much moving things in our world
Presentation right you know I
appreciate the work that you've
done.
I do that I appreciate you
stepping up.
years and years big challenge
you were you've done well you
put the best budget together
that that I believe you you know
how to do.
your leadership in that
committee will be able to you
know keep New Mexico on on track
and K. H. it's important all
Thank you very much Mr president
if the sponsor with yield.
Yes I will miss present.
Thank you Mr president I also
weren't you know of good and
powerful and good but I just
want to say that that thank you
the transparency be proactive
information shared with members
of the body I think was super
important I have I feel like I
thank you Mr president the
questions I had or just to some
more specific items we talked
about Special Olympics and I
believe
that still accurate this
presents center that is the
other hundred thousand came from
junior money.
I appreciate that and I think I
understood that already but a
lot can happen in twenty four
hours in this building as we all
every year so it makes it very
difficult for an organization
that is so important to all of
us which all organisations
report but this one is super
important because of the this
the people that it serves how do
that is a start every single
year to get them off the line
and see where they're at.
Thank you Mr president and so
the three hundred thousand that
came that is something that
there a discussion in the
interim on those topics because
we had a whole slew of you know
credit credits and whatever
really feels like a lot of those
were left by the wayside and
never really considered how can
we ensure that those get a fair
hearing early enough so that
they can be truly considered for
inclusion in the budget there
go look through the entire book
of tax credits tax expenditures
how often they use how they're
done in the other way you ensure
that it's done in an appointees
and I don't know where
book that they receive and where
the legislature should go and
and bills are endorsed or not
endorsed through that committee.
Thank you Mr president so that's
hearing on that and it'll be
considered for the following
year I think that'll be helpful
isn't that what you said we just
simply have to go to the interim
tax committee and get our bill
her there and then all of sudden
a vote and what's happening and
and that committee talks about
tax policy throughout the
interim G. R. T. you name the
tax policy what's getting use
committee I don't think interim
committees ever draft except for
LFC that's wind confuse we draft
we do draft bills and we do
introduce him as LFC
recommendations.
just still very concerned that a
lot of the bills introduced
there didn't quite make their
way
over to use of appreciate that
and the last item Mr president
wanted discusses his broadband
and how super important
regulatory things to help us
move broadband forward Mr
president what what what figure
was the final amount that we're
going to put into broadband this
year.
Mr presence enter I I'd be
you Adrian in the staff up there
that work so hard second thing
is we parked one hundred thirty
three million dollars in
broadband money.
I appreciate that Mr president
area and I will continue to work
in this area what does that mean
for the state of New Mexico Mr
president hundred thirty three
million dollars well that it
could that be multiplied somehow
with federal dollars and and
there's roughly almost nine
hundred million nine hundred
fifty five million sitting
there.
And so when we take the one
thirty three and and for
instance if we have a ten
that number with the federal the
new federal numbers have come
out and I don't know them off
the top of my head there could
out roughly be two billion
dollars in federal money for
broadband across across the New
am happy to hear that because
we're gonna make a huge giant
leap forward with broadband is
here but again I I like to give
credit where credit is due and I
really do want to thank the
with the fifty states were
broadband is concerns is going
to happen we're gonna realize
this and I'm very happy to hear
that I want to thank the members
again of the finance committee
for just focusing on that and
president.
Senator bill.
Senator Neville.
clarify because I think we might
have got some different thinking
this morning when we were
talking about this.
The projection is about seven
I'm just asking are projected
revenues seven point.
Almost seven point five billion
is that correct Mr presence and
that is correct seven point four
papers at what you show this
presents center that is correct.
So.
That does not include federal
money is that correct Mr.
President.
categories that not correct Mr
president Senator space center
yes and there we got the one
point something billion dollars
of nonrecurring dollars which is
That's what I was getting it so
from the standpoint of budgeting
and less we hit a cliff and oil
crashes again or something else
right the best crystal ball we
have a is that number and we we
don't see that in the future I
just wanted to make it clear to
everybody that the Feds.
As far as our daily operating
year I mean but we ended up with
twenty two I guess last year but
we're still holding a sizable
reserve.
And our operating budget is
wanted to clarify that we were
operating the state on federal
money now we're going to build
some roads and things of federal
money but we're not going to
operate the state on federal
build a budget from the out
years from there that's what I
want to clarify and I want to
make that clear to everybody so
that we all understand of that
we're not dipping are relying on
that's all I have Mister
president thank you.
Thank senator bill we have
further debate Senator Gonzales.
Well for the number of years the
that I have served in the
legislature on.
I have been in the a lot of
interim committees and have
worked with the many of the
different
I think it's something that just
a state that we need to really
be proud of.
And the this is with the LFC
staff.
it's for day for day meetings
per month.
And one of the things that is
very just very out standing on
this is so the research that is
done by the staff.
take you one month to read it
you know and it's very powerful
very deep information you know
subject matter you know and then
comes in from that you know
Director Avid and we have a
Charles a lease here in the the
staff the economist and you know
you really want to understand
the operation of our state you
know I strongly suggest you know
if you send some of your days to
attend some of the LFC meetings
Very good statements very good
questions that have been
mentioned today but one of the
things that you always have to
keep in mind with budget.
Avid was set up five point one
well that means we have to come
to that base for next year and
then next year you know whatever
is in place so you know it's
also on the information that is
provided to us by the economist
of that is the most invaluable
information because that really
gives you you know the expanding
the Mr president members into
the entire a finance committee
into chairman when you listened
to the LFC you know how.
Many thanks for the hard work
that has gone into this thank
Thank you Mr president I
appreciate that and I don't I
may have a couple of questions
for the sponsor.
I I have been honored to be on
finance for six of the is my
seventh year.
And so I have a passion.
For this.
I pay that you everybody on this
for pace.
And more importantly the
constituents who voted for us to
put us in the seats Hey.
that we all be concerned all the
time about the tax dollars and
how they're spent.
I want to compliment Senator
manos.
One is direction with finance.
the the the nickels and dimes if
you will of this budget we've
had of on going education thanks
to David Abbey Charles Lee in
process is I think there is a
natural evolution going on and I
think it's good for the state of
New Mexico.
And I'm glad to be part of that.
maintain that reoccurring
budget.
But I'll remind does this body
that just a year or so ago we
built a budget about the same
amount and then we had to have a
to to short the budget and I
think we spend about half the
reserves about a hundred million
New York correct me if I'm
wrong.
But that's a lot of money
tough if if you use the same
figures that pretty much she's
up the reserves so we talk a lot
about reserves and how Jews say
about that reserves are just as
important is maintaining a
budget.
So it's very important to do
that.
In the permanent fund looks
and you take money out of that
savings account you don't make
as much interest and how do we
build a budget in the state by
using apportioning interest off
Senator your mind we will look
at tapping that permanent fund.
Not much a few million few
hundred million dollars.
Yeah I was in California in the
seventies and eighties not to
other day seven hundred billion
in debt no I don't know that's
correct but that was one of the
figures that I saw that's how
you average it out of that we're
certainly not there now we ought
properly but without.
Tapping into the reserves that
we will never get get back
because I can guarantee you
Entire reserve away.
So I want to make sure that we
do the budgeting proper and I'm
opportunity not only to make a
more transparent and better for
the state but now is a great
opportunity to look at how we
actually do the budget.
I have to look at my own
business is what do I have to
have in what projects can I
maintain and look at that.
Maybe meet that need and then
we have an extra dollar we see
want to spend that dollar.
Emergencies and things come up.
and like comment or something
were to happen then we would
have had to probably tap the
permanent fund that's what it's
there for.
we look at maybe taking a
different direction.
And building a budget not just
on every single need that we
have but building a budget that
along oil and gas tanks or other
industries need our help.
So Mister president and.
to go one more step.
And let's look at how we build
the budget and is there a better
way I think there is and I hope
that we will take that step to
do that thank.
Thank you Mr president I want
one thing to ring true
throughout New Mexico.
That we as elected officials.
from our economy to make sure
that we set a budget that that
was balance that we live within
our boundaries.
That we is the legislature to
continue to be educated and we
make them a better.
Child than they are today.
One thing and I think everybody
should remember this.
Each and every one the remember
that.
The state is counting on you
whether you live in hawser
crawls better Farmington or
For what their children need the
counting on you to do the right
thing their economic you to
spend their tax dollars right
they're counting on you for
I think we have.
Not everybody's gonna like
what's in the budget not
everybody's gonna be happy with
what goes on not everybody can
as we spend these dollars I hope
they're used correctly and we
know that we're trying to spend
them correctly I think I can be
remiss without thinking a few
people Senator Gonzales who
Everybody LFC staff really
teaches us.
As members of the LFC and Senate
finance what happens in the real
budgeting world of every agency
in every department and they put
because got gray hair now I but
he can answer it or he knows
where to look.
As his leadership and and the
leadership in LFC and and those
all part of this to the staff
that takes care of us to to the
people to maintain the highways
to you name it the people that
work in the hospitals they're
the beginning but we'll get over
that Senator Rodriguez to my
vice chair thank you Senator
Candelaria thank you Senator
Hemphill thank you Senator
Campos thank you Senator
dinner share Senator Burt
Senator Diamond.
In center Woods thank you.
Without our leadership without
us sitting down finance and
With that Mr president I move
that house committee house House
Appropriations and finance
committee for house bill two and
three do now pass us has
consented the record show that
Centers we're voting on house
appropriation of finance
committee substitute for house
bill two and three as amended
tier seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
Campos Senator Campos yes
senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes.
Senator serve on this yes
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs passes Senator
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Senator Moores Senator Moores no
senator Munoz.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pro.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Schmidt is no senators
so they will vote yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator share now Senator
Shendo.
Senator Steinborn S. Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Yes Senator Tallman as senator
Wirth.
Senator Byrd now.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs no.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
By a vote of twenty nine in the
affirmative thirteen the
negative house appropriation and
budget does a lot of good for a
lot of people.
I think it's unsustainable and I
think we really need to look at
to come together and look at a
better way to build a budget
thank you Mr president.
Senator yes thank you Mr
president I I knew I was going
you standing in and smiling
already throws thank you sent
Campos.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I just want to give
Center millennials a hand and
Senator Wirth and thank you Mr
president did to all the members
on Senate finance for the amount
of work that goes into a Senate
eighteen to president pro temper
Stewart and members of the
Senate I have this day signed
Senate bill fifty two and Senate
bill one twenty two as amended
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business messages
from the house when that order
business the reader to read.
thirty as amended by the Senate
and house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill for as
amended by the house and further
amended by the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
the house has been received.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
reports on that order of
business committee reports the
reader to read.
duly enrolled in gross prepare
Torrez signing by the officers
of the Senate respectfully
submitted senator Pete Campos
senator Kerry Hamblen and
senator cliff R. Pirtle co
and like to announce to the
members of the body that the
offices of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
bill two twenty two and Senate
bill three forty one.
And Mister president you're
had them under consideration
reports that same have been duly
enrolled in gross prepare Torrez
signing by the officers of the
Senate respectfully submitted
senator Pete Campos senator
Kerry Hamblen and senator cliff
I'd like to announce to the
members of the body that the
offices of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
bill twenty Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
business Senator Wirth I thank
you Mr president so that's it
for today we're not going to me
tonight we got committees that
need to work so will be in
Senator is one that order of
business announces miscellaneous
we'll start with Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr president of the
Senate health and public affairs
committee only has a couple of
bills left on our on our
thanks center this panel any
into any Senator Ivey Soto thank
you very much was present was
president of the rules committee
will have a special meaning for
morning at nine AM.
We will be doing exclusively
Senate offices have
announcements.
Senator Wirth.
all the amendment.
Thanks Senator any further
announcement Centers.
Semenya's.
Thank you Mr president Senate
minutes maybe an hour trying to
get a few bills out.
And and try to get some taxing
issues that are that are us in
some house built out
Any further announcements
Senators.
Saying and senator Wirth thank
you Mr president just before we
wind up we're gonna roll the
clock Mr president of the.
The president having landed the
nine AM and will return to
twelve one PM the Senate will
come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
see no objections the Senate to
Senate recess so eleven AM
tomorrow morning.
