And members of the committee of
first up on our special
presentations we have the
bilingual multicultural
Education Advisory Council and
I'm not sure who's going to take
the lead on this presentation is
that would that be you miss
Cisneros.
All right and he can he's been
our witness for for this bills
so he it be great if you
started.
Yes thank you so much within a
madam chair members the
committee on it thank you so
much actually W. O. four of us
and so we're we're extremely
excited we thank you for the
opportunity to share a little
bit about the bonding
multicultural Education Advisory
Council
and we thank you for your vote
of confidence as well the other
day in in committee
with that stated if you don't
mind I just like to support the
the rest of my colleagues to
present themselves really
quickly my name's agents on the
line I've been a member of the
bonding multicultural education
adviser committee probably for
the past for forty five years
and I I came on as the.
Family representatives and how
much my children have grown I
have one more and and she's a
senior in high school.
I'm basically act now.
Members and with that stated
like to turn it over to access.
After Santa.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee when the missus
on a lot of Johnson and I am
assistant professor at New
Mexico State University and so
in our I'm also the co chair of
the bilingual multicultural
Education Advisory Council and
have been for the going on our
my third year and representing
institutes of higher education
so I'm thank you so much for
your time this morning I look
forward to sharing some of the
work that we've done.
Media.
Thank you.
madam chair members of the
committee my name is it is an
assistant I am one of the
cultures for the bilingual
tackles Education Advisory
Council and I'm also a bilingual
teacher in our state of New
Mexico have been for almost ten
years and work us specifically
with students acquire.
As to this council thank you so
much for having us here this
morning.
Dr Begay do you want to
introduce yourself to be gay
you're on mute.
I'm good morning at eight Berlin
to be gay and I am the bilingual
multicultural education
coordinator for my school
district and Shiprock and I have
twenty five plus years and
education most of the Indian
Education and I'm also a member
of the bilingual multicultural
Education Advisory Council I'm
to my I'm.
Navajo relatives I'm I'm I need
tightness on the bus just
changes that you need us to bill
it should invest in LA yeah.
Good and taken away.
Very often thank you so madam
chair members of the committee
what I will do this morning is
just present some information
regarding what we are
responsible for asked account
currently adhoc
Our council works
collaboratively with an MPD and
ensuring that happy
take care not stand support
teachers in understanding and
implementing the five bilingual
bicultural education programs
which include transitional
maintenance enrichment heritage
and language as you can see in
the second bullet point there
are quite a bit of numbers and I
will be reading the power point
but you can see where set of
students he
support through bilingual tackle
education programs across the
state
both native American Hispanic
and others who fall under
English learners or just English
speaking students who are trying
to acquire the second language I
do want which is that our our
that we provide these plans and
and those are DNA he got a
project terrorists T. what tale
work till ones who need Spanish.
I'm and so in addition to that
this is some extra data on how
many programs are within our
state we have sixty eighty nine
school districts participating
in these programs also have full
for sixty funded programs within
four hundred eighty four schools
in the reason why the amount of
programs exceed the amount of
schools because schools can more
than one of the programs that
the state covers and so this is
done I just needs of all
students and another thing we
are responsible well is there
that we are following through
with the act as a state are we
any advisement that we provide
supports the act self the BTC
Act and so I'm sorry B. and the.
A it's just a B. NBA Act which
is the act in the so that
professional learning assessment
instruction recruitment
retention of teachers and also
parents and family each.
Doctor Johnson.
So all of us yes madam chair
members of the committee I like
to talk a little bit about the
history and purpose of the by
the motorcycle to Education
Advisory Council as you can see
there are council has existence
existed since the nineteen
seventy seventies and we advise
that New Mexico public education
department
as well as the secretary of
education and and in particular
one of those students the groups
as the in the English learners
that are part of a bilingual
multicultural of programs
and in reference to the English
learners a very important as the
title three which is the
elementary secondary education
at Act programs it is very
important our state and so the
rational for House Bill fifty
two is it and I won't read those
bullets there but I can just
mention highlight some of the
things here is that our advisory
is very unique in that.
and us that's that's is aside
from the work of course that our
are are colleagues in the Indian
Education Advisory Council and
the Hispanic Education Advisory
Council is that we are very
specific to bilingual
multicultural education programs
that are state supports
financially and program
medically and so forth and so I
think N. as well and as English
language development programs
which in reference to our title
three
statue that we have for our
federal statute we also have to
find a English learners are the
missiles Development.
And they have choices they can
do it within a bilingual take
culture education program or in
English language development.
Program and another note on that
is that as the end of just noted
is that we have a about fifty
thousand students that are in
bilingual multicultural
education programs of those
fifty thousand there's twenty
two thousand English learners
that are a ten are part of a
bilingual program so that's very
important in the in the purpose
of so we have to be very
knowledgeable of what type of
I'm not only instructional but
also a testament that are part
of it and so it's the only one
that exist in regards to our our
call these in the yak and he act
and we've had a strong I think
this is a nineteen seventies a
lot of our
colleague said that have been
part of the of of this council
have had a very strong
leadership there and having a
lot of excitement to our are up
P. R. PED secretary and the
director of back then the
bilingual take culture education
bureau and however it will would
governor Martinez was our was
leading our state I see did this
band are by three council well
and so that of course having as
many students as we do have in
our bilingual programs I was
very important to us and for a
tend not to be.
Abolished and for that which is
very important for these plans
that I just noted for us to for
this bill for us to move from
adhoc to statute so thank you.
Thank you doctor Begay if you
would mention.
You might be you drive because.
Good morning madam chair and
members I wanted to talk more
about the unique part of the
bilingual multicultural
education
programs in terms of the
specific areas of focus and as
our colleague Dr Johnson had
mentioned
those that are the areas of
focus include English learners
and that includes our native
American indigenous and English
learners so in that
we are also I'm creating a
budget received oral language
development framework in terms
of by literacy the Hispanic
population of students are have
that area of focus and with our
indigenous students it's more
oral language development the
reason why there's a difference
between that is because with our
indigenous people our area to
day is really related to
our heritage language
revitalization efforts and so
it's not so much a focus and
literacy because a lot of we're
neighboring tribes and they do
not have that written language
and also I'm with those tribal
nations such as it's citizen
that I am part of the Navajo
Nation
our efforts are more and the
oral language being the fact
that the state of our.
Language today and so those are
some of that by next that we are
providing.
another component is the
advocacy for Spanish language
arts in terms of the adoption
for that specially and Spanish
language development in terms of
Spanish language development
there we are advocating and
that doctrine of these standards
I'm due to what I had mentioned
earlier is that the uniqueness
of the language development and
the process of that that also
goes with the Indian
Then the heritage languages as
well so we have unique
acquisition processes for our
students from the Hispanic
background and indigenous
backgrounds in terms of language
development but in this
particular letter focus it's and
Spanish language development and
addition to that we're also I'm
trying to have a advocacy and
teacher pipeline meaning that
it's more of a grow your own
teachers programming for example
and my current district right
now we are trying to
grow our own teachers in terms
of having partnerships with our
local colleges and so we are
partnering in that sense to
where we have teacher education
programs through their colleges
to increase our indigenous
population of teachers and so
those are the types of programs
that we are wanting to increase
an advocate for when we're
talking that teacher pipeline
and so we all know that there is
a huge shortage of teachers and
to increase our local teachers
and those areas research and the
authentic research does state
that if you grow your own
teachers then you know that
they'll be they'll stay longer
in those areas because those are
the areas they call home and so
that one of our other areas as
focus as well.
Thank you doctor began to
transition over to doctor
Johnson once again yes thank you
and share chair and members the
committee one of the other
advisement that we have and
really it goes in tandem with
the doctor the case it is that
the needs that we have them in
our bilingual multicultural
education programs are are very
a specific if you all in regards
to the authentic assessments
that they have to in multiple
languages in two languages of
course in our bilingual programs
and so I think that for us to be
able to have like initiatives
with the bold in regards the by
the receipt or language
development is also very
important to tie that to the
assessments and how are we going
to assess the students so that
they can have academic success
and further for the English
learners English language
development as well all our
English learners and then lastly
one of the other advisement that
I think is similar to a doctor
today so with the grow our own
we also continue to grow our own
in in administration but also
building that capacity as you
know our our administrators are
our leaders in our schools and
it's very sad and very important
for them to get
for example training and
licensure in regards to
bilingual technical education
programs in in in specifically
in regards to for example second
language acquisition home
language development in eight of
language development titles
three requirements that are
needed that are tied to current
federal policy and I can go on
but this so that is very much
needed as of being in the and in
New Mexico State University I do
hear that from teacher
preparation principles that are
going to is that learning more
about that is necessary so when
they go out to the field they're
able to better service our
our students are bilingual.
A culture education programs
thank you thank you doctor
Johnson look real quickly I'm
I'm charged with assuring bit of
the history madam chair members
of the committee basically what
I what I want to share with all
of you is that the MEAC has
really put the New Mexico on the
vanguard of bilingual education
throughout the nation something
had mentioned previously but
whether it be guidelines for
defining and implementing
programs really many states that
come to us and continue to seek
are are just to get our
recommendations about bilingual
education initial requirements
for endorsements whether it be
into solar bilingual education
how we I guess outlined what the
expectations would be for those
endorsements typically twenty
four hours of study within a
university and then of course
developing something very unique
which is the Representative huh
the problem is the Spanish
language proficiency assessment
that the teachers need to take
in order to demonstrate capacity
in the Spanish language to be
able to teach the class
I'm again very unique and unique
in the sense that it focuses on
valuing the the the Spanish
language is actually spoken in
New Mexico so that way there's a
there's a sense of of you know
recognizing that linguistic
differences exist here in New
Mexico and not something that
that is definitely looked at as
an asset and not a deficit this
next piece really advocating for
English learners with regard to
the teacher observation protocol
the protocol the came out to a
number of years ago it was the
beginning a see that really
stood up together with the
pollution from major to state
that look if you're gonna have a
teacher observation but we
really need to look at language
acquisition.
Within that protocol we need to
make sure that our teachers are
being observed and held
accountable for how their
supporting our linguistically
and culturally different
students in the state of New
Mexico otherwise would have been
just simply a sterile
observation protocol on process
the next piece members we we as
members we participate in
different aspects of the
development of the bilingual so
process a number of years ago in
fact the children the high
school here in our own state was
probably the first to have a
bilingual still and what we did
is we took and we actually
formalized it we weren't the
first in the state
unfortunately excuse me the
first in the you to to formalize
our SBHC and our bilingual so
process but we were probably run
number four five in the nation
I'm again it's it's a question
of a convincing and sharing the
you know with some of our our
leaders to the importance of
these amazing assets that we
have and was being culturally of
course working properly with the
Indian Education bureau to
actually a pull together at the
end of bilingual Dorsen and
tribal languages and native
American languages it results in
the five twenty and Elsie
certification that are and
native American indigenous
communities I find to certify
teachers in in the as as
speakers of the language they
can function as teachers within
the classroom and again helping
the the public education
department develop the technical
assistance manual and a home
language survey that would be
consistent throughout the
throughout the state two things
that are a look that is
exemplars throughout the nation
a couple of other areas here the
implications as we mentioned
we've been touting this for a
number of years I see for the
past twenty years sharing with
our of public education
department the importance of a
shortage of license bilingual
education she's on our teachers
that that something is that's
critical sometimes a yeah the
individuals might be thinking
well the urgency isn't quite
here yet but I can guarantee you
at least fifteen to twenty years
ago we were already having
conversations about this and
we're.
Learning about what it is now.
I just find fund on the funding
formula and help you to a raise
in the increase of that formula
from point three two point five
specific to bilingual education
and with that I'm hoping that's
a the data you'll be able to
close this out here as far as
our final thoughts in order to
questions if necessary from the
Canadian.
Thank you Adrian and so just to
wrap this up but we do want some
we do have some final points to
share and of the person would be
that
New Mexico and really with the
be in the AC has been a head and
outside we would consider of
what appears to be fashionable
are trending in education and
sometimes are our
recommendations to go unheeded
and viewed as out of the norm
because of how different of the
bilingual tackled education
programs are compared to what we
would consider the norm so
obviously putting our council in
statute gives us a little bit
more of that support in getting
responses from the state in
regard to the recommendations we
find and one another thing is
that we were the council itself
was known as the state funding
would by three council prior to
being named the MEAC.
And it as an agent mentioned in
his for earlier scientists it's
been it's a it's on the vanguard
of bilingual education
in the country itself so the
current members are we are
currently the members that are
currently on the council right
now we're committed to
continuing this legacy and
looking forward to having this
council formally recognized in
statute so that we could
continue to advocate and provide
resources at at this more
official level I guess you could
say and finally how school fifty
two will ensure that the council
will continue to serve the state
and that Public Education
Department of purposeful in
profound ways.
and then one last thing we I we
would like to share is
this book here that we used
quite a bit to at the history
from our council it is shoulders
we stand on by Dr Rebecca
Martinez who used to be a
council member and who has
dedicated a whole chapter of her
book to providing the history of
the the council itself as it was
known as as a stabling work by a
council and with that if and the
rest of the council members
don't have anything to share we
we do stand for questions.
Thank you at any further
comments from the council.
As senator Hermio you madam
chair woman it might it's just a
comment I want to thank all of
you for the role that you're
playing of the job that you're
doing you know my freshman year
in college I had a professor
told me I had a word in my
vocabulary because my vocabulary
wasn't large enough but I come
from a bilingual household and
so I wish that they would have
known that that's where I was
coming from and so knowing that
this committees in place to
ensure that our students are set
up for academic success is
something that I'm really
excited about and as a former
educator I really wish this
committee was intact when I was
there I would have loved to have
joined and I've championed all
of your work in my classroom and
so mine is just a comment of
gratitude and to tell you that I
will always be here to support
you and if you ever need me you
can reach out to me thank you
madam chairwoman.
Thank you any other questions
from committee members
I I do have a few thank you for
being here and thank you for all
the work you do and a
presentation and I I'm pretty
sure we'll see at some
communication during the interim
also.
one of the things we talk about
by illegal sale and the sticker.
Are we live.
Well I don't know if anybody
could really speak to that that
and I know that there were some
students that receive that in
the from one of the high schools
I taught at and he was only one
as far as I knew that receive
that sticker and I know
assessment is an issue
especially when we talk about
our language and standardizing
that so that it's
You know relevant and live
really legitimizes that stick it
but how can or to take this a
step further
as far as integrating it into
you know are we giving them
career choices are we really
putting that information out
about how this bilingual seal
and having it added two year
diploma putting it on your
resume
adds value to the person and
that there are real choices
having this you know still can
anybody comment on that.
So.
Madam chair members the
committee and before I comment I
want to definitely open up to
the rest of my my colleagues so
feel free if and if you would
like to comment before me.
With respect okay so quickly I I
would I would just want to share
that that that that's a
wonderful question and it's
actually part of the sports that
need to be applied currently
there are conversations around
recognizing that course work as
a.
Basically a couple semesters in
at the college level so that's
one one option of valuing though
that effort on behalf of
students.
It's basically Weatherby through
some of the AP course work
that's part of the funding will
still or just by having develop
that skill set and having it
happen having received that
bilingual so on their deployment
recognizing that as it leads to
to course credits you know into
the college another thing that
that is kind of out of the blue
and and I think out of the box
and that is supporting districts
to create pathways with local
community colleges and with the
communities where students are
at and so imagine it for example
creating a pathway towards
becoming an emergency medical
technician that recognizes and
values the bilingual still and
continues to develop that that
capacity in in that language in
those those specific areas
absolutely amazing to begin to
think about those those
opportunities and creating clear
Segways into a different career
pathways that values that
language other than English as
something that would be
significant in the in the
communities that are students
ultimately will be serving and
so those are a couple of
examples of how we need to
continue to continue to expand
our our weirdness and that
really think out of the box
about how we begin to value this
is a tremendous asset not only
within our within that that K.
twelve experiences students have
but beyond that whether it be in
the knowledge in your head and
value for college credit or
basically creating very clear
pathways into specific careers
that students will be be
utilizing that language other
than English thank you and the
reason I say that too is you
know if that pathway does not
exist and we're talking about
the council here and I know you
guys are just you know
communicating seems with just
and then PED but that this
probably needs to be and I don't
know what your workload is right
now and I don't mean to add to
it.
But that that expansion even for
those that may not have had the
opportunity to add that to their
high school diploma you know is
there a pathway that includes
state could acquire some kind of
bilingual certification and I
know this is something that
within the court systems what we
talk about our children that are
abused especially if Navajo as
their first language is that
communication that has to come
from the interpreter it has to
be very you know the I don't
know how you would say legal or
you know word for word whatever
the child says because it is a
and some of those.
And some of our languages that
sometimes there's not really.
The descriptive language in
versus having an actual word for
especially for the new stuff
that is out there
and I'm I'm hoping this you know
that we can try to trickle this
up into that area and I don't
know if you guys advise in that
manner of
trying to integrate
so that people can have add that
to their their career pathway
add that to their skill set and
be able to move in that matter
to have a better job because one
of the things and I'm fortunate
my and one of my uncles is that
bilingual teacher but he's a
nationally accredited teacher
which is even better because you
know we're trying to add up and
not just have raised teachers
salaries but raise it on the
basis of them acquiring these
other valuable skills to to
legitimize that raising up this
the salaries
I don't know if you could have a
short comment on that.
Madam chairman I'd like to speak
on that part in terms of what my
colleague agent had shared I
like to speak on the part with
the
that did indeed indigenous deals
with within the nation's of New
Mexico each nation has their own
assessment as with the Navajo
Nation is oral language base and
it is very challenging and so we
do know the state of our
languages today among our people
especially with the younger
generation in terms of English
being a preferred language of
choice however in terms of
utilizing The Seattle as a way
to I'm encouraged and increase
size and putting the value back
into their language their
heritage language is one of the
main emphasis and the
assessments and that's how a lot
of the heritage programs are set
up like for
Speaking from my school district
is that program is what I work
with Woody develop curriculum
that squirrel language based
starting from correct from
kindergarten to build up that
language and comprehension all
oral language based focus and so
based on second language
acquisition methodologies so
based on that in addition to
that we're also providing that
foundation for how we're Navajo
children and cultural identity
development because of we all
know as well to that the
that knowledge the teachings are
hardly being transfer inter
generationally anymore so
that
one of our other focus so it's
so basically it's putting that
value back into our heritage
languages in terms of pathways
did it into it's really about
knowing who they are as as as
indigenous students as Navajo
people as the different tribal
nations of New Mexico is for
them to know that first and to
be
I'm grounded and that and in
that language comes right along
side of that and with pathway
that's what we're building is
that they would
want to continue in that realm
of of of wanting to learn who
they are where they come from I
and the language itself and
that's really different aside
from being told them being made
to to learn and there's a
difference and that's really a
lot of the goals are.
Heritage programs across the
nation
and so I just wanted to speak on
that and the pathways of course
You have those opportunities and
it is challenging especially
with the programs that are
currently set in place within
our school districts because
that's really where a lot of our
heritage programs all right
that's the only time a lot of
our indigenous students receive
that in here that their their
language and so as an advisory
group that is something we
continue I know from my and my
colleagues have continued to
hear me talk about increasing
that as well.
Thank you thank you.
And the reason I think the you
know talk about the careers and
stuff is also that and I hope
we're not doing this is in which
we're just.
We don't want it to be barrier
in which we're just saying well
you just have to be you have to
have Navajo you have to be you
know you have to have the ethnic
background in order to be in
this up language program but
that we are also inviting that
part of you know that we're not
going to just say well you you
know you don't belong Care are
you're not our skin color you
can't come in and learn Navajo I
haven't really seen that
talk to anybody that's
experience at out on the
reservation because of the
percentage that are
the announcement native American
but I've heard of in the higher
end of you know male cousins not
being probably lighter skin are
half Spanish in that sense kind
of being.
Shut out from by local because
they didn't look our peer
spending enough or native
American enough so I think it's
important to that we do not
hindered that that that that
isn't something that we do
that's inviting and that that's
just a comment but thank you
guys for being here and I look
for to having more conversations
about this as we move on and
where you guys are headed and a
deeper deeper time thank you so
much I don't know if you have
any closing comments here what
we were going to move on to our
next presenters.
Madam chair members the
committee and we're just so
grateful for the opportunity to
share with you this morning I
don't know if my colleagues like
to sure thing else for you.
Thank.
Thank you for being here and
thank you for being patient with
us with that at the meeting that
hat.
It
that will okay our next
presenters Rebecca native are
they all present and ready to.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee
we have Mr Gary Lujan for the
Santa Fe Indian school who's
going to talk about the.
Indian Education at the Santa Fe
Indian school and then next we
will have
Really thank Cologne with the
institute of American and Indian
arts who will give us an update
on on indeed and education and I
a Andrea go ahead Mr Lujan.
Thank you good morning madam
chair by Senate chair and
members of the community and
committee thank you for the
opportunity to allow me to
present information on the Santa
Fe New Mexico my name is Gerry
J. lu Han for the public House
director of trust fund
management for the Santa Fe
Indian school.
The Santa Fe Indian school tend
to section eighteen ninety serve
native American students
throughout New Mexico since
nineteen seventy seven the
school has been owned and
operated by the nineteen public
governors of New Mexico we have
overseen a comprehensive
approach to programming and
Services.
The Santa Fe Indian school with
a sovereign education community
that builds upon its rich
cultural legacy to be the leader
in native American education at
core mission of FIS I it to
foster ideal graduate who are
responsible productive members
of the tribal nations and the
global community.
In pursuit of this mission the
Santa Fe Indian school strives
to create implement and
continuously improve programs
that support learning and living
environment designed to meet the
needs of all of our students.
Santa Fe Indian school provides
a rigorous academic program and
New and in an environment that
respect and values tribal
communities cultural.
Ishant he can to create that
ideal graduate.
Our ideal graduate by cat
academically high performing
students who are committed to
maintaining native American
cultural values to support this
according to both the national
governors association and the US
department of education
graduation rate formula.
Santa Fe New Mexico has
maintained for your call cohort.
Graduation rate and in the Heidi
to be specific ninety seven
point two percent over four year
cohort right.
Put that a fait in New Mexico
well ahead of New Mexico latest
rate of seventy four point nine
percent and the most recent
national.
But a brief introduction of
Santa Fe New Mexico which you
can provide more detail about
that in the go to the handout
provided to you I've shared
those with that miss Rebecca
Martinez in the days preceding
Defense hearing so that you can
have that on hand and reflect on
that information.
In terms of pandemic impact
response today March eleven
twenty twenty one market react
we one year that the global
pandemic arrived in New Mexico
with the first recorded cases of
our state since that time if we
are all aware much has changed
in everything we do and how we
operate our system.
Thanks March of twenty twenty
Santa Fe Indian school has been
closed with all students getting
instruction through the Santa Fe
Indian school distance learning
model this distant learning
model is that outlined in the
state in a safe the safe return
to school plan FY twenty twenty
twenty one provided to you.
Within this fact sheet you will
see that the FIS has been
prepared to consider
alternatives such as blended
learning model or hybrid this
hybrid distance and blended
learning model.
To assist our students and
parents we have also provided a
safe return FAQ sheet and
understanding the myriad of
changes occurring within
education.
All of us here you know that
today know that with this
pandemic everything is very
fluid so the Santa Fe Indian
school administrators starting
with the board of trustees also
tribal leadership and school
administrators and the
superintendent have been
learning to deal with this
pandemic in a very fluid way
with that policy changing from
month to month week to week.
Because of our students come
from a numerous tribal
communities banding many County
Santa Fe Indian school in the
consider all tribal health
orders for their communities
some cases those orders restrict
the movement of tribal members
eight garden entire community
with an emphasis on the most
vulnerable.
With tribal communities having
high percentages percentages of
diabetes and cardiovascular
diseases our communities fall
into the high risk category of
to coming COVID nineteen.
Taking this all into account the
Santa Fe New Mexico at this time
will remain closed to the end of
the school year what the and
while this pandemic has created
fluid situation the Santa Fe
Indian school will continue to
monitor changes for the safe
return to off campus learning
environment hopefully in the
near future.
Madam chair vice chair and
members of the committee I hope
that this presentation bring
some clarity as to the impact of
this pandemic which I've had to
our school community yet despite
those impacts Santa Fe New
Mexico continues to maintain its
vision and no way we would have
not imagined this time madam
chair committee at that and for
question.
Thank you and we'll move on to
the other presenters so that.
And I want to make sure we get
the presentation go ahead.
Okay come up next so thank you
madam chair person for the for
the invitation to speak today hi
and thank you to the Senate in
the in rural and cultural
affairs committee for your work
on behalf New Mexico indigenous
people and your interest in the
and commitment to indigenous
education are so my name is
believe that has to be a long
I'm gonna Pueblo
and and I am the current interim
academic dean at the institute
of American Indian arts and
culture as well as an associate
professor of music and studies
have been at the institute for
about eight years now and I'll
be presenting today a little bit
on now I I are you a little bit
of our history and to talk a
little bit about what we doing
in this pandemic pandemic
something maybe like to share my
screen I think it probably is
quickest FY and run through the
power point I presented be
respectful of your time.
Is that.
So.
The interamerican Indian arts
actually was formed initially as
a high school in nineteen sixty
two and in nineteen sixty five
was included.
Are included in the higher
education act of Congress in
nineteen seventy five the
transition to a two year college
I particularly with programs and
studio arts creative writing and
we see and studies and in two
thousand transition to a four
year baccalaureate degree.
Offering school with programs
and studio arts creative writing
museum studies and new media
arts or cinematic arts which
I'll talk about a little more
specifically in two thousand
thirteen we had our first
graduate program master of fine
arts in creative writing and
just this year twenty twenty one
we have HLC certification to
begin offering I MFA in studio
art so we'll have our first
cohort meeting of the summer of
twenty twenty one I'm in
addition to the college itself
we also two other sections of
our institutions in a
contemporary of arts which is
actually the first one that in
the nineteen seventies but in
particular moved to its current
location in nineteen ninety two
I like the familiar to many of
you right across from the
cathedral downtown we also the
center for lifelong education
which was formed in two thousand
and ten.
Particularly out of the USDA
arrangements out to provide
continuing education are we also
in the process this year and
into next year forming our
newest wing which is going to be
the research center for
contemporary arts and culture.
Our mission is an institution is
just our creativity and
leadership and native arts and
cultures to higher education
lifelong learning and outreach
so each of our wings each of our
divisions within in some
recommend arts is contained
within our single mission beach
moving towards a common goal and
our vision is to be the premier
educational institution for
native arts and cultures in the
world and we do accomplish this
through culturally based
programs that build physical
social emotional intellectual
and spiritual needs for our
students.
In terms of our spring twenty
twenty one demographics we have
two hundred thirty seven degree
seeking students we have three
hundred to dual credit students
from eleven high schools across
the state of New Mexico and two
hundred fifty engineering
education students are in the
twenty twenty one school year
we've seen about a nine percent
decrease in full time enrollment
however would illustrate that
many of the students have act
she dropped to part time which
is been part of our strategy of
maintaining connection with our
students for those who are able
to commit to full time but
overall we've actually seen a
twenty three percent increase in
our total enrollment to spring
twenty twenty love that increase
coming from dual credit students
the high school level as well as
continue at students we also
thirty eight graduate students
our student body itself actually
represents ninety eight
federally recognized tribes or
roughly seventeen percent of the
total federally recognized
tribes in the country including
fifteen tribes in New Mexico
twelve pueblos and that doesn't
include our dual credit which
are often our students are
coming from local problems for
instance the Albuquerque area in
the Gallup area our initial
state area.
We also have the three students
who are currently living in the
dorms and panel housing is very
important for us as we made a
transition into this pandemic
era that we did not.
With that we forget
opportunities for students
particularly new incoming
freshmen seniors students what
housing security students have
lack of internet options within
the reservation communities to
have an opportunity to stay in
our since your campus bubble
stay safe and have opportunities
to continue their education.
Terms of our successes and our
challenges we have expanded as
many institutions have our
online learning and different
learning formats for fall twenty
at Interpol twenty one you read
about eighty percent of our
classes online and crude
synchronous asynchronous and
hybridized classes we've made
major investments as an
institution and have found some
great partners and that
increasing our online learning
including building on a decade
of online education the party
had in our experience as an
institution and a particular
investing in technologies that
allow more seamless and more
integrative online learning for
our students we've also been
very successful through federal
funding state funding and
private funding as well as our
own endowment foundation to
support students in our
financial education and personal
needs including things like
tuition reduction emergency
funding for to date gas cards
are housing as well as providing
computers to all of our students
who need them expanding our
software licenses providing
routers even broadband funding
is were able to in areas that
are that's a possibility.
We are largest challenges as an
institution this last year have
been in our inability to
replicate the equipment that we
are rebounded around our arts
programs are digital arts
programs by a lot of very
expensive in the place based
equipment that is just not
feasible to send to remote
communities and so are other we
have again expanded our online
learning there are just certain
things that we cannot replicate
the online form at all we also
have of course the larger
concerns are in our communities
and amongst our students
including things like pandemic
related issues our students are
facing an individual and
community basically one smoke
social emotional support needs
that we're addressing expanding
our counseling expanding those
services that support the
students in their personal needs
and really just a general in
this is common to many
institutions are general sort of
uncertainty that many students
are community are facing when we
return to predominately in
person learning what is the
pandemic gonna look like will
they be resurgence is these are
all things that have a
significant impact on the
success and health of our
students in addition to the more
sort of this impacts of the
pandemic there are often times
the finest energizing our
communications our students
these larger server General
uncertainties that waited on the
students their priorities and
server consciousness in day to
day.
I was particularly other
cinematic arts department which
is actually the second largest
degree program we have at I.
eight yes currently forty eight
BFA and MFA students are
cinematic arts program actually
consists of a BFA hundred twenty
credit an AFA sixty credit
beginning minor which is a
twenty four credit minor and
potentially just as of this week
we've added a new online or at
least of the residency broadcast
journalism certificate program I
was actually just accredited by
HLC on Tuesday of this week we
also have within our new studio
MFA program and integrated arts
track which will involve
cinematic art students of
students who are interested in
pursuing graduate education and
cinematic arts will actually
ensure the integrative arts
track at the institute and be
able to receive graduate level
education cinematic arts to date
the predominant focus of our
cinematic arts program has been
what we call sort of behind the
camera skills technical skills
editing skills
however we two years ago
actually initiated a
reinvigoration of our performing
arts program and we're now
starting to train our cinematic
arts students in front of the
camera work things like
anchoring things like acting on
those skills that oftentimes our
students are called upon we had
great success in our history of
our cinematic arts department
particularly starting in two
thousand what was then known as
new media arts we have students
who are currently placed at
local TV stations one of higher
education institutions they've
actually gone into educating
themselves and we even have some
that are that are currently
working national stations our
national film programs.
In particular our students are
in high demand for their
technical skills again a lot of
our focus is behind the camera
and this is an area that often
times is not a focus in other
cinematic arts programs what is
a primary focus ours
and of course we are constantly
and this is true of all of our
programs you're constantly being
asked to help to encourage
students to our indigenous
students to get into careers in
areas where there is under
representation of indigenous
people and particularly in the
cinematic arts I am the film
industry are there is an under
representation of indigenous
people in particular this year
we actually entered into a
partnership with and the C. U.
Academy specifically to address
this are probably seen some of
the news postings about this but
the idea is to get more
indigenous people involved in
journalism broadcast journalism
our hands are are interesting
the combination of our broadcast
journalism certificate which
will be initiated this year.
In terms of cinematic arts
specific pandemic successes and
challenges and quite a number of
successes including new
production space that's slated
to open in fall twenty twenty
one which will allow again more
technical education for our
students are we currently don't
have a dedicated sound stage or
studio space on campus our
students work in various areas
however starting in fall twenty
twenty one election a dedicated
studio area to practice and hone
skills we have our ongoing
George R. R. Martin fellowship
which has produced now Senator
co point of graduates who are
working particularly in the New
Mexico film industry we also of
course have a new NBC the county
partnership in twenty twenty we
had four of our students were
chosen to show at the Santa Fe
Indian independent Film Festival
we also students who are showing
documentaries at least in France
this year and right now we have
one students so far that's been
chosen for the twenty twenty one
Senator film festival with my
very likely a few more they're
going to be chosen the near
future we also some alone this
year we chosen for the vision
maker media production
fellowship we have to a number
currently working at GBH Boston
in particular on the volley of
the volley television series we
have students who have also been
accepted into a number of
graduate programs including the
prestigious dot Sandiego State
University graduate film
program.
In terms of general challenges
we had within the cinematic arts
program a lot of the challenges
are infrastructure based on
students were working particular
reservation communities are
still dealing with lack of high
speed internet despite our
institutions attempts and and
and efforts to provide direct
funding to students to cover
internet costs it's in some
cases just not available really
at any price within reservation
communities without the
infrastructure we also have an
again this is part of our
general challenge lack of school
are available production
equipment that we can send out
to students equipment that's not
easily loaned or used remotely
again due to things like lack of
infrastructure and we also see
and this is true across all of
our programs but in cinematic
arts program that as students
are learning from home they of
course are part of their
community that has particular
family community obligations and
expectations for them and so
their time is full are they have
lack of private spaces within
their homes and good time
management has been very
difficult for our students as it
has been for many students in
higher education when you are
sure that home you're being
pulled multiple directions and
it means that you cannot
dedicate as much time and effort
to your education as you might
were you in a residential
Rose there right at the
okay.
Yeah saying our internet
connections and stable to
probably getting ready for the
session I don't know if we have
some go head to make a kit we
can real quick in and then hard
meal.
Thank thank you madam chair and
Thank you tomorrow thank you
