Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Monero's.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator pro.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
president.
Senator the chamber we're
lacking a quorum.
All senators in the chamber.
Etcetera so Mister president Bob
or waiting for the other people
just want to welcome you all to
pi day.
Thank you for the reminder
Senator.
You now have a quorum Mister
president.
Senator is it just a few please
rise for the indication to be
allegiance and Spanish to be
there today by Senator Gonzalez
and the salute to the New Mexico
flag to be led today by Senator
for.
languages customs and norms of
behavior.
Which are boundless.
The strongest when we.
Universally diverse.
their language and culture.
As we prepare for final week.
Let us use our wisdom.
For all of us amen.
Pledge allegiance to the flag of
the United States.
Fundamental them if the hello on
that on the blue thousand
you close the sale of polls.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous and that order
business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Mr president thank you
Mr president I yield to Senator
Lopez Senator Lopez Mr president
good evening to everyone
president I yield to any other
members for announcements and
then I'll give us a sense of
what we're gonna do.
Senator is wrong that order
business announcements and
like to talk about Nina Otero
Warren and I believe we have a
picture.
to show the Senate if not I'll
Farmer ancestors Nino terra
Warren who is born in Los Lunas
in the late eighteen hundreds
years ago and she was also the
first Latina to run for Congress
in nineteen twenty two and other
she didn't win that election she
lost by only nine percent she
years and fixed elaborated
school buildings fought for
bilingual and bicultural
education and better teacher
salary and and another very Fund
to Senator Antoinette Sedillo
Lopez thank you Mr as.
Thank you Mr president it was
it was a state Donald dental or
something was the which is about
seven generations up we thought
we had a common ancestor and one
big extended family there and I
thought I'd talk a little bit
about her personal life she grew
up in the lunar mansion and her
She then of her mother remarried
and they moved to Santa Fe in
Santa Fe well they lived in
Santa Fe they shipped me to off
to now for about the school but
Karia Hansel said she was the
first woman to run for Congress
in New Mexico and she ran has a
Republican which I thought was
really interesting.
her life out in Santa Fe after
working so hard on the ERA and
then she also
Developed a real estate business
about fifteen to twenty years
until she died.
So it that's a little bit about
her personal life.
Senator Lopez Senator could
Hemphill.
We do have further announcements
centered the subpoena followed
by Senator Baca Senator Ortiz
that was it was pretty common in
those days.
Most of the new government
economists.
Right after statehood were
Republicans and that's because
the Democrats in the Congress
And the Republicans embrace
them.
And so many of my ancestors from
that era were Republicans and
timers who are Republicans still
very strong and some of those
communities but it dates back to
that period so Nino Terrel
Warren was in the mainstream
when she ran for Congress as a
of welcoming Hispanics and.
And of since the inception of
our state what I wanted to point
out Mr president is I'm looking
I was just looking up at the
gallery in the gallery is dark
you know driving and again we
have the fence outside and here
we are at seven o'clock at night
now seven thirty on a Sunday
the body to to encourage more
openness with the public and to
reject this legislation in the
dark there's really no good
purpose for for being on the
when people are more interested
more awake more alert I think
would be far more effective for
transparency purposes so with
that I just wanted to point that
yes with senator Candelaria.
Senator the Lara thank you Mr
president I to in some way
agency that wanted to corporate
lobbyist and we can put them up
there so we too can feel
together.
but let's be Frank everybody in
the state including my family
would you like to make a formal
request chair Mister president
formally I would request you
animus consent to remove coats
see no objections so ordered
Senator thank you.
I'll say this to Senator Korea
Hemphill also so Mister
president of the other things
about the story about Nino to
warn that isn't really well
known is that she's actually one
of the first people that worked
really hard to bring a doctor an
knew that or not but and that is
where the
Be at the office lows restaurant
the home of the what we're home
for it actually came from so I
don't know if they knew that or
not but I just wanted to inform
most inclusive party in the
country so I really do
appreciate that but you know the
reality is we are here on a
Sunday afternoon at seven thirty
when I should be at home with my
I did get to spend a a little
bit of time with them my mind is
is definitely split between this
building and with my family so
I'm definitely missing my family
we should not be here on a
Sunday afternoon at seven thirty
PM this could have been done
earlier we could have done a
committees from home via zoom
Si no further announcements
Senators we'll go to senator
Peter Wirth thank you Mr
president thank you members
so folks understand every day
we're moving moving bills
forward and there's a process to
read those Canadian reports and
that's how that happens and so
to starts and then a heads up on
the house bill's we'll do
fifteen through twenty three.
So I'll just read about so
Seventeen house bill sixty eight
will be Senator Diamond.
R. eighteen house bill one
eighty three I believe it is
I'm just being informed the
numbers aren't lining up exactly
on what I was reading compared
So let me let me let me start
that back over again I see the
the numbers weren't lining quite
quite up well let's do this what
we'll do is we'll we'll take
Yeah I see that the numbers are
a little different so let me let
me just work on that we'll get
back to everyone on that Mr
president let's start with
unanimous consent to go to that
that the house has passed Senate
bill ninety four as amended by
the Senate.
Senate bill twenty one is
amended by the Senate Senate
amended by the Senate with
emergency clause Senate bill
ninety six as amended by the
Senate Senate bill one thirty
one Senate bill one thirty seven
with the emergency clause and
The journal so the message from
the house has been received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed Senate bill thirty
The gentle we'll show that that
message from the house has been
received.
And Mister president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the duly enrolled in
engrossed copies of Senate bill
respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McCutchen chief clerk of
the house.
The gentle so that the message
from the house has been
received.
business committee reports the
reader to read.
Mr president.
Your finance committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
three seventeen has had it under
Is present at mass mass consent
the right to be allowed all all
the committee reports and then
we vote on them without one
motion and the General flecked
they were acted upon
Senate Bill for tennis amended
do pass.
Senate house bill forty six
house bill forty six as amended
do pass.
House bill one twenty as amended
do pass.
house bill two thirty eight do
pass respectfully submitted
senator George K. Munoz chairman
Senator let us move adoption the
committee report Senator have a
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that order business
concurrence and I would yield to
present I move that the Senate
concurrent with the house
amendments to Senate bill thirty
five as amended.
Senator have a motion to concur
Steinborn explain out so those
in as we're going to use Senator
Steinborn thank you Mr president
colleagues it looks like a lot
but there's actually only one
sentence in law that we needed
to change
in the house the in the
definition of employee in our
state law we actually exclude.
If you would graduated high
school we're no longer in school
you wouldn't qualify for the
minimum wage if you were not in
school because you're taking
care of the family and seventeen
years old do not qualify for the
so we had to eliminate that
exception in law and that is on.
Page two of the amendment
everything else is existing
statute it's just that strike
So with that I definitely move
we concurrence happens to stand
for questions Hey Senator
Steinborn Senator debating the
motion to concur.
I now move that we can current
fire.
By a unanimous probably roll
call the.
Present for that's a unanimous
consent but I don't think that's
You know what I'm moved by
unanimous consent by golly miss
president.
as amended and there has been a
request by unanimous consent.
Can the Senate is concerned with
Senate bill thirty five as
amended Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you colleagues.
let me just try again to give
everyone a sense of what we're
gonna do we're actually into one
through seven we're gonna add
one bill up top the last one
Center money else and then we'll
Item sixteen is house bill sixty
eight that'll be Senator
Diamond.
Item seventeen is house bill one
eighty three which I believe
will be Senator o'neill yep by
these hand up.
house bill one forty six and a
rod Regus house bill twenty two.
I'm sorry number twenty two
house bill two forty that'll be
Senator Baca.
Number twenty three is house
with that Mr as a unanimous
consent we go about our business
committee reports that are the
business committee reports the
reader to read.
Mr president your rules
without recommendation and
further recommends that it now
be re referred to the rules
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Daniel A. Ivey Soto
fort has been adopted.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business third
reading of legislation this
yield to senator Munoz for item
microphones and faced by your
cameras on when you're speaking
and for all those members who
are in the chamber of these
major phones are brought on by
all action for placing Senate
finance.
Since two percent a bill for
thirty nine with a merge kit
Clause on final passage and is
there's people that make this
building turn and work for us
they've been COVID tested daily
weekly of the lines we weren't
nines the staff in and the
council the staff in LFC as
every employer knows when you
put your employees at risk we
need to show respect for them
and what this does is we figured
And being willing to come up
here during this time of COVID.
And put them and their families
may be at risk but to to really
serve the people in New Mexico
they're day and and just a
little bit of help for what they
do for us in the state of New
Mexico.
Senator debating Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
thoughtfulness and to let all
the individuals know who
continue to go ahead and serve
the people of New Mexico your
services are valued and I
realize that it's been difficult
to leave your families and come
tied directly to that I'd like
to say that our employees have
earned this composition
compensation it's not something
is given to on their working
New Mexico and so again thank
you.
Chairman when Yasin to each
member of the New Mexico state
Senate for the support that
we've given to our public
Thank you Mr president I rise in
support of course of this
measure which is really an
initiative of the Senate finance
How do we employers how to
society how does the state
respond to the demands and to
the disruption and the suffering
as we expect from everybody else
thank you Mr president thank you
chairman Yasser thank you
senator on the lot of further
debate we have center for the
thank you much very much Mr
every single one of these people
that work here and give him a
high five a hug or a handshake
to thank them.
Without a doubt they make this
never had a bad interaction with
anybody that works here and I
just wish I could thank them all
personally and and and just say
to you that the long hours we
Thanks for the any further
debate centers Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president I will
just say Mister president add to
what my colleague said.
pretty remarkable thing to be
part of and to behold but thank
you all for for the effort and
it starts with the top with with
with Lenore and and the clerks
Thank you Senator Steinborn
would be a further debate
Senator Hickey followed by
Senator Sedillo Lopez then
ourselves of freshman
the senior the leadership.
Of the caucus has been just
absolutely wonderful and very
very welcoming and we greatly
here I am smiling because the
staff are so welcoming so
friendly so cheerful that it
puts a bounce in my step and I'm
and to our staff thank you so
very much.
Thanks Senator Hickey Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you.
The additional thing I sort of
did to everything that has been
enormous praise and thanks and
so three hundred dollars seems
of.
At least a gesture of our
appreciation for everything they
members of the staff.
You're you're amazing thank you
thank Senator Lopez further
debate center PO followed by
Senator Hotmail.
coming in here putting
themselves at risk but we also
got ad they put themselves at
risk to the threat there's a
reason why we do have the fence
also stand in rise and support
of this bill and I want to thank
the staff because the success of
the New Mexico Senate and the
New Mexico house is because of
your hard work and dedication
it's nice to know that we have
senator Munoz for bringing this
bill thank you Mr president
thanks Senator further debate
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president I'd like to also rise
and thank the staff with what I
work for us we appreciate it
we we really do like having all
of you here I remember when I
was staff here and the best
because that is the best way we
can respect our to staff is by
respecting them every single day
thank you.
and I know this was not an easy
decision for many of you
especially right at the front
end of this process and so again
constitutional duty and so I'm
I'm incredibly.
Thankful that we've been able to
make make it through this
session and do so in a way
appreciation ten times over
thanks so much Senator Wirth
media further debate will center
family each of you takes the
time over all these years to be
here supporting us working with
us and we don't operate without
you and I think this is just a
small way to say thank you for
Thank you Mr president and I
have been here eighteen years
and right over here this
gentleman that has taken care of
me for all of those years you
must see a is the best and all
Thanks Kernan center I'm sorry
Senator Duhigg and then Senate
candidate you want to speak to.
Senator.
your kindness has been just
invaluable and really appreciate
it thank you so much and thank
you chairman Frank mass.
Any further debate senators.
office the staff and every
chairman's office that has to
come in and do committee reports
stay late if you watch it and.
got engaged to my friend to Pyle
who who keeps us full of coffee
and and and pays attention to us
to the gentleman on to our right
appreciate you for your part of
our family I wish we could do
more I wish we could figure out
a way to do more maybe next year
we can but the we appreciate you
Willie that from Los crucis or
don't down south it the kind of
get this idea around Monday I
thank you for that thank you for
helping the people that serve
These are the people that make
it operate I wish I could ask
unanimous consent including you
to vote for us lieutenant
governor but I can't because of
the rules and with that Mr
now pass and ask for a roll call
vote.
Senator is more voting and
Senate finance committees of
state percent of the four thirty
nine with emergency clause.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Gallegos Senator Gregers
yes Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator I resultar yes Senator
how to meal Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan.
monitors.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Yes Senator printer yes Senator
Pirtle Senator Pirtle yes
senator propane.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman as senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods
Senator Woods yes.
four thirty nine with emergency
clause has passed the Senate
Senator Ingle to explain as
well.
Thank you presents present this
is certainly a great thing for
The people in the L. A. L. E. S.
C. the people the LFC the so
much of the work behind the
scenes for us and do their very
best to make us look as smart as
we can.
And sometimes that is a tough
in our bank be thankful.
And thank them for the job they
do because they're often asked
to do things at the spur of the
if I miss anybody but if this is
the time to stand up and thank
our staff and and wish we could
give me a hug and wrap our arms
around it but well the body
rising given the loudest
Thank you to the body were
moving on to item number two on
the calendar that Senate bill
two hundred and thirteen on its
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment order substitution.
unanimously approved a
resolution.
Introduced by the national LGBTQ
Bar Association calling for an
California Illinois Rhode Island
Nevada Connecticut Maine Hawaii
New York New Jersey Washington
and Colorado have banned the use
unquote Defense.
Well essentially what this is is
a strategy that asks the jury to
find that a victim's sexual
It is not a free standing
defense to criminal liability so
if we enact this bill the
defenses of diminished capacity
against the queer community to
claim that they're victims of
sexual orientation or gender
perpetrators of crimes against
LGBTQ victims this quote unquote
Defense.
Which is available in New
Mexico.
less Mr president I am honored
to have as co sponsors on the
bill.
In the Senate senators to
phonics Senator how to meal
And are also sponsoring the bill
we comprise the largest number
of openly and proud LGBTQ New
think that would be appropriate
thank you Mr president and as
we're debating Senate bill two
thirteen we able to center how
to meal thank you Mr president
LGBTQ people have long been
significantly higher rates than
are non LGBTQ appears to the
police the sanctioned violence
we suffered through to the age
of Stonewall riots where modern
prohibiting the so called panic
Defense Mr president is a
critical step in continuing this
effort to achieve liberation for
queer and trans New Mexicans
alleged perpetrator of violence
to defend themselves by claiming
that they were panicked because
of the sexual orientation or
gender identity of the victim.
Thanks to me we do have further
debate Senator Stefanics
followed by Senator Hamblen.
Senator Stefanics.
In the late eighties I was the
director of the New Mexico aids
services for the entire state.
And he was gay and he went to
the bar one night one of the
again by that we have now we're
kirke and he apparently
became enraged that he'd chosen
to do so beat him senseless put
him in his car and burned him
alive.
anything like that to happen
again in the state of New Mexico
thank you very much.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president and thank
I I unfortunately do not have an
experience to share like
senators to phonics has but it
is all too common and I would
like to talk about
representation and how the fact
Key that we know of
the thing that's important to me
is a text that actually I got
today that somebody sent me who
in the car today my youngest who
is ten years old is L. G. B. T.
Q. your comments about families
definitions meant so much to my
daughter she was happy to hear
president.
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate centered on
the other the close
But are still so many young
people in our community.
for their lives.
Because of who they are.
With our state no longer gives
quarter to those sort of
discriminatory attitudes with
that Mr president.
Senate bill two thirteen.
Everything happens we need to
do.
We can build on this bill thank
you Mr president this but I'll
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
yes senator to run this Senator
Cervantes yes Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond DS Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg gas
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator my nose senator Munoz
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator by the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senators committees.
Senator so they are Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
for the next yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
I have a forty one the
affirmative on the negative
Senate bill two thirteen has
We're moving on to item number
three that Senate Education
Committee substituting for
Senate bill two eighty nine as
for Senate bill two eight nine
as amended twice on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
No objection Senator Lopez to
explain.
Thank.
creates a new special education
division.
and an Assistant Secretary for
special education within our pet
the public education department.
Mr president members of the
Senate in an accent you section
Assistant Secretary position
it creates of a statewide autism
spectrum registry.
The bill defines dyslexia
Senate as we know there has been
at the consolidated lawsuit.
Of Martinez Yazzie versus the
state of New Mexico and I'd like
and this was signed by one of
the attorneys who was earnest I
could add a.
This is just an excerpt Mr
position for special education
within our New Mexico pad.
Fighting professional
development for teachers and
other professionals involved in
aim at the needs of students
with disabilities and their
lawsuit arguing that the state
had failed to provide a
sufficient education to students
with disabilities.
also those within higher ed the
in the that the professors and
such
we bring this bill forward
because it's important for us to
be able to consolidate and bring
of New Mexico
Mr president I know there's much
more that we may get into but
I'll be able and willing to
stand for questions.
close.
Mr president I now move that
Senate bill Senate Education
Committee for Senate bill two
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos mmhm Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator manos.
Senator need to be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator by the A. S. Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
senator.
Senator Sanchez yes senator
smitteez.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Steinborn.
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Yes my my vote Senator Woods
yes.
Senator Baca.
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
yes.
Senator Griggs.
Thirty eight.
just twice amended has passed
the Senate Senator Lopez Mr
president members of the Senate
thank you Mr president Senator
Padilla Mr president the point
I'm happy to follow Senator what
senator Wirth explains about
thank you Mr president and thank
you Senator Padilla I just
When you wonder about a vote and
not call Mr Dennis Roch long
term superintendent.
Over in Logan.
from director to Assistant
Secretary no funding is attached
either so it's fine.
District clarification of my
just wanted to give a shout out
and thank you to Senator Lopez I
know that she's worked for many
many years and has advocated for
special needs children here in
New Mexico I didn't know what
the follow comments after the
to recognize that today thank
you Senator Lopez thank you
senator by the LFC.
We are the next item on the
calendar that's item number four
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill two seventy nine
on final passage has been taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution fee no
objections center on it are
Board to license and regulate
the prospect to some osteopathic
medicine Mr Mr president members
medical doctors and doctors of
New Mexico has a obviously in
New Mexico Medical School in
Albuquerque but now of course we
have that osteopathic medical
school done increases the
Burrell College.
the doctors have come together
on this landmark legislation
with that Mr president I stand
for questions centers we're
debating Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
wanting to debate on the bill.
See no debate on the bill Santo
close.
Thank you okay Mister president
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos yes senator from
the lawyer.
Senator Candelaria yes senators
have on this Senator syringes
yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill yes Senator o'neil yes
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator souls yes Senator
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Thirty eight
thirty eight in the affirmative
on the making a Senate Judiciary
Committee substance for Senate
bill two seventy nine has passed
you Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended in that the
record show that all actions for
placing Senate bill three
sixteen as amended on final
passage has been taken and that
all of you and your votes on the
gay panic Bill
You know I've been reminded many
times why representation matters
as an out lesbian serving in our
communities with their needs and
to get them the services they
deserve and if you would've
asked me when I was sixteen if I
ever thought that I would be
serving the residents of New
Mexico in this capacity Senator
who access various services and
monitor their successful use of
those services we will be able
to identify barriers to
accessing particular programs
and services that affect this
identity when they're collecting
other demographic data like age
sex race etcetera the amendment
makes the request very clear to
include all state departments
and freesheet those senators who
Unless the program is federally
funded and the federal agency
provides them with the questions
and answers to use.
Mr president I look forward to
the discussion that will come
from any debate on this bill
Senator is very debating Senate
questions that I have in the
field yes Mr president I do
yield.
on some of my.
Analysis here it says that this
will all be a voluntary.
Then it says a workforce
solution.
Would be required to update and
implement software for purpose.
filling out state forms your
asked your race your your age
your gender however LGBTQ
identifiers are not on that form
and so that's what this bill
information that is where the
voluntary aspect comes in Mister
president senator what's enter
once.
Thank you for the any further
debate senators.
Senator.
Mr president I just wanna stand
in strong support of this bill
you know I I heard earlier
Any further debate senators.
Say no further debate Senate
have the Nichols.
Mr president's Senate bill three
disaggregated the better we will
understand how different groups
in our population you services
with that Mr president I move
the Senate bill three sixteen as
amended do now pass and I ask
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator guide goes.
Senator Gallegos Now Senator
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
Senator Monero's.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator probe.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator severe Lopez yes Senator
share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman as senator
Wirth.
Senator Sanchez Senator songes
yes.
By a vote of twenty nine the
affirmative six in the negative
Senate bill three sixteen as
amended has passed the Senate
Senator Hamblen Mr president
bill two thirty as amended.
Senate office.
Thank you very much Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
I see no objections centred this
explained the bill.
Thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate
It's been almost a full decade.
Where this measure has been
introduced in some form whether
it was done via a memorial.
Mr president we were the first
state in the country to pass a
memorial that recognized
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president and you know we did
pass a measure a few years back
and they did pass both the house
another measure during the
course last year during the
session and then the back again
during the special session that
we had in June.
amendment so the bill didn't
pass again.
Mr president I was honored to be
appointed to serve on the
governor's governor Lujan
council has unanimously endorsed
this bill also for us again for
us to be discussing and debating
here this session.
Mr president members of the
Senate.
institutional racism are hidden
in our criminal justice system
our social systems in the
in the music industry in our
housing industry in private and
public employment.
Mr president members of the
Senate there are many different
But sometimes is basically to
laws that we pass rules and
regulations that are passed over
the years and we all know Mister
to work at Sandia national
laboratories.
And they wanted to purchase a
home.
So they had money my father had
good employment this was back in
nineteen fifty one.
Matteo and the Interstate right
now there is neighborhoods the
interstate of course wasn't
quite built out the way it is
now.
And they were told Mr president.
review what happened within that
particular industry at that time
there was a lot of redlining
that was going on.
Mr president members of the
Senate when you look at my
homes realtors do not you know
directed to cover purchased a
home in my community their first
area in which to go is in
another section of the city
another section of the county.
not where you want to live.
Mr president my community is a
respectful working class hard
working class and in fact
they're the front line workers
to take care of everybody else
We talk about the banking
industry Miss Mister president
we we we all have some stories.
But we talk about what happened.
speaking Spanish.
When you're punished for
speaking.
Your mother tongue.
They were placed in a closet no
light this is done by teachers.
Because they were speaking
Spanish.
And to be locked in a closet no
our native American communities.
Separation of children from
their their families and their
culture.
Mr president this is something
attempting to do Mr president is
for us to begin to look here
within our state government.
And began to make some changes.
Because what we've talked about
on this floor Mr presidents
have and learn how to work with
each other and appreciate the
differences that makes us not a
blending melting pot but a nice
can go on.
But I would like to if I could
Mr president I do have my co
sponsor here in the Senate with
me and if I could yield to
senator pope.
The racial inequity within
institutions and systems of
power.
Such as places of employment.
Government agencies and social
services.
Whether this is done implicitly
or explicitly.
Institutional racism occurs on a
certain group is targeted and
discriminated against based on
unnoticed by the individual
expressing.
Example would be.
So you have a school district
that concentrates people of
this is an example of
institutional racism.
So we must look at our
institutions.
To ensure that all New Mexicans
under we're not built for
everyone in our communities now.
They just weren't.
We've had to make changes to our
constitution.
that because we made a lot of
the folks in that racism is just
went away.
Is just something that.
a in an indictment on our state
and the institutions.
But is to ensure that we're
looking out for all New
Mexicans.
With that Mr president I will
Mr president we will stand for
questions thank you.
Any debate senators.
Senate Bill Evans.
described for decades but I
remember of she's just been so
thoughtful and so
So concerned about this issue
and just always always brings it
the R. word if you use the
racism word people say well I'm
not a racist so I don't have to
I don't have to listen but
that's not what this is about
Unimpressive system in which
what some people.
Don't have the same
opportunities that other people
have.
And the only way to dismantle
This can seem very threatening
but when but giving
opportunities for some is not
necessarily all taking
opportunities from others when
there are more opportunities.
Some people talk about the
pipeline the present the the
school to prison pipeline.
That is a clear example of
really commend the sponsors of
this bill.
For bringing this bill fourth
and I especially commend the
fact that we have our first
arguing about this and bringing
these issues forward for so long
I am so proud The Tonight I
believe that we will pass this
to transformational change thank
you Mr president.
Any further debate senators.
See now for the debate Senator
Lopez to close on the bill.
here with state government
representation matters.
So on that Mr president I now
move the Senate bill two thirty
as amended do now pass and I ask
Clerk to call the roll.
Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
yes senator Candelaria Senator
Candelaria yes Senator serve on
this Senator surrounded yes
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator resultar yes Senator how
to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan.
No explain not that Senator
Kernan now Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator Neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino Senator disciplinary
test Senator Stewart here.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pro.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Tallman.
Senator common as senator Wirth
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Munoz.
I was right there and you can
see me yes.
You didn't answer.
affirmative seven the negative
Senate bill two thirty as
amended has passed the Senate
Senator Kernan to explain about
thank you Mr president and and
not going to say too much but I
council county commission within
our school district school board
all these different The New
Mexico junior college board
there is great representation
and I think we are in my schools
we have schools in one
particular part of town and they
are some of the best schools in
the district because some of the
job in my community I'm very
proud of.
Senator Kernan Senate office
thank you Mr president members
of the Senate.
Going on to the next item on the
send the record show that all
acts for placing Senate finds
ants Committee.
Service to for Senate bill four
It is house bill two moves along
we've heard through the years
and not withstanding language
and and what happens with that
and and how they deal with that.
Mexico so what this does is it
changes a and not less than one
language and repels local
transportation infrastructure
fund from the mortgage finance
what does it just changes not
withstanding language.
Sen debating Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill four thirty eight.
pass and I just
now as consenus Senate records
show the roll is called and we
have looks like.
with.
The card call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
this senators about this yes
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
yes Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator my nose.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator
Padilla.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Sanchez senator Sanchez yes
senator smitteez.
Senator so they are Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Stefanics yes senators voted yes
Senator Steinborn Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Stewart
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator word yes.
By a vote of forty in the
affirmative there on the the
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
Shendo on that order business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Shendo thank you Mr
president of I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
tax we sent a tax business
transportation committee report
course of technical problems
with the committee report and a
corrected version has been
prepared.
I see no objections the
committee for has been expunged
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
and public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill two
forty two has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted
all the committee reports that
we act on them with one motion
with the journal reflect that
they were all acted upon
individually seeing no
objection.
do pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Joseph Cervantes
journal reflect their acted upon
individually.
Your tax business and
transportation committee tomb
has been referred house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for House Bill to ninety one as
amended has had it under
consideration report same with
Senator have a motion to that
report.
This presents.
Senator.
committee so I believe it has to
have us twice amended.
Senator said on the reporter
not.
Senator Shendo that was on is
that on the report.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to order business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business senator
Wirth thank you Mr president so
we're going to go back to third
order of Business third reading
of legislation and ideal to
Senator McKenna.
For item number fifteen house
bill one seventy nine Senator
McKenna.
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing House
Bill one seven nine.
On final passage has been taken
Thank you Mr president and
before explained the bill
witnesses.
It is Mr Tricia.
Julie Julie Julie and I'll she's
a senior strategist for
school house connection.
members I present H. B. one
seven nine which is entitled
fees for vital records for
homeless I am co sponsoring this
minor for youth under twenty
five years of age would be able
to get a copy of their birth
certificate without a parent or
Education of homeless children
and youth committee which has
met regularly for over a year.
homelessness in the state.
during the twenty eighteen
twenty nineteen school year.
Unaccompanied homeless youth are
experiencing.
Homelessness.
On their own usually due to
multiple negative physical
mental and behavioral health
outcomes.
Early intervention is imperative
since the length of homelessness
Mr president and body in New
Mexico.
High school students are
experiencing homelessness.
That are experiencing
homelessness pardon me are four
Unaccompanied homeless youth.
being forced to have sexual
intercourse R. two point five
times greater than the odds for.
desperate need of services often
the simple lack of a birth
certificate ten dollars can
prevent them from accessing
employment healthcare housing
to such services is imperative
to keep our communities healthy
and to boost the economy.
with that.
Senator debating Senate house
bill one seventy nine we have
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president if the
Mr president and.
Senator how are we.
Gonna verify.
The age of the children.
thatthe.
So the that's in the terms at
that's in the scope of why I'm
Mr president and Senator Woods
there are agencies listed in the
bill to verify that Conley.
That commonly verify
Thank you Mr president.
Any further debate senators.
for Representative are Senator
for again this legislation to
the floor how many contact
points are there before the
them before they get to this
point.
to get the best certificate.
Center can Mr president and
Senator Pinto very good question
and even others by service
providers.
So Mister president and Senator
the.
Senator Pinto I'll be right with
you.
in the bill that will do that.
So this particular the already
have contact with somebody prior
of the agencies they would have
to have gone to one of the
agency's first.
Mr president and Senator Pinto
yes I'm verifying with that with
homeless people to use many
states with birth certificate
waivers like this have forms
Senator okay Mister president
and Senator Pinto I have that
just a moment.
Mr president and Senator Pinto
not just that we have in the
area I represent that my young
people even you know elders off
all the way across the spectrum
post office box there's all
these issues and this is just me
telling this is just one of them
I'm it they all interact with
to have that in their system or
they would not caster checks.
At the we're doing prior to
comment.
So there are several other
out of high school and move on
and into the city establishing
that physical address banking
institution to actually qualify
further debate.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president and the.
With the sponsor yield Senator
McKenna yield Mister president
The bill and just trying to
figure out.
Exactly how the identity is
established for the person
Yes thank you Mr president and
Senator Burt I just conferring
with my expert I'll be right
with you.
Mr president and Senator Brandt
are we going to verify the
identity.
Of the person who's requesting a
new birth certificate to make
sure the person who's actually
requesting the certificate.
Mr president and Senator Brandt
she's preparing a response for
us
But while we're waiting
and Mister president and Senator
Brandt the person would have to
apply for a birth certificate on
the standard form and format.
of an adult on that form.
and I'm guessing there's no way
of verifying the person actually
is who they say they are.
To look through the newspaper
and if someone has died that is
very young.
To try to assume their identity.
How do we keep that from
This bill setting up a situation
where someone can get a birth
certificate that they can then
use for every other form of
identity.
Analysis packet there is a term
called self at at the station
and so that would be used.
I'm I'm trying to remember how
self at the station works.
But in our state I don't think
that if you're a minor that you
can sign any type of contract.
And I think you have to do that.
Isn't that correct.
Senator McKenna.
Miss Mister president and
senator Brandt get multiple
is waiving the ten dollar fee.
Mister president senator and if
if that was the only thing you
changed we wouldn't be having
this conversation.
here.
allowing this whole different
process.
For a person to receive a new
birth certificate.
With our state of birth
certificate is that that
document that starts the the
whole identity for you that's
else like a driver's license or
an ID card so if if if you can
get a birth certificate
fraudulently.
Mr president and Senator Brandt
so.
Trying to appreciate.
Your question.
And try to be careful not to
drop my laptop.
So it it starts on the bottom
of.
Page three.
Issue a certified copy of that
use birth record.
To the youth without requiring a
And then.
Read it when my computer jumps
to another screen sorry.
Only from of the touch screen.
To a local education agency
homeless liaison school
counselor school nurse so it is
laying out a cold process.
So that sounds like a new
process.
Can you help me out with the
Senator McKenna Mr president and
Senator Brandt so the written
application.
the department the bill just
makes it clear that no adult
signatures required.
So for instance a school can get
Nevada has had the same law and
process in place since twenty
nineteen.
McKenna Mr president and.
Senator Brandt
waiver also applies to all ages
and social workers.
That serve that serve the youth
up to the age of twenty five.
right I as I look at the.
It seems like the purpose of
your bill.
Is on page.
Six.
certificate of a homeless
individual.
Is that correct.
Mr president and Senator Brandt
yes that that is.
is if I may may I use an example
Mr president and senator.
You have the four users go ahead
Senator so and and I've I've
together the been having a tough
time and so for instance in my
work as a.
Constituent.
obviously because our office is
closed.
We would get folks who are going
through some tough times and
many times didn't have any money
to their name.
Five ten dollars to get new ID
could be quite the challenge
because if anything if they have
that money we want them to use
it for food so I can see how
Escaping a domestic violence
situation.
And not having many resources
and if I made to Mr president
and.
The age that is used in the bill
also social workers commonly
serve youth up to the age of
twenty five.
And so the quote unquote
The big
purpose of the bill.
Senator Brandt.
everyone keeps saying that I had
a million jobs and that's
probably true.
I actually work with the
homeless for years.
years so I'm very familiar with
the homeless very familiar with
working with them helped a lot
of them get back on their feet.
A lot of times they.
picture ID
they they try not to lose that
that they protect with their
life because they know how
important it is but.
Truly verify the person's
identity.
By changing the process of how
you obtain.
Senator is we do have further
debate we'll go with senator
participate followed by center
city Lopez.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
I mean it basically says on the
bottom of page three.
The state registrar shall upon.
Receipt of a written application
only change that without
requiring that the signature the
adult all the rest stays the
same they still have to get the
information about where he was
born have to verify that with
law were to pass they wouldn't
need the signature of an adult
because these homeless youth
could can't can't obtain them
and I think that's that's the
only change that I see in there
Thank you Mr president and the
Senator Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
Made the excellent point but
I'll just add a little bit more
we've had we had to help clients
when they lost all forms of ID
and it's very difficult to get
an idea if you have no no
documentation so what the
department of vital statistic
examples of how you can make the
case that you are who you say
you are and further this bill at
the end requires out to station
a nonprofit agency that provides
services to homeless individuals
a local education agency
homeless liaison school
counselors school nurses social
worker license in the state or
what has happened is people
take.
Take on somebody else's identity
and state and activity theft is
a huge problem but the
department of final statistics
And that will help because if
the other attested to sign on
behalf of the youth and that
will help the this homeless
individual.
fee helps it make make it a
little bit easier but the
department of vital statistics
does not just take this on at
face value value and I think
into qualify for any budget
sometimes a.
Even even picking up food from a
from a food bank they'll they'll
want an ID so I think this is a
Si no further debate sentiment
Canada closed in the bill.
that the role has been called
and I ask for a roll call vote.
Senator suits the clerk to call
the roll.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
that idea.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris Senator Moores
yes Senator my nose.
Senator my nose yes senator
Neville.
Senator by the A. S. Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez VS Senator
share.
Senator share gnome Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Steinborn is Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative to the negative
identity thefts in voter fraud
with this bill I understand the
many good.
Wishes to help people.
Senate body thank you very much
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
reports on that order of
business committee reports.
home has been referred Senate
bill two ninety four has had it
under consideration and report
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
committee reports that we will
in with one motion that the
general effective they were
acted upon individually see no
objection the right entry.
Senate bill four fourteen is
committee substitute for house
bill twenty as amended do pass
as amended.
House bill fifty four do pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one sixty eight do
pass.
House bill two thirty do pass as
amended.
Do pass as amended.
And house bill three oh three do
pass respectfully submitted
Senator Benny Shendo junior
journal will reflect that
they're acted upon individually
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go back to the order of Business
third reading of legislation a
rules be suspended in the record
show that all actions for
placing House Bill sixty eight
on final passage has been taken
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the no
thank you Mr president members
of the body I I like spaceport
America called Sierra County
home and so I'm happy to
introduce house bill sixty eight
Our Environment spend launch and
up aerospace this bill is
intended to keep those anchor
tenants and to attract others
what this bill does is broadens
law what this bill does not do
is excuse companies for
negligence or willful or
reckless disregard for the
safety of space flight
questions service we're debating
house bill sixty eight.
Centerman us thank you Mr
so we would not have to Fund
that through general fund money.
Senator Diamond Mr president and
Senator menulis no this is not
the bill where we would do that
we would need but we could
think in the in the G. O. bonds
are the capital bill that we're
going to see in the re off bill
you're going to see some money
that wasn't spent at the
spaceport twenty million dollars
gonna be using general fund
through the through the capital
bill that Fund spaceport America
I think it's time we have a hard
look maybe next year about what
Senator Ingle was present with
sponsor yield Senator Diamond
deal of course this president
Senator I wish I'm curious I
remember when this first came to
and Hollywood when the movie
stars and I think there's a
hundred eighty thousand dollars.
And I'm just curious what the
price of the tickets were if you
know that and when when the
understanding that right now we
have six hundred participants
have signed up so far at a price
of two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars I am unfamiliar
Any further debate centers.
Saying I'm sorry centers of this
Senator the bill that we have
now would eliminate a sunset on
the immunity that was given to
was it was immunity given to
just virgin galactic or was
given to anybody associate with
The server which is a Sir
Richard.
Sir Richard Branson.
Mr president and senator
surrounded so virgin is the are
currently the only human space
come to spaceport.
And so much for the service so
if I understand this the
immunity with only relate to
people that are transporting
passengers into space is that
right.
I'm sure you're very much better
aware of this and I am there are
a number of other people that
are out there doing all kinds of
interesting things that
spaceport two things up in the
air and for early birds and all
spaceport America in fact we
have a Environment which is
built its own test site for the
sun glider for anyone who's been
out there recently we have spend
lunch who has a sub orbital
legislation would only apply to
a human.
Spaceflight.
Mistras so any of those other
businesses that might cause
injury to a person or the
this bill or existing laws that
right.
Mr president and senator this
bill was only addressing the
spaceflight companies so it's my
and and the the community that
we establish in this bill
requires that that for a company
to be immune they have to have
acted reasonably is that right.
you voted for in two thousand
thirteen senators arrived just.
Thank you Mr president I
appreciate the reminder I'll
vote for it again I just want to
make sure that there's nothing
in your bill nothing in the act
excuse any negligence or or
limit any liability regarding
injury or personal property
damage by by any of these
tenants correct.
don't need the sponsor to yield
I just want to the body to know
that Chavis County
actually had the original space
flight nineteen forty seven so
Pirtle yield Senator Pirtle the
healed.
Mr present are you I was present
you just mentioned that Charles
counted the first of space
flight that something else
happened and Chavis county
Mr president thanks a lot of
this conversations about
liability if there's an accident
in space
and you mentioned it was might
have been an accident and Chavis
county at one time regarding
I believe there were four
casualties in the crash
but I don't think we had any
attorneys willing to take that
on thank you Mr president.
statue limitations on that but
maybe some of the trial
attorneys in this body to look
into that and it would be a
lawsuit in and what I just want
to what happens when some of
these things that we're spending
you Mr president I move that
house bill sixty eight do now
pass and I ask for a roll call
the Senate is tier seats we're
voting on house bill sixty
eight.
Senator Brandis senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Moores yes senator my
nose Senator my nose yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Byrd Pirtle yes senator
Paul.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
common.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
affirmative zero on the negative
house bill sixty eight has
passed the Senate Senator
Diamond thank you Mr president
this model of state policies
Center Pentewan explained her
Thank you Mr president members
of our.
Thank you we're on to the next
item on the calendar.
action for placing house bill
one eighty three on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
See no objections Seneal mail to
than impose the burden.
And the burden of collection on
the juvenile certain fines and
fees are eliminated house bill
one eighty three recognizes the
juvenile that that person will
stand tangled in the juvenile
and criminal justice system I
the the school to prison
pipeline that we talk about a
not going to drive us to
bankruptcy as a state and it's
really important because these
kids you know they got a lot of
other issues and it it's just it
debated house bill one eighty
three.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president with
sponsor field center o'neill
deals I just I yield to my
the at the restaurant to reopen
so we can get reappointed but
the so what are these fees for.
the start center maintenance
consent to have an expert I I
ask for unanimous consent to
have Representative Montoya be
my expert witness for the
just various fees for these for
these infractions.
And so much presidents Senator
does this wave all the fees all
of the finance court fees Mr
concerned about is the victim's
reparation fees not all Mr
president on Senator not all of
the fees just certain fees.
And again Mister president
Thank you Mr president senator I
appreciate that I really do and
it's not about the amount of
money.
having them do something else
community service you know some
something else to
pay for what they've done I mean
they're not getting fees just
monetary you know.
See that they have to on top of
of what they're doing to have in
the form of restitution okay
thank you Mr president I
Si no further debate center
o'neill to close on the bill.
Yes thank you Mr president of I
now move that house bill one
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos Senator Gallegos yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator D. should be no Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator by
the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator printer yes Senator
senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator severe Lopez yes Senator
share.
Cervantes yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Senator Woods yes Senator Baca
Senator Baca yes Senator
Hamblen.
Did you arrive up stairs Senator
Mr president Senator Lopez
unanimous consent to excuse
senator Hamblen.
She was one of stairs yes.
introduce the the chamber to
Representative Montoya this is
first bill that just passed are
steamed opportunity.
Moving on to the next item we
have item number eighteen that's
house bill fifty one is twice
amended Senator Stewart thank
you Mr president I ask unanimous
amendment or substitution see no
objections and Esther to explain
the bill.
House bill fifty one creates an
environmental database of the
purposes providing the
fish a natural heritage program
at UNM they manage it for the
game and session they're taking
on this additional database.
at fifteen percent other states
have done this have found it
very useful and we propose this
for New Mexico that I stand for
questions Senator debating house
madam protection you tell me
just give me an example of some
of the information that will be
found on this database.
already in possession of the
state agencies so it's
department of the energy and
minerals.
and the.
state agencies of for which they
would provide this information
it's already up these agencies
but it's it's focused in the
agencies you can't see it
what's going on so department of
game and fish.
Designated critical habitat for
endangered species crucial
properly levels across the state
by zip code child as my rates
State Land Office locations of
active trust land locations
major sources of air pollution a
locations of curtains current
federal clean air act non
attainment areas.
That's an example send they're
can you share that cost with us
on an annual basis yes Mr
president so there's been an
updated FIR and the.
paying for it through our junior
money
I put mine is recurring so it's
essentially a fifty thousand a
and Mr president and just one
quick question you know what the
University of New Mexico they
they currently have what's
called the with the resource
Is there any reason it seems
like that could be utilized at
that have you considered.
using that particular database
platform where that could be
done but.
Just wondered if you were aware
of that when Mr president we are
at the the database that's
better than not those called the
use so that R. T. I. S. can be
incorporated into this natural
heritage program for very little
money because these are already
you madam president Mr president
and so do it wouldn't have any
role in this is there any reason
why they're not participating.
Mr president I don't believe
there correct Mr president we
were we've tried to use the
database that's the most user
friendly that sort of already
set up that starting doing some
some information what process
what I used to be able to access
the information on the database
Mr president it's open right now
to the public and the only
requirement is that every year
It's the responsibility of the
folks that run the national
heritage to also each year
update the program but you it's
it's pretty cool no you you look
at the map you can draw a
certain area that you want you
can blow it up and then overlaid
now it's just not accessible to
the public and to the agencies
and industry and our aim is to
make it available to all of them
yield Mister deal of course.
Center how does.
What aspect of this legislation
would affect private landowners.
see areas around their private
land to see what's what's going
on it's and it'll be an open it
so might be able to see a where
there's a boiler gas wells
around them if they want to know
that if they're thinking of
Thank you senators are any
aspect to this would prohibit
them from doing any activity on
their own private land.
Mr president that is not the
purpose of this and the answer
sponsor would yield to a
question Senator at a deal.
Why did you use the host.
Of the natural hair Chuj New
This press that we use them
because they already have this
tool set up they just don't have
all the data from all the state
State agencies were forty seven
percent of that industry was
twenty eight percent NGOs for
fifteen percent at that all up
have the pool the mechanism so
it's really just a matter of
collecting the data from the
state agencies that are in here
and overlaying that information
are anywhere from twenty five to
fifty thousand dollars to import
that data to make sure that the
system works to generate reports
and and senator.
Is there a physical location
that I could go visit them.
R. is our or is this a database
so they're they're at UNM but
you can go online right now and
I don't have the exact language
but it's the natural heritage
program you can see their
Mr president and senator what
sparked my interest on this.
Is that these are the very
people that are.
Have the.
That federal law that I've tried
to change so many times.
And had no at no look at but
that's that's what sparked my
have discussed the what our
topic with them before but
that's what sparked my interest
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator as we have further
This presents and then pro
tempore I had just had a couple
of questions and I'm wondering
if this is similar to I don't
know if you've ever used Google
president that's exactly what
we're trying to do and that
that's what you can see already
it's just with game and fish
department at the natural
agencies to try to find the
data.
Thank you for that Mr president
and.
Important I think I just heard
cannot change the detail it
can't manipulate it you can view
it there's no way to access it
any deeper than just the visible
and I'm just wondering if we
UNM I think already has a pretty
extensive policy about this
database so
Thank they also do not.
I I can't answer the details
about that but I'm fairly
certain that this is a very
secure spot.
Thank you for that.
I noticed there's a quite a
portion vote on the house floor
do we have any discussions on
what my colleagues on the other
side the house of what their
people why were split over here.
So I certainly couldn't explain
to you why they're split on the
also like the plexiglass so that
would get us closer together
thank you hi you.
Further debate.
Mr president I know that you and
I did happen to hear that you
were mentioning
That this is a house of course
And when you're looking at the
data the environmental database
what other information will be
collected by this particular
database.
have for Environment Department
it's the location of the current
permits of for major sources of
air pollution locations of
current federal clean air act
act sections locations of foot
flood plains and wetlands
locations of waters with special
statutes locations of national
pollutant discharge elimination
Superfund sites that's just from
one department so the idea is
each of these departments have
this data it's publicly
want to know about the area
rancher land or if you want to
buy a place or maybe you're
trying to get a permit for
something else on your land if
is just not in one place so the
idea behind this is
transparency openness public
question Mr president
Senator this will be something
that can add value again we were
looking at other issues with
regards to possible
Any further debate senators.
Si no further debate Senator to
close.
Thank you Mr president on behalf
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Brandt is yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator do here yes senator gray
goes.
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Kernan noted Senator
about this.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator by the a yes Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
senator Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez no Senators
committees.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator socio Senator Stefanics
yes Madam surprises Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
Senator Woods no Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Diamond
By a vote of twenty million
informative twelve in the
house bill twenty five able to
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
substitution no objections
Senator Brandt explained the
bill.
Thank you Mr president this is a
simple really easy bill.
LFC the LESC can work with them
and help them to do a better job
for students.
Centers we're debating house
bill twenty five we have
home during the interim and yet
and all of the bills that come
to us on education dealing with
higher ed we don't have a lot of
background we haven't heard
their issues we haven't heard
higher ed many times is glad
they don't have an interim home
there are many times they wish
that somebody to bring the
problems to in this this
provides for that and so I fully
Si no further debate Senator
Brandt to close on the bill.
Present I move that house bill
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
senator Brandis senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator resultar yes Senator how
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz yes.
to be now Senator due to being
yes senator for the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto.
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator songes Senator Sweetser
yes senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator souls yes Senator
products yes Senator vanity as
Senator Steinborn.
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of thirty eight in the
floor as it's probably only when
we remember what it feels like
to present a bill on the floor.
Thank you senator brand we are
moving on to item number twenty
action for placing House Bill
two thirty nine once amended on
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
of a deputy mine inspector and
assigns the position to the New
Mexico institute of mining and
technology the W. would be
required to assume the duties
senators are debating house bill
two thirty nine as amended.
Saying no debate Senator
Hemphill the clothes on the bill
Mr president I move that house
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
senators have on this.
Senator Simancas yes Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
Senator Hickey just Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator manos.
Senator need to be now Senator
disciplinary as senator for the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senate severe Lopez yes Senator
sure.
Yes Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative one of the negative
on we're going to the next item
calendar item number twenty one
house bill one forty six and I
yield to center the biggest.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
center this explained the bill
thank you Mr president add this
is the final cleanup language
for the administrative office of
the courts to be able to
course to the district courts
for the magistrate courts and
this basically would complete
the consolidation that we had
approved and improve the
efficiency of the Courts by
Senator debating house bill one
forty six Senator Kernan
followed by Senator Burt Sierra
thank you Mr president will
sponsor yield Senator Rodriguez
real happy with this seems like
I heard something from one of my
judges with regard to salaries
setting.
Mr president Senator Kernan I
legislative actions and it took
a fact in fact in.
January of twenty twenty and I
have not heard anything to the
the district courts but there
was a little bit of clean up
language that had to be done and
that involves what we're doing
today meaning for example giving
them the administrative
themselves for the district
court's.
Thank you thank you Mr president
senator so.
This is have anything to do with
changing how of salaries are set
Further debate senator Byrd
thank you Mr president and with
the Sanchez deal please thank
you Mr president yes I will
Senator Burt thank you.
Mr president give me one moment
Center Burke to get to my expert
witness.
Mr president at it does my
understanding from the
administrative office of the
courts as it does eliminate the
liability for the magistrate
director of the court operations
at the administrative office of
the courts thank you senator
Senator Byrd yes and agency for
as a so basically what this does
understanding it is if so.
What are the ramifications of
that I mean Canada Metrojet just
kind of go off the deep end and
responsible under the judicial
code.
That so he's that is they were
transferred to the district
courts he they did not feel it
was fair that they would remain
The the problem with the finding
the magistrate judge on what was
what there was a duplicate law
and so we're limiting one of the
will be managing the finances
the finances that we sponsored
and transferred over but there's
no duplicate law.
Okay Mister president and and
budgetary processes yes Mr
president thank you senator Byrd
for us that that the district
judges would now control the
finances for the magistrate
judges in their there are
language okay thank you Senator
and thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
president.
Further debate Senator Pirtle
thank you Mr president will
sponsor you Senator there is
will employ in select
magistrates clerical assistance
I know currently that's under
AOC but why do we not allow the
magistrates to pick their own
courts that was one of the
biggest problems is that they
had to do the hiring and we're
trying to change that to where
they give the authority since
the functions have been
transferred in the funding has
courts to hire the clerks and
and staff that they need to
fully administer their their
administrative functions.
And thank you for that Mr I I
wanted to work within the court
so you know I think we're we're
getting a step in the right
direction but you know I think
the more that we let these local
Centering on thank you for the
idea of public to to bill and I
have some I have some agreement
or some of it but then I also
have noted over the years
sometimes our district courts
thing I worry about is is in for
as long as we have some fairness
here and know where that
And the thing about this is we
have to just watch some of this
some of the district
transportation have some
districts that have of many
judges have some districts that
just some some interesting
things happen and we don't have
the magistrates up here saying
we don't have this anymore this
anymore this anymore.
And we have to be careful where
court for you can go in as a as
a business person or an
individual and feel like you
have a chance there without
having to hire an attorney
because I think that very
where we eventually have to have
attorneys and every aspect of
the judicial system because I do
think a practical sense of some
of our measures for it is is
probably support this but I
haven't really heard from my
measures on it so I presume
they're not terribly.
Upset about this I presume I
would have because there for
Thanks Senator Ingle any further
debate centers.
Si no further debate center the
biggest to close on the bill
thank you Mr president members
of the Senate I move that has to
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator savant is yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
yes SantaFe goes yes ma'am
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
center for the Senator by the A.
S. Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Stewart.
Senator sure yes under Tomlin.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Thirty five thirty five in the
amended Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
bill the record show that all
actions have been taken for
the no objection center about
that final bill.
Thank you Mr president as a
result of a mill levy that was
taken in two thousand six and
seven consecutive years
afterward the voters and pull
hospital do the wording in the
mill levy this definition for
contracting hospital did not
work for the providers to come
on to come on in and build the
we can get back these interested
parties to build the to to build
this hospital which is much
needed for the community Mr
there is not a hospital or
twenty four hour medical
facility within Valencia County
to service the needs of not only
Valencia County but also Sikora
we need is a change in the staff
initiative to get the providers
back in the game and get some
health care access to the people
and without all of if I could
Mr president and Senator Baca
thank you yes echo everything
that Mr Baca said I rise in
support of this we are in need
of this twenty for our health
Senator Baca bringing this Mr
president we're open for debate
Mr present thank you Senator
Baca thank you senator Sanchez
says we're debating house bill
two forty is two times amended
how did the fund grow to twenty
six million dollars if it was
not accessible or is it
acceptable for some other.
Purpose.
and it's actually grown in it I
think it started at around
twenty three million and has
grown now to about twenty six
million so just due to the
passage of time we've had an
president and to the minority
leader is this how long has this
been going on because I want to
say that I heard about this when
I came to the Senate about eight
years ago nine years ago and I
or thereabouts Mr president and
the good senator and I thought
you were back in the Senate much
earlier than that but anyway so
struggle in the battle for this
county for many many years to
bring a hospital to this area
will this be allowable for what
type of hospital would be would
and and the definitional change
I guess I'll go back to is
probably the best thing a
contracting hospital is defined
within the health care act means
a hospital located in New Mexico
facility to that and so what
that means is that it's going to
be it can also be a twenty four
hour emergency health care
facility which as I understand
trauma care emergencies and even
even other hospital visits but
it's not going to it expands is
something that you might find in
Albuquerque like that center for
the thank you Mr president and
thank you to the sponsor I think
this is exciting this is finally
unlocking some seriously needed
located or do you know that yet.
Mr president we we don't have a
location yet there they have a
there is they can't they're not
even really a they they have a
been pursued or location has
been pursued there's been
litigation those issues have
been resolved and so this third
this hospital but due to this
definition of the the county
itself was actually apprehensive
to move forward because they
felt there might be further
something more hopefully Mister
president.
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
president thank you to the
minority leader I think this is
very exciting again for Valencia
County I'm fully supportive
thank you.
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
Brandt and Senator Pinto.
Redistricting coming soon
Mr president I yield Senator at
the center of the order thank
you very much Mr president
Center Sanchez I I was impressed
that you got up to support this
this measure.
Mr president Senator well that
it's located in Valencia County
bill that you're supporting
Mister president senator Sanchez
or is that the sponsor of the
bill that you're that you're up
by yourself and in favor of here
senator Sanchez.
about just for for the bill what
is it about Senator Baca that
you support.
Senator Sanchez.
Mr president Senator his hair
We have further debate senator
Munoz thank you Mr president I
don't recognize the house
members that senator Sanchez
that's a house member the co
sponsor.
Sen ominous thank you Mr
president and I've seen this
happen Valencia County and and I
think I sing Senator Sanchez one
night get transferred from one
President senator I do not
recall.
Mr president and and senator
Again what would Senator Sanchez
it's been do a long do coming
and hopefully with passing this
legislation we should be able to
get it done a lot sooner.
President senator I don't know
what to check into that.
Send us thank you Mr president.
We are for the debate we have
County we don't have a nursing
home in the city of Espanola or
in the county in general we went
to bond for a nursing home
eighty percent of our voters
for your county for your
residence and for their well
being I stand in support Mr
president thank you thanks
center had a male further debate
centers the of office followed
Senator Baca deals I yield
Mister president.
Thank you Mr president will
there have to be a new R. F. P.
with this definitional change
well yes I imagine this or if P.
time Senator Lopez thank you
will the co sponsor yield.
This is the.
Mr president I yield Senator
hospital is crossed out over and
over again because of the change
of division of the change of the
Mr president of Senator the
reason is cross out I think it's
because this with this new
language here they'll be able to
And if Mr Baca would Senator
Baca geo Center Baca deals yes I
would yield I'm sorry us or did
he answer question adequately Mr
president Senator Sedillo Lopez
or do you need further
Senator Baca.
Mr president and senator no that
would not be correct it can
still be a hospital but this
flexibility to to the the bond
and and the the mill levy
question that was asked to the
voters and you know to to
address a little bit more about
that I spoke to senator how to
written you know the people that
write these things.
You know the sometimes they
don't do it dig into the
statutes that maybe maybe the
chair or maybe sometimes we do
the county so we have now you
know every property owner within
the county Valencia that has
paid property taxes and did so
for eight years and just as hell
without a hospital so without
options here we have money in
the account we have people
wielding willing to build a
facility and we have a we have a
bill in front of us that can
of getting a hospital built in
Valencia County and we weren't
successful in getting that done
back then the proposal was to
ground because of so many
political difficulties and I am
thrilled with this bill in and I
stand strong in strong support
had such a strong desire to work
on getting a hospital in
Valencia County and I really
commend the sponsors of this of
this bill because
our state to not have accessible
hospital services it because of
the rural nature the state so I
stand in strong support of the
bill I'm glad that I understand
Senator Brandt followed by
Senator Pinto Senator Brandt.
This present with Senator song
chisel you'll for question
centers on to the field.
this also would serve to the
closest hospital is there today
senator Sanchez.
President Senator probably.
Forty five minutes or so.
thousand plus with the
surrounding areas Senator
Brandt.
Senator you Mr president Centers
twenty four hour emergency room
would have a twenty four hour
emergency room.
Sanchez.
Mr president Senator yes it
would have a twenty four hour
emergency care.
Pinto all by Senator Burt
Senator Pinto thank you Mr
president members of the body
with Senator Sanchez yield
processes the of.
President of Mr president I
yield.
that the stem facility would be
providing.
Senator Sanchez.
Mr president Senator so we would
Thanks.
emergency room provides I don't
know all exact
Of that they would be providing
but of full hospital.
Senate and Mr president and
I guess where the there wouldn't
have been such a such a high
rate if there was services
within the area.
Senator Sanchez.
question we have a saying in
Valencia County and that's
saying is don't have a heart
attack Valencia County Mr
president and the reason is is
you unless you have a helicopter
your backyard Mr president and
so although I don't have the
exact numbers on the data I will
tell you that this isn't this
going and so do you days did
that because they thought that
it was important enough of that
their community needed a twenty
your question I don't have those
exact numbers I have a lot of
anecdotal stories that I'm happy
to share with you though about
people who have had medical
conditions and how to traverse
have you and the this also this
also doesn't just service the
coral County it doesn't just
serviceable into County that
doesn't suit just service
Torrance County it'll service is
you head into the city with
traffic that's a much longer
trip maybe not in miles but
certainly in time.
Thank you for the question Mr
in the state of New Mexico to
acquire such services and in
lieu of what we went through
this past year and having you to
reach capacity in many areas a
if it's way far in between to
get those services that is a.
A very bad thing thank you Mr
president thank you members of
the body thank you senator
pandemic we do have further
debate.
or two Mr president I yield
thank you Mr president and
senator
do you know if this facility
will have like a heliport.
Senator Sanchez.
that they will have one but I am
not sure.
Burma's president and senator
just beyond the fact that I
think helped forge a pretty cool
you know you talk about how many
how long it's taking to get the
would not only be cool but it
would also get your people there
to maybe a little bit quicker
fashion and because be saving
lives and I think that would be
will I'm believe will have an
MRI machine and will have all
twenty four hour services as a
emergency room.
Mr president I think that's
great because you'll have all
behavioral health folks in the
area as well is that right.
Census.
Mr president Senator yes we do
I'm glad to hear that miss
present because you know there's
a lot of people who get those
hearing bill for because I think
and have all the right
facilities if you just make sure
you have the helipad that life
flight helicopter I think very I
just find so thank you for the
time Mr president thank you
one for a number of years it was
brought by a large hospital
concern that close to it all of
a sudden we had no doctors in
poor Tallas the people who and
now we do day surgery we have
emergency care we have
helicopter transit to for the
needs of people that need it and
it's worked extremely well it is
And some of them are just too
small to do it but there are
many like Valencia County and
Roosevelt County that have to
fight for themselves and get
this done because without it
helicopters and an and planes
and this is what has to be done.
And I applaud the folks for
taxing themselves to do it
because it works very well keep
need to support this thank you
Senator Ingle we do have further
debate senator Morris thank you
Mr president need anyone to
yield but I just want to point
out to this body this is a
care and how problematic is in
New Mexico I just want to remind
the of the body that this is our
own fault.
We have to subsidize this
hospital it takes twenty years
for to get off the ground in
We have regulations all the time
and then when they do provide
services we don't let them bill
and get paid for those services
and then we cap what they can
charge for those services Mister
president.
health care.
It's not because people want to
provide health care down there
is because this body in the
legislature make it impossible
to provide health care down
there and so we continue to do
this we have insurance companies
in New Mexico where we just want
to drive medical professionals
out of the state to make it
impossible for them to make a
living page on how much they can
It's not needed not needed most
other states for yourself
private sector figures it out
this is our fault this is this
the body's fault every year we
we didn't have enough doctors
and nurses in the state it's no
one's fault but this bodies from
the governor to sign these laws
driven these health care
providers of the state.
to happen.
So if you guys remember every
time introduced these bills that
make it possible to practice
medicine in the state of New
Mexico the target the doctors
and nurses are working hard
taxpayers will answer County for
poor County for twenty years and
served a tax you to build a
hospital and does get done.
It's our fault Mr president to
Twenty years must present people
been dying down there because
this body has decided that
health care isn't worth it and
we're trying to Michael chair
Mister president so think about
Senator closed on the bill.
Mr president I move that house
bill two forty twice a minute.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Yes and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Senator Candelaria passes
Senator serve on this.
Yes Senator Toronto is yes
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
how to meal Senator meal yes
Senator Kernan Senator Kernan
yes Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
senator to subpoena.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator by the.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes Senator Sweetser yes
senator smitteez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Stewart Senator Stewart is
Senator Tallman.
Senator common as senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Forty one of the affirmative
zero the negative house bill two
forty as far as amended has
passed the Senate Senator Ivey
microphone works and he's able
to debate answer questions and
have great presence on the floor
we should congratulate them.
Thank you Senator.
Senator brought explains what
thank you Mr president I really
appreciate the support of the
body you know sometimes we have
contentious bills in here we
vote on one side or the other
on the co sponsorship of this
bill thank you Senator Baca we
are moving on to the next item
that's item number twenty three
house bill ninety two male to
sentiment us thank you Mr
substitution.
See no objections senator Munoz
explained the bill thank you Mr
president since in twenty
seventeen years we have not
increase this P. to inspect all
thousand gallons and that will
actually raise about forty cents
per month on everybody's water
bill and
Five dollars a year it renames
and there is one comment that
that we need all read it you
know it's by someone one of our
founding forefathers.
In wine there's wisdom in beer
there is freedom in water there
I see no debate Senator many us
to close our bill.
Representative turned off my
Senate that the the record show
that we have a roll call vote.
Senators voted on house bill
ninety two.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator gray
goes.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Monero's.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator for the A. S. Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sweetser yes Senators
committees Senator sure.
Stefanics yes Representative
Senator Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Senator Hickey yes.
two has passed the Senate sent
approval explained as well.
Thank you Mr president whiskey's
for drinking and water is for
fighting but honestly in the
president that may explain why
we need water testing in the
lake Arthur Roswell area.
Senator moving on to the next
all action for placing House
Bill forty one on final passage
has been taken and is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
to include lands that prior to
two thousand and four work
partition from the lands granted
by Spain or Mexico to a
community or town in order to
existing partition land grants
and essentially of what can be
if this bill passes Mr president
members of the Senate we're
converts new category of land
grants into a political
following the certain criteria
this listed in this bill for
these particular land grants to
be considered political
subdivisions and Mr chairman
members of the committee of of
Those are being and got amended
which is south of mora the lower
gain us which is west of
Montezuma castle appear near
permits peak mostly he lists
of Taos Mister president I'll
stand for questions Senators
remaining house bill forty one.
roll call centers to your seats
in our house bill forty one the
clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca yes Senator Baca
yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos no Senator on the
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
yes Senator Hickey Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes senator on
a meal Senator Emilio Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo Senator Shendo
yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
common.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
I'm sorry.
thirty four in the affirmative
for the negative house bill
forty one has passed the Senate
Senator Lopez I thank you Mr
president members of the Senate.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
Mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred Senate bill
three ninety five has had it
under consideration and report
same with recommendation that it
consent of the Senate agree to
be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion in the
the journal reflect they were
Senate memorial nineteen do
pass.
Senate Joint Memorial four do
pass.
House Bill fourteen as amended
Committee substitute for House
Bill to seventy two do pass as
amended.
And house bill two seventy seven
as amended do pass respectfully
Senator is a motion to that's
triggered for.
I see no objections the
committee for his been adopted
in the journal show that they
were acted upon individually.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
will not have an evening session
so just for committee chairs
session eleven no evening
session also without a deal to
think we're on the consent
agenda for that and I think we
have five other items to to
finish up our work that's been
referred to us so far.
Thank you center so Senator sure
it was interesting it seems to
me that somebody compared the
citizens of New Mexico to enemy
combatants that this troubled
you Mr president.
because Senator Baca probably
has the highest security
clearance are held the high
security clearance for anybody
in this building.
You worked on nuclear power
plants on aircraft carriers.
airborne ranger I jumped into
places and did weird stuff.
I know what fences are for.
I know how to get through and I
know how to stay behind.
building connect can tell my
leader.
The guy with the highest
security clearance of anybody in
this building.
That there is a real threat.
I will believe him and I will
shut up.
a real threat I believe in the
meantime I'm going to continue.
Do not let anybody claim that
the citizens of New Mexico are
Other announcements Senator Ivey
Soto thank you very much is
present as president the rules
committee will be meeting
tomorrow morning we do have a
how straight resolution that is
we will probably roll over for
another day so the people can
take a look at it before we
consider it we may have
especially on Tuesday thank you.
Seven yes thank you Mr president
They just keep shooting the
reasons and make you want to
test them.
Mr presence in a financial going
tomorrow we're gonna hear about
house bill two and our budget
to clean up we are going to
finish up on H. G. R. one
tomorrow so members if we come
off the floor later we we will
stay to finish up that bill it's
childhood so we are going to
come to a resolution and that in
New Mexico so thank you Mr
president could you tell me what
time it would be if we were not
would be ten twenty six thank
you Mr president I mean ten
twenty six.
Thank you Mr president thank you
centerman us any further
announcements.
interjection the central St in
recess.
Until tomorrow at eleven AM.
