Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes Senator Moores.
Senator Monero's.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Here physically but not
mentally.
would like to welcome everyone
and just that one please rise
for the invocation to be given
today by Chapman was seventy
eight as.
Of this chair of the state of
and the solution Mexico fight to
beasts led today by Senator
Gallegos.
One of the awesome money book
and even now when.
all good things come from you we
acknowledge that par for truth I
pray for these leaders will
serve in this New Mexico state
humility to remember that if
they seek your divine ways you
will guide their journey to
those choices that are always
But I yield to the liability on.
But I look at online of your
store who is part of the in
forget do it is all yours me for
goodness and always with
encouragement sample molecules
with the level gone to court to
what this on me that the US we
acknowledge you and then.
From the left the.
afternoon everyone unanimous
consent we go to that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous hearing no
objection or on that order
business senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president and thank
journey here on day two so thank
you so much for being willing to
share your thoughts with us I
just a couple of announcements
the New Mexico counties
The eastern New Mexico
legislative reception at the in
in spot Loretta was from five to
seven this evening or tomorrow
And Mr president before I yield
to other members we do have a
special birthday this afternoon
And that.
need to skip that for the
moments but.
I know I know the birth date to
Thank you senator angle you know
that did that did feel
particularly good if they really
clerk letting me know he had a
but happy birthday Lenore.
So with that Mr president all
you'll to other members for
announcements and then let
everyone know what we're gonna
do today thank you we are that
flooring gallery hearing no
objections so ordered.
Senator pope.
give a lay the land so K. I
don't get confused Senate
finance will go into one half
hour after the floor I believe
the female has crossed over and
will have that probably in their
emails in the morning and
delivered to your office on the
junior bill the framework and
how you do that
and then
if you need help with agencies
reach out to LFC reach out to
dawn in our office reach out to
our staff if you're having
trouble where you put that
Senate finance we will hear STBs
in capital capacity so will firm
up a number for members on
Capitol and started getting that
stuff going to Senator Rodriguez
Thank you senator mass Center
souls.
Thank you Mr president and if
Center my nose would you for
determine where we're planning
on putting our junior money when
we don't know whether the things
we might be doing it are getting
fully funded through the regular
budget process.
money in all these behavioral
health for example in the
general fund budget and then
behavioral health this year we
increased just on behavioral
health and mental health issues
House approaches not done with
house bill two we may know of
conversations that may be
happening house bill two so just
as we do that ask the question
Funding yeah we're trying to get
that is an ad through general
funding rather than through
junior funding is how do I do
that or can I pull the junior
Kerr occurred to them last year
and then we'll will help you
figure that out.
Thank you Mr president thank you
center so they do have further
announcements with Senator Woods
Further announcements Senator
Tallman.
Thank you Mr president like to
announce that my step
granddaughter discussed accepted
thank you for that
congratulations Senator Tallman.
Any further announcements
Senators.
have committee reports from the
committees committee so I think
what we'll do is once we get
the.
Message from the house and
things off the table to start
the committee reports and if
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business messages
from the house on that order of
Business message from the house
the reader to read the message.
January eighteenth twenty twenty
emergency clause and request the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz more McCutchen chief clerk
the gentle so the message from
from the commissioner of public
lands.
Here no objections the reader to
read.
The general Mimi Stewart Senate.
Resident pro tempore a dear
dash one dash one point one I am
submitting documentation for
confirmation by the state Senate
for the New Mexico state land
trust advisory board.
Colonel David west will be
industry for these appointments
are for six year terms
commencing on January one twenty
twenty two and ending December
thirty one twenty twenty seven
additional information or have
any questions regarding this
appointment please don't
hesitate to contact me sincerely
Stephanie Garcia Richard
Senator Wirth Representative
before going to committee
reports we go to announcements
and miscellaneous for an
announcement that center on the
would like to make your Mr
president unanimous consent we
point of personal privilege so
affirmation to do this.
I'm so.
So.
You know I was very troubled by
thinking about it a lot last
night it makes sense to me that
finance it has a huge impact
financially but rules and
Judiciary they basically are the
want to make a motion to drop
the referral to rules.
On on the on the green amendment
bill.
motion to drop the referral to
rules an essay R. two and I ask
for voice vote no I'm kidding of
the I you know about the
To drop the referral from rules
committee rules that there is an
objection so we will go through
and will
take that vote Senator center at
this present just point of order
motion for terms that in us so
he made a motion so we we did
open it up to debate with that.
Senator.
thank you Mr president.
That we ought to give the public
as much opportunity to
participate in this as possible.
And so it goes to rules.
The the the committee members
to hear it to come and visit
with us to email us to call us
to talk to us wherever it is we
are and this is a big deal and I
think both sides need to be
you know doesn't count as it is
that is that third committee we
do that all kinds of bills here
you know they go to to
committees and then they go to
Cautious with this cautiously
trying to cut the public out of
at least one opportunity to
express their opinion and that's
either side I'm not saying that
only one side gets to talk.
opinion on this as possible so
for that reason I am going to
oppose this motion thank you Mr
president.
the relevant committee.
And would have allowed me then
to of consulted with the ranking
member of which is the
appropriate process to go
motion.
all constitutional limits go
through rules.
We have had on occasion because
is very dangerous as a precedent
for this body.
part of what rules does affect
is the consistency of a lot of
rules committee that this would
not be a from the motion to drop
before.
Any further debate.
May I present.
that a.
Referral to the.
Finance committees or for me to
say this is is not a third
observation that you know maybe
if Senator o'neill was still the
vice chair of rules that would
have been a lot easier to
communicate this.
Senator Morris.
amount we should never blast
bills out of committees and and
we've had that debate over and
over again and that the points
committees are referred it
wasn't at the end of the session
many many bills without this
debate about over the years and
major party has always said that
we have to follow the committee
process and as was just
mentioned finance is not a third
process thank you.
President Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair it was heard
in rules committee and in fact
be awarded pursuant to the
amendment which became necessary
after the Civil Rights Act was
passed last term.
bill I'm very aware of what it's
like to blast the light came
from the house during the the
the you know the driver's
license issue and and you know
this is a bill that we are very
sometimes it's a situation is
warranted this is an important
bill you know you can say that
it's not three committees it's
three committees it's three
it's thirty days so three
committees I don't care if it's
and doesn't count as of the
finance doesn't count as a third
committee it's a third committee
this this important bill
considered so with that I make
my motion to drop the referral
from Senate rules funds Senator
to drop referral.
Vote of no maintains that it has
a committee assignments that
it's currently sitting in
correctly currently so go ahead
and do that we're gonna do this
by a show of hands.
But we're taking the vote we're
just waiting for.
All those present would be
considered voting in the
positive all those present to
raise our hand would be
considered voting in the
negative.
So all those mission of all in
Senator Pirtle voting no Senator
Moores voting no.
Senator Sanchez voting no
Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator Schmedes voting no.
Senator share voting no.
Senator Woods voting now.
Senator Ingle voting no Senator
want this voting no.
Senator how to meal voting no.
Senator when yes voting no
Senator Hemphill voting no
Senator Wirth voting now.
Senator Ivey Soto voting no.
have three committee referrals.
With that I'll go ahead and turn
now we do have Senator Bob this
is center for the of one explain
their vote centers serve on
this.
vote or request like this I've
I'd like to have the Senate
continue to maintain the order
that we have store if we always
have that respect and I
appreciate leadership and others
who support the chairs you know
Thank you Senator about the
center for that explains the.
Thank you Mr president I think
this is the first time in ten
years on this floor that I've
risen to explain my vote you
know I did have to think long
that were made at that point in
that's why I felt like I had to
explain I had to support to this
this these assignments that we
had I do have all the respect in
the world to the sponsor of the
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go back to the order
of committee reports on that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read.
committee having met pursuant to
the rules of the Senate
recommends change the changing
assignments in senators on the
Senate committees of the Senate
Say none the committee part is
been adopted.
The reader to read the following
executive message number three
and this referred to the
Education Committee respectfully
submitted Mimi Stewart chair
acted upon individually and
objects in the reader to read
all the committee reports Senate
Bill to Jermaine and that's
referred to the Judiciary
bill four germane and then for
for to the health and public
affairs committee Senate bill
five germane and that's referred
to the tax business and
fourteen germane events referred
to the tax business and
transportation committee Senate
bill fifteen germane and thence
germane and that's referred to
the health and public affairs
committee Senate bill forty one
germane and thence referred to
Senate bill sixteen germane and
that's referred to the health
and public affairs committee
Senate bill seventeen germane
and that's referred to the
committee Senate bill nineteen
germane and that's referred to
the health of public affairs
committee Senate bill twenty one
germane and that's referred to
seven germane and that's
referred to the taxation
business and transportation
committee.
Senator Stewart I move adoption
of the committee report senators
is a motion to about three to
four any objection.
I see no objections the
committee report has been
adopted in the journal show that
Wirth thank you Mr president so
we're just waiting for the rules
committee reports and while we
wait I think we'll go to the
table and do the bill
that our business introduction
of legislation on that order
business introduction
legislation.
The reader to read.
Senate bill thirty nine
contractors eliminating the time
limitation for special
preferences for New Mexico
resident veteran businesses and
resident veteran contractors
providing for a preference for
New Mexico native American
and referred to the Senate
committees committee then Senate
internal engine cultural affairs
committee and Senate taxes and
transportation committee that
duties requiring that the
commission annually here
proposals for an overview
capital outlay funded projects
making appropriation Senate bill
to Senate finance committee.
Senate bill fifty one Senate
bill fifty two introduced by
for the repayment of personal
loans making an appropriation
Senate bill fifty two.
Senate bill fifty two having
read twice by title Sir printed
Sure that title again.
Relating to state employees
providing for a program through
which participating state
Senate bill fifty three
introduced by Senator Woods and
act making appropriation to the
board of regents of New Mexico
State University for the
by title is ordered printed and
referred to this Senate
committees committee center
Senate conservation and Senate
prohibiting the storage or
disposal of spent fuel and high
level waste amending the
definition of disposal facility
amending the duties and
by title is her printed referred
to the Senate committees
committee Senate conservation
tends to Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill fifty
four.
Senate bill fifty five
Senate bill fifty five having
been read twice by title sort of
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee
Senate health of public affairs
committee and Senate tax
We.
I I make motion removed to
rolling in gross and.
We'll we'll put that down.
we'll Senator yield a center
boards yield please.
Madam president I yield to the
chair of rules.
Senator Moores were you making a
that probably the fastest way to
do it.
Is present in.
No comment.
The
making appropriations to the
higher education department for
financial aid for nursing
students and loan repayment
assistance for nurses and
Senate Education Committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill fifty six.
Senate bill fifty seven
introduced by senator semantics
nutrition program Senate bill
fifty seven.
Senate bill fifty seven have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee
Human Services Committee and act
making appropriation to the
public education department to
increase the number of school
nurses Senate bill fifty eight
Senate bill fifty eight have
Senate bill fifty nine
introduced by senators to FedEx
for the Legislative Health and
Human Services Committee and act
making appropriation to the
been read twice by title sort of
printed referred to the Senate
committee committees Senate
conservation and Senate finance
committee Senate bill fifty
nine.
sold to a film production
company Senate bill sixty.
Senate bill sixty have been read
twice by tires are printed and
referred to the Senate
Senate bill sixty one introduced
by Senator Steinborn an act
relating to lobbying requiring
post session reports on what
legislation a lobbyist or
lobbyist's employer lobbied
two sixty one section seven as
amended Senate bill sixty one.
Senate bill sixty one has been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate bill sixty two introduced
by senator semantics for the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and act
making appropriation to the
Human Services Department to
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee
Senate health of public affairs
committee and that's to Senate
finance committee Senate bill
homeless shelter support
services Senate bill sixty
three.
Senate bill sixty three and then
read twice by title Sir printed
and referred to the Senate
for the Legislative Health and
Human Services Committee and act
making appropriation to the
children youth and families
department for domestic violence
committee intends to Senate
finance committee Senate bill
sixty four.
Senate bill sixty five
introduced by senators to FedEx
for the Legislative Health and
bill sixty five Senate bill
sixty five hundred twice by
title is or printed and referred
to the Senate committees
committee thanks to Senate
health and public affairs and
cents to Senate finance Senate
making appropriation to the
Human Services Department for
three months of transitional
support what a supplemental
nutrition assistance program
recipients employment earnings
Senate health and public affairs
committee intents to Senate
finance committee Senate bill
sixty six Senate bill sixty
seven introduced by senators the
Senate bill sixty seven have
been read twice by title is for
printed and referred to the
Senate.
It is committee Senate health
and public affairs committee
coupled heat pump tax credits
pursuant to the income tax act
and the corporate income and
franchise tax act making the
credit pursuant to the income
and franchise tax act Senate
bill sixty eight Senator sixty
eight have been read twice by
title Sir printed and referred
to the Senate committees
committee Senate tax business to
development incentives requiring
recipients of public support
from the state pursuant to the
local economic development act
to report job creation and
capital investment information
and legislative committees
making appropriation Senate bill
sixty nine Senate bill sixty
nine have been read twice by
title is Sir printed and
referred to the Senate
Senate bill seventy introduced
by Senator Lopez and act making
appropriation to the department
of health to contract with a
program to reduce risk factors
that promote resiliency through
Senate health and public affairs
committee intends to Senate
finance Senate bill seventy.
Senate bill seventy one
introduced by Senator Padilla
among incumbent local exchange
carriers regulated pursuant to
the New Mexico
telecommunications act and
incumbent rural exchange
carriers regulated pursuant to
provide similar voice services
to all wire center serving area
requiring the public regulation
commission to report the steps
taken to achieve regulatory
parity parity among carriers
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee
thence to Senate tax business
transportation and tends to
Senate Judiciary Senate bill
seventy one.
State University to establish
the Center for dryland
resilience as a collaborative
effort with eastern New Mexico
university The New Mexico
institute of mining and
solutions to diagnose and
predict vulnerabilities in
dryland systems and develop
resilience strategies for the
sustainable management of
Senate committees committee is
Senate conservation has to
Senate finance Senate bill
seventy two.
Senate bill seventy three
introduced by Senator souls and
State University The New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology and the federal
research laboratories within the
state to develop curricula
faculty and technologies for the
Senate bill seventy three Senate
bill seventy three have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee
Senate Education Committee and
Act defining advertising
campaign requiring lobbyists to
report compensation received for
lobbying making technical
changes to the advertising
rules committee intends to
Senate Judiciary Senate bill
seventy four.
Senate bill seventy five
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
an act relating to public school
been read twice by title is or
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee sent
Senate education that Senate
finance Senate bill seventy
five.
broaden eligibility for rural
air service enhancement requests
temporarily reserving a portion
of the rural air service
enhancement fund for eligible
seventy six.
Senate bill seventy six have
been read twice by title is her
printed referred to the Senate
committees committee Senate tax
business and transportation and
Services Committee and act
relating to governmental conduct
prohibiting disclosure of
sensitive personal information
by state agency employees
providing exceptions prescribing
committee it's fenced Judiciary
Senate bill seventy seven.
Senate bill seventy eight
introduced by senator Ortiz a
prioritization plans creating
the charter for facility fund
requiring policies for loans
from the public project
revolving fund for the charter
provide information on capital
improvement projects proposed
for funding for property tracked
property tax implement
imposition making appropriation
to Senate finance Senate bill
seventy eight Senate bill
seventy nine introduced by
senator Ortiz a penal for the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and act
provide family peer support and
referrals to families with
children in need of behavioral
health services Senate bill
seventy nine Sen bill seventy
nine have been read twice by
finance Senate bill seventy
nine.
Senate bill eighty introduced by
senator Ortiz a penal from the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and act
making it an appropriation to
Senate bill eighty have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee
fence to Senate health and
act relating to licenses
requiring a space on license
application and license renewal
forms for applicants to state
their desire to make and
statewide donor registry Senate
bill eighty one Senate bill
eighty one have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate
Senator Hemphill and act making
appropriation to the board of
regents of western New Mexico
university to operate and
support an international
academic and cultural program
Senate Education Committee fence
to Senate finance Senate bill
eighty two.
Senate bill eighty three
introduced by Senator Padilla
dispense methadone for take home
purposes Senate bill eighty
three Senate bill eighty three
have been read twice by title is
Sir printed and referred to the
introduced by Senator Shendo an
act relating to procurement and
acting the construction of.
Madam a general contractor Act
to provide an alternative
referred to the Senate
committees committee thanks to
Senate tax business and
transportation fence to Senate
Judiciary Senate bill eighty
four Senate bill eighty five
military retirement pay Senate
bill eighty five cent ability I
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee
tends to Senate tax business and
homeowner associations requiring
that no less than seventy five
percent of the board of a
homeowner's association be
elected by lot owners after
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate
committees Canadian cents to
Senate health and public affairs
and since to Senate Judiciary
programs at land grants
Mercedes.
Senate bill eighty seven Senate
bill eighty seven have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
committees committee thanks to
the local government division of
the department of finance and
administration for training
materials and instruction of
volunteer firefighters at the
committees committee fence to
Senate conservation fence to
Senate finance Senate bill
eighty eight.
Senate bill eighty nine
introduced by Senator Steinborn
providing duties creating the
uranium mining report
recrimination revolving fund
making appropriation Senate bill
eighty nine.
What what.
bill eighty nine.
Senate bill ninety introduced by
senator Tom and and act making
appropriation to the higher
education department for the
ordered printed referred to the
Senate committees committee
fence to Senate education since
the Senate finance Senate bill
ninety Senate bill ninety one
introduced by senator Solomon
intensive short term boot camp
training programs for unemployed
or underemployed workers Senate
bill ninety one Sen bill ninety
one have been read twice by
others and act making
appropriation for Special
Olympics Senate bill ninety two.
Senate bill ninety two have been
read twice by title is Sir
printed and referred to the
act relating to public education
connecting the community
educators act allowing the
licensure and contracting of
community educators requiring
extracurricular activity funds
exempting community educators
from the provisions of the
educational retirement act
Senate bill ninety three Senate
bill ninety three have been read
introduced by senator Tom in an
act relating to private sector
retirement creating the
retirement savings facilitation
income tax credit clarifying
certain definitions in the New
New Mexico work and save
individual retirement account
program allowing employees to
opt out of automatic enrollment
aligning provisions of the New
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to this
Senate committees committee
fence to Senate tax business and
transportation committee sense
but I know that's going to we we
need I think we need to add
Judiciary to that as it's going
to put some legal requirements
we need to find out if they are
even legal to put on to
Senator Thomas.
So what I would ask is let's so
so let's just pull it back and
we have both the chair of
judiciary's here and senator Tom
wanted to we might wanna move.
Some of the referrals rounds of
twenty to visit with the chair
representative here.
All right Senate bill ninety
five introduced by Senator
Rodriguez and act making
appropriation for operational
by title Sir printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee Senate
health and public affairs
committee infants to Senate
finance Senate bill ninety five.
homeless shelter and supportive
housing program in the City of
Santa Fe Senate bill ninety six
Senate bill ninety six have been
read twice by title is our
printed referred to the Senate
committees committee Senate
health of public affairs
Indian Affairs Department to
update and expand the indigenous
wisdom of course our curriculum
project at the Indian pueblo
cultural center Senate bill
sentenced to Senate finance
Senate bill ninety seven.
Senate bill ninety eight
introduced by Senator Padilla
and act relating to
cybersecurity and acting the
committee creating the state
chief of information security
and chief information security
officers for the administrative
office of the courts and the
Legislative Council Service
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Senate committees Canadian
cents to Senate rules committee
intends to Senate finance Senate
to fifty percent of matching
funds for public transit
agencies making appropriation
Senate bill ninety nine Senate
bill ninety nine have been read
twice by title Sir printed and
introduced by Senator Lopez and
act relating to cannabis
regulation defining terms
clarifying the definition of
cannabis specifying the process
beverages on the same premises
providing for a joint powers
agreement between the regulation
and licensing department and the
department of environment for
inspections of cannabis
medical medical cannabis
producers to dissolve their
nonprofit corporation status and
transfer assets if incorporating
as for profit corporations
is ordered printed and referred
to the Senate committees
committee thanks to Senate tax
business and transportation
committee and sense to Senate
Judiciary I guess we'll hear
Senate bill one hundred
introduced by Senator pope for
the legislative education study
committee and.
insurance contributions for
school districts charter schools
and participating entities in
the public school insurance
authority making an
Senate Education Committee
intent Senate finance Senate
bill one oh one.
Senate bill one oh two
introduced by senator Tom in an
action relating to public
Senate bill one hundred to.
Senate bill one oh to have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the Senate
committees committee tends to
Wirth Senator Lopez and others
and act relating to minimum
wages amending a section of the
NMAA a nineteen seventy eight to
provide for a minimum hourly
twice by title Sir printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee thanks to
Senate health and public affairs
committee and then to the Senate
amend article seven of the
constitution of New Mexico to
allow voters who have not
selected a party affiliation to
vote in the primary election of
that the party pays the cost of
that process Senate joint
resolution for Senate joint
resolution for having been read
twice by title is pretty and
joint resolution proposing
amendments to article I section
two and article seven section
five of the constitution of New
Mexico to allow the legislature
referred to the Senate rules
committee and Senate Judiciary
Committee that Senate joint
resolution I Senate joint
resolution six introduced by
Senator Brandt a joint
of appeals district judge and
metropolitan court judge to be
non partisan Senate joint
resolution six Senate joint
resolution six I'm in read twice
introduced by senator toman
Representative Garrett a Joint
Memorial urging the United
States Congress to pass HR
thirty three thirty nine the
Joint Memorial one Senate Joint
Memorial on having been read
twice by title is printed
referred to the Senate rules
committee then centex business
transportation committee Senate
with the support of Congress
federal agencies and state local
and tribal governments
requesting all parties to
support the national
biodiversity Senate Joint
Memorial to Senate Joint
Memorial to having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate rules
committee then Senate
conservation committee Senate
education day in the state and
the Senate in recognition of the
importance that agriculture food
and nutrition play the daily
lives of all New Mexicans Senate
memorial three Senate memorial
for introduced by senator harm
meal the memorial declaring
January thirty one twenty twenty
two New Mexico National Board
to committee to be placed on the
president's table center
memorial for.
Senate memorial I introduced by
Senator Hemphill a memorial
requesting the governor to
I have in place having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed not refer to committee
and to be placed on the
president's table etcetera
Morial I.
convene a task force to study
the costs and benefits and
feasibility of transitioning
detention facilities from
individual county operations to
a unified jail and prison system
Senate memorial six Senate
memorial seven introduced by
Senator Gonzalez a memorial
reaffirming support for military
spouse professional and
seven having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate rules
committee that Senate health and
public affairs committee center
memorial seven.
assistants week to recognize a
certified anesthesiologist
assistants as highly skilled
health care professionals
acknowledge the educational
professional training that
certified anesthesiologist
services Senate memorial eight
Senate memorial eight having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed not refer to
committee and to be placed on
The reader to read.
retirement savings facilitation
income tax credit clarifying
certain definitions of the New
Mexico work and save act
requiring certain employers to
register as participating
aligning provisions of the New
Mexico work and save act to
enable the the formation of an
auto IRA partnership with one or
more other states Senate bill
committee events Senate finance
committee Senate bill ninety
four.
legislature second session
twenty twenty two and for other
legislative expenses including
the Legislative Council Service
the legislative finance
legislature declaring an
emergency house bill one.
House bill one having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate finance committee
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
reports on that order of
business committee reports.
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill thirty has
had it under consideration and
provide same to be germane in
accordance with constitutional
provisions and then for for it
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually no
objection the reader to read all
different reports Senate bill
public affairs committee Senate
bill thirty six germane and
that's referred to the Education
Committee Senate bill seventy
seven germane and that's
committee Senate bill forty four
germane and that's referred to
the taxation business and
transportation committee Senate
bill forty six germane and
that's referred to the
the taxation business and
transportation committee Senate
bill fifty germane and that's
referred to the Education
Committee respectfully submitted
See no objections the committee
point have been adopted in the
journal show that they were
acted upon individually.
Mr president.
president and senator how we
have to go through a complicated
process after the committee
report is actually written then
we have to send that and
documentation up stairs to
napping here these bills so it's
we're we're trying to get it
down even shorter but it'll
probably be like this for a week
or so Senator rest present is
referred to Senate resolution
one has had it under
consideration and reports the
same with recommendations that
it do not pass but that Senate
rules committee substitute for
report centers we have a motion
set up to report any objection.
Say no objection the Canadian
borders been adopted.
Senator Wirth.
president so that is all the
business for today let me just
verify with our clerk nothing up
on the table.
So that's.
We have business.
So Mister president what we're
gonna do we need to we need to
hear the rule change so we're
gonna roll the clock and then
we'll go to that some is present
having limiting I am I move we
this afternoon session no
objection so ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
reading of legislation and ideal
Senator Ivy Soto percent rules
committee sub two percent
resolution number one on that
order business thirty
legislation will yield to
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
resolution number one I have
been taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Hearing no objections Senator
Ivy Soto to explain.
I was advised earlier they're
having a difficult time finding
a picture of the to put up
there.
one thank very much missed
president Thomas present
colleagues would we gathered.
A year and a half ago so and had
This here we have a set of rules
that tries to implement and keep
best practices fairness as we
learn how to live with the virus
That it Senator makes the call
as to their staff.
That's responsible to them
whether not they work from
working from the building
otherwise but but until that
comes if Senator makes it of
their own decision.
Second of all we have that
ensure that everybody present in
the Senate chamber wears a mask.
Representative the
recommendation by the CDC P. I'm
not consume food and the Senate
chambers and this is written
mask and so
this way keeps a flexible as we
go forward.
Six one one at the federal CBCP.
Recommends mass in public places
of the CDC and not consume food
with food in those areas.
Senator shall be considered to
be present and in attendance.
capitol electronically.
A lot of calls satisfied the
members within the capital
shopping participate during the
debate from the floor or the
And so people are flexibility to
decide where the safer or more
effective places for them.
Our with our.
With committees.
Are participating by telephone.
From within the capital.
As senator who's required to
Again this is because it's a
flexible situation the guidance
may change so we don't want to
put the exact guidance today in
the rules we want to be able to
be flexible.
Fatal then they will also be
allowed to operate from outside
the building.
Those are the only two
exceptions.
prevention.
Are
participating yes simultaneous
remote electronic transmission
Are at a legislator who's not
visually president called upon
shall be less is absent.
No legislators should be logged
in to a Senate committee while
simultaneously logged into
president any other legislative
committee or floor session.
witnesses of the public the
gentle station the ranking
member may determine the
duration public comment allowed.
I'm courtesy memorials and
certificates shall not be read
needed to offer greater social
distancing.
And basically than what we're
adopting innovative public
health emergency when one
In addition members and business
attire.
The dress code applies
regardless of whether members
participating in person or via
simultaneous remote electronic
means.
Other than finance the vice
chair can be can have another
leadership role.
In the chamber so
The reader to read the floor
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate rules committee
substitute to Senate resolution
resolution one thank you senator
Phil explained that the
amendment attempts to do.
And and thank you Mr president
the the amendment this is an
attempt you know we've seen a
put people in in more harm with
regard to comment we all
remember and I and I know the
governor had good intentions but
because it's doesn't have the
was is we had people in
essential bread lines out in the
frigid cold closer than they
would be if they had been in the
grocery store and so we don't
the committee areas and and how
many people can go in and so my
fear is if we limit the space
let's say to committee room
three twenty one to five and
that we don't put people in
harm's trying to keep people
safe that we actually take this
and think about it and thinking
a lot further through than some
of the things that were put into
place by the governor that we
were gonna do better because
number one I'll go to Senator
Ivey Soto thank you very much Mr
president and the this is a
friendly amendment.
Any further debate on Senate
know I I I don't want to punish
the body was going back with
with so many things that you
know we can play Monday morning
quarterback in state you know
when decisions are made but I
think that's the beauty of the
like delayed care of people that
weren't able to get tumors
removed in a timely way they
actually put it off and became
more dangerous I mean there was
a lot of things done early on
that that put people at risk of
should consent that Senator
agency consent thank you senator
says manta I request for
unanimous consent it up Senate
floor amendment number one to
Senate rules committee said
Senator Steinborn followed by
Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr president will the
sponsor the rule change please
feel.
Senator Ivey Soto deal I'm happy
here.
Recommends that masks shall be
worn in public places then it
shall be in force what is the
current recommendation of the
So Mr president colleagues I
just want to speak to from the
heart.
I know that this subject.
People feel it's political.
more people will die.
We can also probably agree on
the fact that this is an
aerosolized virus that's a fact.
masses CDC also by the way Mr
president colleagues this is
really important for you and
your staff recommends and then
ninety five at this point.
much higher level of protection
ten ninety five C. N. th CDC
says you can be even around
other people for hours specially
both people running.
around you for their families
for our hospital workers.
We have people who have life
threatening things not related
People with life threatening
conditions.
It is a matter of courtesy to
wear a mask.
I don't care if you may believe
to be so protective about my
eighty five year old mother my
twin brother said it best.
He goes.
We have to be right a hundred
percent of the time we can't
still get COVID.
You can still die from COVID.
So.
You know we have a very serious
I do have Mister president.
And I hope that all these great
biblical axioms about love they
neighbor.
You know.
Can't afford to accidentally get
one of your colleagues or their
family members sec and up in the
hospital you can add one more
strain on those hospital
workers.
So don't do it because of the
do have further debate with
senator Morris famous president
two budget has been politicized.
We got members of this chamber
calling other members members of
a death cult.
room who's taking COVID more
seriously than I have.
Hi every single day for last two
years have expose myself to
this pandemic.
Hi the state is that there are
my house injury coffee and live
in a bubble I went out there Mr
was we're working together a
pandemic people turn this into a
politicized process.
You know what I voted against
this more thing yesterday I
Doesn't have to always be parts
and doesn't have to be twenty
five members meeting in a caucus
meeting deciding this is the way
it's going to be screw the
Republican screw everyone else
Attacking me after I've risk my
life the last two years.
And then to call me names on
Twitter you have the guts to
come up to me.
That is offensive when we work
I plead with you use this as an
example we came together made
this better for the betterment
of this chamber and in state of
New Mexico and stop the
ridiculous attacks against
Thank you Mr.
I certainly support part of this
tired of it.
Mr president.
I was really moved and touched
I'd I'd prayed for the the
gentleman to my left and it's
exactly might my concern was
from my point of view I cannot
accommodate a delusion or an
untruth.
And I have to do with the way
harm I don't view them as a
neutral courtesy I view them as
harmful at least the way not not
universally I wear a mask I'm
no problem with that.
but I I don't believe it's a
courtesy and I'm not going to
list all of the the deals I mean
I'll say one thing is that the
speech delays that have been
scientific body we don't try to
debate dress not a journal club.
And so on but I just I'm gonna
say it feel very brief things
It's just one study that came
it's been peer reviewed
published just a few months ago
in the intern international
research journal public health
in their conclusion was I quote
we did we did not observe any
graph of any state that you want
and I've I've done them I have
them on my computer I can show
you can see Illinois California
New York Florida Texas and you
can see all the ways in the
as we can see
different states how they've
been doing it and this is my
very best pitch to you knowing
that I'm not going to change
anyone's opinion on this.
states red or blue if this had
been settled and was this in in
New Hampshire was just crushing
it on cover some was doing
really well and sort of figured
out policies that we're just
If something was proven to work.
By diverse group of of of of of
folks absolutely let's do it and
schools teachers students.
Is there conclusion quote there
was no evidence that face
coverings two meters social
distancing or stopping children
We're looking at the CDC and
we're saying with the CDC
recommends this and that.
But why are they recommending
considered a much lower level of
evidence and medical and
medicine.
K. we've moved away from expert
opinion and we've gone evidence
based medicine the CDC is taking
millions of Americans are losing
trust in the CDC that's amazing
that's a major problem because
when they come out with other
recommendations that are not
people did on just things to
those people group.
And when you go to medical
school actually teach you about
that in the state have you see
again really do that again for
for cancer smoking or whatever
it is the CDC losing credibility
we need a strong CDC.
So I'm gonna is this is this is
when it asked about current CDC
recommendations so I I looked up
I you know it's it's changes a
lot it's I I don't you know this
is hard to follow and and I and
I clicked on their their
toppling because they have a
and and I scroll down they have
one study on this page you know
that one study is.
It is a state is a retrospective
study.
It's January twenty twenty two
that's what they have here in
the C. C. director.
Recently said in drew ire from
leftists doctors because she
made this recommendation for
spread if you don't wear a mask
in your schools.
You know the end point of that
basing policy on a study like
this.
To get a check mark on that
study.
Your school.
Was defined as having a COVID
Regardless of the number so you
get a tick mark if you had two
kids with the pas of COVID yes
within fourteen days of each
other or you get one check mark
they counted up and it was
higher.
Okay they had a higher number of
total number of schools with
COVID outbreaks.
In R. C. C. director stands up
and makes a policy
recommendation on a study of
that low quality.
And I will stand for the truth
recommendations on studies that
are of such low quality that in
control FIR vaccination rates
they didn't account for rate of
testing or anything once again
get your votes but I don't see
how a reasonable person could
say that the director of RCC can
make a policy recommendation to
a press release on a study and
claim that that your school if
Please ask us to ask of the far
left physician or researcher
somebody that you trust a
personal relationship with a
look at that study with you
sometime.
just wanted to say that that
time
I'm not neutral on this issue I
think we're dealing with some
some bad data Europe has moved
other people's you know thoughts
on this scientifically and and
like I said to reiterate I
certainly will be wearing a mask
when this rule passes thank you
Mr president.
Senate rules committee to
substitute to Senate resolution
one amendments sponsored by
district destructive that was
left out page five line six
after floor.
We should answer the word for.
Centers we're debating Center
pharma number to anyone wishing
debate center Pirtle of Mr
president I believe it's
customer to go to the sponsor to
see if it's a friendly amendment
as going to do that senator but
destructive guy but in this case
it's a from the moment.
Any further debate.
Si no further debate senators so
so far one time amended and I
request unanimous consent
Senator there's been a request
a motion for unanimous consent
to that senator member number
two any objection.
Pirtle followed by Senator
Hickey then Senator Brandt
centre for.
And thank you Mr president I
won't need the the sponsor to
yield I just.
You know as as we continue
through.
with people and and their
beliefs I think I'm I'm still a
traditionalist I still believe I
live in the United States of
America we're that's what makes
makes is great but you know
this governor this
administration re resorted to
you know calling me names in in
a news article getting personal
Because that's the beauty of a
Republic of representative
democracy.
Is that we come up here as
individuals representing areas
of the state diverse areas of
the state.
And at some point and I hope
it's this body that can help put
this baby to bed.
That we we no longer get on
Twitter and just five seconds
gonna give you a piece of my
mind to your face I don't need a
keyboard I don't need to screen
let's talk about policy let's
talk this through let's be
adults.
fist bump a dozen people in a
row.
Get within a foot.
Face to face with another human
being and you want to preach to
me about being safe.
compliance has been pretty much
nil from day one.
You learn to social distance its
way more effective I've read the
studies as well that stinks
cold whenever you can turn
around in fist bump people and
then get within a foot of their
face.
And don't even get me started on
those that stand on this floor
COVID corner as was said by
somebody hiding behind some Fe
candle as I am in person and
also New Mexico.
On the same exact person and I
And it made made me proud
because it's not easy staying up
here for something you believe
in when there's only two of us
standing up for something that
we believe in.
my mask on because that's that's
what you do when you have your
opinion and you lose.
In the New Mexico Senate.
So I hope as we move forward.
That was so inappropriate and I
guarantee you ninety nine
percent of you missed it.
That is.
start now we're we start here
about five minutes however long
this takes and we can move
forward but it goes both ways Mr
president members of this body.
And hopefully we can do that
thank you.
I came to the Senate to be able
to bring.
Insight.
And.
And most of all based on common
sense.
Common sense.
I would dispute my fellow
physician.
Studies in a tangential way.
Studies that are based on.
I do have faith in the multiple
schools of public health and
universities and the
epidemiologists who have been
trained in science who say that
there is absolutely.
The disease market is absolutely
the contrary.
And rather than going in citing
this study in that study I would
refer all of you.
To the D. O. H. website.
every week to bring him up to
date we are learning.
Week by week new things about
is science based and I would ask
all of you to.
Read their websites read the
state website and believe what
I would also ask you to wear
masks.
Because of my colleagues.
I don't practice anymore.
They are in many cases we found
earlier putting their lives at
stake and I've lost him.
They are completely burned out.
them across we don't even know.
That the two hospitals in town
would be able to take care of us
and if we go in we get a little
Multiple hospitals and I have
contacted out in the rural areas
have had people dying in the
hallways because they can't get
potentially lethal situation.
I would like to close.
By noting.
That you know we do live in a
society we live with each other.
One of the laws that we've had
for a long time.
Is that when the light turns
red.
You stop.
And so saying that you have the
right to not wear masks.
Is just like running a red
light.
come in contact with us so we
can keep people out of the
hospitals we don't burn out our
medical staff in the state.
But most of all because we
mass where with pride.
Don't drive through red lights
thank you.
We do have further debate less
Senator Brandt.
Senator Ivey Soto do you yield.
Mr president I don't think the
camera caught me away from my
seat at all so there for never
happened.
And yes I'll be happy to yield.
Mr president and Senator Brandt.
We we have the services of our
medical doctor.
President who was a medical
doctor that was in the room.
That would be the honorable Greg
smitteez and the.
This presents you said you
Thank you Mr president Sir who
was the second opinion.
Sentence of the.
That would be of the Senate
rules committee.
Senator so the Mr president
Senator Brandt we did not.
I think this presents I I I find
that troubling to be quite
To test by whether we should or
not and to then ask questions
about why they believe that or
why they don't believe that.
On anything what is to this
COVID virus Senator Ivey Soto.
I think this president Mr
Senator Representative is
present center I I I didn't
actually understand your answer
was a yes or no.
This president Senator Brandt.
in to give a report nor am I
aware as to whether or not there
was a.
a request made through the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee.
Secretaries doesn't that for the
department of health I think
about once per year.
Senator is present in and I was
able to make a let's say finance
Who just graduated.
Does that.
I'm not saying this wrong right.
So we're not just the questions
light was a big difference the
legislature actually made a law.
Saying that running a red light
was illegal.
In my opinion but we never
debated it.
The almost two years.
That we've been dealing with
this issue and not once has the
I find it disturbing.
Because then we come in we act
like it's already a law it's not
a law please gentleman.
One of our previous colleagues
was the only one that voted no
on giving the governor that
authority.
So there's at least one thing I
agree with him on.
Executive should never have this
kind of power.
Setting laws is our job.
But we didn't even bring the
department.
Never got the expert testimony
to know whether it's a good idea
or not.
And then we have to say don't
Is that the other side of the
aisle did nothing but politicize
this issue.
We have a current president.
Because the previous presidents
the one who had it up or order
that it be done.
And our vice president did the
We are dealing with a matter of
life and death my daughter law
To the freight for the take the
vaccine.
Because the political statements
I'm sorry.
And I'm getting emotional.
That's really ridiculous to come
Maybe I should go out and get.
New mass the state let's go
Brandon on directing them on the
Senate floor.
So I can politicize it.
In here so we can ask them
questions.
About whether or not.
The study show.
And show us the studies.
Majority floor leader.
Is I will tell you.
He's probably one of the main
people on the Democrat side.
You have not been a hypocrite
and I appreciate that.
Thank you Mr president.
We do have further debate with
senator Neville followed by
Senator Ortiz Pino Centerville
technical Mr president of
Senator on page three down at
the bottom it says a Senator
with a medical condition that
class
That classifies the senators
anchor whatever it is on the
federal Senator centers for
disease control and prevention
the question is when we were
rolling out not we but when they
using fifty five of the sixteen
these sixty five different ages
out of what's currently in the
document.
There's a bunch of us that are
over all those ages so I'm just
curious if we're all going to
have to present our driver's
in this particular case Senator
Ivey Soto thank you very much
was president and I'm and I'm
very much appreciate Senator
Neville asking for clarification
of services such as yourself.
thank you Mr president.
might might be in a in a
classification by the C. D. C.
Well that's what I wanted to
clarify Mister president senator
is.
they were apparently defining it
as a medical condition under the
vaccine determinations early on
the other hand there's about a
significant percentage of us
that are over fifty five in this
room and if that's the number of
in the conceivably we would not
have to be here and everybody
else would so I'm just trying to
Then then H..
Okay thank you Mr president let
go to.
Thank you have further debate
with senator these if you know
two and eight and maybe
confusing the the third one to
hearings with the health
department and with their person
in each of which they emphasized
always emphasize the need to you
know use the the hand washing
techniques use the the purifiers
and and and then also to use the
masks they were very clear about
somebody who's running the
health department you you do you
take their expertise as is being
far superior to our own and now
distancing assess Senator Pirtle
mention was also very strongly
emphasized so I mean all of
these things I think play into
it but the hell did to defend
the health department they did
Si no further debate Senator Ivy
Soto to close on the on the
resolution.
Thank you very much Mr president
colleagues I would and I want to
thank everybody for the debate
rules committee I do mean all
the members of the rules
committee.
with that distinction has to the
letter that comes after
somebody's name.
And the written to maximize
interaction as much as possible.
Some of us have been informed.
gotten that message but.
You read the study yes yes
exactly it was a study of
legislators actually.
But at a rate it this is
possible each senator to make
their own decision.
About where in the building that
would like to be.
Where they would like to other
the input that received in the
rules committee and and I will
just tell everybody that the
that the discussion in the rules
committee was extremely I
thought respectful and
thank you all for that with that
Mr president I ask of.
You have consent of the Senate
the record
all members present voted in
favor of the resolution except
for those voting no by show of
hands Senators we're voting tier
Senator share voting no Senator
Gallegos voting no Senator Woods
voting no Senator committee
voting now Senator Pirtle voting
now.
one as twice amended has passed
the Senate etcetera so the.
President colleagues thank you
very much Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president UNM's that we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the journal show
all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
no objection it is so ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
objection it is so ordered
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president just to give our
members a road map for tomorrow
and the rest of the week and for
committee chairs will come in
committees committee reports we
are not planning to meet on
Friday again we've got the work
done it gives just so the public
Monday morning but that's for
committees and now the time for
committee chairs to make
announcements we are on the that
order business announcements
miscellaneous and I'll go first
to Senator Stewart.
little earlier so that we have a
chance to get those Canadian
reports finished by our noon
session three twenty six ten
thirty in the morning thank you
Senator phonics thank you Mr
committee and it is to assess
our capability of doing in
person zoom and economic are all
together and ours to master is
introduction many of you if the
with consent.
See no objection thank you many
of you may notice we have a new
had been the on camera
personality for many motor
sports in some pretty high
profile areas he is worked in
film I did this guy had a
fascinating and I think for a
brand new at the job is done
pretty great job for the first
couple of days.
goes by graph so yeah if you all
get a chance please chat with
them I think it also quickly
about Senate education.
Senator thank you said education
of on Monday is going to be
heard our first bill meeting
will be on Wednesday.
Thank you senator souls who have
further announcements we have
Senator serve on this all of us
Friday for those of you that
we're going to want to hang
around here especially for us I
I I you know it's an opportunity
for me to point out that
oftentimes there's concern about
bill to hear it repeatedly I I
think we're gonna take a little
bit of a break can do it on
Monday so we'll we'll have an
organization meeting Monday and
we'll hear the one bill also
polling highly so we're gonna
try real hard the session to
have hearings which is something
a little out of the ordinary for
the legislature you know we we
coming here we think we're going
to pass bills as we just passed
bills and I think we missed an
department of justice oversight
in Albuquerque we're gonna try
and look at some court rulings
that Senator Ivey Soto pointed
out about our wiress are not
being made in City of
Albuquerque slide eight in order
please look at our agenda we're
gonna try to make it interesting
for all of us so thank you ms
present we'll see a Monday thank
you senator about the sentiment
us thank you Mr president Senate
finance roled let's go in right
I sat with lieutenant governor
he has a place for your junior
money that that he needs help
with so us is members of the
body might want to help the
pretty well I was very pleased
with the senator thank you.
Mr Brennan center order so you
don't need anything else the you
don't need any junior money or
anything else to make it real
travels easier anything I I just
awesome for House treated me so
travels easier across the state
and so hopefully us members of
of the body and you a member of
the Senate will get to ride in
that plane.
well that'll be determined
meeting in Senate finance try to
get out of here.
Everybody's a
one to leave for the weekend and
maybe the last week and we get
to go so we may have a long week
budget as we move along so well
I think we'll cancel the Friday
I think there's some polling
among members that they they do
need to go home or need to take
care stuff in their family for
one last week and before we get
welcome Mr lane of make sure he
knows who I am and just
understand if I bring a bottle
water it doesn't necessarily
mean I'm gonna have to read you
read the entire bill.
to slide out of the room but
Senator on face as a Happy
Birthday and sent Santo Domingo
those rules.
You know when into a fax but
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so if there are no
other announcements a unanimous
consent the Senate Senate recess
