mentioned we're gonna start with
the Senate consent calendar
number one and let me just read
off the bills in the Sanchez.
Senator Gonzales is item number
two house bill two sixty one as
amended.
Item number three is house bill
one eighty eight as amended
battle Senator Candelaria you've
We are not we've taken item I
off the list that was house bill
one sixty three so that we won't
do that.
twenty nine pharmacy benefit
manager reporting that'll be
center Ivey Soto then Senator
guy Aigles item number eight
Senate memorial number nineteen.
won't use anywhere close to that
time and then we'll have a shot
clock and I would ask a Senator
Campos you want to keep track of
the this run here or who's going
minutes on the on the bill we go
over that will just pull it off
and put on the regular calendar.
so with that Mr president's
Unanimous consent we go to that
the Senate that the house has
refused to recede from the house
amendment to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill sixty six as amended by the
house and has appointed the
Respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk of
the house.
The journal so the message from
the house has been received.
When that order business
announcements this thing is
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I was just advise if
there's an amendment on item
number seven so we're gonna go
ahead and pull that one back off
then eight and nine so with that
unanimous consent we know that
our business third reading of
legislation ideal to Senator
Brandt for item number one.
Or vibrate as we begin third
reading with that I yield to
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president so I'm
that all action for placing
House Bill to seventy seven as
amended be taken as subject to
sub subject to.
debate substitution Norman.
we're good thank you we're good
to go Senator Brandt.
This president Senate Bill House
Bill sorry two seventy seven
addresses the concerns raised by
Now towards the end of his
career he would like to
designate his current spouse as
as para does it beneficiary.
to happen.
If the previous spouse.
Is amenable to do so in to sign
the paperwork allowing it to
happen.
Senator Brandt yield Mister
president center Representative
Senator Ivey got to sorry
Senator Senator is this a this
who is been married and then
remarried.
With the permission of their
previous spouse to change the
beneficiary on the paraben of
fits.
but it can only happen with the
This presents are you going to
be what that is your right as a
senator I don't bother me at all
I'm retained that option and
think about it well I constitute
over the this bill thank you Mr
Mr president I move that house
bill two seventy seven as
amended do now pass and ask for
a roll call the.
Senator is where voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
yes senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes senators
have on this.
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Yes Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill.
been divorced twice not on how
how this book this will affect
affect the.
how to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan Senator Kernan
yes Senator Lopez Senator Lopez
yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Senator do should be no Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator
Padilla.
Senator Pinto yes Senator Pinto
yes Senator Pirtle.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes senator Sanchez yes
Senators committees Senator
street is now Senator so they
Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Serpentis
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Byrd.
Thirty four Mr president Senator
this Mr president unanimous
consent to excuse Senator
Say no objection thank you
Senator Lopez.
By a vote of thirty four in the
affirmative one the negative
house bill two seventy seven as
amended has passed the Senate
Senator Brandt.
appropriation would not sign a
form giving up her rise to my
parents and rightfully so.
Thank you senator rand we're
going on to item number two
house bill two sixty one as
amended.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record shows
that all action for placing
House Bill to sixty one as
amended on final passage has
house bill two sixty one does it
requires the the use of the
population data from the U. N.
M..
Population group of any petition
for miscible incorporation the
No Mr president hi this is what
this bill does.
Thank you senator well as
senators were debating house
bill two sixty one as amended.
See no debate Senator Gonzales
to close.
been called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting on the
negative by a roll call vote.
Senator seats where voting.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
the audience.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales is Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator huh to medium.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Moores yes Senator manos
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share Senator sure yes
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator sure this Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Thirty thirty.
There in the pharmacy on the
negative house bill two sixty
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended and that our
records show that all action for
placing house bill one eighty
eight as amended on its final
Mr president house bill one
eighty eight would direct the
public education department to
create a license endorsement for
secondary computer science and
A good bill I urge you all to
vote yes thank you Senator
debating house bill one eighty
eight as amended.
See no debate center comes
a roll call vote senators we're
voting to your seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd VS Senator Campos
Duhigg.
Senator there goes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales is Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores yes senator Munoz
Senator Neville.
Senator Pinto yes Senator Pinto
yes Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator traded yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Stewart Senator sure this
Senator till one.
Senator Tallman as senator
Wirth.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
yes.
Senator Wirth.
eight as amended has passed the
Senate centered on that idea
thank you Mr first members of
the Senate Mr president I may
may I ask unanimous consent just
to make a quick disclosure
send it Sierra that a proceed
thank you Mr president Mr
floor in the past as referenced
do in my private practice
Representative both medical
cannabis patients as well as
introduce licensed under the
plan letter meeting of our
Senate rules for the
governmental conduct or any
other law applicable on the
state of New Mexico to my
debate or vote on any subject
matter bill relating to cannabis
thank you thank you Sierra
Nevada we are moving on to the
next item this item number four
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
one seventy eight on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
the statute and at changing the
or amending the second section
of the counseling and therapy
practice act to include and
clarify a Human Services degree
as a qualifying degree for the
been widely accepted and that's
what it's is needed for a
providers to continue to provide
services in the behavioral
think centre other guys we're
debating house bill one seventy
eight.
Say no debate center there is a
close Mr president I move that
house bill one seventy eight do
Thank you the clerk to call the
roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
night is Senator serve on this.
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
yes Senator Duhigg.
Senate Bill here give Senator
S. Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill Senator Hemphill yes
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto test
center how to meal Senator
Hermio yes Senator Kernan
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores yes Senator manos
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure Senator sure yes
Senator Shendo Senator Shendo
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator smitteez.
Senator smitteez yes.
Thirty seven.
members of the Senate Senator
this reminder and I don't ever I
we are skipping over going on to
item number six that's house
bill one eleven is twice
amended.
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
And Mr president members of the
Senate house bill one twelve is
that is financed with indigent
funds or other local
governmental streams of funding
we can't affect the public
funding I mean federal funding
for denying that care and with
that'll stand for questions
Mister chair Mister president.
Senator debating house bill one
is one twelve as two times
amended.
an emergency room or is this
health care in general Mister
president senator would you
anticipate a yield Mister
president it it it refers to the
indigent care program and so
most part it is the emergency
rooms for people show up and and
use the indigent care program to
finance it.
Okay so Mister president
senator.
Mr president Senator yes there
is a federal law called and tala
the emergency medical treatment
and labor act and and and it it
case the indigent care money
could be applied to matter.
What other status or anything
else about the person right.
Mr president yes Senator that's
participate to close Mr
president I move that house bill
one twelve is twice amended do
now pass and I just for rural
called the.
Yes.
Yes Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator by
the.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez senator Sanchez yes
Senators committees.
Senator share Senator sure yes
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics Senator preventive
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
of the Senate members of the
Senate we're going back to we're
gonna do item number seven
that's on the calendar that's
house bill one twenty nine is
three times amended.
Senator Ivey Soto to present the
I see no objection Senator Ivey
Soto explained the bill thank
you very much Mr president was
president of what this bill does
is it simply provides that
the coupon will be applied to
that particular patient without
I'll be happy to stand for
questions that is we're debating
house bill one twenty nine is
looking at the equipment and
context correctly there's a lot
of stricken language but that
that's just basically saying
we're not dealing with that part
of the law all right we're not
actually taking that part of the
listed in section one of the
bill at the very end okay thank
you and Mister president center
thank you for
Discuss this with me I'm trying
things
Why why do we have these the the
these coupons in the first place
I mean it's it's to.
that is not so that we don't
want something we're trying to
tackle this bill originally
that's that's really for the
interim.
As it affects New Mexicans
R. for the drug that that coupon
is applied to the drug for that
patient now if there's a generic
equivalent they get the generic
under this bill unless it's
mean I died deal with these
folks are.
Mike my concern is that I don't
know if if these.
two ponds where they have
generic equivalents
I mean I guess you know it is it
gets kind of complicated because
different places have different
formula areas and what what's
determined to be medically
necessary by the prescriber
because all the time in
medicine.
That's a really good part of
this bill by the way all the
time in medicine the the
prescriber says is medically
it but this this my real concern
with all seriousness agency
presentation if.
Some of these brand name drugs
people gonna be on for a long
time.
may be on for fifteen years
twenty years.
And once you get started on a
brand name drugs.
The and it's and it works and
And so my concern is that we're
gonna have a situation where the
patient gets a coupon in there
and say oh I have a coupon I
at so I don't know do you have
any concerns me that my concern
is that if work somehow
encouraging people to stay on
discount but if the coupons are
just gonna be there for.
The first I don't know the first
filling the prescription order
only the first.
Two months of the first three
relationship and I don't think
the legislature should second
guess that relation.
Thank you Mr president center no
I I totally agree with you
you know it's an industry this
is near and dear to my heart.
And I and I've I've battle these
folks in the you know resident.
next item on the calendar that's
going to be item number eight
Senator moral nineteen I yield
to.
Senator Gallegos is not in the
chamber center gave us nearby.
task force Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Mr present ask unanimous consent
of the sender the record show
all action for.
No objection senator Neville
explained that Mr president
members of the Senate this is a
willing because we don't give
them any money to do it but if
they're willing we would love to
have them continue their work
and to continue making
recommendations to the interim
health and Human Services
Senator debating Center more
thirteen anyone wishing to
debate.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
president sponsor yield Center
continue to do it or why don't
we pass something where it the
exist in perpetuity.
I don't think we can bind to the
future legislators to this we
Any further debate.
Si no further debate Senator is
a bit of a close Mr president I
move the Senate memorial
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Diamond Senator
Diamond yes Senator Duhigg
Senator Duhigg AS Senator guy it
goes Senator Gonzales Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal Senator huh
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores yes Senator my
nose.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Ortiz Y. Pino test center by
the.
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator suite is yes senators of
the opus.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Cervantes yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Senator Stewart Senator
Senator this reminder
participating be is have your
microphones on mute please.
Brandt.
passed the Senate Senator Ortiz
you know thank you very much Mr
president members of the Senate
thank you senator we're going to
go back to item number eight
that sent more nineteen all
you'll to Senator Pirtle Mr
subject to debate amendment or
substitution no objections
Senator Pirtle to explain the
memorial.
Mexico City the Senate urges the
president The New Mexico
congressional delegation and all
Senator to many some more
nineteen with senator Morris
thing was person for arms
presents or talk about the cliff
not one measurement out there
whether it's in the U. K. the
metric system the standard
system there's no measurement
that can measure quite measure
the cliff Pirtle affect thank
get your DeLorean eighty miles
per hour.
In order to catch up with the
cliff Pirtle affect.
This presents like common we we
just going off the cliff.
memorial.
Thank you Mr president of Senate
memorial nineteen.
Roll call our unanimous consent.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt
yes senator Byrd.
around this Senator syringes yes
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator do yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey Senator Hickey yes
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Munoz Senator money or.
Senator Neville.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
Senator pope yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure Senator sure yes
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senators olds
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Ballman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Center moral nineteen has passed
the Senate.
I yield to senator Wirth.
Split my focus present
apologize Senator sure going
Thank you Mr president so we're
next going to go to Senate
supplemental calendar number
one.
And.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate.
That the record show that all
options for placing House Bill
I see no objections center
Stewart to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president.
This is really a historical
event in my mind for many years
competing bills doing something
very different.
And on behalf of many members of
this body and the governor we
insisted they come to a
number of people who have been
part of this hundreds of harm to
patients and their families.
A senior citizen office New
Advanced practice nurses and the
trial lawyers that represent
harm to patients I'd like to
thank all these groups that gave
which created it's created in
nineteen seventy six and is
officially referred to as a
patient compensation fund.
This fund was set up in nineteen
Over the years the funding
expanded to include out patient
clinics than one hospital in two
thousand and nine.
for harm done by these entities
has remained at six hundred
thousand.
Over the past ten years parties
president members of the body I
do have an amendment.
To correct a clerical error to
the amendment that the Senate
Judiciary Committee adopted.
So Mister president.
go right to a major to re.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seventy five
is twice amendment twice amended
amendment sponsored by Senator
So Mister president we we left
out some people say it was a
drafter.
Chairman of judiciary will stand
up pretty soon take blame
himself.
council service they advised us
that because this entire bill as
an amendment we can't amended so
Thanks.
Actually maintenance in the
morning.
So the correction just correct
the definition of independent
provider.
Turn to section E..
and the one two three fourth
line down after the word
Senator if you can just ask for
a request for a if you're expert
witness was behind if you can
just identify.
Okay he's arrived Mr chairman Mr
president if I could ask for an
start with Senator Kernan
followed by Senator survive this
then Senator Moores Senator
Kernan thank you Mr president
and I stand in support of the
with what you see before you is
in my view is what we should be
looking at and I do support this
thank you.
one one thirty this morning
there was an error in this bill
it's a very the lengthy and
substantial bill with a lot of
made last night and I rise to
support the amendment.
Thanks just about this any
further debate on the amendment.
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator Stewart to
Unanimous consent Mr restaurant
Adams consent.
Seeing no objection Senator
member number one has been added
the key components in this
ammendment.
As I said before for more than
forty years the limit a harm to
patient can receive from
positions participating in the
dollars and adds a Cola the cost
of living adjustment.
Expanding the health care
practitioners that are allowed
midwives with the limit on what
a harm to patient can recover of
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars.
limit to cover all medical
providers employed by the
hospital and accordingly
increases the limit that a harm
year until twenty twenty six
where the maximum will be a
limit of six million dollars.
It also requires that future
Rather than continuing the
current system great harm to
patient has to seek payment from
OSI for each cost incurred.
And finally.
appropriate surcharges to the
positions nurses midwives
hospitals that choose to
participate in the act.
And with that Mr president I
will stand for questions.
sponsor the yield I just want to
disclose I don't this is not a
conflict of interest and and my
work won't be impacted either
disclose that to the body thank
you senator Wirth it's just for
informational purposes for the
body with senator Morris
followed by Senator phonics and
Senator serve on this.
this question's going to your
expert witness I got some calls
from the dental community of
last couple days and expressed
to me that they had early in the
move forward if you were my Mr
presidents Senator central time
if you could address for this
witness what happened with that
I can explain why the dental
community was on included and
A so Mister president senator of
those folks were never part of
this president's honor thank you
very much for that I think there
are you there there is concern
in the future is that if we
could look at this issue with
them especially with the oral
I'm not here just for Andrew
just inside the head it's a work
with them in the future that
would really appreciate that
because there are some critical
need for oral surgeons in New
Mexico and and that this is one
have center Stefanics.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator for bringing this
forward
as you know we had a another
hospitals so we're very pleased
or I'm very pleased that there
was this negotiation and that we
Mr president Senator would you
yield to a question.
Yes all of you are so Mister
presence under this system tire
Okay so Mr president Senator
parts of the bill.
and I think probably somebody
else with the same question.
I changing conditions or fees or
their cap in five years.
Mr president yes in in my
opening statement I laid out
hundred thousand dollars the
compromise expense that limit to
cover all medical providers
employed by the hospital and
accordingly increases the limit
twenty twenty six putting it at
a maximum of six million
dollars.
thank you Mr president senator
needs to be adopted this evening
and needs to protect not only
our hospitals and medical
facilities but also our
physicians and our advanced
Thanks Senator phonics Senator
on this.
Thank you Mr president for just
the sponsor yield in just a few
I've been very careful in this
bill to decline to be a sponsor
or to otherwise actively and
involve myself in the
in the future and so in no way
does this bill affect the might
my current current practice of
law and so I don't feel that I
have to recuse myself in fact
would want to believe that my
tonight on this bill.
I do have a question is
president I can ask the sponsor
to yield.
Senator certainly.
Senator Stewart there is in New
met medical fall practice do you
know Senator Stewart the
financial condition of that fund
today.
Mr president I know it's not
good I think it's something like
superintendent insurance our
state agency says this fund is
fifty six million dollars in
solvent.
That means that over the last
claims for which this fund was
created is that right Senator Mr
president is exactly right.
And then Senator it is true
isn't it that the superintendent
result of that is that the
doctors who are supposed to be
insured by that fund are in fact
uninsured by the fund is not
true Senator Mr president yes it
doctors themselves many of the
doctors themselves were
concerned that they didn't have
the benefit of a solvent fund
patient compensation fund that
superintendent insurance is not
true is present yes and it's
still ongoing apparently.
And the fact the president the
assessments from hospitals so
that doctors and patients would
be protected.
Mr president that's exactly
And when we should be very proud
of the president of the inmate
from here in New Mexico some of
your products she thought this
was such an important issue that
years ago she became a point of.
Mr president that's exactly
right.
And of course not protecting
doctors are not protecting
patients who should have the
benefit of that firm is that
months ago when they told me
that the hospitals and the
doctors were negotiating and and
my reach a compromise some of us
I think even representative Ely
going to be hospitals or in or
hospitals are out.
but what we've done here is
found a way to keep the
hospitals in but increase their
financial responsibility to
it's exactly right and I frankly
have been all of us have been
living this for many years and
every year we've tried to have a
let's raise that met mount cap
the tester to yield any further
I just want to really support
this issue and the compromise
and reinforce the fact how long
it's been since we've increase
this cap and recognize we should
recognize something that I have
a great deal of faith and belief
in and that is our jury system.
You Mr president members of the
doing this there's nothing I
love more than working with the
jury to try and find justice but
let me tell you the way the
system works right now.
award any damages for the death
of our client who is not native
American.
And they told us that their
belief system precluded any
damages in money for a death.
Some of the jurors had deaths in
the family they had to pray all
night long as part of the
religious practice but they
insisted on staying on that jury
this isn't coming back every day
They came back with an eighteen
million dollar verdict.
Now realize the way the law
works.
The law works that although the
jury thought the damages to this
And the law reduce that but by
operation of law to that value.
The jury thought the value was
one thing and our statutes are
failing to keep up with the law.
Live in our society live in our
community they see what loss is
they see what it is to have a
husband or wife taken away from
life of that individual in the
lives of those people.
And juries have decided over
time.
That the value of these things
of malpractice and it's sad and
tragic when it happens.
But realize that if you're a
bread winner.
If you're supporting your family
your children.
medical expenses in the past six
hundred thousand dollars.
And ask you whether we've kept
up.
As a legislature with what the
last several weeks to recognize
it's time that we get current.
And that we protect the fund and
the doctors and the patients
with the fund was created for
the benefit of.
daily.
Your daily experience of life
but you you've mastered some
very complicated issues not only
in this bill but over the twenty
thank you for supporting those
of us who are ultimately trying
to help families who have
suffered just.
Describable losses.
president I'm not currently
doing medical malpractice work
but I have in the past and I
likely will in the future I
don't have a conflict of
interest on this bill or any
direct financial benefit but I
some active medical malpractice
cases my firm handles less than
five it's not as it's less than
ten percent of my practice but I
make that disclosure in keeping
bill and I do support the bill
thank you.
The debate Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president and I
joined the the co sponsor in
I do believe that the bill that
we sponsored reflected more what
the OSI study of delivered and
so my question if the spots will
report that the OSI.
Put out.
Mr president I did not.
So Mister president members of
few minutes and to read this
report.
And I think some of the things
that we've heard tonight are not
reflected in this report and
though I'm going to support the
and my husband who practice for
well over forty years was both
under the PCF at one point and
then not under the PCF as an
employed physician.
because they cannot afford to be
in a private practicing longer
and they're moving into employed
status but they're still the
same position they're still
whether the doctor that you
mentioned earlier.
I wonder if she's read the
report because I think they're
exceptional circumstances
what's being said here tonight
is not completely truthful I
think what's being said.
Maybe does reflect what's in the
report of the OSI.
in other providers and I'm very
grateful for that.
And I think over time the
hospitals are going to adjust to
the fact that they're no longer
But I will tell you when we talk
about harm and certainly the cap
is
gets hired in some states but
lower than others but the
So at the end of the day I'm
going to support this but I will
tell you coming from the other
side it's a difficult thing
because I see how hard our
physicians work.
fairness and I will tell you I
think for now we're going to be
okay I don't think we're going
to see doctors leaving the
state.
But I will tell you when you
decide to come to the state
concern about one was in my
community for number of years
and they're gone now and I'm
glad they are.
But they're good hospitals good
things have been talked about on
the floor today but I'm going to
support this bill it's not an
easy one for me to support but I
do think that there is some
Senator Hamblen on zoom Senator
Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you Senator Stewart and
representative Ely for bringing
this forward you know I this at
sides of this bill and
recognizing the importance of
our medical practitioners in our
state but also recognizing those
because of those losses I
insured and committee that I had
two friends who would who would
die because of of medical
negligence and and so was a very
they were also willing to
compromise and that we had folks
come to the table that this
discussion had to happen in
order for folks to come to the
table from all sides to get
moving on this because as
sponsors for this but also the
patients who rest of re opening
old wounds and raw wounds and
president and Senator Stewart
and Representative Eli thank you
for bringing this forward thank
you for having this discussion
it was a painful discussion it
was an important discussion and
I think it's important to have
Thank you Mr president and
fellow senators my bills being
heard in the house so I'm gonna
make this quick and I do support
this compromise I also did not
Thanks entity.
Si no further debate.
Senator to close on the bill.
representatives from the house
and the centers to phonics and
those that joined in the bill
that we had in the Senate so I I
attorneys get F. and saying well
I don't have a conflict but I
don't want to carry it that's
how I drew the short straw here
tonight but proud to be part of
do now pass and ask for a roll
call vote senators we're voting
on house bill seventy five is
three times amended.
Your seats please the clerk to
call the roll.
I'm sorry.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd passes Senator
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
yes Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores.
Senator Moores yes senator one
else.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator Pirtle.
Senators maybe is now Senator so
they're Lopez.
Yes yes.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Cervantes yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes.
Senator Diamond.
Thirty six I.
amended has passed the Senate
centers the locust explained
about.
I tried to get on the list but I
wasn't quick enough to do a
disclosure because well I don't
husband is a judge and he does a
lot of these cases but we
haven't discussed it in any way
shape or form during the session
so I just a but I just felt the
Senate Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president so just an update
on a supplemental counter number
one I have been asked by the
sponsor to roll over item number
first two bills related to the
cannabis issue we'll hear house
bill ninety six and house bill
twelve so that'll be in the
morning I'm just making that
substitute for.
This message.
Excuse me I believe senator
Morris well announcements
miscellaneous has matter.
Senator Moores it was
presentation members consent
that my name be removed from my
house bill ninety six as a
sponsor from co sponsoring the.
I
no objection.
three on supplemental calendar
number one.
Senator Stewart.
I think this present ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
House Bill twenty as four times
amended without the emergency
clause.
Up be put on final passage have
to subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
hard on businesses.
It's been hard on workers and
their families.
Before we really understood how
Covid spreads.
frontline workers that spread
the disease.
We had frontline workers who had
no.
Paid sick leave.
We had.
because their families had to go
to work.
So this pandemic has really.
Think of it is kind of ripping a
some healthy workforce issues.
This is a paid sick leave bill
it's for.
laws different standards.
But our private employees most
of the large private employer
employers of course do have paid
The New Mexico to provide their
employees employees with paid
sick leave.
It's one hour.
For every thirty hours worked.
thirty hours work.
They can use that sixty four
hours at a maximum over a twelve
month period.
Employers are not required to
pay out accrued.
To earn one day of paid sick
leave.
So Mister president this is been
a hard and difficult bill to
amendments that have already
been placed on this bill.
We remove the emergency clause
we remove domestic workers as
From the health care provider to
only two.
If you're doing two or more
consecutive days versus three
and regionally then the employer
we took that out of required in
the times a public health
emergency we we eliminated that
whole section.
until July one twenty twenty
two.
A year three or four months to
get ready for this.
businesses the use of those paid
time off must be in compliance
with other conditions.
Importantly this means an
employee would not have to
of already made and leave
policies.
The accrual and use flexibility
have been added this is modeled
on our federal MLA.
The amendment that I'm going to
propose a removes public
employee from the Act because
date but it allows employees to
take leave the latter of when
they become employed or the
effective date which is a year
and four months.
And they you can use that for
family members a sick child six
piles at cetera.
retaliating against employees
who use paid sick leave for
complaining or for complete or
and state employers may not
require employees to sign
yes let's have the reader read
DeMint first I'll go to.
committee substitute for house
bill twenty as amended.
In mid sponsored by senator
cliff R. Pirtle.
Senator to move in a statement
You've you've passed out both of
them.
Senator the amendments coming
that we reporter not as the
order they come in.
Senator Stewart the Senator
Pirtle isn't in the chamber so
will readers out once we get to
the reader and then we'll go on
to your amendment.
Senator Stewart is your member
reader read in Mr president we
don't have them over here
correct yes so she's gonna she's
going to we're gonna read it in
and then the Senator will wait.
To move and explain it to you
have it the reader to read.
bill twenty as amended
amendment sponsored by Senator
Mimi Stewart.
Senator to move the amendment
don't explain it yet till the
members have the amendment
first amendment the in Judiciary
we had a variety of amendments
the judiciary amendments took
out the emergency eighty hours a
And that exception is the strike
Senate Judiciary commands
Committee amendment number
three.
That was an amendment that
basically put public employees
fifteen we strike subsection C.
in its entirety.
that it has been struck in this
ammendment.
On page nineteen.
we strike out an investigation
by the division shall not be
required to file a civil action.
On page twenty.
Lying to.
encompass all violations that
occurred after the effective
date of the healthy workplace
Act so that the this doesn't
it's.
All cut in half finds that
employers would be paying for
violations of the act with
that'll stand for questions
judiciary discussion and you
know this is a lay person in a
lot of these areas and including
us but I don't understand why we
we inserted the public employees
entirely different approach and
different bill so I just rise in
strong support of this moment
thank you.
We are for the debate on the
amendment etcetera Pirtle.
qualify for the sick days and so
as they risk their lives to do
the COVID and we gave them the
three hundred dollars this would
ensure that part time government
that they can offer better sick
day leave but we're putting the
floor for everyone so remember
this is the floor not the
ceiling and so that was the
and so especially are part time
employees we couldn't get
answers as to how many there are
they didn't know so it was
important that we set the floor
with Senator about this.
Thank you Mr president present
the you're gonna hear a lot of
folks talk about what happened
Judiciary
bill because they're already
taking care of.
That's not straight.
The bill already says that if
there's a more generous benefit
What's really going on here my
concern is that we would say and
I support paid leave all of my
employees have always have paid
leaving my office and our
businesses I supported a hundred
Why would we be willing to give
them that benefit.
The argument even told is they
already get it or they get
something better but the bill
We're government employees to
have paid sick leave here in
Santa Fe we don't want to pay
for state all state employees.
Part time those who are here in
don't really know how we can say
here tonight what every
municipality in our state has
and it's better than this bill.
deal no harm this bill says you
keep the better deal this
establishes a minimum of those
in place why what we do it
because we don't want to pay for
it.
I think that's a shame.
We have the money to pay for
the.
The second reason I think that
we should lay it out there is
And they have the time off to
get well and take further
Fellers we think it's important
in the private sector but we
can't afford it.
In state government.
We can't afford it in county
Many government benefit programs
like this at the federal level
and as well health wise have
minimal business size they may
cut off a business compliance
with something like this and
hours that we're talking about
here sixty four and although
I'll check with the sponsor of
the amendment the bill in a
minute what was very in the
bill.
Nobody was talking out with the
other eighty hours.
next year when this becomes
effective you got another eighty
hours rate.
That's tough.
That's tough on some small
businesses.
Government can't provide these
benefits to our employees.
But we recognize the importance
of this too.
The private sector and that that
I just don't get.
Why.
This is important now and I
believe it is.
What would we wait a year.
The answer is.
That we want here to make sure
we can do this.
And when we go home and find out
that perhaps this was short
sighted.
We can make promises to come
back in here and start undoing
both in the bill the prime bill
and this amendment I know I know
her.
Our heart is right.
these benefits and not all city
county and state employees.
I have to propose the amendment.
We have further debate on the
amendment centerman us.
This presents senator why is it
important to provide paid leave.
Mr president.
around they had no way to go
home they couldn't take care of
their kids that can take care of
their spouses this originally
came to me about eight months
really understand comment early
on and a lot of people got sick
and the places where they got
sick most were restaurants and
people well at work I don't want
to go to a restaurant with six
employees I don't want to go to
a Walmart or trader chose with
bill was written designed
specifically to operate in the
private sector.
The private sector does not
leave system than the private
sector.
Nearly every municipality in New
Mexico has adopted ordinance
regarding employee sickly.
over burdening employers.
Public sector systems many
government governed by statute
or ordinance are designed to
sick leave at a faster rate our
state of New Mexico employees
approve sick leave at the rate
of two hours for every forty
worked.
And such a cruel is not capped
public for private sector not
public sector.
So the rewriting of literally
hundreds of ordinances to ensure
technical compliance with the
for public sector workers are
superior to those in house bill
twenty.
You know and and now you know
while we're all telling the
truth here.
That we have to put the public
sector into this is a false idea
it's not what the bill is based
on.
Senator Ivey Soto so
I'm sorry let me rephrase the
question why is it important to
provide sick leave.
Because I'm not sure I really
got an answer the question I got
criticism because nobody's
asking many questions so thank
you for asking questions we have
to provides paid sick leave
because we need healthy workers
when sick employees are working
they have to take care of their
kids their spouses other family
members.
stop working these are essential
workers who could not stop
working who spread COVID and got
sick and died themselves so this
work six weeks before you can
get one day you can accrue up to
sixty four hours.
But you can't have them go into
the next year you can't use any
going to restaurants and
businesses healthy.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much of so first of all all all
clearly not everyone who voted
for the amendment voted against
the bill.
Otherwise you'd have a math
problem there.
And and so Mister president and
Senator Stewart would you please
of.
And does the body with regard
to.
Up through the second up so also
Michael please.
Senator.
Be helpful to have a page on
line.
Michael Senator the district
verification we're still on the
amendment here leading to the
amendment question correct that
is correct this is on the moment
Would you agency president
Senator would you please and
does the body with what it says
after the second cycle.
Mr present I'm not going to read
senators so that you have to go
to the chair please.
Hasn't.
So employees shall accrue a
minimum of one hour of earned
sick leave for every thirty
hours worked and we've heard
Provided that employers may
choose a higher approval rate so
Mister president Senator sort if
if public sector employees
already have a better benefit.
not of the amendment but I will
say again.
This bill was not written for
public employees sick leave
policy we have those statutes
and I'm not saying that the
reason they're not in here is
that they all have better a
plans because that's not true
I'm saying that this bill is
written for private sector.
When it left the Senate
Judiciary Committee it no longer
was for private sector.
And this residents are stored
And I just find that very
problematic if.
Last time I checked out agency
president and Senator Stewart.
employees and they have a public
employee system that's quite
different from this.
And our agency president center
short would ambulance drivers be
considered public employees
hard by hospitals they could be
M. T. E. M. T. workers if they
were price said from a private
company in this private.
Private.
but if it's a private ambulance
then it should apply is that
what you're saying.
Mr president I'm saying that
this bill is designed for the
Don't miss president and senator
so if there is a receptionist at
UNM hospital what is the sickly
plan that that person has Mister
Mr president I don't know this
president center store if it's
if but if we pass this bill a
receptionist at.
Senator Mr president I'm I'm not
sure that the you know what what
you said who hired them well
where they were working whether
This presents a short at the
moment it's designed for both
and so I I would like to to
consider for that salt and a
Presbyterian has a very good
sickly plan for all their
employees whether they're
private or public large
corporations offer these plans
a worker public employee
bargaining situation so this is
designed to cover people that
work in grocery stores.
out a plan at all without a way
to get paid sick leave it's very
reasonable there's lots of
design their plan to prepare for
it to ensure that they have you
know
If if they have a twelve dollar
Senator Senator so the Mr
president social would you
please point to the lake place
in the bill that supports what
you just said that this is for
for private employees private.
Workers.
Pry from private entities.
This presents a destroyed a
moment ago you said this was
plan would you please show me in
the bill where it says that this
applies to people who don't
already have a benefit plan Mr
present all continue to ensure
questions if you'll stop being
Decorum respect is always
important just a reminder to all
senators I know it's late.
When we get back to the debate
thank you for respectful Senator
the.
the bill that it says that it
applies to people who don't have
a benefit plan so Mister
president that's a general
statement.
You know the statement this is
This presents a restored but
your did distinguishing as I've
heard you.
At and your answers to the
questions you're distinguish
between public and private
stored about about certain
hypothetical well would reply to
that one because they already
have a plan.
So I'm trying to understand what
the distinction is between the
two Mr president center store.
employee sick leave City of
Albuquerque city of Hobbs
ordinances for their employees
all of which would require
revision to ensure that the
technical compliance with the
healthy workplaces Act provides
no real benefit for the citizens
of the state.
This is from The New Mexico
federation of labor.
Legislative changes disrupted
designed to solve active
the budget contained in house
bill twenty.
The private sector does not
provide sick leave for many blue
calls for blue collar and
rewrite existing comprehensive
sickly statutes and ordinances
serves no real public purpose to
justify the destruction it would
public sector systems many
governed by statute or
ordinance.
Are designed to trick said Lee
just a property interest.
leave at the rate of two hours
for every forty work and such a
cruel is not capped employees
may also convert the sick leave
public sector the following
additional subjects would have
to be included public sector
bargaining which in contrast to
the private sector does not
interaction with a cruel
donations to other employees the
extension of benefits to grant
funded employees and
probationary period of cruel
Senator thank you very much was
president and and and and thank
made Mr president and
Senator Stewart now when you
said that the it's it is
something that can be converted
Of of receive any benefit if
they don't use sick leave most
teachers don't choose cleave
it's too hard to prepare lesson
allow to be paid for.
Paid time off that you have not
used the P. E. R. a system does
but not the year be one.
provide at all for one of the
two systems that we have is that
correct.
Senator.
You Mr president I'm not sure
about that because there could
plans including police fire so
they each have sort of different
mechanisms the basic public
employee us like the city
that higher ed is under the
state since that system as
public school teachers I'm just
not sure about that.
Is it possible that not all
private sector employees would
have the same benefits system.
Of course and many and private
I find sickly to my employees
well I find it so some do and
some don't this is trying to.
private employers to.
Senator to miss presidents are
stored I go back to my previous
hypothetical.
is a private.
Employer.
Required to go to work because
it's a hospital.
Mr president we do have
provisions in the bill that say
if you have a better paid time
off policy you certainly can
good sick leave policies
building a hospital in on health
care system.
Don't miss present and senator.
My question wasn't what we're
pass this bill Senator Mr
president I'm pretty sure that's
correct yes if they're private
employee we have many of
This presents a restaurant
that's that's and that's that's
an interesting issue so if
you're a receptionist at.
You an MH which is a public
hospital.
hour sick leave for every thirty
hours worked.
Mr president this bill does not
apply to public employees yes
you all stuck the amendment on
in Judiciary.
time off bill it's for private
employers.
Senator Ivey Soto so miss
residents are stored if the
amendment were to be adopted a
hour of sick leave for every
thirty hours.
Senator.
Mr president you know you
continue to ask this question I
have difficulty answering it
reception or he is a reception
at a private company or then
they would be required if you
vote for my amendment than the
at Presbyterian Hospital that we
do the receptionist at the UNM
hospitals.
So Mister president I'm I've I
don't like this line of
questioning it continues to be
It's just it's not a very good
thing to ask if you want to ask
about the bill fine but refuse
me please Mister president
senator of not caring about some
US president Senator Stewart if
we believe that we should pass
this because there are frontline
people who may not have a
choice.
And they need to be protected.
are.
You are sponsoring an amendment
that would deny the same
protection to someone who has
the exact same job.
kind of of paid time off
policies so this bill is written
and crafted for private
employers.
U. animates it's not that large
corporations whether they're
public or private it's for
smaller.
Senator this presents are stored
you just said this is not
designed for or for public
employers so you're doing an
amendment to remove public
employers you also just said
going to yield to the senator.
Senator Ivey Soto was president
Senators tort I'm sorry you are
putting forth an amendment that
covered and some employers
should not Mr president Senator
Stewart.
You make assertions that this is
not intended for large
corporations and yet you cannot
taking off the amendment that
you put on in Judiciary where
you turn the bill from what it's
supposed to be for private
merits of the bill and we don't
have those personal discussions
taking place.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you Mr
president for pointing that out
this president Senator Stewart
If everybody and and the public
sector has a better plan.
Then then why would this be why
would that amendment have been a
poison pill what makes it a
pleasant help.
Businesses that public employees
have a very different statute
that governs them and you know
that's the way it is I just
So I just think the system that
you're talking about is not what
I'm talking about in this bill.
No matter what amendment you put
on.
understand you said that was a
poison pill amendment what is it
that makes it a poison pill
amendment so Mister president
public employees I'll start
reading again from The New
Mexico federation of labor if
you don't understand that
so.
our darkest hours over the last
year.
New Mexico's workers kept
showing up and kept New Mexico
running the time has never been
greater to support the health
and well being.
bill designed specifically to
operate and the private sector
sphere the Sanchez and labor
unions do not oppose public
The primary need for paid sick
leave is in the private sector.
Legislative changes destructive
it's designed to solve active
the budget contained in H. B.
twenty the private sector does
not provide sickly for many blue
collar and service sector
write existing and comprehensive
sickly statutes and ordinances
serves no real public purpose to
justify the destruction it would
cost.
incompatible with that system in
many respects.
H. B. twenty is designed on a
use it or lose it from us to
Are designed to treat the sick
leave as a property interest.
By way of example.
Employees in the public sector
generally accumulate sick leave
convert the sick leave to wage
payments for this bill to
comprehensively and responsibly
legislate and the public sector
the following additional
employer implementation
mechanism accrual caps
conversion of accumulated hours
to wages interaction with a
None of these public sector
sickly facets are dressed in
this legislation public sector
bargaining in particular could
be negatively affected by the
Adoption of the healthy
workplace act in the public
sector would require revision of
the NMAC and the new Burrel pull
local ordinance.
City of Albuquerque city of
Hobbs ordinance for their
employees all of which would
require revision to ensure that
healthy workplaces Act provides
no real benefit for the citizens
of the state.
We're in most instances the
existing budget for public
collaborative Lee with many
stakeholders to draft this
legislation.
The New Mexico federation of
labor FFL and the underside
house bill twenty the American
federation of state county and
municipal employees American
federation of teachers
communication workers of America
teamsters National Union of
Hospital and Health Care
employees New Mexico
professional firefighters
association American Association
Senator Ivey Soto very much Mr
president I feel like I've heard
that story before.
so up as president Senator
Stewart I find it very
unions don't support applying
this to public sector employers
is is that what I garnered from
from what you just read Mr
president I'm not going to yield
and I think the body has the
right to have an understanding
about these assertions agency
president I do believe a Sanchez
to stand while they're
presenting the bill.
you just read off a number of
assertions I do.
Hesitant point of order Mr
president I object I believe we
Senator Senators just a reminder
we are to keep the decorum
Senator Ivey Soto in your line
of questioning to ensure that
your questions remain calm and a
there were a number of
assertions that were made agency
presidents are stored and I do
believe that.
When the when the assertions
include the primary need as
private.
Mr president short when you read
in many respects.
That's not all respects.
This presents that are short.
If we're trying to fill gaps
with this bill we should fill
gaps across the board it seems
to me.
that the state passes but it's
not a burden on the private
sector particularly those simple
of those employers that may
Mr president I'm not going to
yield anymore to Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator so the well that's fine
definition of an employer Mister
president senator.
I don't see and that in that
definition.
Senator.
Senator so the.
This presents enter stork
that does that mean that not
every municipality provides a
better benefit.
Senator Senator I'm not going to
That that this is something that
is designed for blue collar and
service sector workers this
presents that are short is there
ask unanimous consent that the
Senate that the Senate stand in
recess for ten minutes.
Centers is been a request you
madam is consent that the Senate
Senate recess for ten minutes.
I'd like to thank the members of
the body for that opportunity to
kind of regroup ourselves.
To recognize the work that's
and the sacredness of this body.
When we broke we were on the
bill in the bed of the bill and
Senator Ivy Soto had the floor
I think this present.
This presents the the Sanchez
made clear she is not interested
in the building I'm not going to
The vigorous debate was abusive.
That was not my intent.
Every single person.
Should have the dignity.
Being able to care for family.
Of the able to go.
See a doctor.
Every single person.
Colleagues that is a basic human
right as far as I'm concerned.
Reason why support why I oppose
removing the amendment from the
bill.
Is because I believe.
That the primary need.
Is in certain places.
Is that there are gaps not just
in the private sector.
The gaps in the public sector as
well.
Regardless of who they work for.
Should have a basic.
Fundamental.
The receptionist at a private
hospital for the receptionist at
a public hospital.
I don't see differently.
If they have higher.
Budget in either the public
sector or the private sector.
This is a bill that sets the
floor.
This president this is the bill
that sets the floor.
I'm passionate about this.
That my passion came off as
What I've been standing here for
right now.
Is the dignity.
Of every employee.
It does not prohibit.
A better benefits.
The Senate floor amendment.
Because every employee.
Deserves that respect.
Thank you very much Mr president
I appreciate you calling on me
I.
Rose earlier to speak on the.
in the and the the the crux the
the the the fiber of the bill is
being debated during this
ammendment debate.
I strongly ask.
the sponsor of the amendment or
the sponsor of the bill was at
all.
Attempting to treat one employee
different than another I don't
believe that.
And and the sponsor of the
amendment the sponsor of the
that I am disgusted by the way
she was treated a few moments
ago.
The bowling.
The attacks.
For all those years in the house
and all those years now in the
Senate all she's ever done is
stood up for workers all she's
ever done it stood up to bring
additional benefits.
And rights.
But I will stand and I will drop
on my shoulder any day of the
week on a matter like this.
And I know we're not going to
discuss right now because we
And I don't like it.
And it needs to stop.
And I don't know how many times
I've gone in the committee and
that behavior for all of us.
Now back to the objective here
Mister president.
benefits that they need can take
time off when they're not
feeling well Mr president.
I want to make sure.
But when they have something
going on with their family or
something that's happening with
care what organization might do
that survey.
For conduct that survey.
These are the things that wind
up at the top and that's what
makes them want to come back
every day and do the good work
that they do for their employer.
they can't do the work in the
business cannot grow and they
cannot make.
Their business larger employ
more people.
And build our economy.
floor I'm sorry it in in the
Senate and then it went through
all of its iterations as it made
its way to the Senate floor.
But I sit stand today because of
I ask leadership to do something
about that.
And I ask the body to please
stand for the people that make
your business is if you're a
business owner that make your
that's exactly what this piece
legislation going to wind up
doing for us.
And I'm proud to stand with the
program on this.
And half of the other members
Thank you Mr president and
members nope I I was the first
to speak on this amendment I
just feel need to clarify my
position you know I love
opinions you know I voted for I
voted against this amendment
that are floor looked at our
proton wants to put back on
manner voted for the bill this
is an important bill you know
the bill to its original form.
I'm in so doing she's not
insensitive none of us that that
agree with this direction are
insensitive to the workers of
our beloved state in the folks
really closely to the experts in
this case the expert for house
bill twenty I thought made a
good case that yes of course he
said many times of course I
you know we have the public
sector and the private sector
and then especially when we're
doing legislation I mean I can
only reflect upon my own
public sector and actually
Senator harden sponsored a bill
we make one to make sure that
people didn't have to disclose
an initial application
their criminal history if they
world the private sector small
businesses it's cetera so to me
the distinction between public
and private it's pretty clear so
in her passionate way restore
the bill to to what it was in
the the whole point of this bill
it comes from the private sector
world no the problem are you
know our businesses that do that
really do not offer sick leave
their people but we're not
talking about those small
business people were talking
about others that do not take
care of their workers so that's
that's all that's all I have to
always respect the opposite
opinions so that's all thank
you.
Thanks Antonio further debate we
have Senator Steinborn.
you have kind of been exposed to
issues involved in collective
bargaining I think it's
important to understand the
deeper unintended consequences
voted yesterday for an amendment
to.
Give a raise to Los paid state
workers
I.
I think the reality though of
Well the collective bargaining
Mr president and colleagues.
The reality is is that they're
setting they're negotiating for
the amendment having to supply
the public sector is he said of
New baseline.
For.
Public sector negotiating which
because actually weakens the
position of public workers as a
whole.
And the he can understanding of
collective bargaining and
right approach for that set of
workers and that is something we
should look at and we should
support them.
but again this bill is dealing
with a different challenge.
Thank you Mr president I to rise
and support of the amendment I
am I have worked in the public
sector.
At the law school we have the
everybody just loved her.
She probably got minimum wage
and you know what I think about
that.
She lost her tuition benefits
for herself and her children.
And most importantly she lost
paid time off.
That's why this ammendment is so
important.
them this was written to deal
with the with what we see our
problems in the private sector
and so I think this is an
excellent amendment and I look
forward to voting for it.
Probably that stuff might.
And.
I know a lot of us have a lot of
still lingering feelings about
how.
I hope my comments right now in
this moment that I can turn us
just for a few moments to the
amendment itself.
One I disagree with that I'd
like to address that like to
speak to the things that I agree
with very strongly.
And then there's some some many
most the paragraphs in the
moment I don't know how I feel
The provisions of this law
that's the most of the bill
mostly member you have in front
of you beginning on paragraph
ten through the remainder of the
lowering penalties I don't know
how I feel about that.
that I know other employers are
complying with this important
policy.
So I really can't address early
can address.
And I hope all of you will try
to do the same I hope the
Sanchez mammal look at that
paragraph it I don't think it
works I think the insertion of
fate doesn't work.
Number five of this amendment is
interesting the bill.
requires an employer to pay for
from the doctor this is the
employer can't do that but then
elsewhere in the bill it says
employer can insist on that one
of more than two days and and
this ammendment is probably this
Let's be clear about the the
employer would have to pay for
the employee to get
documentation from a health care
provider of an absence and and
paragraph five eliminates that
requirement.
Focus on the policy from on.
I know that's hard.
to cover government employees.
That's really what it comes down
to.
And all the debate I still
haven't heard any argument for
reason I heard here tonight we
don't do this.
The argument is made their
better plans and better programs
and so forth that's all covered
in this bill this bill says if
we're always talking about the
need to diversify our economy.
To build our private sector.
We know that's important we talk
about it.
New Mexico is not seen as a
business friendly state.
And for those of us who travel
outside of the state.
Especially to our neighboring
states it's easy to see the
And I'll I'll suggest to you
tonight that part of the problem
is.
Whether it's accurate or not the
business community perceives New
state.
Now there are some exceptions
are some industry which we
subsidize heavily.
We put a great deal of money
into but apart from that.
I really do believe part of the
reason for that is because we
have created division and
allowed division here.
It's time we try to bridge that
division.
division and I believe strongly
the last administration existed
on division.
The idea of creating a division
between government and business
create partnerships between
business and government is
holding us back.
And so I support.
see the criticism of Congress
Congress passes laws like OSHA
and then exempt itself.
Congress passes ethics laws and
In Congress to lose trust in
Congress.
It's hard for me to imagine how.
To go back to my district.
imagine how I do that when I
say.
These good policies.
Which are burdensome yes on
private sector.
We're not gonna require cities
or counties in our state
government we're not gonna
require our temporary employees
here in the capital we're not
going to require government
employees to do this.
relationship between government
and the private sector that we
say we want.
I think we have to demonstrate.
context and and I think
improperly drafted I believe.
and and the last one the policy.
The policy.
gentleman will look at the bill
seven and eight go together this
is something that to Senator
Vontaze brought up in Judiciary
a on seventeen a capital a so
that the sentence that was a
duplicate language is gone.
And the next sentence S. capitol
need to sponsor yield one is
more of a committee and to bring
up the perspective from small
businesses there was a question
earlier about why offer paid
sick leave.
Act admittedly is not good for
small businesses it is out of
reach for small businesses to be
able to pay those premiums to
provide benefits for their
employees.
He paid for employees families
family member's funeral.
They help pay for school they
help to throw you know they they
because not only are they family
but they've invested the time
and the training and to making
sure that those employees
provide the best customer
and the relief that this body
has provided to small businesses
in just the session alone.
Will help our small businesses.
whether this change because it
is no secret that are small
businesses of experienced
incredible challenges during
this pandemic.
And they have laid off people
they have not been able to hire
out on a daily basis just like
the rest of us are.
One of the things that is very
important to them is when they
are able to hire those employees
They want to do that.
But keeping them there keeping
them safe which keep their
customers safe.
Is what I know they want to do.
And I think that is what we need
to focus on tonight is to do the
business of the people we have
less than twenty five hours left
to go.
thank you Mr president thank you
center Hamblen who do have
further debate on the amendment.
Center can.
I have to think about.
The statistics I was asked to
ponder some years ago and that
is.
that's the longest time we have
a relationship.
and then probably other family
members spouses it's cetera.
Many of us have many jobs that's
just the way it is it's not as
if we're with one import many of
us are not with one employer for
Living in poverty unfortunately
New Mexico is one of the
state's.
It doesn't have a very good
pension program at all for its
The R. just stay there a little
bit longer to get something
better you'll get something
it'll give you benefits.
Mr president I worked for.
Where I only worked part then we
got paid for hours worked so if
I have to go to a medical
And then I have the other other
jobs were by I would earn both.
Sick leave.
And vacation that was great
All the time with family and
friends.
And then I had a different
situation where I got paid time
for your vacation time.
And so what I really like about.
The proposed amendment.
This is take care of those
employees.
Because I believe and this is
why I studied organization
development.
Because I experienced and saw.
So many employees being treated
hundred companies and our
favorite one is Wegman's.
On the east coast.
Their most important customer is
their employee.
they can retain that employee it
saves the money in the long run
you have less turnover turnover
is exceedingly expensive.
So that's why.
It will be it's build a
demonstration that we respect
them.
And value their work thank you.
Thank you Senator Canada.
I guess what I'd like to say is
about two things one I've been
getting lots and lots of text
saying you'll kill this bill.
amendment you're you're gonna
kill this bill.
I honestly don't understand that
and and so I would wonder if if
if I'm just missing something.
amendment that was put on
injured issue re.
Kill the bill.
Senator SO Mr president.
Just look at the next amendment
Because if you put the public in
here you can attack labor
unions.
The.
This amendment says employers
should not require a person to
Enforcement.
It just goes on and on to attack
labour you it's.
Public employers have a
different statute a different
way of doing budget they have
they maybe don't get paid as
much but they have good pension
systems.
it's different statutes and if
we if this is a if this is
public employee then you're
gonna have people who do this.
So.
I could read the letter again
from all the public employee
unions that have doesn't work
when you ask the question I know
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino it would
be it would be.
not fly another amendment that
we haven't even got to yet would
kill the bill.
I'm just wondering why asking
for public employees to be
covered on the same basis is
bill was written for private
employees I know it was written
for private employees but if we
said the same thing should apply
for public what is a killer.
Because there are a lot of
work term if your summer
employee there's a lot of public
employees who are subject to the
same situations as the private
employees are.
Are employers to have to do but
we're not willing to to to to to
put the same responsibility on
letter I read earlier is from
all the public employee unions.
Who have told us in detail about
why this should not involve
covered by this so and the other
thing it does I'll just be
honest about this is that this
means that this would have to go
to the finance committee and
for the public maybe it doesn't
cover everybody that it covers
most of the.
This will cover everybody.
It just wanted it and now it's
If it ever got out of finance
center the subpoena I'm I'm
finished Mr president.
We're any further debate on the
amendment senators.
everyone I want to remind you
what the amendment to us.
It eliminates the burden
shifting provision for employers
pay copay for doctor's visits to
get documentation.
It reduces all fines by fifty
percent that also contains
several language clean ups.
language out then we had to do a
capital a because it starts the
sentence a lack of investigation
cetera.
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for house
bill twenty.
Up and ask for a roll call.
So we're voting on Senate floor
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
the Mahdia.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator guy goes.
Yes.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Kernan now Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator D.
should be no.
Senator protein.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator share knowledge Senator
Shendo.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman yes Senator Tallman yes
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Dr Hickey that Mr president all
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Hickey yes.
By a vote of twenty three an
affirmative nineteen the
negative senator member number
one has passed the Senate we
And if you own a small business
and if you know how to start a
small business and you create a
small business and the
government gets an exclusion
create two classes of labor
pools in the state.
And it's on fair to to small
business some thank you.
accurate if if if we had taken
that off because effective date
is next summer it's not
effective until after next
session there is a need to come
up with financing we could have
done it during the regular
with senator Munoz that you know
this idea that the public sector
employees already have something
is just not true.
And the Judiciary Committee did
great work we put on a an
amendment that.
That serve the public.
With an agreement the coming out
it would not come off.
Thank you for the opportunity to
present I was just.
A bit conflicted on this because
the house labor bill House.
The regional sports house
sponsor the bill included public
in the house labor committee.
so those bit confusing to me.
time president of sick leave.
And I was asked to go see very
sick children.
Children disabilities and I
finally told my boss.
I I I have no voice I'm coughing
I can get somebody sick.
And I'm not going to step one
foot in another clinic room I'm
not gonna see one more patient
today because I guess somebody
want to go home but he said you
can go to pay for the rest today
and that's what I did.
Well my boss saw the patients
so we you know I.
doesn't matter we're all people
we can all get sick just because
you're public employee doesn't
mean you can't get sick just
because your problem please does
me can get sick and I was a
Senate floor amendment number
two to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for house
bill twenty as amended amendment
be a success so soon thank you
Mr president I like to move so
for member to to
Goodness.
House Judiciary Committee
Sen objection Senator feel
explain what that amendment this
thank you Mr president this is a
simple preemption amendment
this a big bill I think we all
is is to preempt local
governments to make sure we're
not gonna continue to
Tax things on maybe chill out
for a little bit.
We're debating Senate pharmacies
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent to be able to
call an expert witness Shane
Utes the labor attorney.
Senator Mr president this is an
for their employees we certainly
don't want that
so we have different
minimum wages around the state
sure that the bill allows that
so this is an unfriendly
amendment.
Senator David debating Center
and a respectable sponsor you
know I'm not intending at all
for this to be in on from the
moment but I respect her
opinion.
and and I think that's a great
point about the minimum wage
that say gosh we have the that
the figure out where you did the
work when you did the work we in
this county that county it's
extremely difficult the the
twelve the it is not allowing
any sort of you know opting out
our pre I'm sure anything like
that it's just saying well you
know here's the argument of the
patchwork thing again
the patchwork itself causes a an
administrative burden for for
people
knowing you know where they are
where where you were working
where your business is based
and once again we've had a lot
of debate tonight Mr president
on treating everybody equally
are we gonna just treat
everybody equally are we just
And so with that Mr president
I'd like to move Center for
mentor to to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
labor sub for House Bill twenty
as amended without emergency
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos no senator
Candelaria.
Duhigg Senator Duhigg Now
Senator guy it goes.
Senator Hemphill known Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez no Senator McKenna
no Senator McKenna no senator
Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator one
else.
Senator Stewart NO Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto no Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pro.
smitteez senators chair Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
No Senator Sedillo Lopez no
Senator sure.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
amendment Senate foreman number
two has failed to pass Senate.
We have another floor amendment.
The reader to read.
bill twenty as amended amendment
sponsored by senator Gregg
Schmedes.
Senate to move explain eminent.
Thank you Mr president
this.
it's very sincere and and we've
had actually independent
legislation
to address this issue this is a
folks we're going to I think we
all agree unanimously that this
bill is going to increase in
cost for for the employers but
the it's going to increase costs
for our state contractors the
to do with this amendment Mister
president.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president this
already provide for this but
it's just
it's confusing it could are you
put Confucians and the law it's
Senator Woods.
If the Mr president if the
sponsor of the amendment would
that is already be at a hard
contract to state government.
Now the state government is
changed.
If we don't passes the
contractor now has to eat that
experience is that essentially
what this does president.
Can't fulfill that contract I
mean he's bonded I know so.
Who ends up.
Eating the cost of all this Mr
president.
Senator was there a distance
seem reasonable this president
that.
That if if we're trying to get
the state backed.
To the the deal that wasn't done
we need did the contract.
So I'm.
I guess I just don't understand
why.
Thank you Mr president and and
and I I can agree with the
sponsoring this amendment
because I'll tell you what
happens is a and I don't have
any but if you have just
that in in your in your budget
when you sign that lease and
maybe a five or ten year lease
you're gonna need some
adjustment room to make that
happen
if you are a state highway
amount for whatever you're gonna
do strive the road I mean
whatever you wanna call it crack
Phil you're gonna be bound by
those dollar numbers in the GSA
contracts that happen that way.
I think this ammendment is good
but you have to allow some
flexibility if you really want
to pass this bill you better
contracts not let the architects
still has it has been awarded
maybe is design build contract
is going to be a two year
project now they're gonna have
to play.
to that project he better allow
the flexibility or they're going
to be in default and they're
gonna say you're gonna have to
eat the cost and people can walk
away from certain contracts I'm
otherwise people are gonna run
in jeopardy and and we're gonna
talk about this during the bill
but.
When you come to bed jobs in New
Mexico and and a lot of the big
on for the additional cost or
less bids at a higher cost.
Any further debate centers.
Say no further debate on the
I believe this amendment
strengthens the bill because it
protects our contractors
employees you know with the
thing about the the in the COVID
For people that are elderly
people or disabled our child
care contractors these are
critical.
Critical agency critical
services they're huge Mr
president.
Of critical critical services
that are being provided on
behalf of our agencies to our
they maybe even inadvertently or
unintentionally the unintended
consequence of of putting
someone out of business we're
not talking about some big
To New Mexicans.
And so I I really hope I just
can't tell you how much I I
really hope this this is adopted
Senate foreman number two to
House Judiciary sub for House
labors for House Bill twenty as
amended.
Senate seats where voting.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos no senator from
Bologna.
Senator Duhigg bell Senator
Gallegos yeah Senator Gallegos
yes Senator Gonzalez no Senator
Gonzales no Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator resultar yes Senator how
to meal Senator Hermio no
I'm sorry.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator by the end no Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto no Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator Smith yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
No Senator Sedillo Lopez now
Stefanics Senator Stefanics no
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart Senator Stewart now
Senator.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes.
Seventeen twenty four.
Retrieve.
Senate floor amendment number
two to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House labor
out of the moving explain
imminent thank you Mr president
of Senate floor amendment number
two to help us.
Bill twenty and its various
iterations present.
See no objection Gordon
just kind of reset and realize
that for me.
This is sort of enabling
legislation it's provisions will
take place more than a year year
from now so we're gonna lot of
time.
an amazing job through COVID to
get this right and it's in the
spirit of getting this as right
as possible in this enabling
legislation I offer this
ammendment.
Subpart two so in sub in
subsection E. section ten.
The amendment part one would
delete subpart to.
restart.
So so section seven.
Subparagraph II subpart two the
amendment would be to strike the
following reason in the in the
just in the legal analysis
that's the or the defenses that
are being created to an
allegation that an employer.
Where the burden under this act
would fall upon a worker to show
that their rights have been
violated.
a rights and violated the burden
then shifts to the defendant and
the defendant has to show
typically that they had non
discriminatory or non will on
The current language does borrow
from the spirit of the McDonnell
Douglas burden shifting
analysis.
The the concept not the reason
for the adverse employment
I'm aware of so instead I simply
asked that we have a clear sort
of legal language in our courts
can look to and understand what
does the business need to do to
assert a defense and then what
What the amendment and as a
additional eight subpart three.
In its entirety subpart three of
subsection E..
And the reason is Mr president
is there are often times mixed
motivation basis so you look at
the conduct of an employer and
basically the case law is very
clear what the court does is
they said OK we get that but
what was the center of gravity
what was the thrust right so
doesn't do so in a very clear
fashion I would respectfully
submit and I and I would suggest
the body by deleting that it
doesn't harm the bill that kind
of case law is so clear and sort
Sanchez consideration thank you
Mr president.
Senator Mr president this is a
friendly amendment however the
six point two so if you just
change the twenty three to
twenty it's a friendly
amendment.
Mr president is at the same
point that Senator senator mated
to the amendment was not not
accurate I could not find the
section the page that was being
referred to but I can make a
In my level best to keep up with
the the parade of beautiful
amendments we have tonight some
Senator and resubmit this path
right up there I do have a
separate amendment that's going
we to redraw that or do you want
to move on to your next
amendment.
Are you prepared for the next
amendment to be read out Mister
president we are we are for for
for the next amendment we do
committee substitute for house
bill twenty as amended.
Amendment sponsored by Senator
Jacob R. Candelaria think the
moving explained amendment thank
thank you Mr president this one
I did sort of rely on the
sections in the bill to track as
opposed to page numbers because
I was admittedly Mr president I
just having trouble kind of
deleting sub paragraphs to
so section ten paragraph phase
where we set forth the different
sort of penalties for a employer
of the act they're subject to
now a.
to trouble damages or to a
minimum of five hundred dollar
penalty whichever is greater.
the next paragraph which is what
clearly subparagraph two is
already included in subparagraph
one you don't need it and I'm
just afraid of the confusion
that would cause in the
do we do sections subsections
paragraph six that are that that
explains how we remember
everything instead of writing
out Xcerra since present I move
is also incorrect it's really
section thirteen that we believe
he's talking about that's on
page twenty one.
this.
have to be re done if he wanted
to do it.
Centered on the this presents
this is kind of like a game of
whack a mole with me tonight I
guess I would draw this is the
revised version is going to the
And now we go to the friendly
one I think that I hope it's
been corrected and I will say Mr
president with respect to the
second amendment I will not be
a discussion and Senator
Gonzales will give us a minute
just to get that corrected
amendment distributed don't have
the reader read out and we'll go
to you to move it and explain.
The amendment.
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
Candelaria said that it a moving
explained eminent thank you Mr
president misinformed number two
to house bill twenty and its
various iterations.
See no objection it will explain
correctly identified the
correction of page twenty so
part two of the news subsection
the.
Regarding the discussion we had
Mr president.
and it to I think it comports to
the bill now.
Senator debating senator member
number two.
Say no debate senator Candelaria
to close thank you Mr president
Everything is of the.
Seeing no objection.
Senator member number Senate
floor member number two has been
adopted and added to the bill
Senator just give us a moment
that to the body thank you we're
we're back on the bill.
We do have another floor
amendment.
affairs committee substitute for
house bill twenty as amended.
Amendment sponsored by Senator
crystal diamond.
Senator Diamond to move in
explained the amendment.
substitute for House labour
committee substitute for house
bill twenty as amended.
Center for you explain amendment
we want to make sure and get
that up on the board.
Thank you Mr president Senator I
I do believe that the sponsors a
good job of clarifying that this
bill was intended for the
private sector and for so many
of our districts are private
understand just the impact that
this bill would have on our
agricultural community when it
came to seasonal or part time
employees we offer over twenty
employees up to a hundred people
that are only there for maybe
six seven eight weeks at a time
and then they'll leave the same
thing can be said about our
chili fields any of our
would consider this a friendly
amendment insists changing the
definition of of employee and
section E. there so that are
I do believe that this would add
some relief to our agribusiness
businesses out there and so I I
yield to the sponsor for her
thoughts Senators riveting
even temporary workers get six
so this is an unfriendly
amendment.
Senator Stewart.
We're debating centerman number
two and I'll go to Senator dot
please Senator Diamond detailed.
Yes Sir.
Senator I know if I'm reading
the contract in this bill
correctly in an earlier
committee there was maybe there
performing domestic services at
a private home so the original
version the bill is that a
person providing domestic
services at home would be
covered.
And cover everyone else Senator.
Thank you Mr president and and
could ask the sponsor of the
bill I'm I'm just trying to
track the some of the changes
amendments Senator Mr president
we missed this one they should
Stewart so just me right now the
bill in its present form before
you amended or before you
propose an amendment our party
we make an exception for
domestic service Mr Mr president
everywhere else.
So the service present sense of
the intention here is to not
require individual performing
domestic service to accrue sick
A very slippery slope and and I
don't know how you define the
parameters and boundaries Center
because because I hear we're
going to we're gonna exam
domestic service.
the arguments have been made
here earlier tonight.
If I have a.
Person working at that my house
was a gardener.
He would accrue sick leave if I
For the sponsor of the bill
especially for the as part of
the amendment Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president Senator
I don't know what I'm gonna do
with your amendment yet but this
is the the fallacy of what we're
doing here tonight which is
we're picking the winners and
losers again.
accrue sick leave if you work
outside the house.
I work in the field of the yard
you do and I'm again I just
cannot fathom.
to explain to me how or why
there's a difference.
Thank you for that.
Senator Mr president that
actually has been removed
actually no we yes house floor
amendment number eleven I
believe I'm looking at the
amendments in context so that
amendment we have center share
followed by Senator Brandt
centre share.
Never mind is present.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
tracking with the conversation
earlier with me and I heard the
the sponsor of the bill say the
this didn't apply to part time
is a is that what you were
thinking as well as that this
was not supposed to fly to part
time or seasonal workers.
Senator Diamond.
have a great impact specifically
in our rural districts on those
industries including agriculture
hunting and outfitting and and
many more.
Senator Brandt.
This presents yeah that that
Christmas season and you bring
them for six or eight weeks and
now this is another expense you
gotta pay or you're bringing
someone in you know to help you
works for us and how much we
appreciate the bill the workers
here they're all considered
seasonal employees because they
come up here for a season and I
noticed on the plight of public
comes in for just a very short
period of time and now this is
going to be another expense on
top of that and this is going to
get passed on so the gentleman
We are for the debate on the
amendment centers committee
thank you Mr president with the
sponsor the manual please Senate
I'm in the field yes this
president.
mainly because of what the
Billsponsored said that these
workers get sick too.
These temporary workers.
This about public health we we
shouldn't exempt exempt public
workers which by the way we're
number three in the United
don't.
And I I'm just I'm not sure
we're we're we're going as a
body with this bill I'd either
A huge amount of our workforce
the public sector then we should
just keep figuring out who else
it makes sense to exempt.
And and I think that's up to the
against your amendment and I
need to run another moment to
not exempt public workers.
Once again reminded the body
that the original house labor
committee substitute for the
designed to treat everybody
equally all the stuff I just
don't I respectfully don't buy
that because it was right there
I looked up you can look up the
committee substitute it's it
So I I like to listen as the bay
but I I I do
I either rather do all our non
Mr president either rather just
treat everybody equally or or or
Get a colonoscopy or go get a
check up the rest of the week
etcetera.
Senator I'm.
president I I think so too and I
think.
The the this bill has some good
things has some bad things but.
This doesn't make sense to me
because they want to vote right
they they're not looking for
full time job.
And they have plenty of time to
go get a check up the rest that
we.
were now this employer has to
you know to kind of jump through
extra hoops when the employee
doesn't even want that the
employee doesn't even want that
Mr president.
The employee is happy
everybody's happy we're saying
no no you can't come to an
agreement.
You're gonna have to creating
this other exes sick leave and
do all the secretary paper.
So Mister president center
members of the body I am I like
I said I'm a bit conflicted on
public health we're just talking
about I don't know no we're time
anymore private sector
regulation if we're not talking
about public health then
favor the amendment so I'm gonna
continue to listen to the rest
of date but I I I certainly
appreciate what you're doing I
think it makes a very very good
sector people get sick too.
as I give a personal example
that earlier when I was a public
sector employee.
So I I hope we can make up our
mind as well as a body Mr
president thank you.
We do have further debate on the
amendment Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president if the
You know in agriculture and I
know that's who you're trying to
protect here.
In agriculture many times you
know there's.
to to help them get a little
money together to.
To maybe buy some closures you
know help this family get by.
maybe there's some fans to be
pulled out or something that you
know this it doesn't take a
whole lot of skills but a kid
that really just wants to do
something.
kind of a contractor in after he
learns how to.
To do a few things after working
for you all and maybe he wants
amazing story that that
sometimes these guys come in
and.
And have no skills.
gather cattle and a lot of times
it's they're just looking for a
the chance of employment.
This is your chance.
And.
I think about the burden.
This is going to put on them.
No it's not going to be such a
Down by the guitar or somewhere
like that that no not a whole
lot acres but he's wanting to to
make it in agriculture and he's
You know this.
Live off the fruit of his labor.
But every so often he's got to
hire someone to to help them
proposes amendments because so
many times the.
The less lesser.
Possibly the same testing in.
And hurting them hurting them
get ahead.
And maybe they're one to hire a
high school kid to help them.
know how this is going to end up
but I'm sure they're going to
vote for.
but I just wanted you to know
that I appreciate what you're
trying to do for agriculture
include part time workers under
the same provision thirty hours
you work then you get one hour
of sick leave.
Mr president I think it's
important for me to close the
body that on partner multiple
businesses that rely upon
heavily on seasonal workers and
so on this present I feel in a
certain sense I have to recuse
myself from this photo.
This interests me a great deal
the things we want to do here in
this chamber but I I think under
circumstances I.
I probably have to recuse myself
from this of.
Senator Pirtle.
legislation that that's why
we're here at.
Twelve fifty I think we still
have a few hours and just just
yet I know I do have about four
But you know I I think it really
gets to the heart of the
legislation in the fact that.
You know the question was asked
the judiciary of the Sanchez.
But that's what we're dealing
with here.
We we have a bill before us that
sets to regulate businesses.
My come as some surprise to many
of you but you know I don't set
the price that I get from my
milk Mr president members of the
body.
I don't set the price of the
So we continue to put.
Regulation on farmers.
How much they pay how many hours
So I mean this would make sense
Mr president members of the body
if if there was a way to recoup
this but there's not.
Again we're price takers were
not price makers.
N. and I think this whole bill.
Is a real slap to the face of
business owners in the state of
New Mexico.
That they don't take care of
And so I really appreciate
Senator Diamond bring in this
because I think that farmers and
we do have a large Ag industry
in New Mexico.
Who do have seasonal employees.
Alexis is not get an opportunity
to be on this Senator Diamond
close.
Thank you Mr president I am
disappointed that this isn't a
domestic service employees get
sick or public employees get
sick we all get sick so I'm
disappointed and this and and I
intentional maybe unintentional
consequences and the impact that
that's going to have
there are consequences to this
bill great consequences to this
employers that just try to get
away around.
Actually hiring employees I
would like them to
I'll just close in fact there
are there are winners and losers
calls from your farmers and
ranchers who I believe are
probably unaware of the
magnitude of the impacts of this
bill is about to have on
agriculture and so with that Mr
committee a substitute of HB
twenty as amended.
So we're voting on Senate floor
amendment over three.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos now senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria no Senator
serve on deserve do wish to
recuse yourself.
Gallegos yes Senator Gonzalez no
Senator Gonzales no Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator had a meal.
Senator Hermio no Senator
Kernan.
Senator my nose I would choose
myself from this will.
Senator Munoz recuses himself
Senator Neville.
Senator Padilla Senator by the
end no Senator Pinto Senator
Pinto no Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
songes senator Sanchez yes
Senators committees.
Senator street is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
No Senator Sedillo there's no
Senator sure.
for an X. Senator Stefanics no
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart no Senator
Tallman.
Senator Woods recuses himself.
What did we have fourteen.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president.
That is I just listen to the
entire session the entire
session is about contempt.
For New Mexico business owners
the big box stores love this.
Because what happens there.
If they get to run all the New
Mexicans out of business.
All the people actually live
they've got solid ties with the.
I don't know gigantic other
stores to make everything in
China or wherever.
fair.
Businesses that have just been
suffering and beaten and beaten
and beaten and what we're told
Nassar to stupid to take care of
I just don't understand it Mr
president.
I don't understand it at all.
Public employees get sick but we
don't want to no no no no that's
different that's different.
This special.
Hello beating this the the the
whatever out of us.
And here we go again.
You know Mr president.
Someone who's worked for me for.
For a long time actually when
She went in the hospital just
before Christmas.
And I continue to pay her and I
continue to pay her.
And I continue to pay her.
Well we worked out how other
other programs could take care
for I made sure that her
mortgage payment her utilities
to have the state tell me how to
take care of my own employees
and they're my family.
What's said Mr president.
Of contempt and hatred for New
Mexicans.
That
rattle my cage so bad.
What is wrong with us why do we
think the people in this room
have never signed the front of a
check.
What we don't need is more
bureaucracy piled on to us.
We don't need that kind of
bureaucracy.
When this when this is start
calendar year twelve months
different so now we have to hire
CPA's just help us figure out
Told that we're not essential
enough so we have to close.
We can only serve so many
people.
So we can't make a living
anyway.
Now we have to come up with a
whole new bureaucracy a whole
new bureaucracy.
Long time ago.
My brother was actually
scorekeeper for Connie Mack
World Series.
He's in high school he loved
doing that he probably would
have done it for free.
But he got paid.
along with a bunch of other
things.
The amateur.
Baseball league would have to
bureaucracy to figure out how to
do that.
This thing this goes beyond
anything that makes sense for
Will slam those poor business
owners one more time.
And they're going to look around
at the family.
Renewable.
Because I can't handle this this
is insane.
Beating.
That are small businesses are
taking.
Not sure what twenty really has
I can't continue to have more
bureaucracy piled on and piled
on and piled on.
If you go home I want to their.
Please.
But I give you two weeks of paid
vacation.
But what I do is here relevant
now because now.
Government is going to tell us
what to do.
I've heard that every business
no business owner in this room.
Just can't handle it if we don't
do it as the state of New
Mexico.
But this isn't gonna affect the
big the big box stores.
I don't know who this helps.
It looks Lee lives in in New
Mexico that actually owns a
business in New Mexico that
actually employees New Mexicans
that actually pays New Mexico
taxes.
night New Mexico it's let's it's
out of the state so are banks
our New Mexico banks don't even
get to use it not even for one
day.
We're cut out of the program.
We're just cut out forever.
Thank you.
I have told people.
Rarely does the legislature do
Mexicans not for New Mexicans.
What's going to happen when you
pile more and more and more on
the small businesses especially
businesses that are just now
Here we are one more step.
The people of New Mexico are not
smart enough to handle it
themselves.
Because it just so discussed to
me.
But I'd like to point out all
those people are sleeping in the
Senate lounge right now.
This anybody.
Anybody.
In this chamber.
There are bad things happening
out there.
Now I understand why there's a
fence around us.
This.
You Mr president.
when I was in high school and
college.
I didn't work for any particular
company I just did stuff.
As an independent contractor you
work for anybody.
I just did stuff I learned how
to do stuff by working with
people and know how to do stuff.
Certainly there are that much
better training.
How to do things the things I
was supposed to do and when I
was supposed to do them and how
it's supposed to do them.
We open up our own gourmet
popcorn shop.
Interesting about that.
When I got the army I had almost
no debt at a mortgage I owned my
And I also had two years pay in
the bank.
Mr leader I was broke.
Some friends of mine said Hey
you need to come work with us.
The stock one with infantry
company commanders.
Will you know just like an
infantry company.
You'll get three taco bells like
three infantry platoons they
And so.
I went to work talk about.
Talk about those big corporate
stores.
And we have policies for for
sick leave and we have policies
for.
Just like any fast food
restaurant.
In one year we had this meeting.
I think was the entire western
Yes was the low that was the
best in the in the west
Mississippi.
Why was that.
So even the big stores are going
to have this nightmare figuring
out how to do this.
When you have somebody that
But you know what's worse than
that Mr president.
It's all of the franchise
stores.
Yes I work for corporate stores.
talk ability McDonald's or
Wendy's on it.
They have the same turnover
problem.
And why they have that turnover
problem.
hire you they're gonna say gosh
I give you an extra quarter an
hour maybe a nickel in our.
And so you move from Taco Bell
to McDonald's.
And so then they go to work for
McDonald's and and a few weeks
later they come back and work
for talk about because they
realize McDonald's witnesses
wasn't that good a place to go
work.
Not understanding when you hire
somebody you don't participate
in the wage.
There's all kinds of other
things that go on there.
You have to tack it on.
So it's not just whatever the
hourly wages.
It's the on insurance
potentially that was huge.
And now I have to add on.
An hour for this in an hour for
that it's only an hour.
Death by a thousand little cuts.
And here we are.
In our our New Mexicans again.
And again.
And.
Cutting them with more and more
regulation.
The small New Mexico businesses.
Our families.
It brings people in.
During rush hour.
And send some home when they're
not and bring them back in
later.
What do you do about the person
that works on commission.
What do you do about that
independent contractor like I
was.
I just did stuff.
All I did was drive nails or
somebody else a design house was
just a male driver.
But in two by fours together.
Hello started look like house.
Was great until we start to get
really cold.
That's when I went work
Pachelbel.
This one the other infantry
officers came to me and said Hey
we need to there.
infantry infantry sometimes
stops talk a bill never stops
infantry sometimes comes home
you know get to.
Rearm and refit now talk
abilities keeps on going.
here all night because nobody
here and understands what it
takes to run a small business.
What it takes to run a small
business in a state where the
taxation is just confusing.
But all these little hoops and
Johnson.
We have all kind of special
favors for special companies but
They're not for the restaurant
next to Facebook they're not for
the little retail place next to
Facebook.
Nope nope big businesses get all
The little New Mexico companies
not a little restaurants.
Not a little retail stores.
None of those people get these
I wish Mr president that we
would stop for just a little bit
And I know that you all have sad
stories out there.
But I know there's a lot more
stories.
They're great for.
And so we're gonna punish.
their stats stories out there
there are.
How many more said stories are
we going to create.
Out of this situation.
more pain brought on by the
bureaucracies that that we can't
control ourselves it's almost
like we have a lust for Bracher
season here.
little businesses to the first
to just try to recover from the
pounding that they took.
And I know COVID out there but I
also know that we didn't have to
face.
Most adults could figure out how
to handle this.
We could have tried to figure
out how to maintain some
Yep.
The stupid mask I'm wearing it.
I don't care if you where
they're not.
Apparently I washed my hands
because.
You know we had to have this big
ordeal about how to wash your
hands something well I thought
you know my mom taught taught me
suffering being beaten on
because well.
We can just be told.
Here's some recommendations
here's what you gotta do brought
to do.
We took it to an extreme that
destroyed businesses.
Well well as business owners
they could do it in.
Special all of our restaurants
Have a drive thru window.
Talk about limiting health
raised so much money this year
unbelievable how much money
those folks maybe.
And as they tried to find some
new way to do it because our
entrepreneurs and they started
thinking about how to do things
then we just come up with a new
role why they couldn't.
In the rules most of the time.
Because this is not just a
business this is the lively
hoods.
Of these businesses.
and now we care even less.
We carry from less because we're
going to take these little
businesses that are trying to
struggle I'm gonna say what well
we know you're too stupid so we
had a step in.
From so many people says please
please please don't do this to
us.
How much more battering can we
take.
you worse than that all the
let's do those things destroyed
Business.
Like we don't live in the same
world.
Live in the same world.
And they're just.
got the walmarts of the
Facebook's.
We also have the go hunting
guides.
We have the farmers we have the
dairies.
Which is different from the
small retail shop.
Which is different from the CPA
shop.
Through all of this with each
one of them trying to figure
out.
How do I take care of not only
my family.
But my extended family of the
For the farm.
We have a Senator here who has
both and I'm sure that if you
were still awake you would tell
us that.
In the industry.
But there's a bigger variance in
the little New Mexico
businesses.
Have a lot of contractors that
were important.
One of those services is called
a hot shot service.
So.
wages this size which is the hot
shot guy goes gets the widget
off the shelf I probably have to
buy it gets it off the shelf and
it's costing them thousands of
dollars an hour so they want it
done quickly.
But the hot shot service
doesn't.
Work for.
Quite often.
It's husband and wife or husband
and son or wife and daughter
whatever.
But sometimes there's a third
person in there.
So this is hot shot service now
that's got.
Three people.
eight or nine five as the song
goes.
Different world.
So different.
employee then we have special
rules.
Because we heard both the
government employees.
Or taking care of and then
I don't even know where the
fitness Law.
The proposed law let's see how
they can even get in there.
Such insanity.
Certainly the folks that work on
the farms and ranches they
don't.
There's times when you're
And sometimes it's different.
Sometimes you get to take a
break and come to the Senate.
I don't know I don't know what
we're gonna do here Mister
president.
Because one standard.
It does not work for the hunting
guide.
It doesn't work for the.
For the small family that's just
The better known.
Fast food restaurants.
If it's a family owned
franchise.
or McDonalds if it's a
franchise.
It's going to be difficult.
If it's not a franchise and it's
a corporate store.
start making some different
rules.
And some of the rules we see
already that are happening at
the stores.
president you know what that
means P. I. TA pain in the rear
factor.
The more bureaucracy we have the
more the higher the pita factor
You have the kiosk now we get
the order without ever talking
to a human now you get to order
online.
And make make it so that you can
do with a few less people.
If you've noticed when you go
through.
That's just that's one less
person.
One less pay roll.
One less hour of sick leave or
family time that they got to
deal with.
And it's taken away a job for
somebody that wants to job.
Work has value just in itself.
As a teacher stated in
elementary school.
As a volunteer.
She need to get paid.
Was it because she needed the
money.
She needed to have a reason to
get up in the morning and do
something.
I tried to find something else
for her to do.
None of us were designed to sit
around and just do nothing.
All of us have to have a purpose
in life to get up in the morning
and do something useful.
But there's a lot of us to just
want to do something.
And if you've really got it
right.
The fewer people actually get to
work.
The more people just get to sit
people to to to learn a skill
we've not encouraged people to
try to figure out a good fit for
their life and get out there and
do it.
And then we wonder why they
don't.
Why we have drug and alcohol
problems.
I pointed out earlier today that
New Mexico.
Is the number one state when it
comes to.
Some kind of social services.
Mexico we're too stupid to do
anything.
I think they kind of go
together.
When you start encouraging
people not to work for taking
In in generation after
generation forgets how to work.
Their children were born today
that their parents never really
didn't have a job the way we
know what.
The way we think that things are
work.
We're we're you here you go out
there and you do something
useful.
In this more more bureaucracy
just drives more and more.
More more jobs away.
We need more assistance.
So we better raise taxes and we
better bash those little New
Mexico companies again because
lay off more people are close.
And now you've got more people
that need assistance.
Instead of trying to reverse the
Really feel pleased with their
purpose in life.
So they can really see.
That there's something better
out there.
do is stop with the contempt of
the people that actually higher
New Mexicans.
But the stop with the contempt
of New Mexicans that higher New
Mexicans.
President.
We should be the envy of the
entire world.
The variety that we have New
Mexico from desert to mountains.
witcher on rivals.
We have natural resources.
To do almost anything they can
that they can be thought of any
human mind.
We have a right here.
Compared to almost anywhere else
in the world.
families figure out how to take
care of themselves because it's
important to important for our
hearts to do that it's important
for our souls to do that if we
could help people figure that
out.
That's what we need to do.
I do not believe Mr president.
We in this room are the problem.
It's not where we were born or
where we grew up.
We have to diversify the economy
so let's put more regulations on
everybody.
We need to broaden the tax base.
So let's make sure there's fewer
taxpayers.
The first thing to do is take
that fence down and let people
talk to us.
Second thing what I do is take
these things down to talk to
each other.
For years and this is the first
time we don't actually get to
talk to each other.
We had one bright spot today.
House bill seventy five thank
you for.
For two months.
I've been ready to fight house
all of the doctors and hospitals
out of the state.
I came here ready to fight that
one.
And I'm not sure what happened
but somewhere along the way
Four people actually sat down.
And try to figure out what the
right path was and do the right
thing.
in a perpetual fight and when I
came over here we sat down and
figured it out.
This probably one or two or two
or three senators.
When we came out of the room we
had a solution.
We're not doing that this year.
We're not really trying to
figure out how to solve anything
To survive.
How hard can we make it.
What new thing can we pile on
them.
Mr president what I think we
ought to do.
Sen room.
Bring some coffee drink beer.
Well there's certainly been some
programs out there to help small
businesses.
And I appreciate those as a
small business myself.
Taking advantage of those.
We seem to be on the path for
this time Mr president.
That's what this bill does.
I don't question the intentions
the good intentions.
Of the sponsor or the bill.
As it said Mr president.
The road to hell is paved with
good intentions.
We need to actually look at what
the reality is on the ground
when we do something.
When the various parties have
come together.
In this chamber.
We solve problems.
almost every votes twenty seven
fifteen.
And we're not allowed to talk
things through.
Except for whatever happened
Senate bill seventy five.
I need to figure out what the
So we'll.
So you've taken away one of my
fights for.
I don't know what happened in
the.
In the room where people got
together and fixed it.
Through the course of my time
here that was the standard.
Both sides of the aisle normally
yeah we had some of those who
wish your partisan issues.
We had those.
But that wasn't the standard.
Certainly not the way we used
to.
You know when I did my oil and
Yes people looking out of sync
wow you must must not like each
other.
Is that the B. S. caucus was
strong.
Bill sold bills are.
over there not.
And that's what we ought to be
doing.
What we're trying to learn from
each other.
In this bill here just adds
bureaucracy to the businesses.
That are least able to handle
that bureaucracy.
And that's a shame.
It's a shame because we haven't
thought it through and work it
What can we do together to
figure out how to help them.
Yes there been some amendments
on this bill.
since before the session
started.
Yes I've been in some.
So meetings what I've tried to
work some things out.
So rare this year.
And even the meetings that I
had.
Never really came to a
conclusion.
doing it that's not how we
should be taking care of New
Mexico New Mexicans.
We need to help.
In the first step is to stop
burdening them.
Stop burdening the small
business owner who hires people.
If this only affected Facebook
would care.
Eighteen million dollars a day
or whatever they make on care.
It affects in different ways for
each kind of industry in each
business inside that industry.
Different pricing different
customer counts different
specialties.
All those things affect.
We're not thinking about that.
We've got a vision about what it
About.
How things work in the world.
Senator souls doesn't know and
there are things that he knows
That's for you.
That's what we can do.
Politically.
every level.
And you see this fight.
But you've also seen us work
together.
That's the way it should be.
We're not doing that this year
either and that's why these
bills coming through here don't
don't need to be this way.
not sure I can go to ten o'clock
find a little longer will longer
here.
We should do.
Breakfast together.
And not Republicans with
Republicans and Democrats with
Democrats.
But Republicans with Democrats
and Democrats with Republicans.
You already know I can talk the
law you don't know that I'm
human.
We need to do.
Heavy duty political stuff.
We spoke about.
What are bubbles look like you
know Mr president when I first
got here I didn't think I knew
Not blood relation.
The people that I had known in
college.
so while okay I didn't know you
would date.
Thank him these old but then so
was she by at least by my
standards at that time.
Just we're relations.
These weird little relations and
I'm sure that that we have those
same we're group little
relations all through this
building right now.
How to help all New Mexicans.
Employees and employers.
The big families like this one
we'll have our debates we'll
have our fights.
But we should still love each
other at the end.
We've developed this contempt
for ourselves.
Instead of love for ourselves
and each other.
I know there's somebody out
there right now tweet well if
else in this room I don't want
to have contempt for the people
of New Mexico.
I don't want to have contempt
for business owners.
For the homeless.
A pretty small community.
And just like when I came into
this building and found out that
All over New Mexico we have more
in common than we and we have
different differences.
But wasn't there a Senator sure
I was there's bill sitting
around table eight people sit
around the table talking to the
guy next to me here twenty just
introduce ourselves to you to
each other all strangers.
pads and and pipelines well.
We used to do that kind of work
in Farmington New Mexico.
And the lady sitting next to him
the way yes we have this little
restaurant in Pennsylvania we
got all these guys with cowboy
hats and cowboy boots and one
green chili on everything from
Farmington what are they talking
about.
Control them about hatch green
Chile and how to get it and what
to do with it when you got it
and telling the difference
between hatch green Chile in two
mile.
We understand that New Mexico.
Does it have chili forms for
different than those the just
the trailer rentals.
We all know about the rental.
Because that's our culture New
Mexico.
these things Mr president.
We need to stop.
Take a break.
Read a little bit.
The gender should be New Mexico.
On both sides of the aisle.
Yep I left for twenty years.
Where the uniform of the United
States Army but I came back.
It didn't matter where I was.
I was in New Mexico.
blue caution signs I see why we
lost sight.
I can't even see the sponsor the
bill blue signs between.
and I.
You can let me babble until six
o'clock in the morning.
Are prepared for this time Mr
president.
You know I can go for just on
the spur of the moment.
I think the best thing we could
do Mr president.
The forty three of us including
you.
We had a bill earlier talking
about early childhood.
And I was very sincere not vote
that vote.
We have the same goal.
How do we get there is the
issue.
What's the right path what's the
wisest path to get us from where
going to get there to figure out
the path.
So if we talk to each other.
If we could have in fear of each
other and certainly in the
contempt that we here.
The contempt I think is growing.
And it doesn't need to.
And I think an awful lot of the
contempt is just really from a
misunderstanding.
We can't figure out.
How to negotiate some things not
just court room negotiations.
His family members talking to
each other.
Want to people that are ill to
be taken care of.
It's just how do you do it.
I would like to ask.
If we could just have a moment
of silence.
And pray for the state of New
Mexico.
For our betterment.
Just a moment Mister president.
Centers in the request for a
moment of silence.
Thank you Mr president I think
that was important because I
Mr president.
Mr president.
Maybe it's a little early for
breakfast it's too late for
dinner.
Probably don't have enough beer
in my pocket since I don't have
any beer at all.
I know that people want to go
home.
And I'm doing this for only one
reason.
Mr president I am grateful.
That at least we could come
together for just that moment.
I hope that we would consider
that we don't need to harm
ourselves anymore.
That we need to work together.
And no matter what happens with
And try to make all of this
right.
For the entire state.
Not just for one party or the
other.
Thank you Mr president.
I
no further debate.
Senator Stewart to close on the
bill.
More than a hundred and thirty
countries across this world at
least fifteen states recognize
the basic right of employees to
receive paid sick leave.
less rapidly in the workplace
the workplaces healthier and
more productive our schools will
become safer because parents
will be able to hold their sick
for victims of domestic violence
to take this leap to put their
lives back together.
This law establishes like the
minimum wage the floor for what
studies show that they don't get
preventative mental care breast
exams dentist appointments this
law will improve the public
And house labor veterans old
Military Affairs Committee
substitute for house bill
twenty.
As seven times amended without
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
No Senator Baca now Senator
Brandt.
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator
restaurant does wish to recuse
himself Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Yes I said do Senators around
does wish to recuse himself.
No I only wish to recuse myself
on the amount on the amendment
okay senators about this how do
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Moores no.
Senator Munoz.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the Senator for the
A. S. Senator Pinto Senator
Pinto yes Senator Pirtle.
songes senator Sanchez no
Senators Wheaties.
Senators right now senators of
the Lopez yes Senator Sedillo
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Ivey Soto back.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House labor.
Veterans.
Montoya.
of the body no I was prepared to
Take us on a little dive into
this bill.
You know when you've.
Take the time and decide you
want to read this.
Amazing title although that's.
Really not what the legislation
does.
But we start to look into you
really start to realize that you
know this session is about
And then we're not allowed to
amend anything.
We're not allowed to improve
anything because you know I'm
just gonna vote against it
anyway so why take my amendment
another individual maintains a
household.
So to be a domestic partner you
have to have a house Mr
president.
That makes no sense to me.
You don't have to get very far.
To read through some of this I
was prepared to go line by line
because it is written so poorly.
Employee means an individual
works at a car dealership what
about somebody works for salary
it's never addressed.
You look further.
three minutes is is long enough.
But whenever you start to really
dig deep into the bill as as we
did in Judiciary really start to
realize how poorly written it
is.
is point of order Mr president
everybody is hustling about and
the we have someone explaining
their vote Mr president.
Senator Pirtle.
We're told we're not allowed to
amend it.
But yet whenever members of the
committee go through it they
really point out some of the
issues.
Employees right to earn sick
leave.
And we've seen this multiple
times.
Especially the Judiciary
Committee one minute.
of that go through line by line
by line.
I'm not everybody was privy to
that.
But those of us that were privy
Especially as somebody that's
just gonna vote against that
person just gonna vote against
it why do we care what the
amendment does.
Why do we even read it.
If we're just gonna pass thing
based upon the title past things
that are partisan because you
can't take a Republican
amendment and why are we here
we're not here to make good
here all night and we're gonna
leave now and they're going to
be here for another half an hour
to an hour or more so can we all
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president we just have a couple
things to do I'm gonna first
before we read the messages I do
this was a very hard night in
the Senate because I think as
you mentioned respect and
decorum.
Are the hallmark of this
institution.
chamber and who served in this
legislature.
I'm also incredibly honored to
work with an extraordinary woman
who serves as our governor.
It's not acceptable and it just
won't be tolerated we're all
better than this.
And I just would ask that we all
work together.
Mr Cena for the nonsense senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
our business messages from the
house in that order business the
reader to read.
three as amended by the Senate
and further amended by the house
in requests the concurrence of
the Senate to the house
amendment respectfully submitted
Senator Ortiz McCutchen chief
committee substitute for Senate
bill eight.
Senate bill eight Senate Joint
Memorial one as amended by the
Senate Senate Joint Memorial to
the house has been received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in gross copies of
House Judiciary Committee
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty eight.
And house bill two forty four as
amended have been read in full
and signed by the officers of
been received a like to announce
to the members of the body of
the office of the Senate have
signed an open session house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill for as amended
house bill forty seven as
bill two to thirty eight and
house bill two forty four as
amended.
And Mister president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed Senate
house the general journal show
that the measure from the house
has been received.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president Ms with
start until noon on the floor so
that'll give everyone a chance
in the Senate finance committee
I think needs to meet with there
is a democratic caucus which
are Senator McKenna will
Senator McKenna Mr president are
unanimous consent please of the
democratic caucus will have a
zoom meeting later today from
Senator yes thank you Mr
president I Senate finance we're
going tomorrow ten thirty we
have to built the here and I
think we're wrapped up for the.
Any further announcement
Senators.
address what happened earlier
this evening.
I believe that behavior was
unacceptable and demeaning.
In this chamber or outside of it
Full disclosure.
Last Tuesday evening I had a
discussion with Senator Ivy Soto
about this.
And
You know I may be a little.
Naive or hold a standard that
may be too high but I disagree
this is the Senate.
So if we're not going to hold
ourselves to that standard who
is.
Or leadership position and I'm
also disappointed that our
friends on the other side of the
aisle I respect those who stayed
I really respect you doing that.
But this is not where we run
away.
You know I never thought I would
be here.
And with what I've seen here I'm
really discuss it.
So Mister president I'm sorry I
have to say this I don't want to
have to say this.
But we have to do better.
Thank you Mr president we happy
to follow that I think what the
I want to sit here and and bring
up the point.
Senator Ivey Soto may have been
outlined in lot of ways.
Senator Stewart and her
I believe that.
What we over here she over
there.
The fact that we've got a a
Thank you we can't do.
You're gonna win.
Mr president and members of the
Senate.
Show Mr president and a and
members of the body.
I'm proud to be in New Mexico
state senator.
hope that we can remember the
issues we had tonight.
And we can come out of it better
stronger.
tonight well we saw what went on
and where it went on and so I
resent the implication of the
Tomorrow you announced you have
a caucus meeting.
That can be dealt with as you
Exercise decorum in the face of
all that happened.
And in the end in the face of a
football being spiked in their
face.
Mr president
I don't think this is gonna be
home and I was wondering Mr
Senator Wirth would yield.
Center where the health Mr
president happy to is are we
still doing cannabis later
today.
with those right out of the
gates
but a lot of work that's gone on
that issue with both sides
I know Senator Pirtle has a few
amendments there on his desk and
tomorrow but yes we will Mr
president I reason I ask that is
the young kids call that a wake
and bake Mr president.
We do have further announcements
I think many of you all know
I've been getting a lot of
criticism last few days press
conference against me and others
for the marijuana bill in part
and very candidly the reason
To get an idea of of what bill
we're going to see because even
last night in Judiciary I guess
it was the night before last
now.
And we've got what thirteen
another version of it.
So the last word I had this
morning was that there were
another bill or two that were
being worked on.
possibility that we get the
surprise bill on the floor and
see for the first time expect to
understand a two hundred page
bill so really just us as is
going to be the bill that came
I just want to say.
Because there's a.
Comment that that maybe the the
claims about.
That that might have dealt been
one individual acting but let's
not pretend that there is not an
issue with how women are treated
issues I honestly.
I thought we were better than
this and I don't want to pretend
that this is some.
Representative thing and I don't
want to pretend that this is
legislature but it is an issue
and if you're not feeling it's
probably because you're not a
woman but don't pretend that
it's not happening don't pretend
the other chamber and it has to
change thank you Mr president
senator Munoz.
Thank you Mr president Senator
prior and make sure everybody
state center compass I may just
a point of personal privilege.
I ask the members of the body to
allow me to do so.
What is responsible and the
ability to come in to have
differences at the end of the
day to have respect.
chamber matters.
Every single one of you in this
chamber has value.
And although there is no rule
book.
So we're going to the late hours
we still have a lot of work to
do lot of business to
accomplish.
And I would ask that we come
together as we know in the
Senate.
But to do so remembering why
we're here in this chamber.
To serve the people of the state
of New Mexico.
And I just a you as you head
for the discussions that allow
you to come in hello a little
bit later time to get that rest
so we can come in fresh impasse
and may legislation.
So with that.
Two seconds to take a deep
breath and to collect your
thoughts collect here.
Feelings and.
really is including the
emotions.
Heartbreaks a lot of times the
feelings that.
We really don't want to exude
Tonight this morning.
Until the end of the session and
then beyond.
More wisdom.
The wisdom that you have in your
hearts and your minds.
He used for the common good.
In may that common good.
lives a man.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president just ask
the members can be allowed to
Sentinel Center recess till
twelve o'clock.
