Senator Lopez thank thank you
majority for later madam
Thank you madam president hi I
move for call center on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill
eight.
Yeah put those clothes back on
every bit of them.
Senator Sanchez with his hand up
center more center diamond
So.
Madam president I still do have
a number what purpose do you
freshman that we have a brunch
tomorrow that Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino and I are the hosts for
brunch and so we want to make
sure that everybody that's a
freshman knows that they're
Senator Duhigg Senator Hemphill.
And who did I miss I miss
anybody.
So.
center guy a ghosts also had his
handout madam president Senator
Wirth the members I believe that
one is a call center we can be
doing other business and less
Senator Pirtle and thank you
members I believe the motion was
for all action on Senate bill
eight and since Senate bill
eight is not up in there had
that's not up for action that
the Senate can actually continue
And madam president that's found
in central seven just for thank
you thank you for that.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you
madam president so Senator is
we're going to go to Senate bill
eight the call was put on Senate
bill eight so that so I've had
at any time right now in the
middle call at a time however
senator Wirth can ask unanimous
call the Senate is where we're
on it's a good to agree really
fuel you all met my step mother
the other day I don't think you
had a chance because you're out
there but I don't know if you
saw the news that there's gonna
announcements until we figure
out who's missing and and and
and I'm happy we'll figure out
where we're going to go so let's
just get a sense of who were
missing here and kind of where
the status of the call is.
committee directly or really
want to that here yeah you can
go talk to them directly sure
I'd love to chat with you we'll
try to figure it out because
actually we're on announces
So that's what I so you might
want to go and chat with him.
Service via for a purpose to
rise thank you madam president
just a clarification on the call
nature if we go to that order of
business.
But we are not there we are on a
call we're trying to find the
members and round them up.
Thank you madam president I'm an
So so so Senator you're asking
can you leave the floor to go to
a committee.
Actually that actually answered
my question right there I didn't
Madam president point of
personal privilege.
Thank you alright and thank you
madam president we have in the
past and it is allowed within
whenever the call would be
issued we've done this in the
past where we then go away from
a bill and then when it's
brought back up then the call is
put back into place and then the
We understand all of that we're
waiting for the call to be
completed.
We are on a call of the Senate.
go about our business third
reading of legislation we got
item Senate Bill number eight.
Seeing no objection.
Want to debate whether or not
we're going to third reading
okay.
Thank you madam president I just
wanted to point out that you
Billy it's very clear and that
was really an admission that we
could move on to other business
and we're and we contented the
business of the state as usual
that we're on the call so I want
to point that out.
So the last motion was to go to
third reading and go to Senate
bill eight that was the last
motion from the Majority Leader
at arms up with you can you give
us an update on the status of
the call.
Yes so everyone is here with two
So at this point the call is not
complete because of those two
senators.
Thank you madam president given
given where we are pursuant to
Seeing no objection more on that
order of business committee
reports.
The reader will right.
Madam president your Judiciary
Committee to home is been
chair.
Senator Duhigg.
Madam president at move adoption
of the committee report.
one as amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that do pass and
that's referred to the rules
committee respectfully submitted
committee report has been
adopted.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president and
Mrs and we got our business
announcements and miscellaneous
calendar I think what we'll do
is to item number two which is
Senator Brandt and then Senator
Gonzales item numbers six
Senator Morial seven so with
reading item number two Senator
Brandt.
Madam president I ask unanimous
consent in the Senate the
records show all action for
Seeing no objection Senator
Brandt to explain the bill.
Thank you members of the Senate
currently if you call.
bomb or going to place a bomb in
the building is a fourth degree
felony.
But if you call this building or
any other public building.
This bill will fix that.
And through my willingness to
so that's what the bill does
it.
Allows.
Law enforcement to get involved
something that's actually a
crime.
So this will allow law
enforcement to get involved.
And.
In the case of it being a school
our children from an actual
shooting.
that's what build us high yield
for questions thank you senator
we do have an amendment the
Vontaze Senator vantage to move
the amendment thank you madam
president move Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
bill thirty four as amended
thank you and Senator Cervantes
to explain the amendment thank
friendly when we spoke yesterday
right now this bill requires
certain levels of proof before
it becomes a crime and one of
them is on page two which would
elements of a crime and of the
proposed floor amendment would
modify the word official to
state law enforcement official
so that the response requires a
then be a crime and I don't
think that's the of Sanchez
intent.
Senator Brandt thank you madam
president and I do consider this
Seeing no debate Senator serve
on tests to close Madam
residence unanimous consent for
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill thirty four
as amended ask those voting in
request for unanimous consent on
this friendly amendment so says
the sponsor is there objection
to the adoption of Senate floor
amendment number one.
The reader will read.
Senate floor amendment number
two to Senate bill thirty four
as amended amendment sponsored
by Senator serve on tennis.
Then present before I move the
Senator font thank you madam
president and president now move
Senate floor amendment number
two to Senate bill thirty four
as twice now amended.
to be a friendly amendment the
the bill that he has right now
makes the crime of based on a
threat and to the Sanchez credit
for a gun crime.
The concern I have here is the
existing language we don't we
would only be a crime if the
threat was made falsely and
maliciously in other words if
believe that the goal here the
sponsor is to make it a crime
when somebody.
Calls it a threat intends to do
that for a
gun threat this false should
that that in itself is is
malicious so so here that this
would substitute the words
falsely and maliciously with
but for important and.
Senator Brandt thank you madam
president and and actually
appreciate the the long
explanation because I was trying
to.
I I understand what the Sanchez
saying and I am going to accept
it as a friendly amendment I do.
Senator share to debate the
amendment settlement permanent
members point of order please it
centers around sorry before we
continue the Senate do exist
but the page numbers wrong so
madam president I can run down
to the front with a number of
buys the amendment and I will
but I want well the debate
continues members to understand
All right we're back on a debate
of the amendments on page one or
striking falsely and maliciously
and replacing with intentionally
And if you will call me
something other than Mister
president I'm happy to do that
madam president how could I
possibly have aired in such an
pay attention but then he should
be penitential that so madam
president yes all you.
Yes thank you madam president.
No one is actually intended to
blow up the school there were
occasions where somebody
actually did that but most of
the time it was just to cause
somebody says that they want to
shoot up the capitol.
That means they want us to not
vote on something were to vote
on something or do something
else.
Do whatever we're supposed to do
if somebody wants to the
building so I question if
intentionally is the right I
guess we're going I understand
that but it's intentionally the
Senator share so
madam president if they don't
intend to do it but they still
if they still spread fear.
intend to actually do some harm
with the gun the if you look at
the a number is subparagraphs B.
one at the bottom of page one
harm so if the person intends to
place a person or persons in
great bodily harm they've
committed the crime by their
threat in similarly in
subparagraph two this is a
and if that was the intent is to
prevent or interrupt the
occupation once again to be a
crime and I've gone through the
remaining third supper
Representative you can do the
would only make it a crime if
the person made the threat was
doing so falsely in other words
they would have to have have
intended that to be a false
I understand what you're doing
and at this point.
Your short response was probably
the right answer anyway so thank
you.
Thank you of further debate
Senator Pirtle.
I'm sorry I didn't hear you
Senator madam president I do not
have any questions okay thank
you.
adopt Senate floor amendment
number two to Senate Bill number
thirty four is already twice
amended.
So we're on a unanimous consent
floor amendment number two to
Senate bill thirty four as.
Three times amended.
We have another amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
president and as it probably is
becoming obvious to the members
the Senate I'm going for the
record which I think I currently
hold for accepting the most
amendments on the bill red flag
Two Senate bill thirty four as
the movie that I would make the
motion I think I may already be
the motion well as senator
word or with the word and and
and so if you look on page one
to create the crime.
The person have to intend to
bring the fire arm to a property
Then it's a crime to bring a gun
to a property that's the
existing language and when those
are the person who makes a
the property and to have the
intent both men present so
that's why the or in the and
become important.
Senator press.
Thank you madam president after
Any other a debate senator
Morris manager I'd like a ruling
from you that uh Senator Sanchez
said he wants to go for the
record but if he's only changing
one word pro amendments and we
Seeing no further debate that's
what we're calling it a Senator
contest to close thank you madam
president I move Senate floor
amendment has unanimous consent
percent floor amendment number
three to Senate bill thirty four
unanimous consent any objection
to that seeing none we've
adopted Senate floor amendment
number three to Senate bill
thirty four as four times
amended.
amendment sponsored by Senator
serve on this.
Senator artist to move the
amendment thank you madam
president I move Senate foreman
the number four to Senate bill
thirty four as four times
statutes that this language or
simply reads the action or this
section of the law should not be
construed to limit a court's
authority to order restitution
need enabling legislation of
that time and we should clean up
our such as by getting rid of
it.
And it Senator Brandt the agency
present I I'm a little bit
Yes.
With the senator yield on his
amendment yes I yes you yield
all the older man present.
wondering if someone else wrote
this.
So you have a a marginally
effective handwriting expert
a staff attorney so you're
you're pretty close there you
you got it almost right and I'd
love to know what your hand
writing expert things about my
personality and my horoscope
correct me if I'm wrong before I
decide if it's really or not but
my understanding Senator is that
that we're really just kind of
cleaning up what should have
been in the law in the first
place on this and so will
Madam president correct that's
exactly what we're doing.
Right is there any debate on all
these friendly amendments seeing
none Senator Cervantes to close.
the bipartisanship knowing that
it will last us the remainder of
the day and through tomorrow's
game.
Which the rams will win by at
least seven points and I hope
that will all come in good
spirits.
We are on earth a unanimous
consent of the Senate floor
amendment number four is there
any opposition to that amendment
seeing none again.
Debate on the amended bill all
Senator.
Steinborn thank you madam
president with the senator you.
Madam president I would gladly
yield.
Thank you madam presence of I'm
worked out a good amendment and
finance hello wasn't perfect but
then the bill ended up passing
through site would love to get
my hands on that amendment we
talked about this issue in
And I'll read it as it's been
amended making a shooting threat
consists of intentionally.
Stating to another person that
concern is that language stating
to another person that the
person making the threat.
Sounds as if madam madam
president and senator the what
the legalizing of the person
making the threat.
And we have an amendment that
clarified this that made it
really clear that it was just
the person making the threat
I worry that what this bill
could do madam president and
senators have the unintended
consequence to putting a chill
on a chill effect on those that
might be reporting someone else
trying to wordsmith it but you
know we sent away a lawyer to
figure out language they came
back we rolled over the bill
extent of the bills pass of the
Okay so madam president thank
person making the threat for
another person so I think the
problem is still there.
I think we still need to keep
working on this bill and I I
just really hate for us to pass
feels about maybe even taking a
pause and looking at that
moment.
Madam president I'm doing good
to have them call you madam
president's really simple we
just follow our own rules but
madam president I appreciate
what the senator is talking
Judiciary Committee and the
legal expert in the Judiciary
Committee did not feel like it
worked and the several legal
experts the sit on the Judiciary
Committee
think it needs to be changed I
think it states.
It correctly.
You have to build a state it to
someone else.
And so I think the language is
that they're there needs to be
So I hope that explains what
happened with that amendment
Thank you madam president yet
foreman's weren't there but
and that's fine that happens
sometimes but you know and I
know Madam presence Senator that
I'm just disappointed with on an
amendment to fix it include
myself on that but I just bring
it to the body's attention would
urge you to look at that because
I think the last thing we want
Don't second guess yourself you
see something say something what
this bill says.
Is that.
So I'll continue to try to work
on amendment probably won't get
it in time I would really ask
the bodies consideration that
maybe if we have other business
maybe we can look at other
just taken a possibly could look
at other amendment I mean just
today right now for a few
minutes when we get that other
member down here.
take a look at it I ask Senator
Vontaze take a look at it they
both did you've had time to look
at it and here we are on the
floor and now it comes up again
schools all the time and law
enforcement can't do anything
about it.
So no I'm not willing to roll
this book Bill over again.
if you can work with Senator
president then present Senator
thank you.
Senator Steinborn they want to
provide the Judiciary Committee
amendments in your book first
floor thank you madam president
be brief I voted against this
bill in Judiciary Committee was
a close what I think is five
four vote and I was in in the
negative but the reasons that I
today friendly I regret putting
the whole Senate through the
process we've been good for us
to do it in judiciary will try
to do a better job of that in
the future thank you madam
my answer is always yes I always
yield.
Deals thank you madam president
In the FIR is it talks about of
because stating is making a
clear statement or a written
statement and communication
might be through other means
we did bounce back and forth.
Honestly I'm kind of a gnostic
on that.
Of the because the courts have
this bill and they've looked at
the current case law and that's
what the courts are considering
stating is communicating
so we can change in law are we
can just let the courts
interpret the way they always
have already been doing that so.
I'm I'm really gnostic if you
want to make that as an
amendment I probably would
consider for leaks out thing
hurts anything but I also don't
think it's necessary.
case law for the interpretation
of the language I haven't done
the research myself to figure
out if the courts have have
expanded the definition but it
haven't personally done the
research
The question I have is I
remember this bill from.
At least well at least a year
you said it again that police
would not would not investigate
such a threat.
Because it was not a crime.
schools for part of the part of
his career and I asked him.
Would you really not investigate
a firearm threat because it in
of people secure their firearms
or or do anything so I asked him
really you would investigate
that and he said well it just
depends on the circumstances he
Where the information that the
police would not investigate a
shooting threat.
Madam president my understanding
is that police can't investigate
anything's not a crime.
That is in talking to two other
law enforcement agencies
Yeah yes is is is there a
possibility they might if they
have time.
the student had a lot of
problems then who the student
is.
so we're madam president if they
don't know who the student is
Handing on as my understanding
is depending on the
circumstances they would.
Do an investigation.
it would be glad to do it madam
president I suppose there's no
expert.
No matter present there is no
expert but you can't important
probable cause with no crime you
making making threats against
individuals
in fact a salt is is one of the
crimes that that might be used.
I also think madam president
that it's interesting that it's
a misdemeanor because
misdemeanor are not priority
but again I stand because our
children and our schools do not
feel safe.
And it's because we don't have
any kind of gun safety laws and
many other for approaches to
make our of our children safe
and it's unfortunate that we
we've not been able to get
anything done that would in fact
The reader will read Senate
floor amendment number five to
Senate bill thirty four as
amended amendment sponsored by
Senator Steinborn Senator
Steinborn to move the amendment.
immense Senate.
Amendment number five there you
go Sen and then the number five
madam president okay so Senator
Steinborn explain the amendment
the only crime we're creating
here is the person making the
threat not a third person.
So.
So I struck out.
The person making the.
To another person an intent to
bring a firearm.
To a property is a firearm with
Senator Brandt.
Can you state it again in in tax
context please.
It that then president so I'll
threat consists of intentionally
stating to another person.
That the person making the
threat sorry.
To a property for use the farm
so what we're striking is.
to another person.
That the person making the.
My apologies.
Written kind of fast but I think
you get the intention here.
this is going to work.
this is the problem we ran into
when we're trying to change it
injudicious between finance and
judiciary
if I threaten a tree it doesn't
really matter.
I can have to threaten another
person
so I have to make that statement
to someone.
Not to the hinterland.
amendment I think I've shown
that I'm willing to do that.
I I can on on this one.
What madam president I think the
amendment in finance was crystal
I think the problem was was it
was already law isn't it already
Lara threaten threaten to shoot
somebody.
enforcement this is an example
this is not me doing this if I
told you I'm going to shoot you
especially if I have a firearm
And the secretary answers and I
threatened to her.
That I'm going to bring a gun
I I hope that that's.
That's where.
Senator Steinborn.
Madam president I sense there is
other debate I'm gonna keep
looking at this ammendment for a
second I'm gonna roll over it
and I'd like the opportunity of
not present.
Thank you Sir further debate on
the bill.
Sen Lopez.
Senator Brandt thank you
Just a question or maybe a
series of questions but I know
that we're trying to deal with
over the past few years and also
some threats that have been made
and I know we're targeting I
think madam president of those
persons within our school
How do you think are from a
scenario that maybe you have
gone over and in your thought
process.
How.
and other is better president
I'm kind of working through this
scenario my money
to
maybe is making a physical type
of threat to somebody those are
some of the scenarios that I've
regards to a student to has a
disability.
Madam president Center first of
all anyone that's that's a a
minor.
They go into the juvenile system
and are given of.
Interventions through that
Was keeping this as a
misdemeanor.
You know the the main purpose.
Is so that there can be forced
intervention in the in the
Is it would be any other type of
threat member only covering
shooting threaten this one.
we did have a house member bring
one that was dealing with more
Legislators for everyone else
they'll get the hopefully the
interventions that they need in
those will be able to be forced.
Madam president Senator
There are those in our community
Sometimes to are not as adept A.
you're expressing some of their
anger that maybe have or not and
lot of understanding how to
interpret other actions that may
happen specially within the
We're looking at some of this
legislation is saying well this
is good it tries to address the
issue.
and madam president you know
usually if there's a domestic
but madam president I know that
the social media at this point
in time of this particular bill
that we're discussing right now
how we were criminalizing or
what we were going to do about
that type of communication that
our young people do a lot during
using social media.
different aspects of your having
taking a pause and really
looking at something
because madam president Senator
what I.
With this because even if it is
a misdemeanor madam president.
They're still a way that we are.
Hopefully as Senator Brandt
really have some concerns on
this as to how it's implemented
and what I've seen in some of
the schools in my own district
with the student resource
officers and how they take a lot
of these things to heart and
gonna listen to more since the
debate thank you.
Thank you we do have another
amendment.
Of the reader to read Senate
Thank you madam president
I simply like when we task list
in.
Six would this be six five
Senate amendment number five to
SB thirty four.
Senator Sedillo Lopez now to
Has the sponsor has stated that.
Stating has probably been
interpreted as communication and
case law but for me having to go
Thank you madam president I
would consider this a friendly
amendment just like I said I
want to suggest that.
Thank you madam president I now
move that Senate bill Senate
Senate floor amendment number
five to SB thirty four.
SB thirty four.
Madam president as four times
amended.
We're on a mission thank you.
We've been ask unanimous consent
So let's let's do a show of
No.
Senator Morris.
All right well I thought I heard
Senate floor amendment number
six to Senate bill thirty four
as amended amendment sponsored
by Senator Steinborn.
please move the amendment well
madam president I would thank
you I withdraw the amendment I
just want to say that been in
discussions we have a new and
improved amendment that's
friendly that does what I've
I.
six to Senate bill thirty four
as amended amendment sponsored
by Senator Baca.
Sir Baca to explain the
amendment thank you madam chair
this is just my attempt to we
Judiciary as well as the
amendments I put in there and
the amendments requested by
Senator Steinborn as well as the
amendment from Senator Sedillo
firearm to a property and use
the firearm with the intent to
and then subsections to follow.
Center press.
thank you is there any debate on
the amendment.
Seeing none Senator Baca close
on the amendment.
Thank you madam chair.
amended and ask for unanimous
consent.
Right we're on a unanimous
consent for Senate floor
amended has passed the Senate.
Back on debate Senator sirventes
thank you members of those
happening too fast so that's the
sure I've got it right so the
last amendment that was passed
just moments ago was be to
strike on page one section one
B. the strike section one be
And so I see Center boxing no so
I'm trying to make sure that I'm
understanding correctly but but
the amendment we just pass the
string page one straight section
one B. and this is and in lieu
those subparagraphs under B. one
two and three would all be
eliminated and replaced with
this language and that's the
intention.
I get it but I don't think
that's what your intention was
missing something.
would be to say that had I
intended to include subsections
one through.
Three it looks like I would have
included those to say it to
which identifies that particular
section and in lieu thereof a
new section be that particular
section to replace that section
B. so I think we're splitting
one through three or I would've
stated that on my amendment
where it says to strike.
Madam presence Senator I don't
all those subparagraphs because
they're in when they're on their
in one be there one B.
subparagraphs one through three
C. struck all that any replaced
but but what you've done I think
you I'm very clearly me
eliminated those subparagraphs I
don't think that was your
intention and I think we should
fix that.
Senate floor amendment number
six.
Of Senate bill thirty four as
six times amended.
just took on Senate floor
amendment number six.
Is there objection.
Just then present Senator Wirth
you might want to do into votes
first to reconsider and then
reconsider and you can just
withdraw the amendment.
All right so we're on a
reconsideration of the motion of
the action we took on Senate
our actions.
Seeing none Senator Baca.
Thank you madam president so I
and throw it away.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Madam president maybe too late
Madam president I've got I stood
by my what I thought was right
when I I'm an effort to to
I'm here to serve.
But.
Yes.
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
six to Senate bill thirty four
amendment thank you madam chair
I move sentiment number six to
Senate bill thirty four S. six
times amended.
And Senator Baca to explain the
amendment.
this instead strike section one
P. lines twenty one through
twenty four on page one only and
they lose their of.
It's a new section B. as stated
before.
this is friendly at any a debate
on the amendment.
consent.
We're on a unanimous consent
motion for the new a Senate
floor number six to Senate bill
thirty four as many times
amended.
I think we're now on debate
actually if the bill Sir any
debate I think Senator Pinto
requested debate.
of the body do we have any data
on how many times the schools
with the New Mexico had to
utilize the comprehensive
violence prevention plan that
So we have the template
available from an MPD do we know
if the school districts actually
all school districts in the
my I'm hopeful that all of our
districts are following the law
and PED is supposed to make sure
that they do.
Madam president members
And you know how to respond to
that but that's just my comment
that locally if this is not
being implemented are looked at
thank you madam president and.
Maybe I didn't express myself
clearly the first time but as I
think about this a little bit
more
I think the intent of what we're
But madam president I just like
to let the the body think about
this
we are criminalizing
communication currently what's
in this bill.
But we are not requiring a
disruption.
So for me madam president I have
Seeing none Center Brecht close.
Thank you madam president nine.
Appreciate the lively debate and
I appreciate the bipartisan work
on this bill.
We simply want to offer the same
protection to our kids that we
give to politicians.
We do require a disruption.
On page two and two it says to
I move that Senate bill thirty
four as seven times amended do
now pass us as soon as the
Madam.
Senator Sedillo Lopez I I just I
had my hand in hand up and I was
doing.
You asked for closure.
explain your vote.
Sorry no and if if I don't see
you everyone put your mouth next
to your microphone and say madam
passage of Senate bill thirty
four as seven times amended the
senators to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
souls voting no Senator Lopez
voting no Senator Stefanics
voting no explain my vote.
By a vote of thirty four in the
not seeing your hand thank you
madam president I think that
there was a really good point
made of by Senator Lopez because
in a way that we might have
raised a constitutional issue
what you can do it's always a
balance and so when you yell
fire in a crowded crowded
theater it's it's the disruption
that causes the problem then
takes it out of the first
thank you madam president thank
you senator.
Senator Wirth are removing to
item number six.
Senator Gonzales for item number
six.
Off the Senate that the record
shows that all action for place
in some of memorial number.
memorial thank you madam
president and members so with
the.
Cinnamon oil seven this.
This so.
attorneys this memorial supports
and ask the Supreme Court to
grant military spouses that are
attorneys reciprocity with the
that have adopted some form of
military spouse Attorney
licensure accommodations.
Of the American Bar Association
and conference of chief justice
Madam president members asking
the Supreme Court to make this
ruling would not only allow
military spouses to continue
their law careers in New Mexico
relocate with their spouses if
they are not able to practice
their profession.
Adopting this rule would also
allow familiar units to remain
level employees in the work
force will have a positive
economic impact and increase
consumer spending in our
communities which they re
signed.
Senator Sedillo Lopez I just
want to stand in strong support
I thought this was really
important idea of when we heard
it in committee and a lot of
people in my district would
benefit from this
Any other debate Senator pope
thank you madam president I just
want to thank the sponsor this
is important to look at are
reciprocity in some other career
fields and some portent that we
look at this so thank you madam
president.
Thank you any other debate.
that Senate bill Senate memorial
number seven just twice amended
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent.
Off the Senate that the record
memorial seven us twice amended.
Please go to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
negative Senate memorials seven
as twice amended has duly passed
the Senate Sir Gonzalez thank
you madam president thank you
members thank you very much
senator Wirth thank you madam
president
we are still.
Waiting for some members I
wonder if our sergeant at arms
that are not counted for not
returning our calls are not
contacting instantly buddy when
for the public I want explain
kind of where we are and what
we're gonna do here
understand that if we sit here
all night long waiting for these
two center Hamblen extends the
scope of the Human Rights Act
Senator Lopez is it has a bill
on cannabis regulation there
Senate bills and if we don't get
those out of committee and down
understand that we're we are at
this moment and I want to be
real clear at this moments we
need the committees to go up and
do their work so we're not gonna
sit here all night waiting for
to check in and again certainly
hopeful that are procedural
rules won't be used to block an
incredibly important election
also understand there may be
committees meeting tomorrow but
we're gonna do our best to keep
our work.
In a window of so we're gonna
come in at one o'clock on the
built along we may have here a
couple of bills depending on
what comes out of Judiciary on
those Senate bill so now be the
time for committee chairs to
make their announcements.
Senator mantas.
floor and there were only gonna
be able to go till seven o'clock
so we're gonna try and knock off
maybe one or two or three bills
we don't get done today and
force you will have to do
floor tomorrow afternoon.
I'm watching the rams win the
Superbowl.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank you
actually passing a bill before
as you know.
Congratulate him on on passing
is but then it done to me no I
have seen him before he has
heart of it with with very few
efforts on the on our part to
straighten it out thank you so
much.
Thank you senator to heck.
And act relating to the public
peace health and safety and
welfare and acting pre trial
detention release minimum
standards.
Senator Duhigg who who is the
Seeing no objection this man is
just with regards to this is a
double bill okay thanks now this
is a generic bill.
forty two
primary sponsor thank you.
So any objection to that seeing
none that is sort.
and we're still waiting for some
clarification language from the
executive I think we're kind on
track want to make sure we have
exactly right before they have
to do eight hours of work a I
and then we'll be there about an
hour and then we'll go home for
the evening we may come tomorrow
morning at the college Gerald
see what else we can schedule
because that that out and we
have house bill eight that's
Any other announcements.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president with
that unanimous consent the
