Senator songes.
Senator smitteez.
Senator so they're a little bit.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
the indication to be led today
by the Reverend.
Lance Reiner of troubadour
ministries please remain
standing for the pledge of
allegiance to be led today by
Good morning Senators let us
pray.
Connable people creator and
sustainer of all that lives and
moves in free.
cold and too many these days to
die an early death.
The words of Dr Martin Luther
king junior pandemic in the same
year up is down echo was a
Will it be a office or
community.
He went on to say in a real
sense all life is inter related.
In which we must learn some out
to live together with each other
in peace.
The son of man is Jesus called
himself left to manage the if
state.
We turn to you this day and
great.
Each of us the way of peace.
Yeah anyone the.
A self serving way of life
instead of a renewable service
provided for the common good.
The foundation to secure or
Turn us around god in our hearts
to one another.
We'll go out of the suffering
and the dying in the weird part.
affects all indirectly.
Most feeling the weight in the
power of our responsibilities
expand our hearts for the vision
of a holding the common good.
the world house because our arms
are too short.
Let us begin here and now with
renewed moral imagination.
To build a more just and lasting
peace.
Sure sense of community and
shared destiny.
Trusting that you are hearing us
as we hear one another we pray
Senator welcome back.
We'll go ahead and get started
today I'll yield to senator
Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr president welcome
president thank you Reverend
Shriner for your words as I
always say and I'll just keep
doing it it's a really important
time to just pause and put it
Senator Lopez first and then
other members.
Senator Lopez when is yes Senate
president Eli unanimous consent
first to allow cameras both on
Senator Tallman until he returns
to the chamber.
And also Mr chairman to excuse
senator Rodriguez until she
returns to the chamber thank you
no objections so ordered thank
you Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez thank you very
much Mr president I would just
like to give a shout out to all
in the room and in the world but
you know women do a lot to
contribute to this world that we
live in of and you look at it
Lopez any further announcement
Senators.
Si no further announcements
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
get through items one through
six we will be back this evening
to do another.
Evening session at this point
everyone in the loop on that.
So with that Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
our business messages from the
house run that order of Business
message from the house the
reader to read.
six as amended by the house
house bill one sixty five and
house bill two twenty seven in
requests the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Senate that the house has passed
house bill two seventy seven as
amended by the house house bill
one ninety two as amended by the
house house bill one eighty
House floor substitute for House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill two seventy.
House bill one sixty three house
bill one eighty four as amended
by the house House Bill to
fifteen as amended by the house.
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Senator
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk of
the house the journal so the
message from the house has been
received.
read Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill sixty one
as amended has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
read all of the committee
reports that the vote and then
with one motion and that the
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually the no
objection the reader to read.
And Senate bill two tend to pass
as amended respectfully
submitted senator George came
when Mr chairman Senator Lopez
motion to adopt the committee
report centers we have a motion
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred house bill
thirty four as amended has had
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that you do pass and that's
Senator this a bit of Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports and that
we vote on them with one motion
in the the journal then reflect
they were acted upon
individually.
and it's referred to the tax
businesses and transportation
committee.
House bill one nineteen as
amended to pass sentence
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
committee Senate bill three
forty two passed and then
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill three ten to pass
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
fourteen do pass as amended and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill three sixteen do
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one twenty seven as
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman Santo subito Mr
president I'm I move the
adoption of the of them I move.
committee part of it about that
in the journal show that there
are all acted upon individually.
Senator Wirth.
Senator is wrong that order of
Business third reading of
legislation is just another
reminder Senators if you're
participating be ism when you
speak you can have them the
Woods.
Thank you Mr president.
By unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all actions for placing.
Senate bill fifty.
Seeing no objection Senator
flexibility provide with the
bill this.
Mr president.
I had a gin operator in Fargo
because his trucks was having to
use day permits.
And and crossing into New Mexico
and they were having to stop at
the port state quite a bit of
time.
We have changed cotton plant a
little bit now that it's a
little bit more data to bowl to
drought and it's if you have an
Raisin cotton around the arch
earlier geisha district and we
do not have the cotton gin in
New Mexico and that part of the
state.
To be used by the specialty
cotton modular hauling trucks
this is a specialty truck it's a
our farmers get their cotton to
market timely
essentially that is the bill the
FIR says that it will cost
around five thousand dollars
how big the cotton crop is in
the state the structure traveled
lots of miles on dirt roads
going back into these fields so
Mister president that is
debating Senate bill fifty any
senators wishing to debate we
have center the eagles.
This present and so would you
Hi I think up to five years
before his death in in Lee
County we still have our own
jeans as president Senator Woods
and now everything is going to
bill right agency presentation
was this would give them the
time that they need to.
Crossed between New Mexico and
Texas without having to we do a
day permit to be able
prospect and fourth is that
correct this presents a.
Yes Mr president that's great.
lot of extra time at the port of
entry and also getting the
permit so I think the smart we
depend on cotton
This in the consulate that'll
you'll miss present Senate thank
thank you senator because we do
have further debate Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president of the
sponsor yield center with the
Yes Sir Mr president yes
removepercent alright and thank
you Mr president wants all the
bodies attention that you know I
I do support this I think it's
very important.
Our New Mexico farmers but
you you don't have to drive
drive very far to see five or
six skeletons of gins and Travis
county and in the the one that
was operating
this because we shut down every
single Jan in the state of New
Mexico thank you Mr president.
Any further debate senators.
Do now pass and I ask for a roll
call vote.
Senators tier seats please we're
voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt
yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Duhigg give Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Morris yes Senator manos
senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
smitteez Senators maybe is yes
senators for their Lopez yes
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Thirty eight by a vote of thirty
eight in the affirmative they're
on the negative Senate bill
fifty has passed the Senate
Senator Woods.
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended and that the
record show that all options for
placing Senate bill seventy
three on final passage has been
bill.
Thank you Mr president Senate
bill seventy three was a direct
will direct all revenue remitted
to the state from fees imposed
is strictly a statutory cleanup
bill with no fiscal or
administrative impacts what this
does Mister president of the
bill is right and to remove the
PRC as the middle man and that
million dollars per year and
this bill seeks to specify that
revenue distribute is in
statute.
I see no debate center Hermio to
close on the bill Mr president I
believe that Senate bill seventy
three and do pass and ask for a
roll call vote.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz plan are yes.
Senator for the year.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez Senator songes yes
Senators committees.
In addition the test Senator
sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
XGS Senator Steinborn.
Senator Wirth Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes.
Before we call the roll and we
L. yield to Senator Brandt.
Thomas present like to excuse
Senator Woods and senator
corrects except for the purpose
the yield to senator menu also
explains vote then senator Wirth
and then we'll go to Senate how
to me sentiment else thank you
Mr president I think Center army
centerman US senator Wirth this
press let's have Senator Hermio
first thank the body since he
got a very nice vote nice debate
and then come back to me Senator
Hemphill you're going to close
support thank you Mr president
thank you senator Wirth I thank
you Mr president let's all rise
and give Senator Hermio a huge
Graduation Senator how to me
moving on or go to item number
three that Senate bill twenty
nine Senator souls thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
amendment or substitution in
objects and Senator also
explained the bill thank you Mr
president Senate bill twenty
nine is from the public school
besides straight up buildings
that are of even are available
for capital within our public
schools that have been added
funds what this does is it
allows those groups to now
consider also adding
photovoltaic systems to the
photovoltaic systems on their
schools it is still entirely up
to that council to determine
whether there are funds
available whether the project
makes sense whether there's
reduced that means that
operational funds are not being
spent on electricity but can now
bill twenty nine.
I
see no debate Senator also
closed on the bill thank you Mr
president I move that Senate
twenty nine.
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd
senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen Senator Hamblen
Senator Ingle known Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator manos senator Munoz yes
senator Neville.
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pro
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator sure no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Coleman Senator Wirth.
Early.
Mr president Senator Lopez
unanimous consent to excuse
senator Candelaria until he
objection so ordered by a vote.
Of twenty four in the
affirmative twelve of the
negative Senate bill twenty nine
has passed the Senate Senator
seventy one purple star public
school program and I have to
Senator folks.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules we suspended and that the
See no objections Center pope to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president Senate
bill two seventy one the purple
star school program I also like
developing programs that
recognize the value of military
service service and civic
responsibility the average
military connected child will
experience six to nine different
schools during their K. through
for families and schools New
Mexico has the opportunity to
make things easier for military
families frequently on the move
by stab wishing a purple star
school program that addresses
such as gaps and overlaps in
curriculum different graduation
requirements and course
placement disruption as well as
difficulties related to socially
and emotionally connecting with
to students and families
connected to our nation's
military states such as Ohio
Texas Virginia already recognize
schools meeting this criteria
military.
Designate a page on its website
featuring resources and
information for military
families at least one
supplemental activities such as
an additional professional
military families that have used
the criteria to emphasize
military service and recognize
veterans and active members of
the National Guard and reserves
in their community.
celebrating class members who
commit to serve in the military.
Mr president I would like to
allow my co sponsor senator
create Hemphill to say a few
one with Senator pope the purple
screen program school program is
designed to help schools respond
to that educational and social
and emotional challenges that
and life ready New Mexico is one
of the highest rates of military
volunteerism and it's important
to honor our service members by
deserve thank you Mr president.
Center for.
Mister president we are now
ready for any questions for the
with this program I just urged
the body to supported this is
the right thing to do for
families to move every two to
three years kids go to different
schools and kids go to a to six
schools and twelve years I mean
Mexico is for DOD in the Air
Force and state of of New Mexico
so thank you I appreciate the
Center bring forward both
senators as a matter of fact and
look forward to supporting bill
of us thank you I just stand in
support of this bill I have a I
have several schools in my
district that would probably
qualify for the status and I
think it's going to be a great
Mr president as far as I know we
don't have any active military
students because we're so far
from a base before our schools
that want to participate in a
covered our National Guard or
reserves and in some places you
might have a military recruiter
that's away from military
installation but as I was
mentioning in the presentation
sponsored events that talk about
our present military service and
also recognize students the end
up joining the military so those
those type that type of
participation as a way that the
this in in my public schools as
well even though we're a long
way so thank you for bringing
this forward.
Any further debate senators.
Mr president thank you Mr
president and Senator right I I
do support the bill but I did
just have a little bit of of
questions about exactly how the
they set this up in and exactly
what the benefits they provide
to the military family.
Every make yes Mr president
schools and APS have these
programs are available to where
they help incoming military kids
get acclimated to the school
they're promoting military
purple star program I know we
had discussions before on how
this would be implemented and
and professional development I
had a talk with folks with help
Alamogordo public schools
So much presence Senator do they
do this as a school by Justin
you know encouraging the body to
understand military families are
school that is recognize and as
our purpose our program we need
to set up a P. O. C. and and in
most of the some of the schools
out of already established this
would also have a military
military kids coming into the
school and and just a being
there for them and and
supporting them and promoting
military and and public service.
would have someone.
at the school that would be set
up in designated to work with
those students in those families
to help them make that
so.
With this is that what they
would do is just set up someone
that would work with those
families to help with that
transition into that school.
they would work with the
students and and and help them
in their transition but at the
same time including the student
body promoting military service
program whether they had
military students or not and
then promote the military
service of for students that are
military kids coming in but if
point of contact that does that
within the school Mr president
what
what age levels of schools are
we talking about here is this K.
through twelve versus just high
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator how how often do our
military families move.
Mr president Senator Brandt from
bye bye brancher research is our
branches that are are more often
or branches that are less often.
Mr president Senator Brandt
to your op op you know your
occupational career field
I I know in the Air Force side a
we're trying to move more of
four year assignments but you
still have some folks that leave
three times since I was pretty
average I guess in that respect
as far as how often I moved
spent a really nice three year
but unfortunately my career
field was all state side it only
got to do one tour in the
sandbox a state in the Middle
East I was what it.
hour shifts thirty days straight
instead of while I was at or if
we can Heath
and interesting tour there
Very interesting this is sounds
like a really good program
supported completely thank you
for explaining a little bit more
in detail for us and we urge the
body to support the bill.
Thank you Mr chair Mister
president and members of the
body with the senator yield.
Senator four percent Hemphill
the.
I guess Mr president.
Mr president and Senator Pinto
we're we're promoting service to
our country and and and joining
the military.
sacrifices it's the family
members.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the body and when we
talk about military service and
I think we just have to be
realistic in the sent to those
that are wanting to go into
military service that in times
family in the military also
hindered those promotional
I mean the latter when we when
they are considering going into
the military starting family
Of funding involved with it as
far as housing and all of that
thank you Mr Mr president and
thank you senator stepping in
this bill or thank you thank you
Senator Pinto any further debate
bill two seventy one do now pass
and I ask for a roll call vote
centers where voting tier seats.
All senators to the chamber.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
give Senator guy goes.
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator for
the year.
Senator Padilla yes.
On them.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez Senator Sweetser yes
senator smitteez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senate rules yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Baca.
Senator Gallegos yes.
Senate bill two seventy one has
passed the Senate Senator folk.
Thank you Mr president
I just wanted to say that you
know the priority of this bill
is our military families and
taking care of our National
also competing for our military
missions from the DOD because
they're looking at things like
crime health care housing but
they're also looking at how we
treat our military families so
unanimous consent the Senate the
record show all action for
placing Senate finance committee
sub two percent of bills eight
on final passage been taken
snaps of the debate amendment or
allow Sandra Ely from Department
environment Charles the Salem
New Mexico environmental law
center and Ryan mast director of
environmental health the City of
Albuquerque.
Is about states rights and local
rights.
To regulates in the area of air
and hazardous waste.
this bill allows.
Only in this is important this
is the Senate finance committee
substitute language and work and
I give great credit to senator
Candelaria only if notice public
hearing and a determination
Regarding the local authority
applies to Albuquerque or
Bernalillo county.
that's the definition in the
statute that's been there for
emissions from diesel vehicles.
So Mister president this is.
We can be no more stringent than
federal federal regulations.
And as a result of that.
When you have huge fluctuations
that a lot on the other side of
this argument.
But there's real regulatory
uncertainty when we are forced
to follow the federal
regulations and this bill would
that's what the bill does I'm
happy stand for questions thank
you senator Wirth we're debating
Senate finance committee subsea
percent of bill eight anyone
wishing to debate.
much Mr chairman members of the
committee I stood in support of
Senate bill eight or Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill eight.
wind here there's there's a
community several communities
along the railroad tracks and
over the years we have had.
the the of valley and of course
others inversion and all the
other issues that affect we have
the cold air Mr president
members of the Senate when you
along that particular railroad
area that encompass you know
central state community
affects families
and it's not just been something
you Mr president members of the
Senate but it truly is something
that we have to constantly be
Broadway we're we have a course
the.
The storage facilities for
fossil fuel in the area if we
had other issues in the self
sure that we can take care of
our people and the quality of
life and living so thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Lopez senators were debating
you.
Thomas present I'm happy yield
thank you very much so is is
this is this bill a little bit
more than just about what's
happening in Albuquerque could
you share a little bit about
to the bill one is it gives the
state environment department
through the environmental
improvement board the ability to
set fair and hazardous waste
in the Senate finance committee
with Senator Woods about the
situation on the east side of
the state with.
With the the Air Force bear base
it's just a a real disaster
that's an area that the federal
government doesn't regulate this
bill would allow the state after
So thank you Mr president and
just at the it appears in the
analysis that I'm taking a look
at that it would have some
impact on
of methane and actually
southeast New Mexico.
So madam president I Mr
president Senator Kernan I think
if you're aware there's been a
does have the potential to open
up some other areas related to
you know emissions and I can get
the specifics for that if you
like us so it does give the
narrow lane to be able to
regulate now this would give
them more tools I get the
specifics if you like me to
thank you Mr president yes I
think I'd certainly would like
to have that opportunity to take
out how to how to really resolve
this without absolutely
putting the industry in such a
position that is you know when I
say it over and over and I'm
specifically in my area they
just they packed their bags and
they're gonna go across the
state line and that's what
reduction in in that particular
area in my my part of the state
so what what about the work of
New mocha and the state agencies
have been working I think very
told by my expert who is at the
department of the environment
this wouldn't change that
process so there's been a
stakeholder process for that and
it does it's just I think that
process has been designed it's
been followed I'm told you know
that will continue under the
current process.
many of us here and I don't
disagree but if you look at the
increased production that's
occurring in southeast New
Mexico unfortunately even as
we're trying to come out of this
actually are seeing a decrease
compared to the amount of
production that's occurring so I
think we are being successful I
think the work of the industry
is successful and it just seems
shutting down the permitting
process even if it's temporary
what's more stringent than
saying we can't do have dropped
fracking and if that's what the
federal government that will
can to basically address many of
the issues that are being
addressed by the state in New
Mexico and I just really urge
this body to consider the long
term impact of what we're doing
my part of the state and
ultimately it's going to affect
the whole state of New Mexico
thank you thanks Senator Kernan
for informational purposes for
the body we do have sent us the
in strong support of this bill I
served on the Albuquerque
Bernalillo county air quality
control board during the time
when Albuquerque had the
Albuquerque brown cloud and it
that time was a combination of
wood stoves particulate matter
and inadequate regulation of
construction sites that was
contributing to and the
days anymore and a lot of it was
due to the work of the air
quality control board and the
specific look at what was going
on in Albuquerque and that's why
bill.
Senator Sedillo Lopez Senator
goes and chamber right now will
come back to him centering on.
and things like that certainly
the oil and gas industry that's
in the southeastern part of the
state.
What I don't think people really
what this does.
And whether it's misunderstood
not understood.
You're gonna have some real
dangers was people before long.
you do them you still have to
hire counsel and the amount of
money that goes into these and
the length of time it takes
before these things are settled
is unbelievable.
invariably we change the rules.
In the middle of the game.
We have dairy industry all over
the state that are huge huge
And where they locate.
And it is just something that is
just a step astounds me and
amazes me that we constantly.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator has been a request for a
call the Senate.
If Senator Brandt.
Senator Baca.
Senator Pirtle.
Sergeant are as we are on a call
the Senate.
You're instructed to provide
Senators and to notify them.
a point of border my
understanding is that with our
Senate rules and and when there
is a call of the Senate we are
allowed to participate from our
offices in the capital is that
accurate Senator doctor says
Senator about this as that's the
practice that'll be the utilized
I thank you Mr president.
Senator will send a place for
the sergeant arms.
Laudon Bobby please get back in
president some members here's
what we're gonna do
We're going to roll over this
bill the call will remain on the
bill we're done with third
Sejal maneuver is certainly part
of the rules and just so people
that are watching understand it
can be done and you know we're
going to hear these bills so
so with that Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
order business committee reports
on that order of business
committee reports the reader to
read.
Has had it under consideration
and report same.
With recommendation that it do
not pass.
But that Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
chairman Senator Stefanics I
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion and that the general
submitted Senator those of us to
fund next year Senator Stefanics
Mr president I move adoption of
the committee report Senator is
we have a motion to adopt the
committee report.
bill seventy five as amended has
had it under consideration
report same without
recommendation and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
general affected they were acted
upon individually seeing no
objection the reader to read.
House bill one oh three as
amended do pass.
House bill ninety to do pass.
Senate bill twenty three do pass
as amended.
House bill one fifty seven do
pass and it's referred to the
finance committee.
do pass.
Senate bill for ten do pass as
amended immense referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill three seventy two do
And Senate bill three forty nine
do not pass but that Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill three forty nine do pass
says we have a motion to adopt
the committee report.
I see no objections the
committee board of an adopted of
the journal show they're acted
upon individually.
submitted Senator Joseph
Cervantes chairman.
Senate committee report Mr Mr
about this Mr president I ask
upon individually no objection
the reader to read.
Senate bill thirty four do pass.
Senate bill one twenty three to
do pass.
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bills
fifteen and one ninety nine to
pass.
Senate bill two twenty do pass
as amended.
Senate bill two forty four do
substitute for Senate bill
seventy one do not pass but that
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy one do pass.
respectfully submitted Senator
Joseph Cervantes chairman
Senator about this.
This president three we confirm
the right fifteen committee
reports I believe that's
individually.
Centerman yes Mr president New
Mexico Center rumor jackets the
no objection.
has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Senator
Daniel A. Ivey Soto chairman.
good parts that they be voted
upon with one motion the and the
drones like the direct on
individually see no objections
the reader to read house joint
memorial for to pass.
number one.
And certificates of recognition
numbers eight.
Nine ten and eleven.
chairman Senator Ivey Soto.
What actually amended for that
is where most of the committee
of our.
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
senator William P. sold chairman
Senator cells thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
amended is reported without
recommendation and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
And house bill one thirty eight
do pass and it's referred to the
Saying no objection the German
Department adopted and the
journal so they're acted upon
individually.
Mr president your finance
substitute for Senate bill four
hundred thirty is reported
without recommendation and
further recommends that it now
be referred to the health and
public affairs committee
respectfully submitted senator
motion and the general Fleck
there of voted on individually
see no objection the reader to
read and Senate bill four
hundred thirty eight do not pass
but that Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
respectfully submitted senator
George K. Munoz chairman Senator
me us move adoption the
committee report we have a
motion to that the committee of
our.
amended with emergency clause
has had it under consideration
and reports that same is been
duly enrolled in gross prepare
Torrez signing by the officers
of the Senate respectfully
have a motion to the of the
committee for.
I see no objection the committee
part of an adopted by like ten
ounce of the members of the body
that the officers of the Senate
have signed an open session
I thank you Mr president
unanimous is that we go about
our business introduction of
legislation on that order
business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
and honoring Robert to a mother
I gone for his political
activism and his dedication to
preserving and maintaining
Hispanic heritage in New Mexico
Senate memorial twenty five.
House bill one eighty four
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
And act relating to public
schools allowing an option to
determining instructional time
providing Kate plus Fund K. five
plus funding based on prior year
second and third reporting dates
So Mister president Senator
Kernan said would you mind dad
telling me the committee
assignments on that bill please
Senator Kernan that's the going
house bill one eighty four is
going to Senate finance
Senator Kernan let me pull up
the bill to reach of the title.
for K. five plus under certain
circumstances limiting limiting
called use of K. five plus
extended learning time for the
term instructional time
education or are referred out
Senator Wirth maybe you have a
comment Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president I do have a COVID
let's let's hold this one back
Kernan thank you senator Wirth.
House bill two eighty seven
introduced by Representative
Wonda Johnson.
An act relating to public
education requiring the public
services throughout the state
making appropriation house bill
two eighty seven.
House bill two eighty seven
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate
health requiring coverage of
screening brief intervention and
referral to treatment services
for certain enrollees.
Requiring practitioners to
obtain and review certain
supervision subject to available
funding and resources House Bill
to fifteen House Bill to fifteen
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate
An act relating to insurance
amending repealing and enacting
sections of the New Mexico
insurance code House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Referred to the Senate tax
business the transportation
committee.
That's House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty five house bill one sixty
elective in sixth through eighth
grades amending graduation
requirements requiring one half
unit of financial management
prior to graduation house bill
Representative Figueroa.
And actually to school personnel
changing the requirements for an
alternative level one teaching
license for special education
six House Bill to twenty eight
introduced by Representative
Castellano.
And act relating to taxation
changing a distribution of the
business transportation
committee house bill two twenty
eight house bill one sixty eight
introduced by Representative
Ortiz and act relating to public
Senate tax business
transportation committee house
bill one sixty eight.
House bill one thirty one
introduced by Representative
department providing duties
creating the Assistant Secretary
of Hispanic Education in the
public education department
providing duties making
appropriation house bill one
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for nope sorry.
vehicles adding definitions to
the motor vehicle code providing
for autonomous motor vehicles
requiring permits allowing
platooning of motor vehicles
For Committee substitute for
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill two seventy House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill two fifty six and
act relating to workforce
opportunities in selected rural
and tribal communities House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill two fifty six.
is referred to the Senate Indian
rural and cultural affairs
committee that's house commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty six House Bill to
literacy and oral language
development framework making
appropriation house bill two
nineteen.
House Bill to nineteen having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Education
a license endorsement for
secondary computer science
making appropriation house bill
one eighty eight US bill one
eighty eight having been read
twice by title is referred to
introduced by Representative
but it just an act relating to
human rights extending the scope
of the Human Rights Act to
actions by public bodies and
state agencies house bill one
House bill two seventy seven
introduced by Representative
Harper an act relating to public
house bill two seventy seven
House Bill to seventy seven
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
that's house bill two seventy
that meet Public Education
Department contents and
performance providing for an
ethnic studies counsel to assist
the department with curriculum
development House Bill to twenty
seventy six introduced by
Representative Chandler.
And act relating to the
environment amending section of
the air quality control act to
allow the department of
environment to deny a permit
To the Senate conservation
committee that's house bill
seventy six.
House bill one fifty one sixty
five introduced by
Representative Anderson for the
legislative finance committee
house bill one sixty five this
bill one sixty five having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate finance committee
that's house bill one sixty five
and house bill one eighty four
plus under certain circumstances
limiting limiting co use of K.
five plus an extended learning
time for determining
instructional time providing K.
referred.
To the Senate Education
Committee then Senate finance
committee that's house bill one
eighty four.
Senator Wirth.
You Mr president is that we go
for committees to meet so now be
the time for committee chairs to
make their announcements thank
you senator Wirth we're gonna
start with center Casey Pino.
Thank you Mr chairman in the
Senate health and public affairs
and so in those will be in
addition to the ones that you
see in your blue the committee
list but they include beside
senators Hickey.
by the Gonzalez this is the a
lotus to thanks and Ortiz Y.
Pino so that'll be at two
o'clock thank you thank.
we're gonna get tied up this
week with house bill two
starting looking at language and
and wrapping house bill two up I
just want people to know the
the task force but I bet there's
been.
Under two hundred task force
created in the legislature this
year so every member should have
their fill a task force.
up I don't know if we'll get
back to the full amount of a
hundred million oil prices are
on the rise consumptions up and
we still have an executive order
cautious of so thank you Senator
media center Stefanics.
Thank you Mr president your
Senate conservation committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
nine AM we have one Senate bill
president not I'm just delighted
to hear that production set up
and and and people are for our
the prices at that I wonder if
one of the chair with that of
what's it looking like now and
do we know down the road what
that's gonna look like and you
can share that.
Mr president center the the last
thing I heard about rig counts
there's no permitting amendment.
Alright sorry center thank you
very much I that's that's what I
was concerned about thank you so
the Senate stand in recess until
six o'clock this evening.
Seeing no objection the senator
Senator recess in the six PM
this evening a sergeant of arms
of you can just leave everything
