Join us yes thank you thank you
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee so good to see
you this morning on this you to
fall.
No snow we New Mexico morning
what's so beautiful about New
Mexico is the fact that we can
have a snow so one day sunshine
impacts our beautiful blue skies
so thank you for having me and
it's good to see you this
morning even though it's for
virtual right I hope you and
your families are doing well and
say.
I'd like to
first of all she expressed my.
Appreciation for your confidence
in my leadership of children
youth and families department I
can say that I will do
everything in my power to lead
the agency with integrity and
openness.
To be the collaborative and
accountable.
To the people of New Mexico in
particular ways to do as our
lawmakers so thank you very much
for your confidence in me at it
in serving in this role I would
like to begin by introducing
Senator folks with me today that
have worked very very hard and
of bringing together of Bill
that we believe she's achieves a
great milestones in serving
Indian families in New Mexico
and addressing their needs with
respect to child welfare and
well being.
First I'd like to introduce my
deputy cabinet secretary of
children youth and families
department Beth Delia.
And that's if you could just
great thank you for that
best comes to us from with with
really decades of excellent
experience in the law as well as
in the child welfare system and
in the education.
Asian world I know that bass she
was the
director of the institute of
public law at the university of
New Mexico and I worked with
mostly and strengthening our the
educational
programs for our judges across
New Mexico and serve as of eight
justice and Chief Justice of the
New Mexico Supreme Court but
more importantly best is been
involved with the
With the support of
professionals across the board
in child welfare as the director
of the program what's
family and social justice center
I I would step and maybe I know
they changed the name years ago
back.
She has been instrumental in
really providing support to
professionals in our child
welfare system particularly
lawyers Gardi not license and
others were in the child welfare
system so I'm I must say that
it's really a pleasure and honor
that she has joined our team at
children youth and families
department and she's hit the
ground running and implementing
a great deal
At work at two really
fulfill our responsibilities
noted that that was Department
to circle object and the
families that that are in crisis
well
I'd also like to introduce and
three other members of our team
that have worked diligently not
only this past year but beyond
in really trying to drafts a
bill that we believe is
appropriate for New Mexico and
serving our native families and
that is our director of the
tribal affairs office at CYFD
Donald and servicing now
we also have
On our team since yet shapers
who's been a long standing in we
and and be there at CYFD
brings to this team are very
very important perspective about
cultural sensitivity
and also just if I would I I
don't want to skip over not only
in Donna would you want to wait
there Donald and comes to us
from act would do that I was
elected maximum effect on what
you want to stay a little bit
about yourself and then return
to soon be at in the state.
Okay they want to see if they'll
help a white guy you tactician
Amanda we might set establish
trying to stock my wash them I'm
good morning members of the
committee thank you so much for
allowing us to be here today my
name is Donna Lynne serwis see
now I am the director for the
office of tribal affairs and I
am from the public Aqaba thank
you.
State city and Sen Cynthia you
want to say just a bit about
your background.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is Cynthia shavers I'm a member
of the let me try to North
Carolina and I am serve CYFD for
the past twenty five years happy
to be with you all this morning
thank you.
Thank you Cynthia and finally
last but not least is Cindy Eric
on Cindy is a lawyer who has
served with the department for a
number of years and it's really
been that the.
If I may the intellectual of.
Behind our efforts to draft a
bill that we think is really
a strong bills and so since you
want to introduce yourself.
Thank you secretary good morning
Committee chair and committee
members my name is Cindy are
gone got Dave Bennett Cindy
Oregon chia.
I'm I'm from Navajo Nation I've
been practicing law for a number
of years I started my career as
a probation officer with the
CYFD so government of complete
up.
Circle come back to CYFD and
currently working with the
office of general counsel and
I'm really excited to be here
and it's quite an honor thank
you.
So with the members of the
committee chair and and others
we are here to express our
strong support.
For the family in the family
protection act of that is been
presented to you we have worked
diligently for a long time with
our tribal partners
and work closely with
Representative.
To address all the concerns and
and really create a piece of
legislation that quite frankly I
would consider the best in the
country
we have twenty three tribal.
Communities governments in New
Mexico or nations and and and
really
reaching out and working
collaboratively each of these
separate governments is our
primary of focus and goals and a
team of people not only here to
date but also at CYFD others
involved as well as with tribal
communities and and import we
present this bill to for
consideration we're happy today
to discuss the the over arching
purpose of the bill as well as
how it will operate and it is
designed to really what the.
Focus on the the city of the
tribal families that serve in to
make sure that when CYFD is
involved with these families
that is culturally sensitive
responsive and respectful to
families and that we are doing
all we can to build out a system
here that
takes in to consider the
importance.
Portents of cultural identity
the importance of knowing who
you are where you come from
where the blood in your veins is
coming from and that in and of
itself will create stability and
strength in the family seven Sir
and the children Sir so it is
our intent to really
pushed forward with the.
Commented that would be a lot of
investment resources to do to
make sure that the purposes of
the bill are carried out as as
intended and with that I will
turn it over to get you
Secretary back yoyo who will
give you just an over over
arching
presentation about how would
bill works and I will stand for
questions and comments.
From the committee thank you
chair.
Thank you secretary of good
morning madam chair and members
of the committee as the
secretary said I am Beth Kelly
I'm deputy secretary of children
youth and families department
and I thank you very much for
inviting us here today to
discuss H. B. one thirty five.
This bill would consolidate all
provisions related to Indian
children in one article in the
children's school called the
Indian family protection act
this act not only incorporates
the requirements of the federal
Indian child welfare act to
state law but expands those
protections in important ways
because the Indian child welfare
act or it what is the basis of
the bill I'd like to start with
it.
As you probably know it what was
passed by Congress over forty
years ago to address the
overwhelmingly high numbers of
Indian children being removed
from their families and tribal
communities and being placed in
on the in homes at that time as
many as one for Indian children
who were removed from their
families these removals for
traumatic for the children and
families and deprives children
of their culture and while it is
a truism that children are our
future in the case of Indian
children the removal rate was so
high that it threatens the
continued vitality in existence
of Indian nations pueblos and
tribes.
It was provisions are intended
to overcome the cultural
mistakes ignorance and implicit
and overt bias in the child
welfare and point systems that
led to the often unnecessary and
always traumatic removal of
Indian children it does this
with five main tools that
protect the rights of Indian
children parents and tribes.
First it does so by requiring
state child welfare agencies to
use active not reasonable
efforts to prevent the break up
of the Indian family second by
establishing preferences for
where Indian child displaced if
removal or adoption is necessary
third I requiring particular
kinds of evidence from
specialized witnesses called be
qualified expert witnesses.
Forth by requiring the highest
burden of proof that is proof
beyond a reasonable doubt when
terminating the parents rights
to an Indian child finally by
clarifying state and tribal
jurisdiction in cases involving
Indian children.
All of these tools are preserved
in the Indian family protection
act but the Indian family
protection act includes
additional provisions that will
further enhance the
effectiveness of that.
For example this bill defines
key terms that are not defined
in FY including active efforts
extended family and victims can.
It also expands the definition
of Indian child to be more
inclusive and to assure that a
child status as an Indian child
is based solely on a political
relationship that is membership
in a federally recognized tribe
and not on rates it also lists
factors to help courts determine
when a particular decision is in
an Indian child's best interests
including for example whether
the decision will help the
Indian child nineteen familial
ties such as planchet as well as
political cultural social or
spiritual relationships with
their tribe and tribal
community.
This bill would require active
efforts in collaboration with
the Indian child's tribe or
tribes to begin that
investigation before a court
cases ever filed this changes
designed to identify Indian
children as early as possible to
prevent removal and one removal
is necessary to ensure that an
Indian child placed with
extended family or within the
tribe immediately.
When a child is not placed in
the preferred placement the bill
requires CYFD to review the
placement every thirty days and
the court must reconsider the
placement every six months to
encourage continued active
efforts to place the child
according to the preferences the
bill gives Indian children the
same right to services as any
other child in the state with
the expenses paid by the same
mechanisms as for non Indian
children.
The bill clarifies the tribes
have the right of first refusal
to hear cases involving their
children live off the
reservation and clarifies the
process for transferring cases
to the tribe.
The bill clarifies the tribe's
may participate in all state per
per proceedings involving their
children and provides the tribe
the right to intervene at any
point the bill also allows
certain other individuals who
are important to the child to
intervene it's intervention in
the child's best interests.
The bill requires the court to
make specific findings Act
disposition about how the
child's cultural needs have been
met how CYFD involved the tribe
in deciding how to meet the
child's cultural needs and the
efforts made by CYFD to avoid
the breakup of the Indian
child's family.
And finally the bill requires an
adoptive parent was not a member
of the Indian child's tried to
enter into a cultural compact
with the tribe to assure that
the child will be act be able to
actively participate in cultural
learning activities and engage
with family members after the
adoption the tribe may elect not
to enter into a cultural compact
if it so desires the bill
addresses many other details far
too many to go into here today
all are designed to protect the
best interests of the Indian
child and to ensure the rights
of the child's parents and the
Indian child's tried.
Having reviewed some of the key
provisions and purposes of the
bill I'd like to take a moment
to highlight why it's important
for New Mexico to enact this
line now.
As you may know the federal
Indian child welfare act is
being challenged in federal
court opponents of what are
attempting to dismantle it was
protections with two main
arguments first that will
violates the tenth amendment of
the constitution by requiring
the state to implement federal
child welfare mandates this
argument falls away if New
Mexico adopts the requirements
and protections in its own law
the second challenge the Indian
child welfare act suggests that
it will violates the
constitution's equal protection
clause by treating Indian
children differently based on
their race as I mentioned
earlier this bill to provide
Indian child exclusively in
terms of membership or
eligibility for membership in an
Indian tribe making clear that
the child's status is based on a
political relationship not race
or ethnicity.
Most important however is that
this bill this bill confirms New
Mexico's ongoing commitment to
Indian children their families
and the nation's problems and
tribes the Indian family
protection act emphasis on
communication and collaboration
with our tribal partners
embraces our government
government relationships and
respects the importance of
tribal and cultural connections
to Indian children.
Thank you for allowing us this
opportunity I'll turn this back
to secretary Vigil and be happy
to answer any questions you may
have.
Thank you thank you.
Okay.
But means secretary yes thank.
Thank you very much
Madam chair is let me just ask
Miss Iglesias question is is
the.
Senator Pinto there in the room.
madam secretary's but she's on
the phone she's not here okay
this thank you very much for
that clarification I didn't want
to be inconsiderate to her and I
just didn't want to thank her
for inviting us here today to
discuss this important piece of
legislation so I did want to
The inconsiderate I can't see
very well my eyesight is getting
worse and worse as I age that I
couldn't tell if she was
actually present and I I hope
she is my phone and it's it's
just to to have her there in the
here today this morning I want
to thank deputy cabinet
secretary Beth you here for that
overview of the bill and just
briefly explain that we have
worked very diligent and
collaborating with our.
I will partners around the state
of New Mexico and of course the
Navajo Nation as well they have
I think this is a very robust
bills because of that
collaboration and taking into
consideration inclusive of
individual tribal members or for
communities and making sure
we're listening to what they
consider as important in the
bill with that I would like to
just open it up for questions
for members of the community and
and we're happy to answer any
questions that we are able to
answer.
Thank you Secretary Mr Chairman
usually we have a bill before us
so we would have we would have
very specific questions we don't
have the bill before us so my
question to you is where is
house bill one thirty five now.
The.
Secretary trying to read.
What the staff thank you madam
chair members Matt madam chair
members of the community best
can you remind me where we are
with that I know it's moving
through the house I don't know
if it has one more committee to
be heard and and one that is
scheduled you please answer the
question thanks thank you
Secretary madam chair members of
the committee that bills drive
to committees on the house side
and is now on the house floor so
hopefully we'll be having a vote
on the house side and you'll be
seeing the bill shortly in the
Senate right thank you thank you
W. secretary so to the committee
do we have any questions on this
bill that we can get.
Yes.
But.
Yes.
No woman in tow.
Thank you thank you thank you
for your presentation and all
that are participating.
I appreciate
you coming today.
There are certain scenarios as
far as
that I'm concerned about
especially when we have parent
or guardian.
That.
Actually in my area we have a
high rate
The W. Y..
Do we would there be.
By the way are you there.
With this bill that wouldn't
make it so easily for them to
cut hi with the parent that
because the car straight it.
I think it's based on the job
probably a based on the child
ages the but.
it appears that.
Some sort of
What do.
Bill from a parent despite this
substance abuse issue if that
stress alcohol verses the other
very result.
Drugs that are out there will
give bill allow at least some.
Is a yes but I'm I'm not really
sure but I know that that can be
engagement of the child on that
part but let's say the child is
not with the parent and they got
stopped that big end up you know
doing time in jail
they would it was complete
because any of the child with
the.
Madam chair members of the
committee
The question you ask is I think
goes more to how the department
what what the department's
obligations are with respect to
parents in general who have
substance abuse issues and are
incarcerated and so certainly in
that scenario the department I
just I urge you of incarceration
and not.
For the parent child
relationship
solely because of incarceration
and and instead must really take
proactive measures to ensure the
child as it relationship with
the incarcerated parents.
with respect to substance abuse
and we certainly see many cases
where parents
are indeed causing harm or
neglect to child because of
substance abuse but I don't see
that it would be any different
for a need of American and
parents who suffers from being
treated anymore
harshly as well in that
situation but rather this bill
would really
Require the department to work
closely not only with the with
the Indian parents in addressing
the causes and conditions that
led to.
Removal of the child from that
hearing but perhaps more
importantly ensuring that that
Indian baby or child has a
relationship with tribes with
extended family members in the
tribal community as well as your
aunt so it almost makes makes it
more
greater obligations role in the
part of the state to work with
the tribal community and
ensuring that that child just
isn't removed from the home and
and placed in and out of a
preferred placement on our out
of tribal placement so
those that's my response and and
that's anyone else on my team
has any further information to
provide Senator Pinto in it with
respect to her concerns about
you know ensuring that
parental relationships are not
severed
when there's awful help Houston
and and ensuring that we do all
we can to address the problem in
nineteen that relationship.
Thank you secretary of so we do
look forward to seeing this bill
in this committee and this is
great to have this presentation
so we'll be thinking about it
before it does any of your staff
have any other comments.
I would I would certainly open
up to them we had senator John
sorry.
It.
There's one more concern I have
is.
So if this if it passes.
The
Let's say we have out of state.
Family because of what Navajo
nation's located.
Out of state family would they
still be able to kind of be
under the protection of the law.
I would that child just have to
actually be.
it I guess the residency in that
sense that cross state
of the Navajo Nation.
I'm I'm going to defer to bath
and maybe Cindy to answer that
question I know what I would
like to answer but I'm not sure
it's correct me if more
expertise on that legal matters
so
after Cindy want to.
And Sir Senator yes action eight
chair thank you Secretary and
thank you chairman pent up for
your questions members of the
committee you know I don't think
that this bill actually changes
anything in regard to that kind
of placement the first preferred
placement in any case involving
an Indian child is with the
child's extended family and that
can be wherever that extend
extended family is located so
that is the number one placement
and that's where we were trying
to place initially if we
couldn't do it initially we
would work assiduously to make
sure that we got the child with
their extended family whether it
was in Arizona and the Navajo
Nation or here in New Mexico so
I don't think that I don't think
there's any change in those
preferred placements in that
regard.
Thank you thank you Mr chair but
that's all I have right now
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you and again thank you
the secretary Vigil and and
you're fine staff for visiting
with us this morning and again
we really look forward to just
getting into more detail about
this very important bill when I
arrived in our community.
So I thank you hi and welcome
everyone.
We have thank you now for so
we're going to move on to Senate
bill one ninety rural hospital
services funds and.
Senator Stefanics.
will be presenting thank you
both have been thank you Mr
chair madam chair I need to.
In this problem but.
I would.
This is for the is it.
I
thank you and it's a pleasure to
be here I am presenting Senate
bill one ninety which is the
governor's bill awful and it's
to create a hospital fund for
hospitals in counties with less
than one hundred thousand
people.
There are twenty four counties
in the state that are in those
counties
the four counties that would not
qualify are doing Jana
Bernalillo Santa Fe in San Juan
because there are over a hundred
thousand
Mr chair there is an amendment I
have a signed copy of the in.
I think.
Everybody yes this.
Yeah right and so
Many this is the amendment to
the bill for the moment.
Yes.
For discussion purposes right
move adoption for discussion
purposes second.
So.
Explaining them yes thank you Mr
chair on page we were asked by
the hospital association and of
Presbyterian Hospital to make
some clarification for this bill
and so I'm sorry this money come
in late but we are working to
make sure we're gonna.
Have a substitute bill here.
So on page three.
Representative Eli five and six
and we put in a very page three
for we have five and six.
this new paragraph that provides
acute care services or that
associates with the separate
hospital for the provision of
surgery ancillary services not
required to be provided by the
rural hospital by the provisions
of the hospital funding act or
psychological services.
And on page three they are
straight lines twenty three
twenty five.
And lines wanted to paid for
this is to make some
clarification of what hospitals.
The qualifying hospitals with
the number one and number two
what kinds of services can be
provided is very expensive the
ancillary service.
Thank you for so I was there any
opposition to adoption of this
ammendment.
Saying that the government
development back to the bill
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee so this bill would
really help
expand services to those
hospitals now we have a hospital
in let's see counting is going
to be filled and as for
operating services not for
capital and it's to help expand
services and we all know that
one of the needs of our state
is in fact behavioral health
services we don't have in the
rural areas dialysis there's
often times when people have
orthopedic surgeries they don't
have we have as opposed to them
they don't have a home care they
don't have transportation to
medical services and the list
goes on.
R. as many of you know Mr chair
under present six counties one
of those counties Lincoln
County.
And when I was first down Corona
at the senior center I had a
couple of hours.
Has been come to me and say you
know we're gonna have to leave
our family home my wife has
cancer he needs home care she's
cancer treatment and we don't
have the transportation's gonna
take as the Albuquerque all the
time and we're gonna have to
move to Albuquerque to get the
services that we use no services
within a few hours near us and
this is this bill would allow
all close by house act read also
now that could add on some
services that might this is that
family also the Valencia County
when they build a new hospital
they might only have an acute
care but they might be put on
the health and other services so
today with me I have several
experts I have twenty five
sitting next to me from the New
Mexico hospital association I
think this will be
No one.
Okay so I have I'm gonna need
some experts.
Nicole Comeaux from the Medicaid
director she's on okay secretary
David Scrase that here's not
okay so the call is the next
expert in perhaps County cumple
from former secretary of
department of health
she.
From Nicole and then we could
hear from Troy okay growth and
taxes on full okay.
So let's not fall Nicole.
Morning Mr chair members the
committee thank you senator can
you hear me alright yes.
Okay I'm very little under the
weather bear with my voice here
and at thank you all for having
this morning it's great to be
with you all and.
Senator Cervantes said ratings
Nico and the Medicaid director
and.
We would have at the the
privilege honestly of
administering the funds it
should this bill pass I wanted
to speak to a little bit about
why Medicaid's relevant here and
why we think this is that a
critical bill as you all may
have heard us speak to and and
other hearings we now cover over
nine hundred and sixty thousand
New Mexicans almost half the
population and as a result I
really feel a responsibility
with the majority of the market
share to help ensure that we
have an adequate provider
networks throughout the state to
take care of not only our
members but all New Mexicans.
In this bill really helps us do
just that it's a critical
building block in I think a much
larger set of efforts that we're
trying to engage in this
department in partnership with
the governor's office and you
all as legislators.
I'm a COVID who showed us
anything it is that our state
does not have the capacity to
serve all New Mexicans we don't
even have the capacity to
stabilize those that are needing
care across the state currently
as you all are well aware if we
did our hospitals wouldn't have
spent the last six months under
water and the last three months
increases standards of care.
The solution really isn't to
continue to fly and travelling
nurses long term or try to
support ourselves with this at
supplemental and workforce but
it is instead to put in place
bills like this that will help
us grow facilities in our own
state attract talent in New
Mexico and have a sustainable
long term infrastructure that
can really support our needs.
New Mexico still only has
seventeen point seven hospital
beds per ten thousand residents
compared to the national average
of twenty three point five beds
per ten thousand that puts us
forty fifth in the country and
again just highlighting the need
for more capacity.
However would hospitals try to
establish themselves in some of
the smaller areas as you call
can imagine they run into
significant challenges in
standing up and really being
successful in those early years
these hospitals have lower
patient volume by nature the
fact that they're in rural areas
but they still have the same
fixed costs that continue to
keep them Beijing facing
financial challenges in those
early years with the
establishing adequate Asian
based.
So according to the center for
health care quality in payment
reform more than half of small
rural hospitals nationwide that
have closed in recent years hi
losses of more than ten percent
in the year prior to their
closure and over a quarter of
hospitals had losses of more
than twenty percent so that's
what this bill would really help
address as the hospital stand
that I get their patient base
really grow their staffing needs
are and continue to deal with
frankly a large Medicaid
population and a large
population of still potentially
uninsured folks at this would
help support their losses in
those first years as they got
and financial footing that was
more adequate so that we are in
strong support of this effort
and think that it will really
help us address this ongoing
need and I'm happy to stand for
further questions.
Right back to you Senator this.
Chair and committee members a
report from the New Mexico
hospital association and we also
stand support here privilege to
assist with this bill I think
many of the things that Senator
Sanchez shared and director
global
or actor was on may I would only
on this those with covers of
that from my career in opening
and running hospitals especially
in rural areas I have to move
vote five hospitals in new areas
throughout my career.
One of the challenges you have
as a hospital leader in adding
new services is in the start up
phase of any new service so it's
a completely new hospitals the
same thing on a magnified basis
but even just a small service
your existing hospital there
once and psychiatric services
you want to add home health.
You've got to want to get the
volume which is always small
rural area but you've got the
ramp up time to build so you
bring in a new psychiatrist if
you want to bring in behavioral
services their schedules awful
day one yet their paycheck is
full they want all of the
infrastructure costs that you
have to have to the clinic for
the medications for their staff
is building one and so you have
a challenge as a hospital
administrator to say if I have
to lose money in the start up
period what services do I take
away.
Because my serve my funding is
already obligated to the
services that I already find and
often times or additional
services that if they were fully
ramped up you can bring into
your community it's not all
services are some services that
are too small to ever have
cancer services orthopedic
services but there are many
services home health behavioral
health in some communities like
a road also like center
sponsored a oncology service
could be a possibility if there
are the opportunities to not
have those losses at the
beginning and we see the
benefits of this fund for rural
communities of the state to be
able to provide services that
they have not before by bridging
that gap and helping them make
decisions to say we don't have
to take away from existing
services to us services because
we can have a measure in this
bond we can apply to to help
offset some of those costs.
Providing more access to our
citizens is what we're about
access to health care in the
need to keep it as close to home
usually provides for better
compliance by the patients into
treatment
as well as compliance in meeting
with their providers due to
similar situations like Senators
want to mention some when you
take a far from home simply
don't have the ability to thank
so we appreciate the imports
it's and efforts of HSD in the
governor and looking at the
Valencia County area and the
potential for facility there but
using this bill to expand to not
just once you County but also
including the needs of a many of
the other rural parts our state.
And I would stand for any
questions of course thank you
and so former delayed secretary
and my constituents are Kathy
Konkol I did want to add
anything to this.
This very briefly thank you Mr
chair madam chair and members of
the committee yes as former
secretary of health that was
painfully aware of the lack of
access currently I'm special
director for the governor and I
I work with the state DFA's
hospital facilities and they
cannot serve all of the safety
net needs of the state
interestingly I've been
contacted by a couple of
counties I hope some of them are
able to provide public content
and they are already on their
way trying to develop a
behavioral health beds which
there is a significant we have a
terrible need for that there's a
paucity of services in the state
so I stand strongly in support
of this bill I think it will
make a difference in rural and
frontier communities I think
with creativity we can bring
home health we can bring
services are two places where
they don't have it now so thank
you for this opportunity and for
considering this bill click
here.
Senator do there are other
individuals who would like to
stand up to support I don't know
anybody in opposition okay well
let's well let's try that first
is there anyone opposed to this
very important.
That anyone in support and
please stand up and be
recognized here and here in the
okay do we have anybody online
that the wants to weigh in on
support.
yes we have a couple people for
and.
Mr Corcoran.
Yes this is Frank corporate can
you hear me yes.
Thank you I appreciate the time
to speak to the committee here
today I really want to speak in
strong support of the bill
and I'm a CEO at Sierra Vista
hospital Sierra County so this
is a boots on the ground view
for you guys to to come maybe so
from our perspective.
Hello Hospital we serve the the
county it's eleven thousand plus
lives are schools in the county
and when we did our community
needs assessment back in late
two thousand twenty number one
needed a county is behavioral
health expression of a in the
substance abuse area currently
we send all of our behavioral
health patients to Los crucis an
hour away or even further some
of the taxes on the Albuquerque
and those patients get
transferred they get into an
inpatient program they're
discharged and then they come
back to our community and they
don't have the follow up
resources so we've been looking
at adding behavior health
services here just con is Troy
alluded to earlier.
We'd love to add behavioral
health beds and actually
behavioral health program that
goes from impatient to partial
hospitalization to intensive
outpatient to our routine
outpatient behavioral health
clinics and that's the best
practice for behavioral health
of getting those patients from
an inpatient stabilized and and
treatment through throughout
that program to get them back to
the community to be and better I
guess in a better place than
they were when they came in.
So in doing due diligence and
look at this we have been doing
performers said adding budget
and adding in may two budget
which is made the tax budget and
the performers all show the same
thing as a critical access
hospital I can only and ten
budget for behavioral health and
I would need to have average
daily census of twenty to break
even the reason they and as
sixty percent of the patient
population of behavior health
needs a Medicaid and twenty
percent's Medicare and cost
based reimbursement for critical
access hospitals we would lose
money on that because the
Medicaid rate is not near the
chair right so I'm strongly in
support of this this bill
because this could help us to
add those needed services in the
community and break even or or a
little better without support of
the financial support.
It's doing from the beginning I
can't recently going on a
service that's going to lose
money the hospitals are barely
keep in I guess a head to head
above water with the pandemic
the cost of travel nurses all
these different things that have
kept us going fortunately for us
and I think many of the other
rural hospitals is the provider
of the funds as help stabilizes
through this pandemic those
funds of a more likely not gonna
act of going to go away internet
to see many more much for these
funds so we need to come up with
innovative ideas to help us add
services and again we're trying
able health because that's our
number one need in the county
and my role I've been doing
turnaround projects as the CNO
CEO over the last five to six
years been on for projects.
These typical hospital hospitals
have average of five days cash
on hand
and we've been able to turn
around most of them just by be
doing due diligence adding
services that make money it's
very hard for us to add a
service that does that justified
the end for the means basically
we have to make sure we can
afford it and and that makes
money then sent to a hospital
thank you Mr what was stated.
who is that last we had and
Mister Lawrence ran.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee leader and
registered lobbyists for
Presbyterian healthcare services
we stand in support of the
legislation it and when you
think of Presbyterian hospitals
most people think of rust or
Presbyterian in downtown
Albuquerque or Santa Fe but we
also run several rural hospitals
and so I'd like to speak a
little bit just to the process
of how this legislation was
crafted we appreciate the fact
that the governor's office and
secretary Scrase Nicole called
me a and and senators to phonics
reach out and ask for input on
how can we make a how can the
craft of bill and how can they
craft a process is gonna work
and and allow rural communities
to have access to hospitals and
so you know they reach out to us
for input and tapped into our
experience and we actually got
to tap into ways because before
he went to the hospital
association Mr Clarke serve our
rural hospitals and ran a real
hard hospitals for Presbyterian
and so we just appreciate the
input and and the willingness
for all the stakeholders to
trying come up with something
that works so we can better
serve the health care needs of
our community we think this is a
good piece of legislation and
it's good program and
appreciated to pass from the
committee and and hopefully this
bill keeps moving and we can get
something done the session so
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Lawrence right to the
committee we go anybody want to
talk about this Senator right.
Thank you Mr chair vice chair.
Poet laureate.
One of the first things that led
to wonders a picture that Mr
Farrand use these at a recent
picture.
Anyway now I've got I've got a
specific question.
Care center and it's on it's on
page.
Talk about a family that has a
population of a hundred thousand
for viewers who were talking
about
I mean the definition of a clash
AT camp if you County that is
over five hundred thousand and
there's been there's been five
of those for a while and and
senator Representative slash
Center something change but
Bernalillo Dona Ana Santa Fe
Santa and San Juan Senator we've
Class As counties are just we're
just wondering why we we chose
to use the definition of a
question from reporters.
Could abuse chronic carries it
would not clash right here
outside question County I just
wondering because we we try to
be when we when we grab stuff we
try to be careful from now about
usually numbers and and go with
with class A. and and try to do
that so wizard particular
reserves what the drafters Joe
chair Mister chair I'm gonna
defer that to Nicole our
Medicaid director for any
comment on that or kiss
technical.
Mr Chairman chair and members
committee and appreciate that
comment there in drafting and
there was a choice to try to not
reference other at sections or
statutes or regulations so at
the choice to use the number was
and maybe
but here your points and I'm
Senator clinics differ here on
and how we think to address any
further.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair Senator your
call I just think we need to do
is to is to look at that with
you graduation she of if there's
any particular reason to do it
different of our our financial
aspects really all the we are I
guess we we see this bill wish
last year addition first time in
its business Mr chair chair and
senator I think because the
funds are available this is the
first you're you're saying this.
She is a.
I Mr chair that in center is
there is a high fifty million
something thank you ultimately
it is your right after to.
Mr chair I cannot to others and
help to.
Was served critical which is
going to we we deal with
everything you need to finance
up for grabs sometimes so.
Hopefully that'll work out so
thank you Mr infection.
On.
Anyone else
Madam chair did you want to
weigh in on this.
No I have no question but if
there are not any more questions
thank you make the motion or get
past okay so we as amended.
so we have a motion for do pass
as amended do we have a second.
Senator Sanchez.
Seconds
the clerk shall call the roll
have it this is there any
opposition.
Seeing none you have to pass
thank you.
Mr chair and members of the
committee.
It
is one ninety one.
Senator.
Mr chair I think it double.
News site yes.
RT.
Committee.
These include.
K..
What is.
To find a better class of
friends.
Plus the.
Well before we got a bill and
now it's our farmers program
Senator Mary Kate and is with
us.
Yes.
One members because you know
school for middle school and.
Senator Wirth.
And I will follow great is our
for have a nice.
Okay.
Thank you thank you for joining
Mr chairman in one one third of
the compact.
Or for.
All right we're for those years.
Okay so Senator please tell us
about your bill.
Proud to team up here hi Senator
of finance committee colleague
here and reports in a bill one
ninety one and what does that
provides direct relief and
facilitates recovery so for the
industry that proper houses are
you've been hit the hardest
during this pandemic in that
hospitality tourism so it's
appropriation bill it goes to
different agencies the the
initial appropriation of ten
million dollars to go directly
to the tourism department and
these funds more than just
marketing they're targeted for
local events and local program
so that's in my area that's the
health of you pulling regarder
maybe Dawn Los crucis as the
whole enchilada fiesta but these
are for very selective local
events that we can we can
promote market and then the
second piece of this is seven
and a half of a million dollars
the table to workforce solutions
department and that is to
directly address the workforce
shortages that we see in the
hospitality tourism right now
and our hotels and restaurants
and so we we hope that providing
this funding to this to this
industry will help
what helping move towards a full
recovery because because heaven
knows we need to thank you know
how they can get to so this
appropriation is designed to do
just that.
Senator Gonzales.
Members of.
I would just like to add the you
know all.
Of the it was very eloquent
expressed by.
Senator Diamond the.
Tourism and the.
Many parts of the state you know
the referred to like the
northern part.
With the tourism no this the
edge of the economic engine for
us in the.
An example of yesterday you know
when I made the announcement of
health schemes value safety
twenty four inches of snow.
Well that's good for our water
that we need that's good for
product so for us that's also.
Really ansys our ski areas to be
able to bring in the tourism to
bring in those customers you
know and the recreation parks so
that's just one part of it the
other part of that is on Senate
finance so we do have a the
secretary committed as we you
know you know I made a
commitment of that also Senator
Seychelles.
Really strong.
Warning this could cause of.
Mexico.
And the number of jobs that it
brings is very small compared to
the opportunity that we have
here so with that you know suits
mention of this industry has
been hit very hard by the COVID
nineteen.
The just bring it back that
foundation back to the and then
also you know that encouragement
of
Of people to come into the
Mexico you know the.
You know US economic part of.
Receiving.
We have to offer.
State of.
The.
Right districts of.
L. six more.
So thank you for the opportunity
six.
Currently I just Allison to do
are laid off in support of this
bill thank you very much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee Allison Smith
registered lobbyists in New
Mexico restaurant association
our CEO Carol white is on New
Ask questions for you as an
expert but the New Mexico
restaurant association has
endorsed this effort thanks
Senator Gonzales and diamond for
bringing this forward as was
mentioned restaurants have been
hit incredibly hard trying to
bring back our workforce is what
is is paramount to a successful
industry as well as bring back
our events thank you so much for
your time consideration and my
constituents my constituents.
You are the man.
No longer constituents two
thousand twenty four you still
are.
As soon.
This week's operation of this
New Mexico Hospitality's
Association and how I use and I
need requires our executive
director president CEO of New
Mexico hospitalizations also
online
really what this is about is
figuring out how to have local
recovery right this is a hugely
impacted industries hotels also
know whether brushing facilities
and all the other support
industries we try to recover
from the pandemic in the state
has done something to help them
recover but if we have a focus
on local recovery and so that's
what this money does is it gets
our money to the tourism
department to fund some programs
that they can then decided money
locally to bring a that's back
to these communities and made
sure that he was one these
infants are huge in these
communities and there's for cell
as washers then that's what the
ten million dollars to tourism
department does and then the the
other seven point five to
workforce solutions is really to
continue to provide a program
that's already working on it and
that her Graham is based on
workforce training and workforce
development proving workers back
the workplace because if we
can't get them back we can't
operate at full capacity and
that's really where we need to
be moving out of the pandemic so
it stands for thank thank you
programs for your you like this
bill right.
All of this.
Two of the spec anyone else that
we go to Carol white who's on
Sam Carroll.
Can you see me.
We can hear if we can review of
okay there we go Mr chair
members of the committee first I
want to thank you for your
generosity the relief provided
by last year's gross receipts
tax holiday was a lifeline for
many restaurants I'm sure you've
heard that the majority of
restaurants remain understaffed
many are shrinking their hours
summer closing entire days or
sections of their restaurants
because they don't have staff to
care for customers Senate bill
one ninety one helps the
industry bring back and retain
our staff it also brings back
our local tourism activities
such as conventions sporting
events and meetings again I just
want to thank you for helping
restaurants in communities
managed through this pandemic
and I stand for questions thank
you do we have anyone else on we
care and Jason Espinoza this
Jason.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza the
state director for New Mexico
with the national federation of
independent business and we
stand in strong support of
legislation and I I he's been
doing surveys about every three
to eight weeks during the COVID
pandemic and our survey results
of small business owners which a
great percentage our hospitality
and tourism related show that
that we're still in the midst of
this pandemic is that the
economy has recovered I am back
only twenty one percent of small
business owners reported that
the economy is back to pre
private crisis levels meaning
seventy nine percent I still
have not recovered additionally
seventy two percent of small
businesses again which a
majority are tourism and
hospitality related say that
they're having staffing issues
so the probation and programs
and this legislation will really
help address those two primary
issues that this industry is
facing so we stand strong
support thank you.
Thank you Jason and anyone else
equities are not.
Srna.
Yes good Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for
providing the opportunity to
speak I want to thank senators
Gonzalez indictment for
representing
representing the secretary for
the state of New Mexico which
you all know is is integral to
the speak of the economy more
from the also want to thank
thank Kathy cobalt Care right
and their association as for the
partnership that we had with
them over the last several years
and even before the pandemic
some of the ideas that we COVID
up but certainly if materialized
would would would really create
strong pathways for other
sectors of hospitality and
tourism so but I do want to
underscore is that the program
mentioned in the bill at the
department of work solutions is
I've project that we launched
several months back also
partnership with the the
restaurant hospitality
associations we have dedicated
to this point about two and a
half billion dollars to help
restaurants and hotels are
training.
New workers and create a new
pipeline as are they start to
recover we thus far has had
build out about billion dollars
to help of over eighty employers
and over five hundred workers in
the costs associated with
training them so we feel it's
been a success model today we
look forward to seeing the long
term implications of what it'll
do and I'm simply here to answer
the question a couple thank you
thank you Mr stern our secretary
Seneal what and what else and
Kathy from all.
Kathy.
Good morning Mr chair Madam
chair members of the committee
thank you for your time today I
also want to quickly thank
senators Diamond Gonzales for
championing this important
legislation for us this is the
result of months of research and
interaction with both
hospitality businesses around
the state and with communities
around the state and you know
provided you some handout
material previously and
hopefully you have a chance to
look at that but of the the main
gist of our our challenge right
now is that group travel which
is events meetings conventions
saw an eighty percent drop
during the pandemic and every
community across the state is
impacted by this and is
struggling to recover and of
course our hotel your hoteliers
and tourism businesses were
forced to go through
Capacity shut shut downs they
had to cut back on the number of
rooms they could run out and
lost a significant portion of
their workforce and so it's
really critical that we attacked
both of these issues at the same
time and that we rebuild that
workforce and get those events
back happening and getting
vibrant tourism activity across
the state and I thank you for
your kind commitment to hear
this issue and I stand for
questions thank you.
that okay.
We go out.
Senator great.
The person thank you thank you
Mr chairman I like it's built to
reasons of one is because I
always like bill Senator Paypen
love.
It's got to be good and the the
second one is the is the ten ten
million going to the tourism.
But and unfortunately because of
that I may need to recuse myself
from this both.
I will tell you why this because
my daughter is contracted with
the the tourism department in
the past or the vents
that is to help cross the state
so tell I can clarify what my my
role would be in that I'd
probably be used by show from
this vote but it is something to
show all those years ago that is
present very helpful with what
earners worked on with with
communities across the state
could help them.
Refine their vantage and and
make them even better than that.
Then they are and it's important
to the small creative.
Encouraging you members of the
committee to support.
So thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator Shendo thank you
Mr chairman of thank you
senators for for bringing this
bill at the to really
portability west I have a I
don't exemptions anymore of.
It would be on the program won
the ten million to programs
supporting local governments of.
Presumption is but I want to ask
is that also supports of tribal
governments and and some other
projects like Ford Act others
that also for you know for them
to the area that has bill thank.
It does.
He stays and and things like
that.
Thank you.
madam chair do you have any
comments.
For questions.
No I don't know I don't I think
I committee present really great
bills that come through this
window.
No I have one question before we
go to the motion
This is recurring Mr chairman of
the members of tackle from speak
to that.
No it's not hello my part you
know this legislation is not a
one time.
In my part I hopefully have
enough.
Develop the accountability of
what we can show with this the
eventually we could make a
recurring.
The chair would have ten motion
motion invests.
US vied gonna return.
Some of the part is there any
opposition to this bill when we
K. okay one or two cases Senator
thank you thank you for.
Okay so you have a do pass thank
you guys.
Your.
The.
Is.
Is.
There
of.
Okay.
Okay.
We do have a another special.
Thanks to the.
Well that might be one.
Yes.
Yes.
For more on our.
As for the White House
reasons well there's just too
this these
days.
No.
One of.
Restored order.
Well.
The.
This.
Is this this is.
Last.
Years and I.
Our vision to the.
I'm gonna.
Sen.
Hi the text to
the.
You.
Yeah okay.
And she had me send them that.
Just ask for your four seasons.
I I just I mean it's really
events the.
Have any suggestions that
he's with us on these folks that
was given.
This report.
What you're.
The fish on the.
Two bills.
And maintenance on their.
All right to.
Thank you.
Version.
Sure there is still in the same
place over there.
I'll take the million.
If.
