So ordered the Senate is back in
session.
There's no tax on announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you
madam president so as members
and introduced the bill that
just came over from the house so
that is the plan at this point
one other thing just in terms of
an announcement from me there
will need to step off to have
dinner but I wanted to point
that out certainly thank the.
Sponsors that have helped do
that and provide those dinners
We're on the order of Business
messages from the house the
reader will read.
Message from the house of
signatures of the officers of
the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa Ortiz McCutchen
to park.
signed an open session house
bill one.
There were.
the concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa
emergencies McCutchen to work.
The journal so the message from
the house has been received.
There's no taxed introduction of
legislation the clerk will
three.
Duhigg.
And that relating to cannabis
and acting the cannabis
regulation act creating the
cannabis control division of the
regulation and licensing
permitting press three license
authority under the Lynn and
Erin compassionate use act to
the cannabis control division
agreements with the Indian
nations tribes and pueblos
requiring training for amenities
and acting that cannabis tax act
repealing and enacting sections
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight.
House Bill to.
House Bill to having been read
Senator Peter Wirth thank you
madam presidents a unanimous
consent we go back to that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
whole and once we do that I
would just ask that I understand
are.
Our.
into a committee of the whole
sentence for the purposes of
hearing house bill two and
Senate bill three with to
provide those number one that
bills to be read by the clerk
that those provisions not be
followed.
Yes there is no objection the
Senate is in a committee of the
sponsors of house bill two and I
believe that Garcia my sister is
getting them ready to address us
we will then hear from
supporters and opponents.
opponents then we will go to
comments questions from the
committee which is all of us
Probably Representative
Martinus.
Romero.
Good morning good afternoon.
Thank you Madam had to have
thank you all for it's great to
have you here it's great to be
here at this point before us is
house bill two many of you have
today is to reduce harm in our
state that has been caused by
the criminalization of cannabis
which is disproportionately
in our state of why we're here
to legalize is to create jobs.
Legalizing and regulating
cannabis will bring one of the
largest opportunities for our
economic opportunities in our
first year alone we're looking
at three hundred eighteen
million dollars in New revenue
to the state which is it would
additionally it helps consumer
safety right now if you buy a
street drug you don't know
what's in it this will allow
adults to know what is in their
this product that we hope to
bring to market.
And finally were ending
essentially the long term
consequences of what cannabis is
simply the use of this we have
known what the drug war has
caused in in many communities
and historically who they've
targeted and that has meant many
not only saves the state money
from not targeting something
that we hope to ensure that
folks use safely but it also
ensures that we can bring brand
properly in the way that leads
with social justice and equity
around the state that we can
actually develop in that way
this is a very substantial piece
to be able to be in front of you
today look forward to the
discussion and I will make sure
chairman has had a hopefully a
break we just got off the house
Yes thank you thank you madam
madam with madam chair
and and members of of the of the
Senate thank you for the time
quite some time
of legalization efforts have
have been around in the house
and and in the Senate for for
many years this particular bill
stems from a bill that was
the sponsor
along with senator teasing you
know and out of that bill I
think has really evolved a piece
from one of our chambers in
passes in a committee and then
Iran Iran at a time in its last
stop which I believe at the time
was in it
twenty nineteen session of
twenty twenty session and they
worked off of that house bill
three fifty six build upon it I
was a bipartisan multi
believe it was which passed
another Senate committee and
then was tabled I believe in
Senate Judiciary fast forward to
twenty twenty one
in the house was passed by the
house chamber.
It was it was a heard and
amended in Senate tax business
incorporations transportation
it ended up running out of time
on the Senate floor.
Much of what we heard during
those two committee hearings in
Senate tax and judiciary
bill two and I think that that
really speaks to the
collaborative process that is
bill has gone through you know
I've always said that this bill
is not perfect this bill will
revolving should be involved
with the time right we learned
that lesson with the liquor
license bill that we heard this
past session you know where some
of those dynamics hadn't really
and so I'm I'm looking forward
to that work you know over the
next few years up in the last
Lee madam chair and members of
the of the Senate
can move forward I think that we
all know that New Mexicans want
this you know the pulling is off
the charts on this issue seventy
four percent of New Mexicans
to thousand seven only thirty
four percent of people supported
legalization fast forward to
twenty twenty and seventy four
percent of people support
legalization one last point
This bill has three foundational
principles the first one is to
ensure protections for medical
cannabis program the second one
is too short a smart regulatory
and tax framework so that this
we protect communities across
the state that's why we've got
language in here that provides
for easy access into the into
the industry for the micro
business licenses we are
twice you know folks want to
come in and have the big you
know establish slices that they
can do so you know without
having to yield high somebody
else's license for half million
for all of the great suggestions
and thoughtfulness that so many
of you have put into this bill
and we look forward to
continuing the debate here today
madam chair members of the
we're here because of her work
in the work of so many others in
this chamber and in my chamber
over the course of the last
twenty twenty five years thank
you madam chair thank you
madam chair in the in the
members of I have been working
on cannabis of for a long time
know my connection to that is
actually well I was an advocate
for it when it finally passed in
a a member of the cabinet.
closely involved and engaged and
and
watching the program as it falls
and.
You know when we
legislative process creating a
structure in a regulatory
framework around it.
And since then and what I hear
facilities in Colorado.
And talk to legislators there
there comments was some of the
difficulty that they had in
implementing recreational said
in combining those two markets
and secondly that.
most of those other states have
voters not through a years long
sought out and carefully crafted
statutory and regulatory
that there was no regulation or
control around marketing and
packaging.
And in the US if you saw the
drugs and I don't know that
issues around our children.
Its use update our packaging of
many of the products and all of
the animals look like candy bars
that they just in question and
you know look like Mars bars or
or whatever that
it is so it was it was more
advertising it's not our intent
for it to get to children
it and the real issue for for me
now adults are using it now.
But is it street drugs it's our
illicit market we have no what
I'm there's also issues around
what
contaminants might be in it from
growing at what fertilizers what
way we can control what is out
there for adults and that kids
may accidentally get their hands
on is if we legalize it so we
product it has to be an
independent lab so we can
control FIR those contaminants
we have
may see so we can respond we
have also addressed
smoking in public places so we
have
consumption areas that can be
Indoor clean air act and so
language in the in the bill
tracks with with that act so
that we are not of doing smoke
initiatives and and things that
we've addressed in the bill and
I thought I think it's it is a
well thought out long studied
this body and I think we have a
good
bill and a good framework and
the ability to closely regulate
thing that we have accounted for
that I've tried several times to
run legislation on and that is
reserves are we now have in here
one of the licenses for research
what's in it how its use so I
think we've
covered a lot of bases in this
and given it a really good
strong structural framework on
for questions.
Thank you all very much
appreciated we will now move to
ours so my sister and supporters
representative madam president I
I rise on a point of personal
privilege to in case anyone who
is living in the state of New
Mexico doesn't know already I
business under the Lynn and Erin
compassionate use act one of
those companies being ultra
health I do not have a personal
direct financial conflict of
interest that would preclude me.
Senate bill and I'll just say
this madam president closing
their thirty four producers in
the state.
Many of them produce the maximum
number of plants it's not just
alter Health.
Hispanic it's very sad miss
madam president I think the
implicit racism and
discrimination that has gone on
about the allegations and
apologized again for not
remembering I had to go to all
right so we are ready for
supporters of house bill two.
so first we are starting with Mr
Larry love.
Mr Leri love.
Mr Leri left.
work this last a big session and
the little one
there's been a lot of
misinformation out here and I'm
really sorry to hear that I've
been waiting fifty three years
for legalization of cannabis
states where cannabis is legal
some people in the house or the
Senate have specify the opposite
of that.
As far as I I've also seen
Children and so forth it's up to
parents to protect their
children you put your in lock up
your medicine in the medicine
cabinet your liquor the liquor
this bill goes through I'm in
support there are a few things
that do need to to be amended
specially in the use of
Nicholas Ponto yet and after
that Kim Chavez Cook.
Well then next we have miss have
as cook.
Thank you madam president
defender where I am the
appellate defender for the
department I wanted to speak in
support of this bill because of
many of the reasons that the
sponsors of already laid out
would welcome the opportunity to
be part of that conversation one
of the issues I want to flag for
those future efforts is the fact
that this bill still does
and believe we should be moving
away from a felony scheme to
enforce what ultimately I think
we're all trying to achieve
which is a civil regulatory
scheme and so that is the one
lives and really impacted a lot
of communities in New Mexico so
we we do urge support of the
bill by this body and thank you
for taking it under
consideration.
members of the committee I
Marshall Martinez the executive
director of equality New Mexico
the statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization the legalization of
cannabis is a racial gender and
significantly more likely to be
stopped searched detained
arrested and incarcerated than
their cisgender peers and one of
the most frequent reasons for
have access to home growth we
must create a structure of
licensure that provides
equitable access to those
without immediate capital those
of us most criminalized in the
past must be given access to a
New Mexicans of color and our
perspectives that are in this
current bill are not a raised by
voices of so called experts in
the legal commercial or
regulatory fields lastly we
prohibition as a result of
disagreement thank you.
Next we have Mister Ben Lewin.
important issue and I urge you
to take action to legalize
cannabis for adults right now
this is our last opportunity
right now to dictate our path
forward as a state as it relates
HB two is for doing what we have
to do is a state this is our
moment this is our opportunity
to legalize cannabis to join now
market as the industry is the
consumer base grows and matures
as the country decriminalize it
is D. schedules and eventually
legalizes cannabis will have
opportunities to continue to
support H. B. two I urge you to
create new recurring revenue for
our state I urge you to put
eleven thousand New Mexicans to
work in a new exciting industry
I urge you to commit to
and everybody's work tirelessly
to.
Next we have miss cat sat.
used under twenty one we have
worked on issues related to
criminal and juvenile justice
reform for many years we're
supporting HB two in combination
Mexican families and
particularly families of color
have been deeply impacted by the
sales or on drugs generations of
families have been criminalized
should not be separated from
equity issues and the need to
repair depot harm done to
communities of color LGBTQ
communities and other impacted
communities there's more to be
thank you.
Next we have Mister David
Valdez.
cannabis industry we've assisted
over fifteen thousand New
Mexicans in attaining their
medical cannabis cards and
guiding them through the
program.
now most of our patients are for
that the regulation should be.
It recommendation yes.
On a regulated as possible
however patients rights should
The rounds is it need be
the patients are really afraid
that
the field is this.
There are getting like pushed
all the medical cannabis program
is a lot of work still and now
it seems like it isn't being
looked upon as a much important
And lastly we have Mr shad to
fort.
The
of the body my.
I out there but I think.
Senator AUMENT
the market we eight this all
fall they are ready which is
already understood all right I
will not comment thank you
because we're supposed to take
Those were the two hundred acre
facility one hello while
everybody out of the water eight
one so people that and I think
we should all you our goal
they're going your friends with
it thank all.
Thank
is your.
You I thank you right my vote.
Who all share.
It I know but.
Or should this brief.
see can move to the opposition
if there is any and Carlos we
could not hear the last speaker
very well so if you'll try to
help monitor.
Okay and again as a reminder for
those.
Good afternoon I would like to
ask the committee to please vote
no on legalization I agree with
is creating a state government
controlled monopoly.
I white privilege in an industry
that is over ninety percent
fostering institutional racism.
Thank.
Next we have miss Linda Siegel.
the American cancer society
cancer action network and we are
very concerned about the
amendment to the D. Johnson
clean indoor air act that allows
but we still feel like we are
exposing employees and these
cannabis consumption areas to
secondhand marijuana smoke and
affirm that secondhand marijuana
smoke creates a serious health
risks to the public.
As many find particularly what's
in it which regardless of the
chemicals and thirty three
personagens in short there is no
safe level of exposure to
create a newly unprotected class
of workers that have to give up
their health for a paycheck
spank you very much.
Madam chair and members of the
Senate.
Thank you know I I hope you know
the sponsors are not.
lawn doesn't you know restrict
any standalone cafe restaurants
and even putting of standalone
economic development and sort
through so we're we are opening
up you know this legislation for
thousands of people working.
And being exposed to secondhand
marijuana smoke.
And you know marijuana
secondhand smokers is as
bill but you know this is you
know where you know we we see
this you know legislation going
so we we strongly urge.
is Joanna Strother representing
the American lung association
and not to repeat what my
colleagues have said today but
the American lung association
does also still have concerns
amendment to try to tighten that
up unfortunately we will be
creating a new lease on
protected class of workers who
will be working in these
asthma attacks and make
respiratory infections more
likely we've seen with COVID
nineteen pandemic has done to
New Mexicans that we we need to
clean indoor air act thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee we had done with
opponents of house bill two.
representatives could stick
around with us we are now going
to the presentation on Senate
bill three and then any
Senator Pirtle are you ready for
Senate bill three.
I am madam president.
Senate bill three is the.
version to that and that was a
bipartisan bill.
The bill that had support from
from both parties in and most of
both chambers.
And it was
Along with protecting the public
safety of the state to the best
that we could.
So this year we brought the the
But I thought it important that
we not only do that but we need
to treat cannabis.
For what it is cannabis is eight
power to one person as the house
bill does.
The house bill makes a king out
of or clean out of whomever is
in charge of our LD.
They have all power to suspend
power among three distinct
departments and for good reason
because every single department
every division in the state has
has their specialty they have
something that they're good at.
All things that would be
consumed comes from the
environment department and it's
important to note that currently
we have this legalized of the
legalization of growing of him
than point three percent THC the
rest is regulated by our LD and
that's important because we have
lounges and dispensaries and so
they would be regulating things
that they currently do such as
bars
We want to allow our small
farmers are small producers to
have an ease of access into the
market.
Well Senate bill three is is the
hundred plants of somebody wants
to grow thousand.
They pay more than the person
that's growing a hundred.
This is important because it
takes it out of the hands of of
it's not complicated.
Another important thing is we
don't put a per plant of fifty
dollars.
How many small farmers do we
Our little small farmer with his
acequia ditch growing.
One acre does you have fifty
thousand dollars to get a
license from RLD.
That the house bill will help
any small farmer in the state of
New Mexico.
It's actually designed to do the
opposite.
departments need to run the
program.
So currently with him.
I want to grow hundred acres or
We don't need to put barriers in
front of our growers and I are
small farmers.
They're just trying to make a
living and that's exactly what
the house build us.
technology currently.
Or you can swap somebody's cheek
and say.
Your high right now.
They can do a test and say
The other concern is we only
have ten percent of our police
officers that have adequate
training in recognizing people
driving under the influence of
intoxicants.
So in Travis county on any given
shift there's only one officer
that has this training.
So Senate bill three insurers
And putting that money to the
department of public safety so
that we can train every single
officer with DRT training.
Because I should be more as as
much about public safety.
contract with any lab to create
the technology to do a roadside
test.
So New Mexico would be
innovative in the fact that we
And that's exactly what this
bill does.
Madam president pro tem madam
chair members of the body.
Do we regulated in a way that
actually allows people to enter
the market.
And participate.
Or do we create a king maker.
seen or read since I've been
here for nine years.
Or do we want one that says you
know as long as you're not a
danger to society should be able
to participate in this new
And that's exactly what Senate
bill three does.
It also allows for.
Those that want to create a
coop.
allows five or so to create a co
op.
And get a license to dispense at
a discount because they've
created a co op.
And it allows are smaller
producers to get their product
For those that sell on
consignment.
So that somebody that has a
store if if they sell a small
producer at has under a thousand
plants.
So if you support Mr president
and members of the body if you
support public safety.
If you support efficient
government.
And Senate bill three is the
bill that we need to push.
And I would urge the body.
Madam chair to support thank
you.
wanna talk on the bill or shall
we go to the opponents and
supporters.
One man wolfpack today madam
chair all right okay Carlos we
committee we do not have anybody
in the call in support of SB
three against SB three we do
have Mr Nicolas Montoya.
All right having a done are two
presentations we are going to
Yes let me know if anybody wants
to test Senator Padilla.
have done work up to this point
over the years and thank you all
so much for all the work that
you've been doing.
had questions along the way
came to the original the regular
Have a couple of things I would
like to ask first on Senate bill
ninety fifth I'm sorry she's on
Senate bill.
house bill two excuse me house
bill two
that we're going to the house
bill two first and you've just
gone to that but we're going to
talk about house bill two first
and then we'll move to Senate
put me on your list for a the
Senate bill two thank you
but it did I think the last two
big you know issues that I have
on this deal and on the in house
bill two is really around cash
into banks in a secure manner
doesn't create any sort of
safety issues for the business
owners or for the retail
establishments or whoever maybe
doing business in this area so
to hear from you that's a great
question you know and that's
something that our current
medical providers have been
dealing with the my
understanding there's a couple
banks I know there's one for
sure in Albuquerque that banks
plan the plan for that
management of cash because it is
an issue particularly when you
can't really bank the way you
can you know with the
traditional you know the more
evaluate that when people come
in and apply for a license I
should say madam chair and
senator we do have a couple of
experts to on the line that that
pardon me then that the radio as
well as Emily Kaltenbach with
the drug policy alliance in the
secretary of taxation revenue
secretary seventy Schardin
security plan with in effect
that.
Thank you madam chair and I'm
trying to get used to call you
madam pro tem madam chair and so
madam chair and and Sanchez so
fees percentages than than a
typical business in terms of
managing cash for these
businesses.
provide services to them part of
the reason is those banks have
to be more meticulous in the
recordkeeping above and beyond
what they already have to
obviously and so that makes the
cost of doing business a little
line of questioning madam chair
I just want to again commend
them for all the work they've
done over all of the years and
this is just been a huge huge
lift an effort I just wanna say
thank you to everyone that's
listening that's worked on that
chair I still.
Trying to get my hands around
how we prevent squeezing out the
small farmer here in New Mexico
that wants to do this I I'm I'm
just quickly get things rocking
and rolling for them but how do
we prevent what can you just
walk me through the key steps
that are in the current piece of
legislation with all the
amendments and everything that
Madam madam chair and senator
the yes that's a great question
and and that really goes to the
heart of our bill.
As as you heard in in in our
presentation I think you're in a
create a set of licenses I think
there is I think it was
described as the stranger
auditor or whatever the the
licensing framework we actually
think it's a really smart
licensing framework because it
to sell
and yes there's a fifty dollar
plan fee and you know everything
that was said is is accurate
however we also provide free
other manufacturers or other
retailers road producers
or you can get an integrated
micro businesses license which
would allow you to do basically
there is no fee for those plants
okay now the fee for that
license I believe is about a
thousand dollars madam chair and
participate in industry now are
there costs associated with the
business absolutely you know if
if if I go out there and I want
to start a new business tomorrow
in a previous version of this
bill we actually created a rural
equity fund which would have
allowed for cannabis revenues to
go into a fund to help support
those types of business start
Parties that earmarking funds in
a bill before the bill even
passes and before the revenues
you in here was not something
that was advisable by many so we
removed every single fund from
like the rule equity fund so
that that small farmer in
northern New Mexico in southern
New Mexico in the north valley
in the south valley is able to
enter the business and actually
in the industry but you still
need access to capital but that
access to capital is not you
know it it doesn't only apply to
those industries that access to
to be done in the future to
ensure equitable access to the
industry.
Thank you madam chair and I'm
happy to hear all that
Representative thank you very
much that was a good lay out of
know a lot can happen to a piece
of legislation in our it's like
an internet here in our
legislative process or day and I
tried to ask Miss recently I
think is about the fourth or
fifth time it's kind of all
getting garbled together all the
superintendents Rubio was a very
good friend of mine as well that
structurally what would prevent
to someone and and swindling
number one micros from ling
down the road doesn't quite put
this input some sort of a
barrier in their place as
they're trying to grow their
their little operation.
recognize recognize this at the
beginning one superintendent Rio
got involved
My balls went off.
We Mr in the house but we're
off small and then moving into a
larger business we set up the
micro business licenses
specifically to have a be up to
pay for their plant count also
gives them the opportunity to
you know begin their business to
move into a solid structure and
for plant count and that also
gives us the ability to do
similar to what other states
have done I'll just use Colorado
as an example they have a three
maybe even a four five tier
to build and so we're actually
built into the structure of the
ability to go from a very small
up to the two hundred and then
they could begin moving up into
the four five hundred and they
have the ability structurally
bill so if you could put me on
your list then I'll wrap up with
this and I'm this is made mainly
madam chair and representatives
and and excuse the sponsors and
business to large business on
the planning on the front end I
mean I think that you know we
had the cannabis waving white
just went I'm sorry the hemp
wave and it just went just just
crazy for so I don't know how
highs in my business I've had
some extreme lows thankfully
more highs than lows
but I just want to make sure
that we're doing everything
possible to to help the New
Mexico movement on this happened
about you know the roll out of
this how this is going to work
so that we make sure that people
fully understand because it
seems to me like it's really the
legislation is really changed a
preparing them for what's about
to happen and and that they
understand you know from that
that you know talked about cash
management a little while ago
there's about nine hundred other
things happen in addition the
Thank you next will have senator
Candelaria.
Thank you madam president madam
chair and all those wonderful
titles.
specifically on section forty of
the bill of house bill two.
Which at least on the amendment
and contacts that I'm looking at
occurs on page fifty three or
there abouts madam chair I
think.
I just want to take a few
moments since we are in a
committee to kind of spend some
time discussing how the current
system works and what doesn't
work.
license limitation in plant
count limitation for its medical
program.
That's just a fact.
Another fact madam president is
that because of the
As a medical cannabis patient
when I go to purchase cannabis
oftentimes the strains I need
are not there.
wants to look this is one
Graham.
Of indica cannabis extract that
economic standpoint when you're
selling on well basically
unadulterated flower.
We go to sniff the boat off the
UP I have one but a flower
equals one gram you know how
much flowers gonna take to
generate a certain amount of
revenue.
But when you when you want to
make something like this this
health to limit artificially the
number of medical cannabis
plants.
Because producers simply do not
have the amount of drugs
romantic idea of ploughshares
being put into the ground and
small little areas.
That's great but let's actually
talk about what the realities of
a market place look like.
context because under the
current law.
The department of health
estimates the demand for medical
cannabis and it does so.
reports from the licensed
medical cannabis producers in
which those licensed producer
self report how much cannabis
they have in their inventory.
This is a joke.
But the thing is in that lawyer
the lawyer in that case after
speaker egolf.
when speaker Egolf to the
Department health.
Is arbitrary capricious and
unreliable.
I didn't say that judge Thompson
did now the Supreme Court
justice Thompson did.
Self reported production data
that the courts on numerous
occasions have said are easily
manipulated and Harley not
have the first one is madam
president if we look at the
language.
The language authorizes RLD to
set.
recollection of the uniform
statutory construction act tells
me that or means at.
or communal or.
And doesn't mean or and just
means and.
department intends to do all
three.
So that we would have not only a
plant cap but also a canopy
limited square footage or is the
And chair and senator I see us
resent the radio up saying no so
let's have a response your
question.
Thank you madam president thank
you senator it came to our
attention within the last week
square footage so we put that
language and so that we would be
looking towards the future
instead of maybe looking back in
health things have been always
footage then we would probably
look at an outdoor field are
using the square footage model
if you have a green house we
would probably use the account
Formulas that we would be using.
Madam chair M. and I I thank you
for that I think it I think I
think we're gonna have a
respectful disagreement about
square foot model because it
matches their business model
more.
Right so
and then I'm gonna dissuade us
from thinking that this is just
this is not all three this is
pick one and I think now that
there is a record this is a
record and and I think the
court's gonna have to look to
Are they can interpret that to
mean at.
And so we just want to be very
careful because this is new
language at least I've seen.
In this bill.
three.
The rule shall set the number of
allowed cannabis plants for
licensee to meet an average
national market demand for
cannabis products in states
I have no idea madam president
what that means.
I litigate these issues I live
with these issues I have an
think it invites over reaching
abuse by government.
And that's what causes
litigation.
So madam present I guess the
question is for the sponsor and
initially had been amended in
Senate tax through the twenty
twenty one regular session
and it has been reworked over
group of senators that have been
working on this so this is
language that you know I'm my
original bill did not have as
other co sponsors Senator Duhigg
and the superintendent chime in
and give you a little bit more
of the thinking behind that
particular language and madam
How does this work and where
does the data come from and what
date are people going to be
looking to madam president.
Specifically.
center so this this concept of
of of the plant limit
And and I know you don't you
don't need a a history lesson
find me I ask that madam chair
I.
As a result of discussions with
a variety of people and and and
senator Candelaria at large
among them because because I
good insights and so this is
what the late but the version of
it that we're seeing here
actually comes largely out of a
point that Senator Candelaria
Sam and that's because we really
want to make sure that these
little guys these micros have
the ability to come and get a
foothold and be competitive
a flood that market I'm not so
because the bigger guys.
Are needed are they are muted
frankly we we we need them to be
able to to to meet demand but we
don't want to do so at the
years and then it is repealed.
But when when I was discussing
this issue with senator
Candelaria.
Madam chair Senator Candelaria
and setting arbitrary and
capricious plant limits and one
of his suggestions was to look
at the average plant count
then we realized one item and
this was also based on some some
point senator Candelaria maybe
that that median might not be
the best approach to take so
average would be a better one
also it's really hard to find
Is the.
What we have here the national
market demand that has so what
is being bought as opposed to
just what is being grown and so
Madam chair that is based on
looking at some of our
surrounding states that have
legalized and what the typical
in general what percentage of
make sure that the plant count
couldn't be any lower than a
certain amount and those
actually another another idea
that they came from senator
place will set a ceiling we want
to make sure that they're at
that the floor is appropriately
high that we're not creating at
an unreasonably protectionist
Our Environment and and we are
So as they are.
I'm sure senator Candelaria I
kind of think of this this
provision as a as one that was
was informed from your expertise
to commend Senator Duhigg for
all the tremendous amount of
work she's put in I know after
the regular session I went home
and became a hermit and watched
RuPaul's drag race for about
work I guess madam president the
issue is this for me.
and I think it's a question I
think it's kind of a word of
warning for the next three years
I think the department needs to
are watching of how this number
gets set because as I started
the debate madam president the
department of health already
estimates demand and not one but
Is arbitrary capricious and the
legal.
That's not me.
As judge beach I'd R. as I to
call in we tried that Brian
same sort of chick cannery.
Happens under the recreational
market that we've seen under the
medical market.
Rest assured there will be
litigation.
Of ensuring that small
entrepreneurs have an
opportunity to get into the
market places renewable.
What I have objected to madam
president is this there are
Older health is one of the only
minority Hispanic owned
businesses of those thirty four.
And throughout this entire
two reasons one I think it's sad
when the one few Hispanic
minority owned company is the
one that gets picked to be the
were constantly trying to send
good messages to.
One on the one hand we're saying
we love business we're open for
business.
But the other side of the mouth
few Hispanic majorities in the
state.
So I lay all out out there madam
president because I think we've
all debated this enough I know
I'm done debating I know the for
And thank you senator the next
we have center guy it goes.
He looks like he's nodding his
head.
Mr Chairman Martinez appreciated
I just want to start out of you
already known to have some
errors in I was just wondering
if you could give me some
pointers on how we would come
back in the thirty day session
to fix.
piece of legislation like this
one
it through which we are creating
a brand new industry and keep in
create an industry built into
this you from scratch and set
set up the rules of the game
from scratch and so you know
given that fact this piece of
and every single time we've
heard and seen it we've amended
and fixed it and there's a
hundred and twelve very smart
legislators in this building all
of whom have great ideas and so
the product that is here in
need to be fixed next year not
at all potentially there could
be as with any piece of
legislation mind you
my point was more toward it you
know some of the things that we
would that funding we would help
your mark some revenues from
this industry to help support
business start ups in rural
communities in the cannabis
industry so that's not so much
thirty year rate if this three
year plan the mid framework you
know after year to.
Doesn't work then by golly we
better come back and fix it I
madam chair that's not my style
if things need to be fixed if
things need to be improved upon
if things need to be checked I'm
always open to those suggestions
being willing to improve our our
legislation case in point the
liquor license controller it
took us thirty forty years to
constantly every single you know
year or every other year there
should be improvements to this
piece of legislation.
Thank you for that Madam pro
pushing this too fast I know you
know this is the fifty years
that I know of this bill coming
forward and we still do have a
lot of Justin's going on to my
that poll was corrected was it
just University of New Mexico or
was it statewide.
No
madam chair and and senator I
think if we would have done it
drug policy alliance using you
know a traditional you know
pollster you know people who do
this for a living and they are
yeah I'm I'm sure we can talk
you know I think it was roughly
half fifty fifty males and
females you know I'm not sure
with the age breakdown was I
know that they did also
scientific poll did a poll you
know this wasn't some are you
know Twitter poll or something
or or a UNM Lobo football game
pull or anything like that.
four in nineteen oh three
against and and I just wondered
you know if the polls role
versus Albuquerque I I just
have a another question for you
in it's just one in the.
The COVID they're talking about
have any discussion points for I
didn't see anything in the bill
The talked about what we do with
that I I know that you know
currently we get money from of
madam chair and and senator all
differently a co sponsor reserve
Armstrong on that on that
question I I will say you know
in the future into specific
programming but a chairwoman
arms or if you want to chime in
on the specific question of of
secondhand smoke please.
cigarette tax is going to a
dance that going to treating
cancer and other
smoking cessation programs and
over I purposely marketing
that the cigarettes that contain
carcinogens but
so there's not a specific
is however is that it will be
treated first for pop any kind
of public consumption to be in a
Johnson in indoor air act so for
instance if it's outside
area it can't be so close to a
development where others have to
walk through it to.
To to enter if it's a in a
building and has to be a stand
alone building and it has to
that would otherwise be
precluded from
from allowing smoking such as a
restaurant or or so forth so
it's each place that would allow
public consumption would would
have to be licensed.
Thank you madam pro Tallman
question then program is for
Representative Romero she still
online.
Madam chair and senator I
answer this in her opening she
talked about this would help
minorities in in against arrests
to page forty three of providing
cameras protect.
Cannabis products to minors
penalties and I'm trying to
figure out where the protection
for arrest is and I understand
for a minor in the school
can't speak for what she said
specifically
I I'm not sure I don't remember
her saying that your question is
whether or not it's a
misdemeanor for to be a youth in
going to help minorities
against rest in New I know
currently you know there's
different depending on the
I don't think that's correct
madam chair and and senator I
think that the.
You know and I think that for
somebody so cannabis on on
school ground.
Madam pro tem and and
Representative on page forty
three and just try to look
through their to see where it
did say because this section
find the penalties but I'll go
on.
Madam pro tem and and
Representative what what I was
trying to get to and I know
earlier is discussed about
twelve twenty fourteen the
percentage of Hispanics and
African Americans.
The war rest for training for
teens under age eighteen.
which it decreases an arrest by
eight percent and I'm just
wondering it just because she
brought up the topic this is
going to help minorities I'm
issue speaking because it caught
my ear that we're trying to help
minorities not to be arrested
with marijuana.
Adult use cannabis and not over
policing the same communities
that have bore the brunt of the
war on drugs including Latinos
to help all of those folks.
With regard to Colorado I would
submit to you madam chair and
and senator you know I don't
policing I mean it's just it's
just really it's it's it's it's
logic but I don't necessarily
follow but to to Michael Sanchez
points I mean I think number one
right way to do it in a way that
ensures equity and social
justice for those same
communities you speak up I think
it's a game changer now we can
place you know of what the
licensure system will look like
but I think with regard to the
act itself and the way that it's
agricultural product.
Madam chairman Representative
thank you for that I I I guess
my consideration staying on the
children issues because the
investigation you know even if
in the coming years and the last
type stuff and I was just trying
to see if we're doing anything
to protect our kids from using
children.
Madam chair Senator absolutely
and and not only you know in the
last five years but since since
the very first bill one of the
mean it it really does have to
look a little bit more you know
think of
think of your your Walgreens
deal medicine thing with a label
candy right that all of that is
here in this bill those are
lessons learned from the past I
don't know that Colorado when
Colorado legalized they did so
through a ballot initiative and
then tweet three months later
is here in the bill to ensure
that young people don't access
cannabis as I said it is as we
said over three hours of floor
debate today on the on the house
tomorrow this simply legalizes
regulates in taxes adult use
adult being defined as twenty
the in states that have
legalized marijuana minority
youth are shown much larger
increases in use and marijuana
than their question Caucasian
counterparts and I was just
just have one more comment line
love to read this is this is
just talking about and and you
know the this last session we
did a lot of discussion about
is brought up in its from the
soap Smithsonian magazine
dollars Sen Smithsonian mag dot
com this is and is talking about
warming greenhouse gases and I'm
wondering if you guys have
looked at that in in in your
model are they all indoor or is
Madam chair senator I think it's
both I think those are business
decisions and and that that
licensees will make I will
depend on the amount of space
that they have you know we're
we're we're we're the operation
to the to the licensee to decide
how they will run their
operations.
I appreciate that Madam Proterra
and adjust the following that
sixteen gallons of gasoline
depending on where in the US
it's grown in in just knowing
that you know this body
continues talk about global
warming and and the issues that
with this but also I have a huge
understanding that waters an
issue in our state and with the
social issues we're going to
have to deal with that with that
I yield thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Thank you madam president I just
want to.
Thank you Senator.
work on this issue.
as one eight.
And I'm sure you talk to other
states.
examples of were state said that
to you and what was the issue
and what to do we corrective
action do we take so as not to
make the same mistake.
issues related to social justice
and equity the state of Colorado
when they kicked off their
digitization framework it was
sort of a sort of a free for all
here as we legalize a multi
million dollar industry we've
got to ensure that every Mexican
who wants access to that
industry can get access into
sure that people who have been
harmed by the war on drugs
people have been incarcerated
people who have criminal records
out of this of this new industry
those are all this is that to me
really inform the the basis of
this bill let me defer to agency
Thank you madam president and
senator.
Two other examples one that
Representative Armstrong
mentioned at the beginning was
Colorado what we saw was an
increase in people going calling
poison control are going to the
ER because they consumed more
very scary and they didn't know
as specially with edibles how
much to consume so in Colorado
they did a lot of
really good education public
education campaigns so that's
one example the other is around
the tax rate and Representative
market but you also don't make
it too low so that it could
cause potential public health
impacts of getting that tax rate
called equity licenses in other
states the one before you is
around this micro business
license type and so that is also
legislation eight improve.
Debt and we learned a lot from
that neighbor in many other
states thank you thank you for
the answer and I'm.
The reason I ask is you know as
you know
Is a lot of cannabis grown and
calendar within California's.
Is that enough of the cannabis.
Being grown to meet the demand
anybody thought about that.
manufactured and produced here
In terms of you know can we grow
enough cannabis to to meet the
demand I mean I I think we can
think the first two three years
will be key.
Okay thank you for that
madam chair and senator bill
that's already and an existing
statutes it's you know in our D.
cannabis
you know would be charged with a
DWI obviously there are a lot of
technicalities in terms of how
you measure impairment and there
are a lot of technicalities
necessarily because that exists
elsewhere already.
Thank you for that those
Representative.
And the.
Madam president.
Madam speaker and gentleman well
you know you you would be able
to to consume cannabis in your
space as as was explained by by
Michael sponsor representative
Armstrong.
Thank you thank you
Representative thank you madam
president for that to.
Provisions to.
This allows the.
Local government from
determining the number and
location of outlets.
the time user location you know
based on their own local local
ordinances our water bill does
not do is allow for a complete
for them if all of a sudden
you've got twenty three counties
where it's legal in ten county
is where it's not so in last
year's version of the bill in
operate where they operate
within their jurisdiction.
Thank you thank you
Representative and thank you
madam present this all I have
thank you.
And we knew thank you thank you
madam madam chairman chairman I
have a very small amendment for
And so if the clerk will read
the amendment and will.
What we
and give the rest to be
distributed.
Go ahead and read the amendment.
It Senator to move the
amendment.
Madam chairman I I now move the
the.
Sen foreman the number one to
Very simple amendment just the
says on page twenty eight
between lines for section seven
insert the following new
subsection the subsection and a
person who is a member of the
New Mexico senator house of
activity prior to July first of
twenty twenty six.
All right debate on the
amendment.
you just to the Sanchez whether
or not it's a friendly
amendment.
So we're Sanchez there they are
many women friendly but nothing
like this so this is a bit of a
curveball
Madam chair of.
Representative that's totally up
to you.
Thank you madam chair and and
senators and Senator Ingle
while I one hundred percent
and that we as the ones who are
of voting and debating and
amending and and building that
industry all one hundred twelve
was our building this industry
from scratch
date and be first in line for
these things.
I'm going to respectfully going
a respectfully tell you that
this is on friendly not because
that I would feel very
uncomfortable putting this
ammendment on the bill
but please know that I I I see
is time that we can prohibition
I have no business interest at
all and neither does my family
at all in this industry and so
everything that comes with being
a citizen legislature thank you
madam chair thank you senator I
appreciate your amendment.
ammendment I think this is a
very prudent and fair subsection
to add to this piece of
legislation.
And I think it really gets to
the heart of some of the
way to generate revenue and
that's not the point of even
debating this is is we are
debating whether or not this is
good policy for the state of New
thank you madam pro tempore I
also stand support I I
appreciate bring in this detail
out in the light I wish there
were more things we could do to
will pass this legislation so
for that reason I do stand full
support.
Thank you next we'll have
senator Candelaria.
Quite frankly now remind us all
of the sad story senator Phil
Griego.
we didn't need a specific
citizen legislators there has to
be at least a one year period as
I understand it before we could
be appointed to an office
about it is it's very easy to as
an institution try to score
points about saying how terrible
we are and how self interested
here also is you know you're
you're adding a new restriction
on top of the existing
restrictions that exist in our
law.
and and what you're really doing
to a citizen legislature is
here.
into a contract as long as it
complies with existing law and
so I just urged the committee of
the whole to let's just stick
with the existing law and defeat
this amendment thank you.
Thank you Mr president and the
one thing I would point out
madam president Sir the one
thing I would point out is that
get a license but my brother and
my father in my life get one I'm
just as likely to to be in a
conflict as is this so.
accruing to the the legislator
from from the section so I would
I would say probably
I don't have anything against
voting for this it's just it
for to Senator Ortiz Pinos
pointed to was a spouse or would
still qualify under this just
because of a the nature of the
property ownership in the state
madam chair
Senator all I know is that would
include the governor and the so
is there a particular reason why
we would just of exclude members
have any objection to that I
don't so I just didn't think of
this as something that
necessarily applaud her but I
have no objection to that that
the former senator Phil Griego
in the situation it happen on
the so Senate floor those years
ago and those of you who want
here at the time please educate
yourself on that issue and I
have in our our as as
Transparent on these issues with
a couple health role or to
accusations in some house
members Representative recently
Into this industry one of them
said he's not planning to but I
would like to hear directly from
the house Sanchez if they have
any current financial interest
in this industry at all because
we all know what happened on the
there's been situations they
have not been disclosed in
recent times chair so I I would
ask the house Sanchez to yield
an answer question about any
conflicts of interest to help
Madam chair and and senator
happy here have a response to
the question I must say it's not
a question of never had it
before and perhaps we can ask
the question of all of us
there so I'd be curious to know
if people have to act financial
interest rate they have interest
through you know colleagues
friendships LLCs corporations
and I would like to hear
response to from from the good
Senator to see if he or anybody
associated with has any
interest.
your body to answer is no or no
single person actually and owns
a license and so that's my
answer renewable forty two
people in this chamber will
truthfully answer the question
so the other Sanchez madam chair
connection don't plan on having
the connection nor does anyone
in my
family any connection with any
existing cannabis
So I believe that we only have
the two Sanchez there Senator
more thank you madam chair those
are important questions us such
an issue on our Representative
Thank you madam chair thank you
for all those answers are just
encouraged house members are
seriously considering also in
the future.
Other debate on the amendment.
Thank you just talking about of
the Senator I go I I a student
earlier in support of this but I
and I go with etcetera Morson we
really need to look into this to
make sure that we are above all
them think the we're in this for
the money so hi thank share more
for bringing that forward I was
here on the day center goes
Duhigg.
Thank you madam chair and I I
appreciate senator Morris is
that I think inherent trust in
me as a sponsor of this
litigation not asking me whether
I have any financial interest I
do not I and I look forward to
debate Senator Ingle perhaps you
can close.
Thank you.
Thank you madam.
there's always something that we
have to think about this is what
I proposed this amendment for
because there is always
discussion and things like this
that we are not passing this for
the benefit of ourselves.
And not it's a it's a piece of
legislation that so.
that gives us all and we're not
passing this for any any mutual
benefit for ourselves thank you.
Now move adoption this amendment
to.
House Bill to and as for April
call.
Okay we are on adoption of house
floor amendment Senate floor
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg no Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gallegos
yes Senator Gonzalez no Senator
Gonzales no Senator Griggs.
Hickey.
Senator Ingle yeah so.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
known explain my vote please
Senator McKenna no Senator
Moores Senator Moores yes
Senator manos yes senator Munoz
Senator to sabino yes senator
for the.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
songes.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez.
Yes.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
In addition the test Senator
sold.
Senator souls no Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Tallman no senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Madam chair.
Senator Wirth I just clarified
Senator Hickey's vote could
Senator Hickey are you with
this.
Senator Hickey.
The world's No.
By the end of twenty five in the
affirmative seventeen in the
negative.
bill and madam chair with I'm
sorry I have three people want
to explain their folks will go
to Senator Hamblen first.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Ingle for bringing
volunteer legislature and so I
agree with that in principle I
worry that until we become a pay
legislature and that we are with
the doors for some things that
that would be problematic but I
just want to make it clear that
I support in principle that none
of us should be benefiting
financially from any of the
legislation that we are putting
Representative Martinez.
Thank you next to explain vote
we have Senator McKenna.
Thank you madam president I do
and just as like just as Senator
Hamblen said I just worry about
the.
The president setting that this
amendment may do.
understand are gorgeous but
thank you very much.
Madam president.
I have one more person explain
You know I have consistently
recused myself when there has
been a direct.
And I do not tolerate madam
chair.
Those types accusations on the
Senate floor this is the Senate
of the state of New Mexico.
And I have been consistent.
And I voted yes because I have
never.
Supported a piece of
legislation.
That would affect me
financially.
emotional right now because I I
don't take it lightly.
And I do not like those types
accusations being thrown around.
Thank you Senator Candelaria
thank you madam president and I
guess it is to explain my folk
but.
I can't get a personal
production license to grow my
own six plants.
Right so can I yield the Senator
Duhigg.
So Madam I don't think that's a
conflict for any but on the
enemy were gonna be harm by me
grind my own six plants so madam
president I yield instead and
just make sure if I can still
away the the home grow license
for medical under the spell so
so anyone will will be entitled
to home grow as long as they're
twenty one years of age or older
All right let's continue on with
our debate on the bill Senator
Pirtle.
Certainly madam chair and
senator.
Thank you Representative
Martinez and.
You know I must say was a.
A pleasure to.
as closely whether was COVID or
what the issue was but I do know
that I hold you with the utmost
respect for your continued
persistence with that with this
As it came across from the house
it was a better piece of
legislation minus the
expungement pieces.
And then in tax you know I think
we're comes advertisement just
as it does not include a signer
outdoor display or other
statement permanently affixed.
plant to the front of the
building.
because of this because of this
definition.
Madam I think I think of the
ordinance
applies.
So madam chair I believe under
the zoning act the the zoning
questions we go.
building so the way I read it as
just a lay person as a citizen
legislator a citizen farmer the
way I read it is that they could
basically as long as it was a
Anything affixed to them as long
as it was a fix the giant seven
leave a giant sign things that
may not really fit the function
No madam chair and senator again
local local regulation would
apply you if they just couldn't
discriminate against that
business from putting if they
plant and not a McDonald's sign
so
that's the way I read.
And and thank you madam chair
for that I guess we'll just a
disagree there that that because
include an editorial or other
material.
Printed in a publication with
the publication of the editorial
if it's not paid for by a
looking at that in this bill I
do see a few other areas we
might be infringing on the first
amendment and and how are we
balance between how we allow
these industries to to
advertise.
You know one of the concerns we
heard and we heard it back in
characters and and the such so
you know what we're we're trying
to strike a balance I believe
that what we have here would not
infringe on first amendment
rights I believe that the
industry is the greatest thing
since sliced bread they should
be able to do that I mean that
would be really violate
you know their their their
perhaps read behind the comics
section you know maybe kids
might be reading or whatnot
maybe that's stuff that needs to
be more in a little bit more
us refine this bill since the
last time you saw it Senator
Senator Duhigg.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative huh so so this
campaign reporting act and what
what is not an advertisement
under the campaign reporting
that so this is not an
infringement on free speech or
free speech issue this is
not be allowed but I can already
tell you the easiest way around
this issue get somebody
else to pay for it a separate
LLC that doesn't hold a license
printed in a publication when
the publication of the editorial
materials not paid for by a
licensee.
So all of the language later on
in the bill that deals with
not allow that flexibility for
the regulators to ensure that we
don't have those type of
publications so that's just
another piece that that gives me
a little pause that's an easy
it's written and it's Hodge
podge format.
You know I go to page six
hundred contaminants.
It means pesticides and other
sponsor of the bill wants to
answer why are we putting in
statute the definition of a
contaminant whenever the
environment department deals
with this on a regular basis
already has determined as how
many flies can be on a pizza
legally why are we putting this
definition in in statute.
that's right but that's the
choice we made for this bill.
So so madam chair
Representative Martinez.
do that there's acceptable
levels of many things in food
and for good reason but I can
tell you as a farmer.
the committee are small farmers
with their one acre author
acequia.
You put pesticides your dank you
don't put pesticides your date.
If there's a bug in their.
Even though through the
extraction process they can
contaminant later on in the
bill.
Whenever we do the tests.
If a bug is in there.
How are we going to allow.
going to be basically determined
as contaminated but if they
don't and they provide a fly or
of a warm it's also going to be
determined.
think you're you're we're we're
we're in the definition here I
don't think we prohibit the use
of pesticides in products I
think you know that there are
some rules and regulations will
contaminant means pesticides the
first two words.
So so if pesticides are are
detected it doesn't say at a
level
as we've learned the session.
It can mean a lot of things
So how how would we address that
they don't use pesticides and
there's a residual but it's
below the accepted limits.
Or just let the bugs takeover
and yes there's a little there
might be a worm in there but
madam chair Senator I'll remind
you in the body that we are in a
definition and we can look
further down the bill and then
we can go through here to to
some section T. H. six line
twenty three depending on the.
Copyright can at.
But we are not prohibiting the
licensing department cannabis
control division.
Will be in charge of
establishing standards for
quality testing of those
contaminants and so they're
going to come up with the rules
come up with what's acceptable
for the products so
you know that's a again what
we're looking at definition and
and I appreciate the discussion
pesticides in either situation
I'll be able to sell it.
And madam chair representative.
You know anybody that's gone
through either Judiciary
So I I think we need to tread
lightly when we say well that's
just a definition that later on
in the bill that's how it's
going to be.
Interpreted by the courts so I
think we need to be careful when
regulate and deal with
consumables.
In deal with health and public
safety with safe levels because
line fourteen.
Immature cannabis plant means a
cannabis plant that has no
observable flowers or buds can
I have
I don't you know I'm not a
connoisseur of of the cannabis
plant so I don't know exactly
what it means but.
So madam chair who's observing
who's observing these plants
who's looking are we opening up
People who have cannabis plants
and giving officers probable
and then madam chair and and
members of the body through the
him law we go on a much more
observer flower on what appears
to be a cannabis plant.
Because there's flower it has
nothing to do with THC levels.
So we're going to create because
and for people that are going at
home that we're basically giving
an out for for police officers
to look over a fence and say why
observed eight plants.
a lawyer but I know of these
terms are are squishy so we need
to be careful when we use those
page nine we're going into what
products produced menu packed
and manufactured by that person.
Do we want to exclude the
ability for multiple micro
madam chair Senator Wirth Peter
looking at again it's page nine
lines two and three.
transportation of cannabis
products to market or to sell
each other's products.
Senate bill three is very clear
transported by whoever created
and or or grew it so I think
that's a that's a huge
distinction that we need to need
to notice between the two bills
that this this does not allow
where it says line twenty three
local jurisdiction means a
municipality.
Home real meat municipality or
county was it the intent in
let me refer that to to miss he
superintendent regulation
licensing.
senator I'm sorry could you
answer asked that question again
I I was looking at something
else
and thank you
so it's page nine line twenty
past the all or any would say
home rule municipality or home
rural county but we don't
include regular county such as
Chavis.
through ordinance and and things
time in placement and those
types of issues.
Madam president Senator no
if a cannabis dispensary locates
outside of a municipality I
think everybody's assuming that
all these dispensers are gonna
be located solely within
municipalities but we don't
to line eighteen when we're
we're discussing
With respect to a location that
is specifically license for the
production of cannabis outside
of a building the entire unit of
So I think this is important for
everybody by pay attention to
this part.
Somebody on the farm the other
ten acres and they have a house
on this farm.
So we're gonna violate people's
constitutional rights.
To privacy because their farm
That if somebody applies for a
license and has a farm that
they're basically giving up
their constitutional right to
privacy to get that license
within their home within their
at in New it is written very
poorly.
They will go to page eleven.
Definition Q. Q. reciprocity
madam chair is that proof of
enrollment within a tribe.
Or is that proof of enrollment
within a medical program of the
tribe.
Page eleven you said.
Page eleven line eight.
We're saying who a who has a
reciprocity and reciprocity with
By a government regulatory
authority of the New Mexico
Indian nation tribe or pueblo.
So are we ensuring that they are
a member of just the tribe or
have a medical medical program
madam chair I don't madam chair
center I don't think any do at
this point at least not in New
Mexico I don't know about other
states.
will move down to the line
sixteen on process.
Means on altered from an
original raw or natural state.
Not altered but because it's not
in its raw or natural state has
this natural state would be
obviously attached to a cannabis
plant.
a raw flour as being a process
product.
And chair what was a question
Senator was it the intent madam
chair and and Representative to
store and we buy a tomato that's
a that's an unprocessed Act
product.
But according to this definition
if we were talking about
tomatoes it would be considered
a processed Ag product because
that are
just the the butter the flower.
No madam chair.
And thank you madam chair
because that that's exactly what
what that definition does so I
later than January first twenty
twenty two.
The division shall promulgate
rules.
You know here we are it's not
even April.
We call the special session
such an emergency and this is
such a budding industry that we
have to do it right now.
Madam chair Senator I can't
speak for the time of the
special session as you know the
one twenty twenty two it could
be much sooner than that.
And madam chair it's been my
experience when we say up to
fifty dollars it's fifty dollars
if we say no letters later than
can attest to that same so here
we are wasting fifty thousand
dollars of the taxpayer money
for something that's not going
to go on to affect for a more
long or why they would need so
much time.
Madam chair the January first
twenty twenty two to to
promulgate the rules.
and Senator of the no later than
date that was just language that
was in the original bill from
the regular session but when we
the middle of August mostly I
guess at this point depending
upon how long the special
session last so once the act if
it were to pass and was signed
special session at which point
then we'll be able to start the
process of getting the notice
out thirty days later
identifying holding a roll
the rules it amendment filed and
have them published so there's a
there is a time line but we
think that that time line can be
met sometime the middle of our
an emergency that's what we
should be doing.
So then we go to page thirteen
and we're talking about the
rules that are going to be
Any cannabis in excess of the
amount described in item one of
the sub Care paragraph shall be
stored in the person's
residence.
And shall not be visible from a
public place.
Unless they enter the residence.
So again we're giving the police
officers who we're we're trying
to stop
property because of this
definition.
Probable cause to say who it
looks like more than two ounces.
It appeared to be more than a
hundred milligrams.
Or somewhere through a window
that you could see it it may not
be over that but now we've
basically created probable cause
for the police to enter
someone's home.
drafters but that's exactly what
that definition will do.
Let's move on to page fifteen
now.
You know Senate bill three.
Goes a step further than just
specializes in in growing and
farming in this is an act
product.
The environment department
And madam chair there's nothing
in here requiring regulation and
licensing to take the
recommendation.
can you repeat the question
please.
And madam chair and and
Representative Martinez it says
in consultation with the
department of environment.
in the Department of
Environment.
Madam chair and senator I mean I
I think it's
I think it's
wants I'm sure I've got it all
the faith in the world in our
government employees and and and
public servants to to implement
heart and do the right thing to
assume that they wouldn't you
know does that make sense to me.
Well madam chair and and
two in Senate bill three is the
experts rate the rules.
The experts rate the rules
environment department is the
one that already does this for
for for him.
consumables and contaminants.
And they must consult but
there's nothing saying they
shall take into account for they
shall.
Do what they support or what
only one in charge with all of
licensing.
And it's gonna be open for for
corruption.
Because there's only gonna be
one one department watching over
this entire program.
later than January first twenty
twenty to the division so
promulgate rules in consultation
with the New Mexico department
of ag department environment in
the office of the state engineer
that we would have to do
something such as this.
Madam chair Senator all up all
have senator sorry I'll have a
superintendent three your
response to that.
because according to the statute
we're gonna have to work in
consultation with the department
of agriculture and the
department of the environment in
assurance that it's not our
intent to act in a corrupt
manner so we'll do everything we
can to get the accurate
information that we need knowing
that we weren't arbitrary and
capricious in the decisions that
we make.
And thank you madam chair and
again you've you've made my
point that if we want to write
that I'm hearing today and so I
I hope that brings pause to
everybody.
Here.
I'm looking at the make up of
the membership how many members
are on the advisory committee
madam chair.
municipal police chief so I
think we're up to sixteen
restaurant and.
It's not a test.
And madam chair what is the
of rules pursuant to this act
including best practices and
promotion of economic and
cultural diversity in licensing
and employment opportunities as
well as a protection of public
page seventeen.
So madam chair of the point of
this bill is is to create an
industry and economic
development.
What I don't see on this
We have a labor organization
qualified patients policy
advocacy organization whatever
that is.
deal with these regulations a
business person.
business woman.
So I I think as we've created
center that is a so madam chair
I've.
That was not a question directed
at the Sanchez thank you.
instance not correct chair.
quorum here in the Senate today
as we we finish the debate of
this bill I appreciate that.
cannabis the retail experience.
just as member shall serve at
the pleasure of the
superintendent
chair Senator yes the superbly.
Thank you madam chairman and
members the body I hope you pay
That this can to this work could
be completely wiped out so I
think that should give everyone
pause.
We look down and says monitor
the supply and demand of
and Cheryl defer to the
superintendent.
Thank you madam president and
senators so the department of
will just be expanded that that
database will be expanded to
include adult use cannabis.
And will that include the
illicit market madam chair.
here is that's that should be
the main focus.
Of this legislation and that's
what Senate bill three does.
Is it it does a much better job
We're looking through important
the the page twenty.
We were dealing with the
department of health.
Then fifteen professionals with
expertise related to cannabis
products through work training
or research how do we.
Look at that
madam chair and senator is is it
stated in the bill this is
for reports in terms of child
access road safety workplace
safety eccentric xetra.
Thank you madam chair so it's
regulate and administer and make
collect fees in connection with
the administration of.
Commercial cannabis activity
licensing related to commercial
cannabis activity.
Section six page twenty two
starting online eleven.
Yes so those fees here let me I
mean this out for you so.
thousand dollars a year for each
license promise not to exceed a
hundred and twenty five thousand
dollars for an integrated
cannabis micro business the fee
would be twenty five hundred
permit which be a three year
permit would be thirty five
dollars maximum
and then it goes on from there
happy to read them all off if
you want to.
cannabis activity then just as
an licensing so we have the
limit on what the licenses will
be but what will be the the fees
related to commercial cannabis
activity and we have that
Senator the kind of this
activity is the licensing fees.
And madam chair respectfully it
doesn't say that.
cannabis activity on top of the
licensing so I think we need to
take a long hard look at that
line.
discretion that they may collect
from one licensee but not from
the other licensee because
that's the way I read it madam
chair.
Hey collect fees in connection
with the administration of.
So as it's written on page a
lead on page twenty two the way
I read it is that they could
Well madam chair senator I think
that the I don't think they're
going to pick and choose between
businesses you know that might
that might be grounds for you
know for other action but I also
does give that that ability to
pick and choose who they.
They charge fees to.
licensed Activision cleaning
activities pursuant to the hand
manufacturing act except for
sales of alcoholic beverages why
are we excluding alcoholic
Within that we that we've seen
in other states.
madam chair Senator public
safety mixing alcohol with
Representative.
How does how does that affect
public safety any more than just
consuming cannabis or simply
consuming alcohol is there
madam chair senator yes I don't
know that it makes I'm sure it
makes some people the interest
but regardless of that fact
out liquor license the bar who
can that can also serve cannabis
I would not want to that that's
a bad idea public health public
safety.
But what about a license that is
held by a limited partnership a
limited liability company a
limited liability limited
Senator on this floor own to a
corporation they've gone through
all the proper licensing and I
just buy the shares of their
company.
madam chair and senator so first
of all at the the intent of this
is to ensure that we don't
create a problem like the liquor
although the specifics my my
My my assumption is that these
because the applicants will be a
person at the end of the day but
correct me if I'm wrong
superintendent.
reality is people are gonna hold
these licenses under LLCs LLPs
ello LP's nonprofits
and corporations are not gonna
hold them as individuals so all
Other issues and background
checks in those types of things
are gonna be moot point because
somebody can set up one of these
businesses go through the
that the intent was okay and
you know we've we've all seen
intent but it doesn't get to the
meat of the of the bill on the
issue that you were trying to
we're looking at paragraph L.
line twelve to address the
shortage of cannabis supply in
the medical cannabis program the
division may.
Require all cannabis establish
licenses to ensure that at least
put in statute.
A cap of twenty percent if maybe
thirty percent is more what we
need to ensure that our mental
medical program stays whole.
percent is there December twenty
second of twenty third December
thirty first of twenty twenty
two
the ten percent is something
And madam chair what if the need
is only five percent what is a
business supposed to do are they
supposed to purchase and have on
the shelf more than what they
concrete minimum ten percent.
Thank you madam president
Senator we do allow a retail
state if company and Hobbs is
not meeting their twenty five
percent then they you know we
their medical they're loud to
sell that wholesale.
Two goals again to try to make
sure that there's plenty of
cannabis available for medical
consumers.
Madam president senator that's a
really good question will know
when they are purchasing it at
the cash register of bills of
their medical patient they'll
So madam chair what happens if
if one of these duel licensed
facilities.
state and one of my communities
that has quite a bit of tourist
traffic.
And be prohibited from selling
because they're not reaching
that ten percent threshold.
Madam president Senator the
answer to that is now.
what's the penalty how do we
ensure what are they supposed to
do if the demand for the medical
goes away or is it Matt or they
have a high enough supply that
they can sell ninety five
Madam madam president Senator we
believe with the over one
hundred thousand licensees that
are on the registry right now
twenty five percent will not be
a problem.
And madam chair we gonna ensure
that by
putting in plant caps.
thousand licensees producing
medical.
One way that.
That might be done to keep that
number artificially high is to
Madam president Senator that
would be counterproductive.
And thank you madam chair I
Reasonable measures to
expeditiously incentivize
increased production of cannabis
plants to remedy a shortage of
Madam president Senator it's
gonna really depend upon what's
happening at the time but there
could be an opportunity to
streamlined licenses to make
them our producers have the
ability to.
Start producing sooner I think
And and thank you madam chair
I'm I'm just gonna give a quick
example let's say you're selling
a thousand grams of medical
currently so that means.
happen in this next of
subparagraph three.
because we're saying the
supplies based upon the sales
even though the volume could
stay the same.
one point five million grams now
we're below the ten percent
threshold and we could
potentially then implement
subparagraph three.
the same in the demand has
stayed the same I think we need
to be careful with this system
of a percentage of sales even
though we're saying that's a
Is talking about
Subparagraph a license issue
percent of the cannabis
regulation actual not be subject
one on down the line and then
this of the paragraph three.
Require as a condition of
licensing pursuant to the
cannabis regulation act that the
applicant demonstrate.
determined by the division
related to the license as
evidenced by documentation from
the office of the state engineer
of a valid Water right or from
water provider that the use of
understand madam chair what
that's even saying.
Because right out the gate right
of the Watergate it says
commercial water supply water
rights for another source of
water.
I want a license I understand
the intent and and we can talk
about the intent of this but the
reality is this section is not
necessary because in New Mexico
you have to have a water right.
And I'm really curious about the
source of water sufficient to
meet the water needs what is
that what is that language mean.
Madam chair.
grow
on the land or in the greenhouse
that they have they're gonna
have to have enough water in
order to do that and those are
some of the things that will
that there's that there's enough
water to to do the work.
So madam chair again this is not
necessary as as other ag
producers
restrictions so again I think
this is something that's big U.
S. language that's that's really
not necessary involves the the
state engineer one is not
necessary.
afternoon or evening at nine PM
so.
and there was no consensus on it
so this that's where the concern
is coming from.
There we go to page thirty says
like way too long that if an
application is complete it
shouldn't take more than seven
to ten days to issue a license.
but in the event that you are
going to have to deny something
the department is certainly
going to want to make sure that
we got a valid reason or denying
in in to go to court to defend
the decision that you've made as
not being arbitrary and
capricious so when you're gonna
deny a license you've really got
application it may appear that
it needs to be denied but.
You typically would go back and
forth with the application to
I think ninety days is is way
long and and we shouldn't even
put that in the statute thirty
twenty would be sufficient side
I think what we're gonna see is
we don't want to and and that's
that's the unfortunate truth
with with the way that it's it's
written the next questions as
the division shell the line
application for initial license
or renewal if the application
send this in this one little
portion that you you just
omitted we can get moving on
with your your license why is
for licenses in the past with
other departments that do have
that flexibility especially with
alcohol and and and applying for
liquor licenses that if the
would we put shall instead of
may there to give a little bit
of flexibility to ensure that we
don't delay these licenses any
longer than we do.
Madam madam president Senator of
couldn't maybe issue a license
if they don't find everything
that doesn't mean as I mentioned
before in your other question
that is a department we don't
provide the applicant the
information that they need
hopefully almost immediately so
that they'll know what they're
missing or whether the
application is complete without
licensing and renew all online
so that the customers can have
some selfsufficiency in the
information that they need but
it would be it would be
the division shall deny.
So if you say may deny then
maybe some of the information
that they sent to you was
sufficient enough to deny the
start the process entirely over
just because they were missing
that were said you may deny it
would allow you the the
flexibility to to get with that
if if people are confused
especially our small farmers and
people are just lay people
trying to apply for these
licenses that don't have
safe you'll send this and we can
move forward with it and and
process the license and either
deny it or
give you the license so I think
that shell should be a may.
applicant is a limited
partnership each partner.
Live include limit limit on
liability company each member.
Corporation each director an
shares so why are we treating
corporations different than
partnerships where each member
of the partnership even though
they're not a general partner
would have to go through a
Madam president senator I would
just point you back to the
definition of a controlling
person on page seven under a
definition you and so the.
So madam chair said ten percent
but I can have one percent of a
limited partnership and still be
required to do a background
is any member of a limited
liability partnership.
And then under corporations as
controlling person which would
be ten percent of shares so you
could be part of a limited
that I wanted to bring the
body's attention to that we only
require or we don't allow the
sale between individuals but
state and so that was the point
earlier of making that
distinction
with regard to.
To the licensing and transfer
between individuals.
Madam president Senator which
Michael business so you're
thinking up.
And and madam chair appreciate
that the production.
For a cannabis.
Producer Michael businesses up
to one thousand dollars per
year.
when drafted because Senate bill
three is a scale license so that
those that want to start small
don't have to spend more per
per plant.
Than someone who's growing two
hundred plants it was that the
intent.
ways to help insure that if
someone's growing fifty plants
on the up to a thousand dollars
of there are some other states
and I think I mentioned this
earlier and a question that you
based upon how many plants they
are growing and keep in mind
that they're not going to pay
for for her plan so they can
have a to two hundred plans
End up with with some litigation
if somebody applied for
microlights since without it
saying scalable licenses based
upon number of plants that if
you're treating one different
scalable license is the better
way of doing it so that if
somebody does want to start
small they're not paying a
thousand dollars to start small
and they don't have a thousand
dollars to to spend to get
started.
This is required existing
licensee at a licensed premises
to relocate.
So we've allowed
can prohibit recreational
cannabis.
within certain areas so I think
there should be some huge
concern there that if somebody
had a medical.
ensure that there weren't
recreational cannabis
establishments there so I think
that's an important section that
a lot of us in the rural
communities
really need to look at.
packages shall be resealable.
Child resistant resistant
in the bill when it doesn't
really belong.
madam chair and senator I I just
read that it doesn't belong I
think the point of this is to
do it all as much as we can as
much as possible with you know
the best practices in place.
senator.
And madam chair I can't think of
any off the top of my head
that's why I don't think it's
it's necessary system to use
language that is not necessary
or something along those lines
even though paper can be
recycled so I think it's just
language that's that's not
needed that makes us all feel
good.
but then on page forty eight it
bodies that even necessary Madam
chair of don't we have to.
Abide by the law all of us
without it being explicit.
that's just really not necessary
that if this had gone the
judiciary I'm sure we would have
would have struck.
collections that ensure accurate
test results.
Including requiring that testing
samples be collected by
laboratory staff trained in
testing sample collection so how
that our small farmers can get
in the business putting putting
something like this that would
require them to pay a laboratory
staff to come.
take a sample.
consuming the product and you
know of for me it's the cost of
doing business I would also say
if if there are producers in a
rural community there's a lot of
testing facility I'm sure that's
basically in ploidy of the
department that comes out and
does it and that's that's part
of your license that's you know
around five hundred Bucks so we
don't just keep adding cost of
small producers to to compete.
Will move on to page fifty.
We're talking about prohibit the
advertisement and marketing of
cannabis products on radio
is there a reason
in this section that that we
would
Want to have the
madam chair Senator I believe
that the size of the beginning
you know we're trying to find
throughout the country on things
like tobacco for example and so
you know I I think that the the
language is it's it's it's
is is just fine.
And thank you madam chair I
think there's gonna be a few
questions with that but I'll
move on to page fifty seven.
Senate bill three make sure says
consume.
So that if we're sitting in a
restaurant somebody can just pop
out.
any type of cannabis product and
cannabis product whether it's
vape or
edibles or those types of things
that are going to be labeled in
a way that is obviously cannabis
that's that's going to be in in
public view.
Representative why did we
limited only to smoke instead of
consuming cannabis in public.
madam chair senator I'm not sure
an answer that question.
I'm madam chair and senator one
of the reasons is that concerned
about
that there is a noticeable smell
You know it's in.
I think you could also say
consume I don't think that's
bad language but the intent was
and they wouldn't need to then
consume once they left but
someone else who might be
you know.
consumer smoke but we wanted to
make sure smoke was included.
And thank you madam chair that's
why we had consume in in the
bill two years ago and into
and I'm gonna and on page sixty
seven at section forty is plant
limits
you know there's a lot of
information out there that
somehow if we limit plants.
That because of no plant counts
and no license limits in order
again they have the lowest
illicit market of any state in
the union at ten percent.
prices to ensure that the
illicit market is going to
thrive and so if the goal is to
put the illicit market out in
this section definitely has no
Especially with the governance.
production should be under Ag.
Consumable should be under
environments and we shouldn't
chair.
Thank you next on our list is
Senator center fund this.
And during the Senate Judiciary
for quite some long time and as
best I can tell took all of the
amendments that we requested you
version the bill expressly
allowed parents to get more
wanted to their children in the
home and I guess you all nodding
your heads that was not a good
idea I think we would all agree
through all of it and and I
would have had other questions
and comments that I'm sure would
of
perhaps led to some further
consideration of other parts of
this bill anymore or that we're
here to debate this bill and to
rewrite this bill
we're called into special
session week of Easter just like
possible to a predetermined
result.
and so we're not really
genuinely here to debate the
bill or to improve the bill
but we don't really have time to
legalizing marijuana despite the
fact that I was the sponsor
proponent for decriminalizing
marijuana.
It's kind of interesting about
that with all due respect to
them is that when I when I
supportive of decriminalizing
marijuana back at the time of
the they didn't show up for
committees often times they
weren't there as proponents of
Bill because decriminalizing
wasn't the goal and the thinking
serious unintended consequences
in this bill let me start with
the Sanchez if we can.
R. rash to get into the drug
business as a state and that's
escaping that and we'll we'll
all support that with specific
language from the bill itself
but the state is getting a
partnership with with the drug
business and and I don't think
other states do that I think
fifty eight and fifty nine.
This is a section the bill that
that relates to the requirements
Of the of the unintended
consequences of this bill is
that we're going to encourage
our use to get into the drug
business.
and I know that's not your
decisions but the one with the
way the bill is written in the
structure of this policy
procedure is really going to
make it.
A business for children and the
reason for that is the following
Candelaria earlier talking
about.
But growing plants and so forth
what's interesting is there's a
limitation on prisons for twenty
one years and older.
minute
the limit is sixty go to twelve
in gross six more plans for a
fifty dollar fine we can do the
math I I used to have the
is a rounding error in a and a
balance sheet for penalties of
those over twenty one years old
but look at the penalty for
You'll see the penalty there in
subsections one and two.
If you're under eighteen and you
grow unlimited number of plans
When we realistically think as
mature thinking adults that the
drug producers in the less than
market are going to do.
If the penalty is fifty dollars
What what would we expect
delays.
Am I missing something in the
bill Representative I see you
shaking your heads up in my
misunderstanding the bill when I
read the part that the person
as a committee service if
there's is there something else
that applies to somebody under
eighteen years old.
Chair Senator no no I think
you're you're you're perspective
is is spot on you know what we
right because there's so much
that can be done in terms of
enforcement
that could lead us into more
punitive stuff whether it's
fines and fees or whether it's
choose to violate this section
by providing them with the
resources the education the the
the wraparound supports that
they need instead of the
communities the twenty five
fifty five hundred dollars to be
a lot of money so that was just
a policy decision we made your
not wrong at all in your
interpretation I mean I think
that that's a valid point but
been saying all along as you
Mexico's not ready and and I'm
just trying to give you one
example is the your good policy
Representative to try and make
sure that we're not putting
young people in the prison and
market and so simply we just say
that although although those
twenty plants are growing that
backyard they belong to my
sixteen year old my seventy year
old son and then there's then
there's respectively no penalty
your child or or if you're
listed drug dealer who wants to
make additional money you simply
have a sixteen and seventeen
year olds grow for you or claim
to grow for your take
cynical perspective on the world
but I think it's realistic.
We we shouldn't we shouldn't be
naive about the way the world
works and and and this is just
one very good example of doing
so let me have you turn to other
trafficking distribution.
the the penalty on page sixty
subsection seeing for an
individual under eighteen years
old.
the license sale cannabis and
penalties so the distribution
sale barter of cannabis done by
someone under eighteen years old
products your penalty is if
you're caught your unfortunately
caught you've got to go to for
our class at no cost
is this process is expressly no
And induced to the selling of
cannabis illicitly.
People under eighteen because
the only penalty they'll have to
do is go to a Saturday morning
into trafficking and and the
markets and the and the
sophisticated individuals and I
I know we're talking about a lot
of very reputable business
people that want to get into
this business but we should we
From from unimaginable crime
problems.
Some of the worst in the
country.
And so we're simply making it
easier for those individuals to
and I'm I'm also trying to point
out what I think are going to be
the unintended consequences of
of the policy that we're gonna
drive tonight I'm certain
without fail.
society and one other health
group spoke in opposition to the
bill I want to thank them for
that because what's been
interesting over the last couple
to tobacco the those same
individuals are the ones now
promoting most strongly the
excess of marijuana in our
society in the in the the logic
we try to encourage make
marijuana even more accessible
let me give you again the
example that I promised I would
in the bill there was a question
smoking marijuana in a public
place you're walking down the
street here at the farmers
market you're at the basketball
or football game on Friday night
at the high school game and you
and your contact actually caught
you're caught smoking marijuana
in a public place you're at the
Friday night high school game
you light one up there is no
penalty and you cannot be
penalized for smoking marijuana
public place if you're under
gonna turn into when we have
sixty and seventy year olds on
smoking pot and and frankly
doing so without a consequence.
This expressly without a
consequence.
Let me let me turn off the
subject of what I think this is
going to do as harm to the young
people in our state let me turn
to the issue of D. W. Y. last
children in a D. W. I. crash.
Unfortunately this same week New
Mexico once again was the
recipient of the number one spot
on the national highway
children a reminder to me we
have an unaddressed problem in
New Mexico on page were making
no progress personal number one.
And of course we don't want to
be left behind but the number
one issue as I understand from
reading the press in New York
was how they were going to
enforce driving under the
There's nothing in this bill
that attempts to even address
the issue of driving under the
influence at all and as I heard
of the Sanchez earlier say that
that there was no need to do so
driver over and detect the odor
of alcohol that is allowed to be
used as a clue a basis for the
officer to take further steps a
reasonable suspicion is what
section twenty five on page
fifty four that an officer who
pull somebody over and detect
the odor of cannabis that cannot
be a basis for the officer to
for taking any action by law
enforcement officer unlike
alcohol.
And unlike alcohol we have an
open container in the vehicle
that too is a basis for law
enforcement to take further
unlawful an open container of
alcohol with this bill expressly
says that an open container or
an open container or openly
visible marijuana in section
influence.
And so this bill frankly is much
lighter on enforcing driving
under the influence of driving
impaired in New Mexico than
adding to that problem with
making it harder to convict
individuals for driving under
the influence of marijuana is
wise policy.
presumptive levels for driving
aggravated this bill has nothing
about any presumptive levels
this bill has nothing about any
standards or testing or other
measured This bill again is
Until we can get our existing
problems under some level of
controller show some progress
it's hard for me to say that
The bill I'm also does something
interesting on a different topic
which is with regard to the
economics.
And the the earlier speakers
raised the issue with the
Someone might my colleague
center kind of leading the
passes talked about the term
used in the bill market
equilibrium the the commission
the committee's job is to
Or increase or decrease the
licenses and then by that in the
state of New Mexico will control
and and I see the role of
superintendents saying no so
that all all will go to the
specific sections in a moment to
control the market to establish
this market equilibrium so we'll
turn the page twenty four.
Section six a six H..
Of the bill.
major members of the cannabis
regulatory advisory committee
voting on the question that
market equilibrium is deficient
and threatens the economic
viability of the cannabis
The superintendent may impose a
temporary moratorium on new
license.
And and all open to the
vote the market it really meant
is market the reliever is
deficient.
And threatens the economic
viability of the cannabis
industry.
The superintendent may impose a
earlier that if this committee
determines there is a threat to
the economic viability of this
industry you have control to
correct me if I am incorrect.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator and I just it's
really nice to see you I say I
that we address those things
that you brought up on that that
I'm not sure how but you might
have ended up with the wrong
version because we did take that
climb over the rainbow and make
a left at the yellow brick road
because it was nearly going to
be impossible to do and so that
that section is no longer part
the point of pre G. L. G. so I
assumed this was five point five
by Mister all right yes with all
due respect I'm open waste
anybody's time with anything
else that I have wrong in the
were any of those changer the
still in the bill.
Madam chair and senator the
those remain in in the bills
just one one slight COVID on the
down that paragraph.
It says that that section will
not apply when a law enforcement
officer is actually
investigating a person for
operating a vehicle while
intoxicated or under the
might my point earlier was less
about the law enforcement of
driving under the influence and
more about what we're doing when
you use and and the those
concerns remain but I'm I'm very
I'm I'm not being overly
aggressive in my questioning but
but also
I I hope you will shake your
hand or all of your hand if you
think I'm getting something
wrong particularly if even
to figure out where to begin a
one stop.
The
very please of the state match
was not going to try and control
of the market and the price of
or financing for individuals to
be able to purchase of medicinal
marijuana and and I see that's
been taken out of the bill as
people to to buy marijuana the
state price would be assent
essentially no different than
Medicare or Medicaid pricing of
with the issue of economics
although those the
superintendent fortunately is
not going to be controlling the
supply and demand I I do think
that it's important to also
Madam president senator that is
correct.
And I think that's a terrible
mistake here's why throughout
this bill the enforcement
to be serving.
If your baby violate any of the
provisions of this law the
remedy here is suspension or
revocation of the license that's
the most that's the most serious
consequence there's earlier
license which frankly is no
consequence at all of you have
multiple licenses and and
several right smart businesses
and these people are very
sophisticated businesses there
of them as their license
suspended Corporation B. has our
license but it no sweat
operation eight corporation D.
corporation in FY right on down
the road and so why putting
really no consequence to
violating this law other than
perhaps later in regulation
we'll try to do something for
the individuals who may be
my mind the release on to be no
consequence at all.
On the matter of economics I
have to weigh in it's been it's
been interesting to me that he
to listen over the last couple
the the same idea to apply to
have we we that we allowed to
have it we legalize Tampa we've
allowed rules for have the
economy would boom that new
so that we're going to build
cars you all heard all this
really is going to get very very
wealthy I have to tell you the
those arrested in farming for a
long time and R. K. over four
generations most of us that are
not going to get into the
marijuana business for some of
the same reasons and I think
we'll have to recognize that
eventually the the market really
is going to come that the
product is going to come from
Mexico.
grow very much onions tomatoes
chill really
actuals in the Missouri valley
more we grow pecans cotton
alfalfa we grow things that
don't require labor and the
labor drugs of all gone to
restrictions on insecticides New
Mexico has no problems with
water and and and of course
their labor costs are far less
expensive and so we need to
five and sixty six I was
fascinated by by this section
the bill which authorizes the
governor to enter contracts with
Mexico and other foreign
countries presumably in south
bill it says the governor shall
mandatory shall interject
remains with other jurisdictions
within and outside of the United
States.
that to me means Mexico San
state.
and if you look in subsection
two of the bill provides the
agreement shall include
international delivery of
cannabis products international
jurisdictions in the United
States or internationally.
and so yes I realize that this
is all subject to the feds
saying yes which may never
With companies and people
outside the United States for
delivery of cannabis products
international delivery other
jurisdictions internationally
and so forth help help me
Madam chair Senator you know I
think I think that the the idea
is that if the federal
government would allow for those
here I think that's the idea
behind it you're you're correct
I mean this could certainly be a
standalone bill and for five
years but we could end this one
Well this I'm gonna hope that
never happens for a lot of
reasons but but I think once
again I think this part of the
bill sends the wrong message
don't think that that squares
with our FY idea here that that
this is about economic
development for New Mexico
growers I realize the thinking
imported by Mexico by Mexicans
and other south and central
American countries I've never
heard of that has I've never
heard of any of the other drug
trades in the history of drug
opposed to the the other way
around.
So.
Fortunately that I think
summarizes just a few of my
general observations of things
see that this session will as
intended for that purpose for us
to debate and and really really
try and improve this bill more
but I I do want to and
request that I had and
suggestions for you at that
time.
And all this and on on I thought
I I spend for the public I have
I travel into other states and
frankly our neighboring states
were I have one of my law
offices were my partners are
a lot of money I'm wondering why
what is it when we're when I'm
traveling when I'm looking
around what is it we're we're
not doing that all the other
states around us and
southwestern doing and I'm
Representative Madam chair
Senator it's eleven thousand but
Levin thousand new jobs and and
what and what's the economic
benefit the state of New Mexico
in terms of tax revenue Amanda
dollars other studies
independent Saudis have shown it
to be closer to fifty other
subsequent to be closer to three
hundred so it's it's all over
the place yeah well
for whether it's gambling
whether it's have.
we've always got the latest the
greatest idea to get rich quick
and and short cut the maybe a
little more reliable process I
three hundred million it's hard
for me to imagine New Mexico
population and market comparing
to new York's and and so the
numbers to me are are somewhat
influence our state is so small
our economy is so small it's
controlled by such a small
number of people we don't have
the diversity I hear Senator on
the lady I hear you
backgrounds how do we do that
and I'm not I'm not convinced
this bill will do that I think
this is still an insider's game
and for those who think they're
at it for a long time so good
luck but but but I I I don't
think it's fair for us to to
encourage this is an insider's
And I hope that that's not what
happens here because if so these
insiders are going to have the
benefit of hundreds of millions
of dollars to Greg greatly
this bill working now making
hundreds of thousands of dollars
to make sure this passes we've
seen in the newspaper all the
political contributions of the
industry I would hate to think
that this industry hands of
So I'm my my concern with this
bill my my opposition is not to
marijuana.
There I wouldn't just
decriminalized if I felt that
about marijuana as as matter my
that very slow thank group of
business people who end up
profiting off of those who I
think we all.
A concerned about in our state.
So when you're walking around a
know well will know that that we
we made this decision and and
this was our vision for New
Mexico it's not my vision for
New Mexico of course but but I
respect the majority tonight and
Thank you senator just for the
body those Senator here
we're going to hear from Senator
choir but there's no one here
and that's okay because maybe
they're in their office maybe
they're online I know my
daughter is she's watching and
This is one of the most
important pieces of legislation
that that this body will
consider.
And no one's here to hear the
debate that I just heard from
own.
Senator Pirtle did the very same
thing.
And I learn things about what
we're getting ready to do and
So I hope you're all in your
offices don't think you are.
That it's disappointing to me
that we are not listening to
this very important debate.
General has stated with regard
to federal law.
So when you look at the title of
the bill.
And
Madam president Representative
and pueblos what what kind of
agreements.
Do you anticipate entering into
with regard to the tribals.
tribes or pueblos sure the
choose to participate in the
industry and so these these
these agreements would be able
use of some sort I'm assuming
it is really designed to ensure
that we don't leave out an
important in historic part of
our community Indian tribes or
pueblos.
able to to to work with us and
engage in the practice madam
chair and senator.
Thank you madam president thank
you Representative and I think
is prohibited on federal land
so I I thought I know in Lee
County we have a lot of federal
land Lee in Eddy county New and
I know it's federal land because
That's about twenty seven
million acres of federal land.
And it's really a patchwork if
you look at a map and I try to
pull it up I've seen one
I've seen a map in various
So so when you are federal land
and no one really knows when
you're leaving.
State Land or private landing
you're moving into federal land
if if you should possess
and international forest or if
you're hiking in the organ
mountains Lee that's federal
land now of the you would not be
Chair Senator that is that is
that is the case now I I will
submit to you though that the
last three administrations in
states where the they have
You know enforcing me traveling
through with personal
consumption now you know
obviously that's one example I
know those are completely
different situations if I'm
traveling through federal land
with cannabis for my personal
consumption you know I'm I'm
the things that we have asked
for what I would like to see in
the bill is local option and
we've been told that no that
would create too much of a
patchwork.
Well we already have a patchwork
that the polls that that you're
referencing was done by DPA are
the drug policy action group
because it was pretty high
Yeah madam chair Senator the
percentage was seventy four
percent and and I I I'd like to
add that you know
We know we don't know how people
feel about us as candidates
right and so while you can
produce a poll to say whatever
the heck you wanted to say
want an artificial pool that's
going to tell me I'm great and
they left me and on election day
I get slammed so even though the
poll was was commissioned by an
her I'm not sure of the gender
he him or her
the through through their
polling strategy in their
polling mechanism I came up with
the metrics to ensure that we
legalized when it's really a
push pull doesn't really benefit
me right I really want to know
what people are feeling and
people are saying out there and
so the poll said that seventy
four percent of those
Kaltenbach probably can pull up
to cross stabs in the numbers
and go over those with us but
the pull truly is a measure of
of of what people are thinking
out there again it doesn't help
those numbers now if you look at
other polls you know ride you
know over the last few years the
Albuquerque journal which tends
to publish would rather
think that public perception on.
This issue has definitely
changed and so you know that's
that's the only reason I
mentioned the full I would never
mention a pull based on some
sort of you know push pull
mechanism it's it's legitimate
four percent of the people do
support legalization but when
you look a little bit deeper
into that a lot of that is H.
based and I think some of it
and I know from my community I
don't think you would pull that
high and I haven't done a
scientific poll and and my good
friend senator guy goes did to a
either the DPA or the journal
indicated and again I think
that's why I would really
request a local option I just
clearly do not welcome this and
those of us that live on the
border we're gonna take a
greater share of the burden
because they're going to come
back into Texas and and I think
that it's just terribly unfair
not to allow us to make that
decision for ourselves.
So just a thought on that
years societies dealt with this.
And we've tried to figure out of
whether the freedom to choose as
to even consider that it would
be legal to use.
mind altering drugs.
Today we're talking about
cannabis.
We've had massive overdoses over
the last two weeks.
People that have.
Inadvertently gotten.
No and that's that's a terrible
thing.
Absolutely acceptable and that
concerns me because it's not
just about the person.
Who makes the decision to use of
mind altering drug that's
The M. for your.
All of those people at some
point will be impacted by the
individual and even society.
begin to lose interest in.
In their jobs interest in their
families.
It changes them.
And I think that that's
But the impact on the state of
New Mexico is going to be
significant.
see I see many very intelligent
people in this body.
People that I have great respect
for.
That for state that is the third
highest.
In poverty.
We'll be spending whatever extra
money they can find.
And I look across and I wonder
why we are doing this.
Madam president.
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
All my frankly since during the
regular session but I've been
working for years as a sponsor
of the bill knows.
That I believe that when we got
drug and alcohol treatment in
the state of New Mexico.
We.
We have as we know massive
substance abuse problems in the
state.
of substance abuse mentalities.
In the country.
We have a very significant
problems social problems.
And the reality colleagues is
that if you look at the research
and I've been looking at the
research.
So this bill.
This bill has a public health
I think a lot of folks who use
cannabis are using it illegally
right now again I think it just
shifted to where they're than
For those that need it.
And so as I look at other states
across the country madam
president.
from legal cannabis.
For treatment and prevention and
they just pass a citizen
initiative this last year
They they backed it up with
money.
So.
I've been.
Amendments drafted madam
president and colleagues to
require that.
a while.
Very likely until even after
next legislative session.
There's a lot of things being
worked out including as the
Sanchez talked about.
For important priorities and
I've heard him talk about
entrepreneurship.
But I think treatment is an
incredibly important priority
sponsor question at this point.
Madam president if you'll you'll
for question.
Representative Martinez madam
chair I gladly you'll to Senator
to.
To know from you you and I we
worked on this issue a year ago
when treatment was in the bill.
Right eighteen percent of the
excise tax of the state of the
for funding for treatment and
not in a token way but in a
significant way as we look to
finish this job next session and
we work on this in the interim.
right now so I am very much
committed to working alongside
you and our colleagues to make
it happen and and as you say not
in a token way in a real way
that makes a real difference.
You know we're going to be
raising a significant amount of
money from legalizing cannabis
if this bill passes and I know
that the house just passed an
amendment earlier today or
forecasters the sales are going
to roughly double.
I guess anticipate you might
start off with three hundred
million in sales here to here to
and could grow to like six
donor forecast images blow the
doors off these forecasts it's
very possible here so so
important madam president
colleagues we're putting some
money towards public health.
substance abuse but that we're
actually putting a dent in just
the massive problem that we have
in New Mexico.
And it's really important people
and I know we all know how
and that opportunity it will be
a big missed opportunity for the
state.
And I will not be better for
missing that opportunity so.
With that settlement.
Work with our leadership house
leadership.
And let's get this done to take
effect when this bill is being
Thank you I had no one else on
my list wanted to move to Senate
bill three Senator Brandt is
race is sand Senator Brandt
Anyway would sponsor you'll for
question.
Madam chair yes.
So I guess I'm a little bit
confused.
I thought marijuana was safe.
so in my opinion it's safer than
than tobacco and alcohol but as
a state everything with the
reason and that reason includes
Chair and representative but why
then are we charging this excise
tax on top of our gross receipts
tax especially at the eighteen
percent we usually only do that
want to make sure that we can
pay for the program you want to
make sure that we can raise
revenues not only to to deal
with the you know some of the
unintended consequences we've
heard some of those here today
You're in Representative that's
I guess that's where the
confusion comes because MALAGARI
so safe and now we're needing to
raise this money to pay for the
state one moment we say it's
safe the next moment we say
their side effects and there's
unintended consequences and we
have to have treatment what we
have in treatment for if it's
safe so I just feel like we make
actually raising the tax we've
done nothing to get the cartels
out of this business either
because now we've increased the
tax rate two point that the
Thank you so that in order our
debate on house bill two and
it's time to move now to debate
on Senate bill three.
Thank you madam chair the
dinners excellent by the way if
anybody's interested.
Thank you to those who brought
us dinner.
The great conversation with
And and thank you madam chair I
believe in the committee the
whole it's not necessary but I
would happily you'll.
Thank you madam chair
so I just had a question on on
what have you I think that's a
very interesting innovative idea
and and something that I agree
with you we could lead
you know in in the country in
the world on this you just can
you give us a little more detail
support of HB to it is gonna say
that out loud now but I'm
interested in your ideas as well
I think you're you're you're an
important part of this
conversation as well.
the state puts it into a fund
where we would train all of our
officers within the state so all
or the development of a a
roadside test for we would test
the metabolites and someone
system.
to determine if the have
senator so I guess my question
is if this is been you know
happening for a while I know
that you know or again other
states and is that why hasn't
this been done before do you
money to it but they haven't
taken it seriously.
they throw money at it just just
as sometimes we do things here
just for the optics.
And so I know there's probably
that basically would allow the
completion of such a project to
contract with Los Alamos labs or
some other lab to come up with
adequately funded it.
Thank you madam chair and
senator how did your legislation
SB three hundred it deal with
that topic.
so as it built over time without
knowing what the revenues would
be it's hard to guess as to how
soon we can start to develop
Thank you madam chair and I've
also been out getting my steps
maybe I'm a little light light
light headed I should been
little clear how did your
legislation madam chair and
senator deal with the roadside
developed a roadside test and
then also provide for training
for our drug recognition experts
within all the police forces all
police officers within the
state.
So madam chair and senator as
you know we passed the feed bill
today so it would start with
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars.
And then as
July because why are we here
wasting the taxpayers time if if
we're not in a hurry or if this
is not some type of emergency so
starting in June or July as
fifty thousand that we approved
earlier in house bill one I
believe.
Thank you madam chair might ask
another question later but I
think that's it thank you.
Thank you madam president and
and I I had the opportunity to
to listen to all the debate on
but a lot of the points.
That even brought up today also
applied to.
Senate bill three nothing
Senator Pirtle is right it it
A difficult to shape people's
lenses to shift them.
I think Senator Kernan is
correct I think part of it is
generational.
And I think that there's a lot
And one thing I would submit to
the body as we consider both of
these bills is.
Cannabis does not have a net
negative effect on a person's
life.
Have a net negative effect.
I think we can all sort of start
I think that think that needs to
be said today because I think
that's one of the assumptions
that is always circled and
But like any other substance on
earth.
Right.
The possibility of abuse and
addiction does rice.
That for you or bad or morally
repugnant it makes that over use
repugnant.
And I submitted to the body
is we think we can reduce it to
simply increasing the budget
line item for Medicaid services.
And is far more complicated
picture that and I think it has
alcoholism and method of use
especially in the queer
community because folks are
dealing with trauma and a lot of
that trauma is personal from
your own lived experience for a
treating addiction.
Because that is the root of
addiction I think madam present
is that trauma.
know some kind of out there
concept that can be laughed off
and just disregarded now the
really experience.
Of that trauma New Mexico is
real and I think that's what
hundred years of trauma and
colonials ation and war and rape
and violence and we salute this
flag every day saying we are
To following my heart on this
today and realizing that
perfection should not be the
enemy of the good.
do I think general fund needs to
increase in future years
absolutely.
One thing I would submit to this
body before **** sponsor
question and then stop talking
probably for the afternoon and
for this tax revenue for this
department of that department to
actually send fifty percent of
the annual revenue to the
permanent funds.
Twenty five percent of that to
the land grant permanent fund
everybody in this room for the
governor and for every local
government.
Increasing the land grant
permanent fund will now may not
only more money for all the
existing beneficiaries would now
for early childhood.
Once this revenue is realized as
premature now.
I guess the question I want to
ask Miss Senator Pirtle Madam
chair in closing is this.
I think fundamentally.
There's two different
philosophical approaches on the
table one that you need to
protection regulated markets to
Some bad thing inherently but it
does come with certain economic
costs.
Your bill on the other hand miss
madam chair says.
the right market price Xcerra
I'd like for you to explain to
me as as an actual person who
grows things for a living.
Why you support the latter and
thought we had the votes to put
some of this revenue into the
permanent fund I would be right
there and I think quite a few
people would agree that we could
milk we're talking about actual
milk.
Just to just to get that clear
we're not we're not milking
almonds down and Travis county.
But Canada put in a quota
system.
guess what they limit the amount
of milk that can be produced.
So now we've created a market
much like limiting licenses are
is because we limit the supply
of milk who is punished at the
end of the day.
The end consumer.
A gallon of milk in the United
But in Canada where they limit
production.
Limit supply limit the amount of
licenses of of cows to produce
milk.
You're paying anywhere from five
That we need to ensure that we
are hurting the in consumer.
You're not really helping the
farmer.
Because if somebody in Canada
going to be high our young
farmers are are underserved
areas are not going to be able
to to get in.
More importantly when we start
limiting plant counts is we have
to push out the illicit market
one.
But to we want to make sure that
we're not leaving people out
A lot of time but we spent
plenty of time on house bill two
fifty five.
That was a hard vote for every
directly affect people's lives.
Well why.
We're people's lives being
directly affected because we
created a system of limited
licenses were things have value.
system in cannabis that's
exactly the same.
We want more people involved we
want to be cheap we wanted to be
fair.
We wanted to be equitable and
that's what Senate bill three
three but will soon for set that
at our next forthcoming special
session as I've been told.
you know there's there there are
and listen to this whole thing
probably if not the best one of
the best debates that have
actually happened on the Senate
floor and I think the decision
of doing this in the committee
think we can be very proud
honestly of this institution and
what is done.
The madam chair I I asked that
question because I think that is
Is how personal.
How vicious.
Downright just unsure in me.
coming from one side.
And and you know at some point
you realize you're up under out
matched you've made the
argument.
And I think that what's been
politicize them not personalize
them not made them about someone
so it's going to get rich at the
expense of someone else.
But actually look at them as two
different economic ideas.
While I trust government to do a
lot of things.
Really don't trust governments
to set market prices.
make better decisions for the
people of New Mexico the people
of New Mexico commit themselves.
So I appreciate the time and
present to say that that.
That maybe we should tone down
the personalizing.
John down the vilifying of
Business.
for this body is US two economic
ideas.
And I submit to this chamber
madam president closing that if
you really believe.
economy then the small business
person and the hardworking
entrepreneur.
In many many ways as a
practicing attorney who has to
fight for the quote unquote
little guy against Goliath every
single day.
Thank you I don't see any other
debate sorry Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
into this from comparing it with
the earlier version is clear
that you've continue to develop
and and and and to incorporate
ideas it's also clear that many
of your ideas have been
and independent commission that
would run this.
You then have moved it as I
understand it The New Mexico
State University board of
because the department of ag is
under the board of regents the
production license so production
of the Act product as many other
things including our our current
meeting with the governor I
thought we were on the same page
that are all the needed to have
some regulatory inside opposed
consumption areas consumption
areas met madam chair Senator
just as they do with alcohol
that's their expertise so
personally I thought it
important that we don't just
those rules the department of ag
is the expert in Ag products
this is a farm product this is a
plant that's what we've heard
over and over why are we locking
people up over a plant lots of
senator have you discussed this
with the board of regents what's
their position on it.
And and madam chair and senator
you know they they haven't
hamp program that is still going
to be in place after this the
production is under the
department of agates the same
exact plan except it has above a
point three THC level and then
with him that then then chairman
and senator the difference
though is that until the fed
said it's okay to go ahead and
grow hemp.
That department didn't get
the position of producing a crop
or of overseeing the production
of the crop.
That the federal government
still considers illegal.
By this no you know the federal
government is not acting too
aggressively about this but
there's no guarantee that in the
future.
wonder if if if that might not
be an issue that the as as this
moves ahead you might want to
take into account that we could
And madam chair Senators that so
those concerns are apt are
absolutely valid and I I do
appreciate them being brought
forward but the reality is.
So really it it's pushed back to
the Feds
this hypothetical that somehow
they're going to
this point because they they've
taken the decision they made the
decision and and taken the
position that they're gonna let
the states decide even though
they have not the scheduled on
pesticide use how much water
would take in all of those
issues so that that's the
expertise that we need in
writing rules and we don't want
we don't want to centralize all
So there's no input from the
legislature as to how that will
go so we're basically putting
all of the power and all of the
better if it's three branches of
government coming together
making rule each with their
expertise as opposed to one king
maker making all the does all
the decisions thank you.
secretary so we do have some
form of control it's it's two
degrees of separation but just
as we don't confirm the
executive the governor doesn't
pick tag secretary so there is
way we do insure that the
regents
consider the department of ag
and and take those and our
opinions into consideration when
about about cannabis because.
You you do permit as I
understand it you permit
personal grow.
That seemed to be included on
And that's a considerably less
than the other approach and yet
if somebody violates the any of
funds so do you do you favor.
The light on the penalties for.
appreciate that question here's
the thing we're we're gonna have
it where without a license
without a fee without anything
someone's going to have the the
it'll probably be six and every
household that's
about six pounds of of cannabis.
at one time and so in a ninety
bit of cannabis for personal
use.
On the other end we have a
system and we have a legal way
of doing it and we want to say
if you want to produce cannabis
Unlike in house bill two where
it's fifty dollars per plant to
to produce something if you grow
more than twelve at home it's
only a fifty dollar fee.
The fee to do it legally is
and we expect people to
participate in the legal system
so that we can drive out the
illicit market of course madam
chairman and senator in house
that of the two approaches yours
really is the one that favors
the large producers.
Because there's no limit on the
plants.
struggle to find a niche in the
market.
They might be able to survive.
Where as in house bill two there
is the the two years these first
survive once the the the plant
count limit is is lifted.
So madam chair that's we're a
lot of the confusion is coming
in.
It sounds fun and it's exciting
just for the license.
So my build scalable.
For the Group One planted be
paying a thousand dollars for
plant and and and madam chair
license and they can only charge
what it costs to run the program
within USDA arming NMDA.
So if it cost three million
dollars to run the program they
something that if someone wants
to grow twenty plants it's
cheaper to get into the market
then coming up with a thousand
dollars they can come up with
twenty dollars get into the
market start growing figure out
Miss madam chairman I'll just
conclude is one last last
comment about about your the
approach you're so excise taxes
far lower.
and the city collects the tax
only when it's purchased in the
city.
so that gives a price
differential and so most people
would assume by their cannabis
But the net effect of it all and
insert especially because of
what you just said about the
price per plant only being
determined by how much it would
take to operate the you don't
want to put the revenue on the
backs of the producers vo for
House Bill to.
If we want producers to start a
business and we want small
last night online that that the
going rate for outdoor cannabis
at a ten percent THC is a
hundred Bucks.
producer and put all the money
and get as much out of that
person as we can and basically
says Hey small producer we want
you to make what you can because
we want the price to go down.
What the price of cannabis to go
down we want to be affordable we
the lowest amount of illicit
cannabis is down to ten percent
because of the amount of
production but so if we put
fifty dollars a set amount per
get our revenue on the back in
so we don't have peer emitting
and taxation of drugs and till
they are at retail well I do
understand madam chairman I do
because it's such over
production that they were
hauling it out of the state in
trying to sell it in other
states.
And and if you want over
production that's the way to do
it.
you possibly can which really I
don't see how small grower units
there if if if the if their
license is causing much who's
going to buy their product when
To have unlimited production.
It makes it very difficult for
them to.
To find a buyer for their
product.
So madam chair Senator go back
to just come up for that license
not many I don't know of of very
many and that's another
important distinction between
house bill two and Senate bill
to market.
And then we're gonna allow the
discount the dispensers license
for those that take the small
producers product on consignment
within their store so that they
don't have to build a store
that they're not gonna be able
to do and that's why Senate bill
three is better for the small
producer because we allow and
incentivize people to bring in
products from our small
they do it is by saying if
you'll take product on
consignment your license fee is
is cut in half and that's it's
an incentive to to try to
you have the you've got some
strong points in your bill
Senator but I think in an
overall looking at the state for
trying to find a way to.
Both protect.
And and to find that sweet spot
where we can drive the black
market as far into the corners
as we possibly can while
appreciate all the work you put
in Senator and and that shows I
think because many of your ideas
were adopted in the house bill
two.
Thank you madam chair.
So seeing none and I want to I
want to thank everyone for the
tenor of the debate today in the
decorum I think we did a good
job of listening to each other.
bill three I'm gonna give the
body a few minutes to either
come back on to the floor or
ensure that your online in your.
The.
So this isn't this isn't the
normal Senate closing it's
basically a committee of the
Thank you madam chair I move a
do pass on house bill two as
amended.
So we.
sure everybody is at a place
where they can vote.
Yes.
Can you explain the vote in the
committee of the whole and then
going back to the Senate floor
if there's going to be a vote.
And then the we will resolve
ourselves from the committee of
the whole and we will go back
committee report and then after
we do some procedural things
then we will be taking a formal
Yes.
All right we're on a do pass
motion on house bill two as
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd
senator Byrd no Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales now
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal yes Senator had a
Senator Moores Senator Moores no
senator Munoz.
No Senator monitors now Senator
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
So Senator Pinto no Senator
Pirtle.
senator Sanchez senator Sanchez
now.
Senator committees.
Now Senator is no senators of
the Lopez.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods no.
negative house bill two as
passed the committee of the
whole.
Mood do pass on Senate bill
three information's there's no
second necessary thank you.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senator Campos now senator
Candelaria.
Senator Duhigg no Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez no Gonzalez no Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hemphill no Senator
Hickey.
No Senator Hickey no Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator McKenna
Senator McKenna no Senator
Moores.
Senator.
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator the Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neill no Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
no Senator pope no Senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez now
Senator sure no Senator share no
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator souls
Stewart.
No Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman now senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator but.
Senator Baca no.
Five of six in the affirmative
and thirty six in the negative
Senate bill three fails to pass
the Senate.
president I move the Senate rise
and report progress.
This is closing madam president
I second that motion.
Thank.
So.
Fund that.
There's no objection it is so
ordered.
Senator is back in session.
Seeing no objection so ordered
Senator work thank you madam
president so what we're gonna do
is take a thirty minute recess
to allow our chief clerk to put
Seeing no objection we'll see
you back here in half an hour.
