Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzales present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator committees.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you members ask you please
rise for the invocation to
relate today hi Revenue Jolene
hair pastor of the Christ
Lutheran church in Santa Fe.
the salute to New Mexico flag to
be led today by Senator
Stefanics.
Good morning let us pray.
And this Monday the beginning of
the last week of this year's
schedule Senate sessions in the
roundhouse we give you thanks
discuss and debate the issues
impacting our state.
On this Monday beginning the
last week of winter we give you
as early spring snow continue to
bring needed moisture toward
drafted land.
teachers for senior citizens for
small business owners farmers
restaurant workers were the
leaders would make tough
decisions during this time for
God of compassion got of mercy
we offer our prayers for the
over thirty eight hundred deaths
from COVID nineteen in New
Mexico.
now during this last week of the
Senate session to guide our
thoughts our words are actions.
Grant us patience with each
other.
But issues so that we might
find a understanding of each
other.
And rediscover common ground.
Momentum hello I love and that I
the Los estados.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico and the see a
symbol of perfect friendship
among United cultures.
we go to that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order of Business
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president thank you reference
session and so I very much
appreciate your words
also members before I yield to
Senator Lopez just wanted to
and see them on the front page
of the Santa Fe New Mexican and
I just think that's a pretty
cool thing and they do certainly
yield other members.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you a majority floor
leader worth and good morning Mr
president a unanimous consent to
allow cameras on the floor and
in the gallery.
so ordered seven as one that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Ivey Soto
I thank you very much Mr
president is president I just
very much because of the
communication that I've had from
the president pro tem in terms
of house bills as they work
critical fashion while also
making sure that we that we are
respectful the other chamber as
we get to the final days of the
session and and so tomorrow we
ensuring that that each of us
December respects the other as
their bills work through there
so thank you very much.
announce this again later but
the Senate conservation
committee which has been quiet
does have one bill referral so
far maybe today will get another
so tomorrow morning will meet at
nine A. M. the Senate
Pino centerfold Mr president in
honor of women's history month
I'd like to honor Clara.
Bill Williams.
Williams was the first African
American graduate of New Mexico
Williams graduated valedictorian
from the purview of normal an
independent college now known as
per view a and M. university and
for every Texas in nineteen oh
Williams began her studies.
At New Mexico state in the fall
of nineteen twenty eight.
Where her professors did not
allow her into the lecture halls
She graduated in nineteen thirty
seven with a BA in English
literature and went on to work
at Lincoln High School which
opened in any church in Los
crucis after the institution of
at Booker T. Washington school
in Los crucis for over twenty
years after it opened in the
nineteen thirties.
In nineteen sixty one.
New Mexico State University
Mexico State University English
building the clear bill Williams
hall.
And then February thirteenth as
Clara bill Williams day in two
thousand one.
Thank you senator Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president and the I
understand it didn't make it
afternoon we we only have a few
I think we have to Senate bills
bill complete all the Senate
bills that were assigned to our
committee and there's only one
Center anticipate any further
announcements Senators.
Sane and senator thank you Mr
president so just for the
do seventeen through nineteen
and then kind of see where we
are we'll probably take a break
in the middle of that to do the
confirmations once that
committee report comes down I
governor.
That order business the reader
to read the messages.
Senator executive message number
sixteen.
rules committee the following
nomination for appointment.
Old Alan Edmundson junior for
appointment to the New Mexico
military institute board of
regents for a term commencing
from the governor has been
received.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill fifty four
has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendation that it do pass
four percent as we have a motion
to that the trigger for.
Say no objection the committee
for has been adopted and Mr
president your finance committee
to home has been referred Senate
bill one thirty I do pass
respectfully submitted senator
George K. Munoz chairman that
are they just move adoption of
the committee report have a
motion to adopt committee for.
unanimous consent we go to that
order business third reading of
legislation and Senator Hickey I
believe you are up first for
item number one Senate bill
Thank you Mr president and
fellow senators I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill three
Seeing no objection Senator
explained the bill.
Senate bill three seventeen does
the following it places a
medications for a period of five
years.
This applies to all commercial
health plans offered in the
state small than large group
outside the jurisdiction of the
state.
Mental health and substance
abuse substance use disorder do
plague our state.
barriers prohibited them or got
in the way of treatment and
taking medications.
Two thirds of these patients
health and substance use
disorder dramatically decreases
chronic disease costs by a
factor of two to three.
costs of care for the state
health plans and of course the
patients who are reflected.
Also health systems are very
likely to increase facilities
remain in therapy for a full
course now that the financial
barrier is out of the way.
This is a win for those who
having to deal with the problems
of copays and deductibles for
plants in the state through the
I. back in actually saving
money.
three seventeen anyone wishing
to me.
Senator Martin.
Thank you Mr president the good
senator thank you so much for
caring this bill and I'm really
reform.
What are you guys do something
really great for first
responders and recognize we're
in very tough situations we deal
assistance to help us out and I
was a great ideas to start
working on a bill.
That basically did a fraction of
what this bill does and when I
learned the the Senator Hickey
obviously included what I was
going to work on so I didn't
introduce that bill happy to
sponsor this one colleagues I
just want to say
There's lots of research on what
care and what the data shows
that when people are treated.
It says the health systems money
cause medical problems don't get
out of control say some lots of
that we're hearing the session.
Truly can be one the most
impactful pieces legislation
help the citizens of New Mexico
and it's a win win for the
providers there may be a knee
jerk reaction to say we can't
leave this path in New Mexico
will lead the way on this one is
done so thank you for allowing
me to say a few words Mr
president and I hope that you
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president and I've
been reading.
We had the ineffective Services
from ourselves and the public
but not collecting information.
On the effectiveness.
Of the mental health program.
But over here when we start
talking about
I guess how we're going to
operate this program which is
all state employees are
solutions employee assistance
program.
And all members covered by the
program employees and covered
dependents have access to one
free an office behavior health
visit per year.
So it's kind of a it's kind of a
even when we have the service.
And on the other side we're
going to provide free service.
To without copay.
On the other side.
For behavioral health care Mr
president and senator if you
would you CENIC you deal.
Yes Mr president and thank you
also calls for measuring the
impact of this program on data
that is already collected by
measures already exist to
understand and study the impact
on both increasing the Gallegos
getting people into therapy
the state which is self insured
which otherwise don't
necessarily have an incentive
will now work with these two of
the state Presbyterian does not
charge any copay and they're
seeing significant for for these
coordinated care services and
Senator it's.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you for that answer.
So who pays for this if there's
Senator.
Thank you Mr president and
there is substantial literature
that proves that the two thirds
of.
patients who have substance
abuse or behavioral health
health or substance abuse they
come down so that the net the
dynamic scoring will show as it
has shown in the plan that I
Thank you Mr president I assume
that we have this data to prove
this from other states that have
already initiated this program
That New Mexico will lead the
nation in this type of
legislation and will show the
way for the rest of the country
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president thank you
for that answer would be a great
thing for New Mexico to be
number one and something.
to excuse Senator by the.
And senator Candelaria I think I
have already excused him and
then also for that's all for
right now Mr president.
etcetera etcetera thank you Dale
yes Mr president.
And sponsor appreciate I can't
hear this in committee and I'm
still troubled I had a good
on how the funding is going to
happen
in the FIR it shows that there
are multiple years of
approximately three point five
nine million on the high side.
money this year but that we need
to start thinking about next
year do we know how we're going
funds to continue this project
after.
The next year agency
that in dynamic scoring not in
the static scoring which are the
costs of the.
reduction in chronic disease so
in fact there will not be a cost
to the state even though
statically they identified
return of potentially anywhere
from two to five to one and that
costsharing absorption thank you
present.
Senator thank you Mr president
and senator guy a goes that's a
great question I can tell you
that it true health New Mexico
substance abuse disorders
for outpatient and therapy that
we saw an immediate result in
that our visits to the emergency
emergency rooms were fully one
third and more less than the
other health plans in the state
percent reduction in hospital
admissions so the cost savings
will start right away.
This presents Center appreciate
Primary issue whenever they're
sick and they do the go directly
to the emergency room so Mister
president and senator thank you
there's no history on that I'm a
little bit cautious and just
wondered if there's any other
details you could give me to try
to understand the.
this now and find out that it
doesn't work what our plans are
in five years misprision
etcetera etcetera Hickey Mr
president and senator I will
the cost savings when behavioral
health and substance abuse are
stable and the reduction in
chronic care costs that results
that research.
Mr president center I believe I
received that in my packet when
we heard the bill and I
apologize I've had the an
overwhelming number of other.
always done a great job so I'll
listen to rest the debate I am
trying to make a.
An informed decision we go to
the vote thank you Mr president
Mr president I move that Senate
bill three seventeen do now pass
and I ask unanimous consent of
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca now Senator Brandt.
Senator to run this test Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg Senator do here yes
no ma'am.
Senator Gallegos Now Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator more snow Senator monos.
Y. Pino Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Sanchez Senator centers now
senator smitteez.
Senator street is now Senator so
they're Lopez yes Senator
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senators
proponents.
Senator for drugs yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Byrd.
I'm sorry.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan no.
By a vote of twenty five in the
affirmative twelve in the
negative Senate bill three
calendar that's item number two
Senate bill three forty five as
amended and I yield to senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you Mr president and
members so I ask unanimous
and has been taken and that it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution I see
no objections Senator Gonzales
explained what the bill does.
Senate bill three forty five as
amended all.
Mr president and members so
under current law standard per
travel.
Public officers employees
traveling within the state
receive eighty five per day or
up to one thirty five with
reimbursed for actual expenses.
Mr president and member says so.
This is mentioned this is not
been updated since two or three.
secretary role metal stating
that it takes more time
administratively because most
employees will prefer to be on
actual reimbursement because of
Now that we're experiencing with
a virtual and also you know in
providing per diem during
finance and administration it
would just bring everyone to an
update current rate with our per
diem.
Rural so we have in place with
that Mr president members all
member a few years ago the
association of counties came to
talk to me about doing something
about the discrepancy with
respect to the Prodan rates for
bad difference and employees are
not being treated fairly and
when it comes to getting
reimbursed for the per diem and
so at that time we it came in
taking a big lead in this bill
and doing work on it to to help
us all get this discrepancy
finally fixed it is only right
don't have to go and work extra
time and getting every single
receipt to claim what's called
actuals and so this way they get
employees them to be at par with
everyone else thank you Mr
president members of the Senate.
Thank you senator there is any
further debate.
I just want to mention one part
that I failed to mention and
this does not own this this does
not apply to legislators this
bill three forty five.
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent that the rule has been
called in that all those present
vote in the affirmative except
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt passes senator
Byrd.
Cervantes yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator guy
goes.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores senator Morris
yes Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
mayors yes senators for their
Lopez.
Senator so they're Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Representative Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Senator Brandt yes Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes.
affirmative there on the
negative Senate bill three forty
five as amended has passed the
Senate Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president and
members I do want to acknowledge
thank you again thank you
members thank you Sierra is
going on to item number three
that Senate bill for ten as
amended and I yield to senator
Byrd.
Thank you Mr president I ask
amendment or substitution seeing
no objection Senator Burt to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president have this
state auditor's the counts and
CPA's around the state to bring
us up to the same level as the
national
policies and procedures and this
Senator debate incentive for ten
as amended.
See no debate senator Byrd to
close.
been taken by a roll call vote.
Senate seats where voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca passes Senator
Brandt.
Senator Byrd senator Byrd yes
Senator Duhigg gas Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gallegos
yes Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
You swear.
Under the desk.
Senator Hickey is Senator Ingle.
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Senator Rodriguez yes Senators
lunches senator Sanchez yes
Senators committees.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator souls.
Senator souls.
Senator souls yes Senator
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth this Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator Baca.
Mr president Senator Lopez Mr
president animus consent to
negative Senate bill for ten as
amended has passed the Senate
senator Byrd thank you Mr
president members of the body.
The next item that's item number
placing Senate bill three forty
on final passage is been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
begun for creeping into our
medical cannabis program in the
state.
What we finding out is that
people who
They simply get online and get a
call a California doctor.
To authorize their medical card.
Online without ever having
California chart to
to purchase cannabis here
what we're trying to do is to
make a respite reciprocity
agreement much more effective so
cannot get a card in another
state and then try to use it
here if another state will give
you a card you're welcome to go
to that state and buy cannabis
there but not in New Mexico is
Senate bill three forty.
Session.
I'm thank you Mr president I do
have a couple questions anyway
A program I don't remember how
many years ago was there was an
estimate that there was going to
be two or three thousand people
on the program
how many of how many are on our
to use an expert witness Dr
Dominick Cirillo the head of the
program.
I see no objections so ordered
and the Mister president senator
share doctors are low says it
currently New Mexico has issued
a hundred and eighty thousand
medical cannabis cards.
Mr president we we way missed
that guesstimate didn't want I
did this.
Frankly Mr president center I'm
stunned I I I really thought
that the the two or three
So Mister president senator Here
I'm told that that a hundred and
eight thousand or the number of
New Mexicans who hold New Mexico
cannabis cards there are another
seven to eight thousand
Okay Mister president this I am
really trying to get a handle on
this because I I knew this thing
Colorado and at this point.
Mr president and and the Senator
share of doctors who look tells
me that of those eight thousand
So.
So Mister president the.
Did they go to California and
see a doctor how to how do you
that's what I was explaining in
the introductory comments that
they can simply go some states
have very loose Oklahoma has
similarly loose medical cannabis
may live in el Paso they called
a drive in Venice beach and the
drive in Venice beach authorizes
tougher reciprocity rules and
very restrictive program but
they can come into New Mexico
under current law which is what
makes a lot of sense I'm just
confused to how we got how we
got from where we were to where
we are I just that's the part
that I'm that I'm trying to get
been to a physician or somebody
that's authorized to prescribe
this just as you would if you
were getting prescribed is the
path.
yes that is one of the
stipulations in our program you
have to have seen a position in
been authorized by a physician
to participate in the program
they can't call the prescription
Okay so Mister president can
Can that be done online or over
the telephone or does that have
to be done in person.
Mr president Senator doctors are
low says that the initial visit
has to be a in an in person
and whether their authorization
needs to be tweaked anyway.
So Mr president I know that CVD
oil is become the range all of a
sudden.
Can can see the the.
Replace medical marijuana in is
is it any safer better for one
thing you're not smoking CBD.
And and that Mr president and
the Senator share the issue
Medical cannabis has some amount
of THC another the.
The ingredient in in in the
to some form of of cannabis that
has T. H. C..
Then you need a card you need to
be authorized and you can only
participate in New Mexico
currently in the medical
Use
Mmhm the oils that are derived
from the cannabis plant they use
suppositories they use
So so smoking is actually I
think I've heard one of the.
This fewer and fewer people who
are using cannabis by smoking
I can't remember the term maybe
since Senator Schmedes can help
me but but you this medicine is
for this of the issue of is is
For specific treatments I think
that the.
Mister president senator of
Enormous range of of properties
and so some people traditionally
could on that us here in New
Mexico used it.
We would be in it alcohol they
undergoing cancer will use it in
a different form to improve
appetite there are people who
use it to help sleep it just has
so many varieties and depending
This Medicine should only be
used for these things because
it.
In its different forms it could
be used to to to provide relief
So while I do.
I I understand in actually
applaud trying to to control.
Of the use of it I don't like it
especially with the hundred
eight thousand number that I
mean I was going to ask you
these questions based on twenty
or thirty thousand but the
hundred eight thousand really
just brought a whole different
level of of.
New Mexicans to smoke dope
Senator.
So that's why trying to get a
handle on what this what the
thousand recreational users I
was thinking about.
So that's why I was just trying
to get a handle on where we're
going with this and what it
means and what it does it's
certainly especially if you got
In in so that's why I was trying
to get a handle on what we're
doing here so Mister president
senator thank you very much I
applaud what you're trying to do
here I just think that are we've
it's been fifteen years that
we've had the fourteen years
that we've had this program
fourteen years and so it has
grown it hasn't grown enormously
each year but there is been
couple of years they'll add
another recommendation the big
jump occurred when the medical
advisory group recommended that
they include posttraumatic
stress people who suffer from
but not exit extravagant the
that was the one big leap after
that it's been going up seven
I was the CVD the people that I
know that you see comes in a
variety of things so you know if
you got a king joins or or or
whatever
I know at least one person who
has a.
you know there near elbow
whatever.
Is there any efforts.
Two of go through some other
But to these the the to the
people that find these cards are
the.
Are they actually trying to do
some other things.
was a good point and I I I think
it's probably been used for
centuries maybe melania I don't
know how long people been
chewing on willow tree.
An interesting kind of side note
Bayer aspirin at the end of
World War one one of the things
that the allies demanded was the
recipe for aspirin so they
didn't have to non willow tree.
the willow tree example.
So well I'm sure people start
out with aspirin and they move
up through that we whatever
Advil Tylenol Motrin whatever
I before I issue the card.
Mr president and and and the
Senator share of.
physicians who who have patience
in the program did come and say
that they found that this was
of.
then then other things that they
had tried so I think I mean I
think that there is a real
effort made to.
of whether the physicians that
participate in the program have
tried alternatives first but my
assumption is that is medical
professionals they would of.
percent for him so but in
Colorado now they're they're a.
Their GMO marijuana is pretty
powerful what's what's New
Mexico's medical marijuana
to strain variety to variety
there's some that are that are
specifically
grown and a bread for high
levels and others that are not
That we do ask that in is
checked it's monitored that if
it's a certain levels that it is
Okay so does the medical card
say you get.
Eight percent or you get twelve
percent whatever the the numbers
are of THC.
Mister president senator.
then for the staff to the
dispensary to work with the
patient to find the right strain
that has that level of of
potency so that they they don't
something to help me get my
memory back thank.
Thank you senator we do have for
the debate will have Senator
Steinborn photo by Senator
committee Senator Steinborn.
you know Mister president
senator I I
I just struggle with this a
little bit because.
undergoing lots of different
medical conditions and.
Just how restrictive some other
states can date and providing
phone currently painful
chemotherapy they only allow in
Texas if you have a terminal
cancer illness.
So.
program is really humanitarian
in nature and I understand all
the legal issues and concerns
about that's cracking is down
which I think is a little bit of
presents senator this tax just
Mexico have a supply problem
where we have shortages in
supply for our medical patients
here.
supply of medical cannabis but
that at the rate it's expanding
the use of these reciprocal
cards issued by California
people are crossing over so
readily.
Mister president senator I guess
I'm not quite understanding why.
Patients in Texas I guess get a
require a card from their
department health.
And then.
They could.
yes that's exactly the issue if
a patient in Texas has a Texas
card.
Incomes across they can buy
their cannabis in New Mexico now
or after this law passes.
that's the abuse that we're
trying to close with this
Mr president and so I mean it is
a rare reciprocity you know
amendment so by definition this
a program at all from getting
access.
So having said that.
You know my research is only
thirty six states.
were in one of those states and
you got a California doctor to
give you a card.
Could they buy it under our
reciprocity law the way it is
now.
what state doesn't have one
let's say the New Hampshire.
Our main okay some state that
doesn't have a medical cannabis
program that they get in touch
difficult for New Mexico to
verify that this is actually of
a bona fide letter from a bona
fide doctor it's not issued by
of preventing that if this bill
passes that particular of the.
Activity would not be permitted
okay thank you Mr president
last year it the bill that.
Really Rep restricted in
clarified program was only for
New Mexico residents I think.
So for that reason alone I will
I will be opposing the bill Mr
chairman but I I respect bill
and I know you're coming from
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor you'll please centers
the subpoena Mr president and
senator I would be glad to thank
you
Mr president.
this is an extremely interesting
and and actually deep debate on
on something that's bigger than
just marijuana and it's really
about states sovereignty.
in Health public affairs
committee.
And really the the argument that
I'm hearing.
other state is oppressing their
own citizens.
And therefore even though we're
in another jurisdiction.
conservative state we're gonna
go help them.
And and we've heard we've
actually heard some committee in
this body.
That well if you if you don't
And I and I know you don't think
it's a good attitude.
And and so once again I just
find it extremely interesting
Texas law.
Instead of the added to that I
believe in is you know what if
there's another state if if
governor they've got elections
let's let Oregon the Oregon I'm
not going to go up there.
As a state senator and tell
people how they should live
body to please be more
respectful and considerate of
other states.
That you don't have a voice in
you're you're not a citizen of
United voter there you're not a
is what I think it is so if you
have that attitude if you have
the attitude of we want to
enable California to be the
savior of the of the marijuana
marijuana well here's here's the
real issue if you really care if
we really being thoughtful about
these people is are they under
care of a doctor.
So.
Mr president and senator of it's
my understanding that they deal
with somebody by telephone or on
the internet and and that there
somewhere in and Mr present
center isn't the cost like
fifteen dollars is that is that
what you said is something
extremely inexpensive.
so much presence Center so
fifteen dollars.
Make a phone call get a letter
sent to you.
Yes how much that doctor how
much work that doctor is putting
into those letters that are
probably copied and pasted and
just sent by some medical
Who is a medical cannabis
provider here in New Mexico.
Spent a lot of time with this
gentleman.
You know I I'm a surgeon so I
doctor's doctor an internist a
profound respect for these
people there are extremely
intelligent
they they they get paid to think
They require coordinated care if
you look at page for this bill
and with the way it started
number one number one cancer.
you can care responsibly for a
of fragile patient with cancer
over the internet setting a
letter for fifteen dollars does
us to understand pages four and
five is the the rapidly
increasing expansion of our
medical program and you can see
Severe chronic pain that that's
not even really a diagnose I
mean that's not a medical
diagnosis that's a symptom could
not going to get into those
details but look at number
twenty three here's here's the
other issue is that we've we've
you know kind of once again
advocated our legislative
authority any other medical
Which which of course is a
problem because these are all
off label uses the FDA has not
approved
campus for for any of these
things.
because of politics because
people in general on the left
feel like they need to be the
the savior of of the victims in
red states and we need to go get
this should be about science in
caring for patients and so my
biggest point I'm trying to make
is these people that are getting
the fifteen dollar letter from
California are not under the
for people that are pretty sick.
And yes they're getting help
they are getting help.
But I don't think we should open
THC levels are not being managed
they're not following up and
saying how how are you doing are
you experiencing any.
Side effects are you
experiencing any memory problems
So if we're going to be
sophisticated for going to care
about the people of New Mexico
to continue their care they they
they still want to maybe they'll
participate somehow in our
medical campus program under
this bill and that's good if
they're least they're legit if
pain in there they're kind of
really self medicating at that
point I don't think it's safer
patients I don't think it's best
for patients I really don't.
So I think we can best manage
hope we can just put patient
care first instead of viewing in
other states as as oppressive
that that's just not a good way
to care for people it's not a
good way to think about health
Sierra Lara can you make a
motion to please.
Mr president I Mr.
I
see no objections centered on
of information that is been
provided by the department of
health on this bill that is both
on true.
And by their mission or
intentionally.
Mexicos this.
If a state if a jurisdiction.
As a medical cannabis program.
program New Mexico is going to
honor that.
And when the legislature.
Set up the reciprocal program.
Rights which states programs we
would recognize.
I residency.
So the amendments that the
department is proposing are
this.
be reciprocal patient.
And that in New Mexico residents
cannot be both a qualified
Because at the time when all of
this is being negotiated.
Many patients including myself.
about three grams per day.
Is arbitrary capricious.
It's not really based on the
doctor or medical science or
research it's based upon a
instead of increasing.
The amount of cannabis that New
Mexico patients could purchase.
Could in fact become both a
qualified patient and reciprocal
patient.
Now I'm really troubled Mr
president by the assumptions.
And I think it's frightening to
And I'm not sure my story of how
medical cannabis came into my
life.
What is done for me.
prescribed medical cannabis via
my.
Health care provider in New
Mexico.
Was because I suffer from
posttraumatic stress disorder.
trauma that clause that in your
life is just minimized and just
laughed at.
I and and we get on and and and
and it's just well it's it's not
authorize today what we're
talking about.
So more provider referred me to
the medical cannabis program for
two reasons.
sort of like why are you asking
the answer is yes.
But he is an internal medicine
doctor.
So I was part of it.
Because the post automatic
stress disorder.
I think I've shared with you on
the floor before in passing but
this system is what is the
source of my poster automatic
stress disorder and this the
source of that Mr president.
The source of that is being a
Courage us.
So the current law allows me.
As a New Mexico resident because
the department so opposed.
Mexico resident on a qualified
patient which I am.
I am also a reciprocal patient.
Since going amounts of cannabis
medical cannabis I've stopped
using prescription painkillers
I've stopped using prescription
I got to a point where I almost
had to go back.
It terrified me.
With a licensed physician in
California.
Yes it was a telemedicine visit.
Present I was referred to as a
I think some of you also know
that in my private life.
The Martinez administration of
lighten the mood here it was so
stressful at the time.
but workers comp is a big is a
big part of my firm and and I
of a woman who worked at a gas
station and was raped by her
supervisor and she has brought a
claim under workers compensation
and she is allowed to bring a
claim of of PTSD.
question that literally Mr
presidents come up is you know
is right the NAS to trigger
trauma.
I'm not kidding that was asked
for the deposition.
Help me back the most of my life
is my own response to that
trauma.
The department issued rules.
Following the passage of the
statute.
That was consistent with the
original statute.
The department held hearings
Folks like me started to use the
law exactly as it was written.
Then the department in mid
September of twenty twenty.
We're going to do what this bill
is attempting to do we're not
going to go through an emergency
rule process we're not going to.
We're not going to follow the
law we're gonna issue a letter
patient and I'm speaking today
really allowing that experience
and the journey of my own health
care which has led me here.
counsel for ultra health not
general counsel.
I handle specific litigation
cases.
One of the cases that I took for
And the District Court in Santa
Fe till the department of health
you violated the state rules
act.
Your tend to to change the law.
statute requires the department
of health to consult with the
medical cannabis Advisory
Council before it issues a rule
that affects my ability to
department is asking us to do
today.
What was not mentioned Mr
president by the department.
Is that that case is currently
The department of health is
arguing.
The department of health is
arguing.
The statute as written without
They're asking us to implement
in statute.
But they claim they have the
authority to do already by rule.
There are pieces of this bill
that trouble me greatly as a
patient as I've explained.
I will point out before we move
And expert depositions with
psychiatrists psychologists
clinical psychologists.
In the DSM it sets forth the
The DSM five does not require an
in person physical examination
of the person.
To arrive at a diagnosis of
PTSD.
consistent.
The DSM.
This legislature I counted.
prescribe medicine and give
health care over the phone and
over the internet.
And so I think it is really
any other compare via a phone
call.
Really imminent.
Is it done we're gonna talk
So I'm gonna propose an
amendment Mr present I'm I'm
writing it now almost done.
I'll describe it on page two.
Provided that no rule of the
department shall restrict.
The amount of medical cannabis.
A qualified patient all
And I'm offering to the body
here is a compromise.
Is as I understand it the exact
same purchase limit that's
included.
And is now pending.
I believe still in Judiciary.
So I would yield to the sponsor
of the bill.
guess Sierra that is so we still
are on debate of the bill so
what we'll do is we'll address
your amendment once you get that
turned in and have the reader
read we do have others who would
like to debate the bill all
I don't really have the debate
the bill but I will point out
that I was here when we passed
to the legalization of more of a
maybe a hundred people that
would qualify for it so the
state has come forward in a long
ways on this I don't necessarily
always agree with it but.
thousand people with
The prescription for for
purchasing this but I noticed in
my life and my talent for tell
us where I live.
thousand but anyway it's
something that we're dealing
with and we are going forward
with a lot of things with this
and perhaps legalization but I
probably soon will be.
We're gonna have to be really
have some real judgment calls
here's a legislator on things
like workman's comp in liability
That's where we started with the
legalization of marijuana was
for folks dying of cancer and it
was very limited at that time so
No further debate we're gonna
just hold in place until the
moment arrives we'll have the
reader read that amendment and
then I yield to the sponsor
in consultation with the Senator
Lopez I would move that we
excuse all members not in the
chamber for the remainder of the
I don't want to greedy that on
unanimous consent because of the
issue of the call if we do have
members that are.
At least on the side when
members have been excused for
the day in the rules do allow
people to be excused even for
purposes of a call.
Senator Brandt for that I
withdraw the motion.
We do have the floor amendment
the reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill three forty
I see no objections CENIC on the
can the lighted to move and
explain the amendment.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president.
A kind of lead in late some a
In attempts to ensure however.
That New Mexico patients who are
under the supervision of their
drive.
grams per day.
We have by far the lowest
purchase limit.
myself of the current law and
all other patients I simply ask.
That the restrictions be
loosened for us thank you.
Is eight ounces every ninety
days this is the limit that the
state has currently.
That's a limited the medical
With the with the of
cooperation of the agreement of
their physician.
Says they need more they can go
to twelve ounces every ninety
days.
to increase the amount.
Senator Candelaria as request
would be a hundred and eighty
anses every ninety days.
free for all whatever you need
whatever you want just come and
get.
And so the department and I
would go agree with this says
this is very unfriendly
only produce a certain amount to
try to keep the program
regulated and that's the real
issue behind this amendment I
believe so with that we would we
would say it's an unfriendly
some reason I was not given a an
amendment here
but.
I think this is really a rural
issue as well I I appreciate of
live hours and hours and hours
away from
the place where they buy their
medicine Mr president members of
the body and so when we limit it
to this they're having to drive
of often and I and I hope that
it's not taken lightly because
it is sincere in its from the
heart that you know we have a
lot of people that live in
situations and we we really have
couple days just the right
amount of medicine that that
they need and so I think this is
really of a benefit to our rural
patients so that they have
adequate access to the to their
Mr president grant the the bill
sponsor to yield for a couple
questions may be directed to to
right now it says that this the
the supply of medical campus is
only going to be derived from
interests States source.
Is there gonna be a some supply
issues or would we have to make
changes to how we're supplying
medical cannabis in New Mexico.
twenty fold increase in the
amount of cannabis that that
somebody would be able to get if
we did this ammendment they
If we do that if we take the
plant cap off the fear is that
it really increases the supply
in the black market and that's
But I think in hindsight is
proven to be very wise very
cautious approach to lifting the
plant can.
And I know that there is some
prestigious let us grow whatever
we can let the market decide the
problem is.
That then puts pressure on all
call up and order whatever you
want and you can buy as much as
you want.
And that's we've been trying to
avoid.
The mistress.
gonna be a bit of a closing
You know.
I really don't even know where
Litigation which I've been an
attorney let's go into the
evidence that was presented
before the court in those cases.
So
patience want to point and now
then judge now justice Thompson
found.
That the department's plan cap
is arbitrary and capricious.
That number has not been
increased here's.
And so you have a situation Mr
president.
Where are.
seventy thousand patients now
there's a hundred and eight
thousand.
And we still only have seventeen
hundred fifty plans for
producer.
Not not not also do for gross
seven hundred fifty.
entirety.
Saying that the department's
regulation of this program is
not based on data that's
reliable.
Not based on science not based
Recommended to the department to
increase the plant's cap by a
substantial amount that has not
been done.
to regulate this program and if
you go on to any Facebook page
where patients discuss their
experience they do not sure the
committee that this is a model
Mexico is ten dollars per gram.
For more than any other state.
So it's too expensive.
for this Mr president you're not
gonna have this cavalcade of
persons just going for a free
for all why because we still
have to pay out of pocket.
money but I pay out of pocket.
Mr president
I am one of those people.
I'm simply asking you in all
sincerity.
If the department can agree to
this morning which.
You can agree to this purchase
Arbitrary.
Yes.
Present was a four number number
one match for roll call.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca now Senator Brandt.
Candelaria Senator Candelaria
Senator Ferrante this no Senator
serve on this now Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen now Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan noted Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez no Senator McKenna
No yes senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator probe now senator
Rodriguez.
No.
Senator Sedillo Lopez now
Senator sure.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
I'm sorry senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd no.
Senator Pinto.
No.
Twenty three.
By a vote of twelve in the
affirmative twenty three in the
I'm sorry Sierra that in here
you said I have more debate on
the bill Mr president when
that's appropriate.
We are back on the bill.
Senator Candelaria thank you Mr
president
Zero.
You have a small group of
producers.
Want to make sure that the price
I pay stays hot.
We'll go to.
To restrict access to medicine.
Today.
I'm really shocked and I'm no
I'm not shut but it sure is
interesting vetted department
It's very interesting so I think
a lot of discussions going to
happen this session Mr
president.
On.
Regulation of the cannabis
industry.
We need to really re think how
this quote unquote model
program.
Has been wrong.
Is much higher in New Mexico but
no one seems to care.
That means that low income
persons well I would think are
the people that we want to tell
many groups for people share
cannabis.
Because it's too expensive.
to orders by judge beachside
actually in Santa Fe.
Which all go through over and
over again.
Why various rulemaking by this
the fact that these plant caps
and units systems and things
that are bad for patients we're
all put in place when the
current governor was a secretary
of health.
That not one.
Two district judges in not one
but two at least three cases.
Sometimes we just don't care.
Senator sure has a point maybe
the friend says just gotten to a
place.
You know I think the implication
earlier from the department was
all this is Candelaria he this
is all because he has a secret
motive he's trying to screw the
So most recently I did file a
case Mr president challenging
the one thousand seven hundred
fifty point cap why.
It is arbitrary capricious.
This aren't many options
available.
Because there's not enough
supply in the market as it is.
And I remind the body in
December of last year the
So yes I am a lawyer in the case
and in that case.
We introduced affidavits and
emails that we had received.
designed to retaliate against
one producer.
So I ask you all.
About protecting the agency at
all costs.
That's fine.
E. mail evidence the rules being
put in place specifically.
To retaliate against one
least that should all give us a
moment of pause.
So I lost the debate the nature
of our body.
I love that and I want to thank
you all for last night is press
one of the best moments of my
public as.
Any notion the public as what
the department of health does is
in the best interest of
patients.
It is a political agenda.
Si no further debate Senator
Ortiz fan of the clothes on the
bill.
Mr president I move the Senate
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Burt.
senators serve on this yes Madam
chair run this test Senator
Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill passed Senator
Hemphill passes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator do
should be no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator Paul yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Sanchez Senator songes
yes senator screenings.
Senator share yes Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator Woods now.
Senator Hemphill no Senator
Hemphill no.
the no objection.
Thank you Mr president and you
know we've got a couple of
really important marijuana
bills.
That went to Senate judiciary
So that people wouldn't have to
mess around with us that don't
want to necessarily go through
the process of the medical.
so it seems like we need to get
Senator portals Bill down here
cannabis and get as much as they
want or as much as they need
thank you.
Sierra that explains the thank
you Mr president
it's it's more to provide some
unravel this violates Michael
protection rights if you have a
personal grow license in New
Mexico you have access to for up
for female adults that's how
much you can grow for.
with the same medical condition
can access for plants today.
So again Mr president at four to
bring in the lawsuit I don't
expended I heard I'll do this
recreational legalization this
year maybe it's time we just put
the brakes on that.
I get another thank you.
Senator disappear.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty two and all
you'll to Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
debate amendment or substitution
no objections Senator Kernan to
explain the bill thank you very
much Mr president and so what
this this bill is some of you
might know the citizens
particular Advisory Council so
what this bill does and Senate
bill two forty two it updates
and expands the purpose of the
citizen substitute Care review
child abuse prevention and
treatment act requirements also
known as captain.
It modifies the council
membership increasing members
CYFD as a non voting member.
Immense responsibilities of the
council and more clearly
outlines second administration
review and help resolve issues
with the department's discharge
of its child protection
responsibilities.
And it provides that the council
So basically that's what this
bill does and certainly will
stand for questions or explain
more as this body request.
Thank you Mr president and and
the.
My neighbor here on the floor
just asked me why I voted
against this in in the committee
and.
And I have reservations about it
tried to reform would have been
the citizen review board
process.
And we thought we'd come up with
a way of doing it but it turns
out that the reports issued by
getting their advice on
substitute Care policy and
procedures as well as individual
cases.
They're just basically been
So that's why I oppose it in in
the committee I've I've met with
Senator Kernan.
I think each of us feels that
senator Candelaria as bill that
But.
For what it's worth this is what
we've got and I think if we
could make it work and we did
willing to give it a try let's
let's try this what is clear
though from all of these bills
in the hearings we've had all
these bills is that.
It is not gotten any better over
the last two years.
It is.
Not serving the children of the
with foster children.
And with the volunteers the
tried to help through the costs
of program for the citizen
out there and I would hope that
that possibly this bill might
make a step in the direction of
them opening up and listening to
others who might be willing to
Thank you very much Mr president
me the sponsor to yield I just
also want to stand in support
you know I
good senator has also become a
repository to help deal and
manage these issues as well and
I think anything we can do to
help CYFD as hard as they are
working I don't know that
issues the work that they do is
very hard but this can only help
and this can only sign you know
some serious light on on the
work that they're doing so I
just want to thank the gentle
Senator Lopez I thank you madam
president in I to stand in
support of this measure
and madam president as we know
exist within the department.
as I mentioned I think to
Senator Kernan this is a piece
of the puzzle.
that hopefully begins to make
Russia is a honor a to read the
work that those persons who sit
on these particular
children's code that this could
also be part of that as we
review what needs to happen and
make those changes because the
children's coat also helps to
I see none Senator Kernan to
close thank you very much miss
madam president and thank you
for the for the comments on the
should help but it requires CYFD
to actually respond to the
council and that's one step
judiciary is going to address.
Your issue of training the
judges on on receiving these
reports and and actually to pay
put the puzzle pieces together
it's going to take this entire
legislative body on both sides
of the house and the Senate to
trying get some of this
legislation through.
better transparency with this
particular department.
So with that madam president I
move that
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
We are on final passage of
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty two two year
seats the clerk will call the
roll.
Senator Campos yes senator from
the lawyer.
Senator savant is.
Yes senator Munoz runners
Office.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator have one yes
Senator Ingle yes senator I was
of the.
Senator had a meal Senator had a
meal yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator my nose yes senator one
LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator Bob yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Sure all I'm sorry said the
little business up Sir Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Braniff yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn S. Senator
Stewart yes Senator Stewart is
Senator AUMENT.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty two has duly
passed the Senate.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you we'll move on to item
number six Senate bill two
ninety four Senator Stefanics
thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
or substitution centers to
provide to explain the bill
thank you madam president and I
do have a minor amendment that
simply changes the marriage
license fee from twenty five
dollars to fifty dollars that is
all it does.
The reader all right.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill two ninety
four amendment sponsored by
twenty three we strike the word
feet and on page one line twenty
four we strike fund for county
clerks and answered and Lou
there of the county clerk
Seeing none Senator to close on
the amendment madam president I
move Senate floor amendment
Seeing none.
So far member number one to
Senate bill two ninety four has
been adopted.
debate Senator Schmedes.
Thank you madam president with
the bill sponsor you'll please.
Madam president I will yield.
witness from a particular county
stating that they I guess they
had some revenue issues they
they mention certain expenses
thank you madam president thank
you senator for the question of
twenty five dollars would
continue to be divided ten
dollars to the county general
almost every county and new
software or I. T.
implementation of marriage
Thank you madam presence and
it what what in in looking at
this issue or the county clerk's
moves this kind of their top.
Madam president senator as a
former county commissioner I can
tell you that every elected
official comes to the county
commission for approval on their
elected official departments so
I am assuming of that county
clerk's offices don't have.
of this is brought to me by one
of the county clerk's in my
district but then it was
supported by the entire county
with on a on a county level
basically I mean I understand
the fees in statute but but the
root cause I mean is there is
there any way that counties
counties could just do but could
you just.
Please click clear that up for
me.
Madam president I am looking to
the history.
funds this increase in the
fund might generate two hundred
and eighty five thousand dollars
to three hundred and fifty
thousand dollars over two years
Okay then present center I I
guess I have a concern that if
if the if this is two hundred
eighty thousand dollars
thousand if you were to divide
that by you know thirty three AM
in the the dollar amount seems
seems low at least from a.
How you know a government
standpoint.
I'd call a user fee.
I'm but besides madam presence
in center you know that the user
increase feed the service was a
spay and neuter kind of program
but for marriage
madam president and and senator
the public for for marriage.
Madam president Senator the
fee there is a piece of paper
when a person gets a marriage
license and then they have to go
back a second time after they
have been married to actually
just going in and getting your
marriage license once and being
finished with the process.
Thank you madam president and
a true service and it's just.
You know keeping these marriage
licenses in either a computer or
a binder somewhere.
to buy more binders well I would
just get rid of all the marriage
licenses.
And then we won't need any
binders will need will need new
software.
So I just think it may be time
Thank you we do have a floor
amendment.
Senate foreman number two to
Senate bill two ninety four as
amended.
Thank you Senator Pirtle to
explain amendment.
Thank you madam president.
thank you madam president.
Senator Stefanics thank you
state and my bill is
specifically about a marriage
license fee thank you very much.
Hi to Sir further debate on the
amendment.
madam president to double fees
for a marriage license because
there is the added expense and
clerks and save some work for
the storage and save some of
that those resources but by just
eliminating that all together
I'm so it seems to me that it
Senator Schmedes thing then
present with the sponsor the
manual please madam president I
yield thank you madam president
and senator I I had asked this
And and madam president senator
I appreciate the that question
because you know really it's
just a an out of date extra step
government like I was filing a
deed to to property or something
along those lines it's it's an
out of date practice it's not
necessary anymore the is that as
we make thank you madam
president thank Matt present I I
support them because I think it
really addresses the root the
root problem here the Roadrunner
is increasing expense and I
the people to New Mexico to bear
that burden Furthermore this is
a flat fee you know fifty Bucks
so if you make three hundred
thousand dollars a year if
you're making a six figure
sort of deal there so I think
this is a lot of reasons to
support this idea madam
president and center.
Any further debate on the
amendment.
it it kind of funny that if you
speed through town and you get a
ticket and fees we waive them.
if you do the crime and.
And it is just one of those
issues that as we're saying well
if you if you break the law and
there's a fee a court fee that
pays for the courts to exist
And so I think this just brings
in line the great work that this
body is done to eliminate fees
on the people in the state and
so I move Senate floor amendment
We are an adoption of Senate
floor amendment number two to
Senate bill two ninety four as
amended.
And the clerk shall call the
roll.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Campos.
around this yes.
Iran is yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Hamblen no Senator Hemphill no
Senator Hemphill no Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Hermio no Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan noted Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez now Senator
McKenna.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill no Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
for the now Senator by the end
no Senator Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez no senator
Sanchez.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics Senator
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth now Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
My vote of twelve in the
affirmative twenty four the
Thank you madam president
unfortunately we couldn't agree
on marriage freedom here in the
New Mexico Senate
And you know I think I rise in
on lowering fees for people who
commit crime or violate moving
violations or things along those
situations such as this thank
you madam president thank you
Sir further debate on the bill.
amended do now pass and asked
for a roll call vote.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill two ninety four as
Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd Now Senator Campos.
Rodriguez yes Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond just Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator yes Senator Ingle.
Senator I was so the.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator my nose.
Yes.
to be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator pro yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez no Senators
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
development.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator Moores Senator Moores
no.
Senator Pinto to explain her
vote.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the body when we talk
about documents that we are
indicators in such like the coal
and how it's tied to the
inflation and the consumer price
index instead of waiting for a
our budgets to get crunched that
we should have some predictions
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that order of
business committee reports.
On that order business committee
reports the reader to read.
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Senator
Daniel A. Ivey Soto chairman.
Mr president.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
fifteen dated March twelfth two
thousand twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
appointment.
Philip Arthur boosters as a
member of the eastern New Mexico
Senator executive message number
eleven dated March fourth two
thousand twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
appointment.
Senate confirm this appointment.
Senator executive message number
eleven dated March fourth two
thousand twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
appointment.
twenty six your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment.
Senator executive message number
eleven dated March four two
thousand twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
expiring December thirty one two
thousand twenty two your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this appointment.
Senator executive message number
eleven dated March fourth two
thousand twenty one in which the
confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
twenty two your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment.
And senator executive message
number thirteen.
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
twenty six the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment
respectfully submitted Senator
report as we have a motion to
that three to four.
Seeing no objection the
committee part is going to drive
in the journal so they're acted
upon individually.
thank you very much Mr president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Philip Arthur boost those who
is been appointed service regent
executive message number fifteen
dated March twelfth two thousand
twenty one I move that Senate
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of fill up Arthur
boost says region for eastern
probably well over fifteen years
that he's a remarkable New
Mexican
he he stated in his confirmation
hearing this morning that as a
student of eastern New Mexico
Restarted the student services
operation there and has taken on
many different leadership roles
within that institution and
several others in his career he
this gentleman is he he's a
volunteer at the St Felix food
pantry he literally picks up the
food on Wednesdays and the make
sure that it's situated the
top speed he's part of windows
windows as part of a navigator
ministry providing Bible study
mentoring and educational
activities for children through
high school and some of the
poorest parts of Albuquerque
families move on into the next
portion of their lives he's also
part of Johnny and friends
Albuquerque where he serves as a
volunteer he picks up Mr
president wheelchairs he fixes
of New Mexico he just wants to
serve Mr president and so even
in retirement I wasn't surprised
he's kinda like the maciver of
higher education various
institutions of parachuted in to
over the years and so that's a
just a small snippet of Philip
our starter boost those Mister
president.
Thank you very much Mr president
I ask unanimous consent that the
record she is that we approve Mr
bush those appointments to the
eastern New Mexico board of
regents.
president thank you Sir thank
you senator you're correct that
is a voice votes but more
specifically will do the roll
call vote also have also this
income into the chamber.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
savant is yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator guy goes.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes senator McCain ideas
Senator Moores.
Senator Monero's.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be no Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Padilla.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes.
Right right.
Vote yes Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Pirtle needs to get back
to his seat the vote.
All he voted I'm sorry.
In the affirmative zero the
negative the appointment of fill
up Arthur businesses a member of
the eastern New Mexico
university board of regents for
term depends in part
confirmation expiring December
Senate welcome to our newest
eastern New Mexico region Philip
Parker most of us.
Haviland who's been appointed
regent of the western New Mexico
university board of regents and
I yield to senator have.
Senator Hemphill.
confirm the appointment of merry
Linden have a line as regent for
western New Mexico university.
western New Mexico university
and the beautiful town of
Silvercity
I'm doctor have a lan is a
public health executive an
president of Landon have a line
item company where she advises
nonprofit clients and fund
raising personal brand
University and she's an avid
writer and the various
publications an excellent cook
and is volunteered in refugee
camps around the world and I
want to thank the governor for
to stand in strong support of Dr
have land for region at western
New Mexico university thank you
Mr president thank you senator
Senator debating the deployment
I ask unanimous consent Mr
president that the record show
that.
The appointment for Mary Linden
have a lan is confirmed to buy a
roll call vote.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
Sierra the chair Senators up
front this yes Senator Brandt is
yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Hermio yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
senator D. should be no Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator
Stewart a.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods
Senator Woods yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator challenges.
Yes.
of our confirmation expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty six has been duly
confirmed by the New Mexico
state Senate senator could and
feels.
Thank you Mr president I asked
Senator Ivey Soto.
New Mexico university board of
regents and I yield to senator
for that humble to present this
country Senator Hemphill thank
you Mr president pursuant to
Gonzalez as a student regent for
western New Mexico university.
No objections Senator Hemphill
to explain thank you Mr
president it's an honor to
western in interdisciplinary
studies she graduated from
western New Mexico university
with a bachelor's of science in
kinesiology with a minor in
Mexico City and former customer
support representative for
ninety she has impressive
bilingual verbal and written
communication skills and I want
it's my privilege to stand in
strong support of this
appointment.
Senator debating.
Deployment of Brenda Hernandez
Gonzalez.
that the point meant for Brenda
Hernandez is confirmed by roll
call vote.
Seven we're voting to seeds
please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos yes senator from
the lobby of Senator Candelaria
yes senators have on this yes
Gonzalez.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator will.
Senator had a million Senator
Kernan Senator Kernan yes
Senator Lopez.
Senator wanting us.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
Senator sure yes Senator
Tallman.
Senator common yes senator Wirth
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
Thirty six in the affirmative on
December thirty first twenty
twenty two has been doing
confirmed by the Senate.
Senator Hemphill thank you Mr
president I asked that the body
Thank you Mr president we want
the board to be correct when
someone that takes a picture of
it so thank you very much is
present as president I hereby
present the the submit the
president percent to Senate
executive message message number
eleven dated March fourth twenty
twenty one I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
treasuries for many many years
we share background in education
together and she out of
certainly he is a proponent for
for strong education she
Which serves at risk students
she has also served as an
adjunct professor at the
university of the southwest and
does she received both her
bachelor's and master's degrees
year award she also has served
as a board made member of faith
in action she has served on
multiple committees with the
outstanding woman and those are
just some of the honors and
awards that she has received she
also served as a member of the
Authority Nexium and on their
board she's been on the con alma
health foundation board of
trustees and the the thing about
Trish that I really appreciate
equality and social justice for
students.
One thing about Trish she
considers herself differently
and nothing stops her but she
has a real awareness for people
that she shares that situation
with and I have the greatest
respect for her she's probably
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president and and
anybody who knows trash and all
of you do and we're busy today
you know doesn't matter we're on
the same side of the aisle
politically or otherwise she is
all about region I can tell you
he's all about the kids she's
better for and anyway so this is
a great appointment and I'm very
proud to support Mr president
thank you senator thank you
senator Simon further debate
we're Senator Sedillo Lopez
leadership and we're matter how
tense discussions got when she
walked in the room above not
is just going to be such a great
contributor to eastern New
Mexico to the board of regents I
am so delighted that I have the
opportunity for this this
afternoon.
confirmation myself this morning
when we were going through the
rules committee Mr president but
I really wish I could have not a
member of the committee but I
wish I could have spoken into
every single interaction I've
any circumstance any situation I
know that she works just as hard
as all of us and I think the
university is going to be just
really in good hands with her at
the helm there and she knows the
colleagues on the commission
spoke this morning very
eloquently about tradition I
just hope that everyone this
body at some point gets to
interact with her because she's
really a a treasured New Mexican
unanimous consent that
fisheries be confirmed as region
for eastern New Mexico
university roll call.
Senator is here seats raised
more voting.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria.
Cervantes yes centers around is
yes Senator Diamond Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes and Ringel.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto this
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator money us.
Senator mail yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
senator senator Sanchez yes
Senators Wendy's.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics Senator
Representative Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
I have a.
Thirty three affirmative on the
negative the employment of
treasuries as a member of the
eastern New Mexico university
Kernan thank you very much
members if you would please
stand and let's uh congratulate
to Trish trees on her
appointment.
hereby submit the credentials of
Dr Dan officially known as
Daniel H. Lopez who's been
appointed regent to western New
Mexico university board of
Senate executive message number
thirteen dated March ninth two
thousand twenty one I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Dr Daniel H.
members many of you will know Dr
Dan as he's affectionately known
within these.
Call hallways of Dr Daniel Lopez
technology for nineteen ninety
three and two thousand sixteen
and and boy Mr president members
at a such an impressive
university president so he's no
stranger to leadership he served
our country in the Air Force he
was born in a small town in New
been real active in so many ways
on on up here in the in our
capital and so he's
affectionately known as Dr Dan
and with that I would stand for
Senator Ingle thank you Mr
president president I certainly.
Paul disappointment I've known
doctor Dan.
There since I've been up here
And he's just a great man all
together he was work for the DFA
who in this first year under
governor line yes.
And he he resistant and an
And sometimes it was really hard
but he was always there with the
facts they were always correct
and here's a good good man is
I see no further debate Senator
o'neill to close.
Thank you Mr president members I
asked that the appointment for
doctor Daniel H. Lopez be
confirmed by our body and I ask
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator from the Lara yes
senators are wrong.
Yes Senators around is yes
Senator Diamond.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
a meal.
Senator automobile yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill yes Senator o'neil yes
senator do should be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the young.
Well yes Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator dole many as senator
Wirth Senator Wirth this Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Wait.
confirmation and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty six has been confirmed by
the New Mexico state Senate
center o'neill thank you thank
you Mr president and asked that
Harvard of the law.
Thank you Senator nail Senator
to the eastern New Mexico
university board of regents and
I yield to Senator Ingle to
present this conferee Senator
Ingle thank you Mr president
appointment of Schindler head as
a student region for eastern New
Mexico university.
I see no objections Senator
Ingle to explain.
performance she's very active
there in the community helping
students with financial aid.
Mexico student government
association.
And she is also serves on the
student page board.
She has had several award their
The festival finalist in twenty
twenty she's a very very
wonderful young lady and I
certainly a good student and I
know that she will serve the
See no debate centering go to
close thank you Mr president Mr
John ask unanimous consent that
the record show that the roll
clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Yes Senator is yes Senator
Diamond Senator Duhigg Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Hemphill Senator Hemphill yes
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator manos.
should be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator by the ATS Senator
Pinto.
Sanchez Senator Sweetser yes
senators with these.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Venice yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of thirty two in the
expiring December thirty first
twenty twenty two has been
confirmed by the Senate Senator
Ingle thank you Mr president Sen
plagiarizing given the
confirmations coming down we'll
be hearing them on Wednesday and
a few more on Friday in order to
finish our work with these
outstanding regents for our
Mr president of can you restate
the question under that any
words of wisdom or poetry or any
I have is is this going to be a
delay of of significance I could
read my whole book if you want.
No is seriously.
What I do my John sapien poem
since is not here.
The state senator.
Okay.
So
want to sit in them then she got
mad at me for.
Naming her.
But
and that's a really good poem by
the way but I this is a this is
called Cesar.
Cesar is all about three S.
Flores or the lonely product
that he let others on Tuesday
charcoal black here every
morning.
He handles the gavel with
assurance or at least paneling
back his way what he can.
He would like to distance
himself from his own achievement
that cannot help himself it has
We have these buckets of money
see his bucket your bucket makes
eleven buckets.
those camels and those noses.
Senator runs angry if you vote
against them and is big on the
third person so.
He rises from his seat and scans
the chamber with his goofy
sneering smile the truth is in
his cufflinks.
Says Ron that order business
nonsense miscellaneous all yield
Which is house bill forty seven
that'll be Senator Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr president I ask
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Sierra that order business
third reading of legislation see
no objections Center semantics.
life options act the Sanchez
representative Armstrong other
house members and myself Senator
Hamlin and Senator o'neill.
To qualifying for this end of
life options act.
Person must be an adult they
must have a terminal illness
That person must also after
going through the requirements
must be able to self administer
Injecting the patient or giving
the patient anything themselves
it relates to a prescription
Who must then determine that the
person is terminally ill.
And is mentally capable of
making an informed decision.
determines if the patient has
capacity and is mentally capable
of making an informed decision.
Informed decision making.
And explain all anticipated
outcomes risks and alternatives
including hospice and palliative
care.
Some died before they feel a
need to use it.
For others just knowing that
they have the means to end their
suffering if it becomes
waiting period from the writing
of the prescription to the
filling of the prescription to
ensure timely access for
two must be a physician.
Is defined as an M. D. D. O. and
advanced practice nurse or
physician's assistant.
Positions nurses and loved ones
are protected against
prosecution for assisting
suicide.
Further good faith compliance
certificate lists the underlying
illness as the cause of death.
It also prohibits any insurance
policy from being conditioned
and there is a section in the
law that relates to this
conscience provision.
This is compassion for the
suffering.
But for those who are suffering
unbearably at the end of life it
provides a measure of control
obligations of their calling.
To relieve suffering.
The state the following states
The state of Colorado the state
of Hawaii the state of New
Jersey the state of Maine and
the district of Columbia.
Mr president I know that we
might have some amendments but
I'd like to tell you.
And the body.
and one from the Santa Fe New
Mexican have endorsed this bill.
The following municipalities
have passed resolutions
The following organizations have
endorsed medical aid in dying.
The ACLU of New Mexico.
Health Action New Mexico the
league of women voters.
Madison at downtown.
The national student nursing
association.
The New Mexico community health
workers so ciation The New
Mexico nurse practitioner
council.
No Westra salute.
Sage advocacy and services for
LGBTQ elders.
adopted positions of engaged
neutrality.
The American academy of
neurology.
association the American
pharmacists association the
American psychological
association disability rights
New Mexico the greater
the bill section by section but
before I do any further I'd like
to request unanimous consent for
my expert witnesses.
Armstrong and the second one
will be doctored Deborah I think
it's Deborah Brill.
And I have yet to get them into
the system.
Issues that I've talked about
already are spelled out in
different sections of the bill
and I understand.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill forty seven is
twice amended amendment
sponsored by senator Joseph
service.
Thank you Mr president
people that hasn't even done I
move US senator member number
one to house bill forty seven as
amended amended.
bill in judiciary and I very
much commend the sponsor of
behind her intentions and the
passion and and and the good
that she's trying to do by this
on the floor the the amendment
as a number of things.
Representative number one just
the some remembering since there
would be some that different
eight of the bill a seven eight
of the bill intend to deal with
contracts the issue contracts
between parties the as they may
relate to end of life and
certificate and it's my position
that that we should not be
telling doctors in statute how
to practice medicine or how to
make a medical decision and we
should not be telling doctors
what they should list for a
four is intended to represent a
civil immunities provision in
the bill this would have
immunize anyone and everyone
from participating in and and
this is like this or
had cases in New Mexico where
for example Walgreens fails them
I'm not getting into trouble
Walgreens but but there is a a
well known Walgreens case were
Walgreens agency fill the
appropriate in the bill and
that's the.
The amendment that is in
paragraph number four.
the members five six seven all
relate to language that really a
superfluous in the bill and not
one Senator facts thank you Mr
president the while you know we
would prefer that everything
state as it is we understand
that the language needed some
judiciary and with the house
sponsor and we are accepting the
amendments.
Further debate on Senate floor
member number one.
all look to the Senate Judiciary
is is the.
Experts in making a bills game
game type you know came ready
that carries today and it's up
to Senate Judiciary to make sure
that we're not passing bad laws
and I really want to thank the
sponsors of the amendment for
working with with the sponsor of
just kind of like can't we just
moving on but it's really
important that we stay true to
our tradition and do our
senatorial duties so anyway
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor the moment please you'll
for quick question centers
around the state of gesso you
civil I was gonna strike civil
and criminal would you would you
In line me as to why we're
leaving the criminal liability
in the bill that that does the
same thing which is we have a
law on our books is entitled a
criminal offense of assisting
suicide but in any event we have
a criminal statute that says it
is unlawful to assist in a
suicide and you'll see in the
bill there's an attempt to
change that criminal statute and
and the language that you're
on with the sponsor does not
relate to the criminal
immunities a provision of the
bill you did tell me that that
was of concern to you and I
anticipated you might have your
Thank you Mr president and
senator I would really love to
hear your your legal mind on on
this because.
You know when when I look at
that at the end of the bill the
gun or here's a here's some
poison or here's a lethal
prescription and so that's why
we have to include that in this
liable for assisting suicide.
and and and just to be clear for
want to be very sensitive to the
folks that I've heard on this
bill that that you know they
don't really want to die they'd
rather have their terminal
illness removed they'd rather
get better and they they don't
my concern my concern is a a
criminal you know if someone
does something else criminal
like let's say the doctor the
doctor you know you know forges
president and and Senator so due
to our if the if this amendment
is is drafted.
my understanding is that we we
would still be allowing some
sort of criminal immunity for
does not address your concern
it's not intended to do so.
Okay thank you I appreciate that
Mr Senator Mr present.
Any further debate on the
Bonser of the bill.
She's a class act and you know
right out of the Judiciary
Committee she sent me a text
saying she'd like to meet with
me she's been diligent about
and forth quite a bit in the
last twenty four hours but but
I'm gonna and with that the she
handle it in a an incredibly
professional I want to thank her
for the way that she want to
work constructively on a bill
Sunday here at the cathedral and
the archbishop was saying mass
so this challenge are challenged
by this and and and
I'm very confident that.
I can support this bill with
this amendment and so much
To house bill forty seven is by
amended.
Clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandis senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Campos yes senator from
the lobby of.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Ingle yes Senator be
sold so.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
had a meal.
Senator Moores yes Senator
manos.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Sen.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
so there Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Yes Senator Steinborn as Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
I have a lot of thirty seven the
Fuhrman is in the negative house
Thirty seven of the firm is zero
in the negative senator member
number one has been added to
house bill forty seven now three
two to house bill forty seven as
three times amended amendment
sponsored by senator Daniel A.
Ivey Soto.
Senator so that a move explain
eminent thanks very much Mr
short title to the end of life
options act or the Elizabeth
wide field end of life options
act.
If if I could keep presenting it
to drug addicts federal
Representative Senate Bill
explained it I think you just
did an explanation unity moved
it but we'll go to debate and
We understand that judge
Elizabeth white field really
wanted this bill to pass but we
also understand that we have
We can accept this amendment
thank you.
Center's media further debate on
Senate floor member number two
Senator o'neill thank you Mr
Any further debate on the floor
amendment centers.
Siemens Representative closed on
continued to be memorialized in
statute.
and this is.
She was somebody who.
Always listen to the parties.
She was the judge who can make a
decision.
Was born in a marine base in
cherry point North Carolina.
And she came to New Mexico.
With the first husband Jan wide
field.
her family to graduate college.
I want to went to law school.
Getting her juris doctorate
award.
I'm not going to go through all
the various honors that she
earned.
During her time.
The biggest honor that she ever
had.
In two thousand eighteen.
That's why feel testified in
favor the bill.
My ability to drink.
Don't let me die without
dignity.
That's why I feel the some but
I'm very much loved.
For who she was.
And admired for how she lived.
Her name will remain in the
Stefanics and representative of
Armstrong's understanding.
And compassion of their own in
terms of of us balancing those
two.
and ask unanimous consent of the
Senate.
Sentences when requested up
senator member number two by
unanimous consent.
We do have another floor
amendment.
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
move and explain imminent famous
present on like to move us
informant number three to house
bill forty seven thousand.
and it just in addition strikes
the criminal immunity that has
been provided in the bill and
that's all it does mistress.
Senator debating senator member
other states that have this
language and we believe that
this protection of for our
provide some protections thank
you very much.
Senator debating Senate floor
amendment number three anyone
wishing to debate.
Is I really want Evan understand
what what we're about to vote
here.
On page ten and I'm gonna I'm
gonna include the the amendment
dying.
So.
Anybody that participates in the
act.
Is included in the act if you
Immunity from criminal
liability.
And I understand.
From the bill sponsor that
We're also protecting anybody
from forgery
from any other crime because
they have participated and so
I'm not subject to criminal
liability because I have
participated in medical aid in
dying it's right here in section
nine.
And I I don't see a reason why
fixed that the bill this has
everything to do with doctors
and other health care providers
that are included in this act
they can be criminals I think
we've all seen that they can act
like criminals they can do
their license I don't believe it
belongs in here I I strongly
favor getting rid of the Civil.
Immunity.
And we're not gonna if we're
gonna get rid of civil immunity
we might as well get rid of
call please thank you that is
where voting on Senate floor
member number three Mr president
did anybody ask to debate
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt
yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gonzalez no
Senator Gonzales now Senator
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto no senator had
Senator lovers now Senator
McKenna no Senator McKenna now
senator Morris.
Senator Moores yes Senator my
nose.
Senator manos no senator
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
by the.
Senator Stewart and now senator
Pinto no Senator been done now
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Rodriguez now Senator
senator senator Sanchez yes
Senators maybe he's Senators
Senator Shendo na Senator souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
number one has failed.
To pass the Senate.
We do have another floor
amendment.
The reader to read.
Senate committee to move explain
the moment.
Thank you Mr president I don't
believe I've been handed the
thank you.
Thing is present and like to
move us informed over three to
house bill forty seven as
medically.
bill for the the the doctor who
prescribes the lethal medication
to actually see the patient in
person this can currently be
medical school that at the end
of the day just really need to
examine the patient
especially if you know if we're
that you just look at the
testing you you may so I know
what's going on or I know I saw
the patient last week so I
really know what's happening but
but we really don't.
determine good faith that
individuals request does not
arise from coercion or undue
influence by another person I
just like the body to kind of
things is a very very
complicated decision and so on
us is that we the person
actually writes that life in the
prescription let's just require
that they have an in person
interaction with with the
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
president and on this particular
amendment the
Treating physician would have
already examined the individual
Senator debate in Santa Clara
member number three.
Anyone wishing to debate.
Senator Baca the wishy debate.
Senator Baca thank you Mr
Mr president I will yield but
not on the amendment.
It is on the bill Mr president
with the sponsor yields to her
own bill.
point that out I'd be much
appreciated Mister president
thank you Mr president I need to
look for it for one minute.
four line item nine B. provided
medical care to the individual
in accordance with accepted
medical standards of care would
cover that issue.
president and senator is that
we're relying on this statute to
point to accepted accepted
medical standards of care and
Mr president and at the top of
page six line one eight examined
Thank you Mr president from
individual is and then you skip
over to.
Lucy medically.
Anyone else within the debate.
Semen so we do have Mister chair
who wishes to debate this
Are we really protecting.
Full moved on a variety of
things here bye bye stripping
out protections that that some
stripped out of fees and fines
and we make things legal that
we're on legal before.
in in in I think that doctors
committees.
Which have done exactly what
he's concerned about we've we've
we've weakened protections for
health care providers.
So I think it's reasonable to
not taking anything away from.
From the desire of the bill or
the sponsor.
It just helps clarify help
strengthen it.
And I think we ought to just
take a little bit of time and
consider.
All those people out there that
are worried about what we're
doing and this is one and this
is one spot where we can
that this is a unfriendly it was
it was pointed out that was
redundant maybe it is maybe it's
not but even if it is.
Let's make the medical community
president thank you for the
indulgence full I will read
through that and it does appear
that the language is a little
bit different on on the one hand
what the sponsor of the
amendment please yield Mister
president Senator Munoz detailed
I'll miss present.
your amendment.
The restaurant is thank you Mr
president and senator
Baca yes on top page six's
examine the individual but I can
that it not appear to be any
acute distress they were you
know alert and oriented sort of
thing like that so is that that
right there the top examined
doesn't mean an in person exam
four the accepted medical
standards of care
I would ask what what standards
are are we are we referring to
this is something that is gonna
be very new in New Mexico so
what what are the standards of
does not have to include in
person examination.
so that that's all this does
once again it just
It just requires an in person
exam for the prescriber.
examination basically it is just
like a is it like on zoom like
we're doing for committees Mr
president is that the kind of
thing it would be like yes Mr Mr
included in this bill that
hasn't Mexico Lysons.
That could was living outside in
New Mexico but they have the
license and the pricing
telemedicine so we just did this
Teletubbies Destry.
And this bill because it does
not require that in person
interaction the only in person
interaction it actually requires
and I'm glad that's in here is
you know the cancer that sort of
thing they are required.
The to have done in person
interaction with this individual
is specific to that other doctor
or other health care provider
but it is not required of the
prescriber of the the the
medication so that's that's what
us a few examples of things that
you can not do when examining a
qualified individual of you to
examining of the telemedicine
thank you Mr president said that
that's a good question so first
of all and I'll go back to
that you know someone comes in
and they tell you their personal
story or they tell you what's
going on even it's it's how they
they say it and you just
your family are you having a
hard day.
And and it's it's really will
that sometimes they actually
want to be asked those sorts of
questions they they don't want
to say it sometimes it's very
on a laptop the other things for
me I mean you can't examine
somebody for oral cancer the you
know online I mean you have to
you have to feel things at the
they're a lot of times we just
by we call palpation just just
by feeling whatever the area of
interest is and and you can say
yeah that feels like a tumor I
examples we go under a lot of
things
On you know things you just
can't do unless you're you're in
person but the those are just a
few examples of things that
really require that in person
interaction.
appreciated the sponsor of the
bill her her response to the
amendment and that you know that
she really wasn't opposed to
this or that and proponents
really weren't opposed to this
we just thought it was redundant
is in that a bit of a difference
you know this adds really two
words that that would seem to be
the real difference and that
means in person and I really
doesn't tae it's simply just
requires that that the the
person be examined in person so
they're sitting in front of
somebody and and I think
compared to having them on a on
a television screen is just a
tremendous difference difference
you know I'm I'm so glad that
Decision should be able to be
examined in person of under the
care of a qualified individual
and so I I appreciate this
ammendment I I hope the the body
Any further debate on the floor
amendment centers.
Si no further debate on the
floor amendment centers
committee to close nothing is
have today that at the end of
the day.
When a doctor is making a major
decision you just have to
examine the patient in person
you really do thank you Mr
Senator how do you like this to
take the vote
well.
Roll call.
a friend roll call be fine Mr
Chris there has been a request
for a roll call centers here
suits.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos now Senator from
the last year.
Senator serve on this.
Senator surrounded now Senator
Diamond.
No Senator Gonzales now Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen now Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Ivey Soto no senator had
a meal.
Senator economy on our Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez no Senator
McKenna.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neill no Senator need
to be now.
Senator Ortiz the national
center for the year.
Senator prognose senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez now senator
Sanchez Senator songes yes
senators moody's.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Stewart no Senator
Tallman.
Senator Wirth Senator Wirth no
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Moores yes.
another floor amendment the
reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
three to house bill forty seven
as amended amendment sponsored
by Senator great committees.
to house bill four seven as
amended.
And what this does is this came
up in in committee and I was
just mind blown.
at the intuitive nous.
And she said oh I would never
have brought this up I would
never brought up.
In in your life early is what
she was saying I would never
Often.
Some pressure a little bit of
pressure.
Comes along with that especially
if you have a low health
literacy.
well what's your evidence what's
your you know I read online that
this in this in this.
The person of low socioeconomic
status.
They've you medicines very
educational level which is my
main concern with this bill
which we'll get to in a minute
but but this bill protects those
people to protect the people of
low health literacy of low
participating in this medical
aid in dying.
It protects them and how does
that is on page nine all we're
doing is adding the words upon
request.
They shall you don't get a
choice you have to do it and
even if you're not asked by the
patient you must initiate the
already explained but to.
Sometimes it's just not the time
sometimes it's just you need to
wait you need to follow up.
very delicate situation so all
this is asking for is instead of
you shall initiate you shall do
it it just says upon request
from the sick person they have
what are my options so if I ask
what are the options then the
the doctor gives all the options
I have no problem with that
we're not trying to hide
was really moved and touched by
once again by Dr that was
supporting this bill I'm not
saying that that that person is
support for this particular
amendment I haven't asked them
Senator the main senator member
number three we go to the
Sanchez Senator Stefanics Mr
president we consider this an
unfriendly amendment it violates
the principle of informed
options which includes all
options thank you.
Senator debate incentive
amendment thing is present in
just to be clear we are not
changing the words all
reasonable options at all all
we're doing is and the words the
health care provider upon
of the bill we would be
violating the the idea of
informed consent we really
would.
What I'm doing is I'm saying
we're not gonna initiate the
president thank you and with
that I'd like to move Sen
foreman number three to house
bill forty seven as then
Senator.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Burt.
Senator Sharon does now Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg now senator gray
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill no Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez no Senator
McKenna.
Senator McKenna no Senator
Moores.
Senator Munoz now senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Senator podia now Senator Pinto.
No.
The printer knows Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
probe.
senator Sanchez Senator Sweetser
yes Senators communities
Senators religious Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator souls no Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics no
Senator Steinborn now Senator
Steinborn no Senator Stewart.
Senator branch.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey.
We're back on the bill Senators.
Any debate on the bill.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president and
sponsoring on on page on page
two of the bill page actually
page two and page three we
have to be able to indicate that
the individual the person is and
in the condition that they can
make those decisions for
practice pursuant to the nurse
practice act we've got to the
physician assistant and those
are those are the identified
health.
those four were the ones chosen.
Senator fenics thank you Mr
president and senator do it is
related to the New Mexico drug
the types of drugs that would be
necessary to
Utilize in an end of life option
nurse specialist which is in the
mental health psychology Reno
would not have that prescriptive
authority so the for entities
that have prescriptive authority
please send a detailed.
Yes Mr president I yield.
physician or an osteopathic
physician or a or a nurse or
physician is session there any
official knowledge as I am an
osteopathic I'm not in the house
to pass the excuse me allopathic
physician I took the oath of my
physician's assistant state.
Thank you Mr president thank you
doctor do that such all I've
I've got there
I'm.
ago and I understand your
passion I understand the passion
of of everyone that you know
staedtische for a physician
assistant really should be
someone.
you know we talk about a
psychiatrist a psychologist but
then we talk about a master
social worker and a psychiatric
concerned that they reach the
level.
Of expertise to evaluate an
individual in these in these
identify the mental health
professionals Senator FedEx.
Thank you Mr president senator
So Mister president and senator
all of these individuals that
are listed here have the skill
Ph.D or an M. D. and they are
all eligible to to bill under
our state Medicaid and in some
Thank you Mr president thank you
thank you senator repairs.
You know again image that I just
already said what what I'm
concerned about and in that and
the if we might agency
presentation go down on page
three where we talk about shelf
administering.
And we go back in in in the back
on page sixteen we exempt people
from from helping this person in
self administering in the in the
bill.
I'm not exactly sure I knew what
that means because it could I
Our somebody handed to you
purchased on your lip you're
able to swallow it show you've
self administered
administration actually in my
mind could be quite complicated
it's not for a person who is
comatose it is for a person who
So to self administer does mean
being able to swallow in this
situation.
of attorneys in in here
which president would Senator
Cervantes yield for just a
second Senator Brandt as
detailed Mr president could I
Senator for vantage on page
three where we talk about shelf
administering
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
president senator I was also
given some additions an
individual could be given a
be put in their feeding to.
Senator Griggs thank you Mr
president and and going back to
senator Sanchez if you will
yield you.
The way I've described it
moments ago would be that
potentially an individual and
even if we talk about
suppositories.
We're they're actually.
utilize it
does that under the under the
terms of this act is that expose
the individual who shares with
that.
actually Mr president center
going going too far in that
instance for what it is we're
trying to accomplish with the
bill.
Senator Hernandez.
presence of a person whose
utilizing this medication and
end of life medication the
person who's in the presence is
not liable but by being there
probably work if I can get to a
crime rate would be that if if.
It would your family member.
water or you held it there while
they swallowed that.
Then that would be deemed self
administering the drug.
details you just did but but if
you look at section nine you'll
to see that.
in here it reads no person shall
be subject to certain things and
just as important being present
I think makes pretty clear that
this and are you again the
circumstance you gave the person
who have the medication the
person would not.
You know I've I've got one other
question and then I'm I'm
finished and that question is
Fourteen day.
Waiting period.
And Mister president center we
use forty eight hours.
Two weeks is still correct and
what was our process or your
process to come up with with
forty eight hours in staff.
Senator Stefanics.
So Mr president and senator my
expertise is telling me that it
is actually going to take much
longer than forty dollars for
the entire process to be
concluded the first of all you
firm you have forms to fill out
and have notarized and witnessed
and then you are given a
prescription after you are given
take four to six weeks to
complete.
Thank you Mr president Senator
so did did I mention I
understand or possibly misstate
Page fourteen day.
Senator Stefanics.
Mr president Senator there is
fourteen in or again there is
fourteen days between the first
medication becomes available.
Because of the ordering.
Thank you Mr president Senator
and and that such.
You know I mean I know that in
just there's absolutely not
But I guess the.
You know they go through it they
get the and then you can get the
drug within forty and if you get
Issue right there the only data
got to do it and I'm I'm going
to.
You know is is something that I
I ramble just a little bit
because each.
I've got too many people that I
know that potentially could have
benefited but at the same time
R. and IBM I don't believe it's
that is the right the right
thing we should do as a as a
For standing up here and putting
this bill forward because
regardless of how the Bogo.
Regardless to vote yes and who
voted No.
senator.
Thanks Senator Jenny further
debate.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president in the I
don't need the sponsor yield I
To actually prescribe something
that would take someone's life.
I I understand it very
But I live that paying every
single day.
But this is an issue of whether
Practice is always been to try
to protect life.
We have another issue so so here
we are in law.
We don't even affirm the right
of our patients.
To reject care.
Their doctors every day that
when people who have cancer or
that's something we could deal
with and we can probably all
agree to deal with.
Yes you're right it is and
should be someone's choice.
But I don't think a doctor
Was to get cancer.
I would have to seriously
consider whether or not I was
willing to go through.
Single therapy for one thing.
the other stuff I have to go
through on a daily basis.
Doctors need to be able to give
you the options for treatment.
And then.
be and should be dealing with.
Because we have doctors all the
time to try to take it to court
to force treatment on someone
Or go through chemotherapy
treatments when they don't want
to deal with that.
That's not what we're dealing
with no we're we're dealing with
allowing doctors.
thing for us to be doing I think
that's something we shouldn't be
doing and I know they've done in
other states I understand and I
involved in I don't think it's
something that doctors should
have to deal with that moral
dilemma.
But we definitely need to deal
and not have to go the court
system.
To make sure doctor doesn't
force that treatment on us.
That's something I could support
over this for mineral however
long it's come up.
So I do have a
just a question or two here and
then some comments but.
this but so you you get the
prescription and it takes a
while to to get it filled what.
What's in this cocktail of
drugs.
of compassion and choices sent
me a detailed email about what
issues to.
And the.
physician he did not find the
exact amounts.
But there is something that's
given to prevent vomiting and
improves absorption.
the heartbeat and make it beat
irregularly.
At the same time something is
given to cause the heart to
The average time to sleep is
about ten minutes.
And then they are given a form
The average time to death is one
and a half hours or less while
that person is in a deep sleep.
So first we start with something
to of nausea half hour before
next just to keep you from.
Get rid of what they're given
your next.
Two drugs one for a slow
irregular heartbeat and one for
a faster regular heartbeat or
did I miss something and if this
The proof the vomiting.
And anxiety are the vomiting and
Then one half hour before using
the compounded medication.
Something is given.
To slow the heartbeat.
The compound that will and the
life.
Senator.
Of or drugs of some kind.
And you have to take this
yourself.
That is correct Mr president
Senator.
Yes maybe put on an individual
to use pain medication pumps and
quantities of alcohol that can
actually take longer if an
individual is extremely obese
that can take longer.
And then there are some medical
Mr president so but the first
two hours you're still awake you
still.
at least have some reasonable
knowledge of what's doing before
the before the last step.
Mister president senator you
have to be a way to do the
entire process and so all the
first drugs are doing is of
to not only put you in a deep
sleep but to and life.
Mr president and senator.
So now I'm an hour and a half
Mr president once the person
takes a compounded medications
they're ending their life.
pet that we've had to put down
what is the difference between.
Between your dog in a few
minutes and this in a few hours
what what we doing differently.
one that a pet is usually much
smaller than an adult.
And those of pets are usually
We talked earlier in in in
Senator Dr Schmedes was looking
for some kind of.
Would he be required for any
physician any health care
provider that could do this with
the ever be required to do this.
section nine Page ten to eleven
at actually protects any person
refusing to participate.
that was antiquated and in fact
the moral in this bar in this
chamber.
So I can see that coming
eventually.
No matter what we say today.
mentioned that there haven't
been any recorded abuses in this
and I'll take your word for that
at least in the United States.
But I also know that in Europe
Hospitals have to said we're
going to do this parents have
sued in hospitals come back said
nope sorry.
Well we probably won't do it for
a little while but we will just
because.
Once you start down that
slippery slope you can't stop.
But you don't start sliding down
that hill of.
If you don't really want to go.
On some deep level it bothers me
but it also bothers me on a
legal level.
We have declared that we have
Liberty well we're gonna make
you do some things.
Because if you don't do well
it's probably because you've got
In the dispositive the path
we're going on it bothers me
that.
In our society today.
I know that there's people that
don't want to.
To live because it just doesn't
get out of the pain well in.
Your unconscious I get that.
But I also think the human life
has value even up to the New.
In those are very sad moments.
I don't think they tried to rush
the process.
In fact I was not with my father
my father didn't die until I
walked out of the room.
He didn't want me to see him
die.
He died shortly after I left.
Think about the real value of
human life.
If there is no value on human
life.
And with the votes going to be.
I pray for the state of New
Mexico.
They're further debate we have
Mr president I will yield to the
senator Senator us misprision we
heard this in committee and I
voted no because of also like my
extended the time from the time
they start the process the time
they're dead
our tool in my calculation about
two and a half hours Mr
Thanks.
Up medications are anxiety drugs
and some of the last medications
are morphine which would
alleviate any pain.
And I understand what more often
does I just in that duration
process I've.
I've had to put our is down with
child because it took too long
and and this this really bothers
me Mr president Senator just a
little bit of history
my father passed away in in my
shrapnel he had quite a few.
Problems.
But in his last hours.
His lan on my lap whether his
Yes severe I did not want him to
have to suffer.
And I'll give him credit don't
know if it's military or of his
chest stubbornness but he didn't
But I know this dude I know his
life.
That is in pain.
And I guess we all look at pain
differently.
Places in the bill that gives
them some comforter some options
I I liked Center.
These.
Mr chairman and senator Mitch
presents under
also use my mom and I did this
in committee.
But ten years ago she was
diagnosed with cancer.
said that some of us ask you
know what our next steps what we
do.
But I'll tell you technology
changes on a rapid basis.
Thank you for listening quite.
But she's in remission.
And if she would have this
option actually talked about it
That if we ever get to that
point.
I will not allow her to do this.
Because Mr president center if
we would have done this ten
years ago.
just a brief question because I
don't know that I can change my
and your heart.
I just wanted to clarify and
And your bill is I couldn't
understand if it's clear.
If a more mental health
practitioner.
asset agency present center is
and we've stated before we got
some really good mental health.
A practitioners in Lee County.
What's a bad life.
What is just really really
incredible mental health issue
and I don't know if.
this presents center with Dr
Schmidt is talking about you
know wanting to be hands on in
the process with him being a
doctor physical drive.
Would you be able enlighten me
on the medical of the mental
health professionals.
The first this Mr Burciaga.
of drugs that are needed for end
of life and no they cannot the
only thing that the mental
health professionals can do in
our bill is to determine
Mr president center I appreciate
you giving them the authority to
pass on because I think that
would be a huge responsibility
that they may not be capable to.
What that'll you'll thank you.
bill sponsor you'll please says
seven X. deals Mr president I
will yield to the senator thank
you very much Senator thank you
Mr president.
beneficial hopefully helpful to
the body as as they this side.
How do you like to vote on this
and I do have a question is kind
And you know unfortunately the
bill no longer contains
protections against insurers
denying health care benefits.
Manning chemotherapy.
legislation and this is the
reason the California to make a
change and I don't I don't see
this in this bill and I'm just
wondering if the if the bill
sponsor would would consider
this or think this needs to be
A woman was called on the phone.
there's also another individual
has written a letter business
same thing they were denied
dollar twenty cents co pay don't
ask me why they put it on twenty
cents it seems ridiculous you
should have no copay but maybe
there's a legal reason so my
and number two should we make it
illegal for an insurance company
in New Mexico to say we're
denying your care but we're
going to offer you aid in dying
of Senator I only heard your
first comments about that
section C. I'm sorry I didn't
hear the last question thank you
sars bit long winded Mr
president center I'm and I'm
And number two she would make it
illegal for insurance company to
say we're not paying for your
care but we will offer you aid
in dying at zero copay.
It's just a CENIC's.
Senator Cervantes will you yield
Senator on the field.
Yes I'm sorry yes.
in context basically the
amendments and context and we we
struck paragraph see on page ten
that it's in law unlawful for
insurer to deny health care
benefits.
denied care they said we're not
gonna pay for chemotherapy but
in the same form of
communication we are we're going
to offer you.
Aid in dying.
we need to explicitly ban the
practice in New Mexico of of the
denial of care with an offering
of a free aid in dying in the
same form of communication.
Senator on this so much present
I'm with you.
When you're correct that we have
struck that.
unlawful or lawful for an the
denial of health care benefits
an individual the terminal
illness based on the aid in
dying.
Yes Mr president center I'm
it makes unlawful for an insurer
to do certain things to the line
health care benefits that would
be available to an individual
the terminal illness based on
the availability of aid in dying
benefits that would be do
patient simply because we would
have this law in place which is
what that that language says is
based on the availability of the
medical aid in dying the carrier
would make it unlawful for an
insurer once again to attempt to
influence an individual.
To request medical aid in dying
that that that may be naive of
me.
But but I don't know when
insurance carrier that makes
medical judgments or tries to
direct patient and when one
direction of care or the other.
really dictate health care
decisions
all the time.
I prescribed the some sort of.
Medication for heartburn reflux.
things that the insurance
company quote unquote approves
of so Dr your prescription that
you wrote that you decided it
was best for the patient
we don't like your decision I
ask them I called them on the
phone as I have you have you
examine the patient would like
to come to my office and an exam
the patient before you deny
their payment for surgery and
they do guiding dictate policy
all the time but but I I think
it's fun I I certainly accept
that the answer I'm just asking
the question I had for to
deliberate this bill I I just
people's thoughts are but you
know that there's nothing in
this bill that that prevents
the insurance company from from
once again that they deny care
all the time they deny things
but here's your aid in dying so
and and what they did was they
they went back and changed the
bill that's what they did they
said is it is is explicitly on
lawful to do that in the same
that we provide we provide aid
in dying and and I'm just
wondering if we need to do that
in this bill or if anybody
thinks we need to Mr president.
Mr president I believe that
Senator Vontaze provided the
answer to that and I believe
if people wanted if other
states and I just ask you about
this and with the rhetorical
question on this point how would
you feel if your mom received a
letter that said we're denying
Once again back to my other
point why ran other amendment
they are initiating the
conversation they're they've
done in California there's on
organ.
They initiated that.
So I would feel much better
about this bill if we explicitly
made it unlawful.
And I think people think co
insurance comes on to legal from
Justin I care they don't do
that.
a study and they'll say well
your chance of five year
survival or chance of to your
survival of metastatic lung
cancer is less than five percent
he said well I've got a five
percent chose not great.
But you know what what what's
the downside I'll take the five
percent because it ended a five
hundred and with and maybe one
And.
Really think about this if you
receive one of those letters
your family member received a
letter like that how would you
feel.
Of this measure but you you
won't hear the American medical
association.
Click to read one cents from
their statement other current
fundamentally incompatible with
the physician's role as healer
would be difficult or impossible
to control and would pose
serious societal risks.
NA we have a distinct cultural
language and time honored norms
values and philosophy life that
predates colonial western ways
of being.
those are just two associations
that are opposed this bill.
As a money is is as you can
tell.
And you know there there's.
informed vote and I want to
fully informed vote on this
bill.
And as part of the deliberative
body I really hope we give this
great thought because I think is
a very big moment this from the
as we've seen in other states
the overall suicide rate goes
up.
Overall right.
What are we number one or number
two in the country right now per
why it had skyrocketed in
Oregon.
we don't have the data yet.
But this is what the World
Health Organization currently.
Recommends.
Suicides intentional taking of
your life.
Okay and what they say.
Mr Reid Mr president it says
Okay avoid repetition of stories
about suicide.
Avoid providing detailed
information.
About attempted suicide.
celebrity suicides we saw in the
cover of people if you remember
that a few years ago member a.
Thank you Mr Britney on the
cover of people.
Very sad story.
this bill will be amended I
guarantee it.
Within.
No I don't know put a number on
it within five years there's two
reasons why this bill cannot
The teenager or the twenty two
year old healthy girl with
depression.
That's suffering.
A doctor came along and
compassionately helped her in
her life because she was
suffering.
But I'm suffering to.
you're you're in it you know
you're in this campaign you're
not in pain.
You can decide you to tell me
how much pain you're in to self
reported indicator.
person that suffering just as
much well no you don't have a
terminal disease.
A doctor in sign off and say
when dine six months so you're
not eligible.
this thing that they're calling
terminal depression now.
Terminal depression.
I don't want to medical school
Mr president but after you
ended your life because once
again this bill is about giving
options right it's about getting
a tiny and it does.
This bill gives more autonomy.
cancer was suffering what I have
a concern about him on this on
this no fly because well he was
upper middle class well educated
great family that I'm very
blessed to be part of.
No concerns from me on that
situation.
can see how dominant cultures
just sweep up the minority
cultures this we come up even
unintentionally Mr president so
let's think about this this bill
Okay well documented well
documented phenomenon different
cultures.
And so.
Let's go through the bill.
Let me use one of my other
Has a cough one day Mr present
he goes in to the doctor they
get a chest X. ray one thing
leads to another he has
metastatic cancer all over as
long as all over his brain that
He qualifies for this bill.
However is there a requirement
for suffering in the bill no
in pain at that point but he
qualified in this is the reason
that he can exercise this
statute Mr president he can say
Thank you so I qualify because
of a doctor that sciences I of
four to six months to live.
I'm not suffering right now but
only want to go there and I want
Here's the problem with it.
My friend.
I'm talking about.
Upper middle class also Mr
well what what little I have I
want to give to my grand kids my
nieces my nephews I don't want
to I don't want to use up.
The money at my end of life for
medical bills.
why because they have so much
financial pressure under
different conditions.
Okay.
We talk about this all the time
health care about our frustrated
They lose autonomy under this
act Mister president they lose
wide because of the altruistic
suicide factor and because
they're free to choose their
You can just be I don't wanna be
a burden on my family.
You know I saw that you know so
and so died and they were burden
on their family well.
And and this is really the
about your support structure how
rural bus that is that's
actually defines wealth and
success in America once again
that's well documented but.
you know this is a working class
families.
So once again it's not in the
bill.
The bill just says you have to
have a paternal illness six
months and so the poor.
That's the other problem that's
why they lose economy it's a
double whammy Mr president.
So that that's that's one
reason.
I'm.
With the announcement of window
rock was really getting at they
understand.
They understand.
What it means to have this this
I I I cannot fathom why this has
not come up more and more and
why I seem to be the only person
bring this up that seems to have
a concern about it.
We cannot give exception just
for terminally ill patients it's
not going to last it doesn't
make any sense.
And there's nothing in this
bill.
Of these World Health
Organization guidelines the that
I've that I read you know we're
we're putting it we're putting
Now my my last main point of
this Mr president.
Are people with disabilities and
and one of the prior senators
spoke on this.
I thought was very wise very
intuitive.
you that does this act exclude
anybody with a disability.
Senator Stefanics.
were comfortable with and
working with individuals who
might have disabilities that
would request end of life
options.
Thank you Mr president Sander
and they rang up the mental
health specialist I mean it's
important to.
with this bill exclude or
my decision that would be the
health care providers the two
health care providers and the
mental health specialist if
they're involved.
Senator Ortiz thank you Mr
the ability to self administer
the medication that's on page
four so someone cannot move
their.
With our arms they they cannot
bill you have to have the
ability in the dexterity in the
where with all in the physical
strength to to take this and by
the way it is it's quite a bit
of stuff the barbiturates and
everything it's quite a bit of
stuff.
in a lot of money and you know I
might my patients have lost
their ability to swallow they
are on feeding tubes yes this
bill does include a patients
that can self administer it into
what cannot stand it cannot
stand Mr presents under this
bill will not hold because it
excludes people that can't eat
themselves and free themselves
eligible for this bill based on
their disability.
That that that is illegal that
is illegal as a violation of the
ADA Mister president.
their disability and that's what
this bill does.
As it said no follow sponsor I'm
not at all please hear me I'm
not critiquing the sponsor
Sanchez been incredibly thorough
Where we have to go to make this
even stand on legal ground at
some point.
Well we have to allow for
we're not gonna this we're not
gonna discriminate against you
based on your disability anymore
you're not eligible for aid in
dying based on your disability
how we're gonna fix that we're
To administer the medication to
you so you can exercise your
economy and you can exercise
this statute.
What do we call that Mr
president.
And this bill which I'm glad is
included.
This bill explicitly.
Mr president my point is that we
must if we're gonna pass this we
must legalize euthanasia because
if we don't we're discriminating
against people based on the fact
we're gonna include here in in
health care
the if that just doesn't make
sense to me so once again I I'm
I'm trying to trying to paint a
patients number over a hundred
thousand.
Well.
Where we going with this Mr
president.
two and by the way when we go to
euthanasia this is also what
happens now that we can do
euthanasia we can also perform
overall suicide rate going up
because once again.
We're not gonna say no you're
not suffering just as much as
this person.
That's also discrimination.
circumstances this can be seen
as compassionate.
But in other cases.
It's just not because the poor
Why why did the original
Hippocratic oath included
specifically exclude this
practice why did they do that
thousands of years ago.
Well because they knew that
rates we we we send that
message.
It's either for everybody
equally.
Or it's not it's it would you
know that the way this
legislation has been developed
have seen that.
Mr president I have other
smaller concerns with the bill I
wanted to I could literally I
could probably talk for another
least receive a chance to hear
my thoughts on those things of
first of all like the
intentionality of the loose
residency requirement.
you know we're just talking
about that in the medical
loose this is a resident you
present for two days and you
qualify under this bill that's
intentional.
Okay so very loose requirement
but to try to just to wrap up
Mister president.
we are not following World
Health Organization guidelines
you have to refer you have to
you have to tell people about
all these things.
have a lot of a lot of concerns
with
they have a by and of I don't
even know how much I mean the
usual they're fairly significant
I think they can be up to a
hundred thousand dollars to a
thousand dollars he paying this
And that's why you heard
testimony in California on the
assembly floor that they don't
have a house call and simply
from progressives from
progressive Democrats stood up
Well they saw how money dictated
health care.
And that's kind of how how how
things ran.
And they couldn't do it and they
They blocked the bill the
progressives that and what
happened.
How did they get it through Mr
present well they it was this
that thing for.
Pass the wisdom of their own
health committee.
And so I I would urge people to
to just consider consider that
this pressure of money.
Especially when we're allowed to
actually initiate the
conversation now.
We can actually just bring it up
have you ever thought you got
over this from the northwest.
She shared a story about how her
husband this is this is crazy Mr
president her husband the the
To end his life early.
Of course she got upset the wife
got really upset when she found
out called the doctor and
Meaning.
E. relation let yourself become
a burden drag your wife down
drag your family down.
I've heard the conversations in
the hospitals when I sat down
with our New Mexico.
A little while back to address
some issues of people
disabilities they had just
like this the guardian was in
the hospital they heard someone
come to the door is kind of
running around doing something
so the guardian one out and and
several what are you doing Sir.
this patient.
And you know the hostel worker
didn't present.
He said.
Just look at him.
Just look at em.
people they say look at that
person over there they're just a
visual their lives not worth
anything over my life my life's
really valuable look how great I
am.
all they just need to pull the
plug.
Time to go look at on.
We judge we judge we judge and
our society is that and so we
put all these things together.
We have a country that has a As
sickening range of elder abuse.
against people with cognitive
disabilities and all kinds of
other disabilities saying that
your life not not worth living
anymore and I'm going to be the
judge and the jury on that.
we're gonna pass this bill Mr
president.
I did mention the the abject
poverty and low health literacy
that we have in New Mexico we're
gonna take all those things
Mr president I'm.
I am I am concluded with my
remarks I I sincerely hope
people I I realize we see this
issue differently.
Please consider those of you in
the chamber there and continue
to serve in the next you know
years and however long we all
And and let's ask ourselves
where we're going.
Because we will not Mr president
I guarantee you we will not stay
here we're not going to stay
with this version of the bill we
just can't do it.
Senator thanks goes on the bill.
Thank you Mr president
I'd like to.
legislative issue and Morris to
be Brandenburg.
We have the similar laws to this
with the two to one margin.
A twenty twenty Gallup poll
indicates seventy four percent
And what it has done is it has
increased the use of palliative
care and hospice care in the
Mr president I understand that
some people.
Cannot vote for this.
And I appreciate the thoughtful
debate.
house bill forty seven as four
times amended do not do now pass
and ask for a roll call vote.
Senator is to the chamber
please.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca now Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd
Diamond Senator Diamond now
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator gray
goes.
Cheryl yes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan now Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes.
Senator Neville known.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Neil yes senator
participate now.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pro.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator share now Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator sold.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
amended has passed the Senate
Senator panics thank you Mr
president members of the Senate.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president the unanimous consent
Mr president your Education
Committee to home has been
referred house bill six has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that a
do pass as amended thence
consent of the Senate that three
to be allowed to read all of the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflected that they
were acted on individually no
House bill one eighty nine do
pass.
House Bill to nineteen as
amended do pass.
And house bill two eighty seven
as amended do passed as amended
respectfully submitted Senator
the journal so that they're
acted upon individually.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred Senate bill thirty five
as amended has had it under
Hamblen and senator cliff R.
Pirtle co chairman Senator
Hamblen.
Mr president I move the adoption
of the committee report centers
we have a motion to adopt the
committee report.
amended.
It's also Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that our
business messages from the
governor on that order of
section forty two of the New
Mexico constitution I hereby
submit to the Senate rules
committee the following
nomination for appointment.
Stephanie M. Rodriguez for
have all duties responsibilities
and authority of her office
during the time prior to final
action by the Senate
respectfully submitted Senator
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business messages
twenty two as amended house bill
fifty two as amended house bill
fifty seven as amended and house
bill one fifty seven have been
McCutchen chief clerk of the
house.
The gentle so the message from
the house has been received like
to announce to the members of
the body that the officers of
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
in that order of Business
announces miscellaneous senator
Wirth thank you Mr president so
will be back for an evening as a
voting session will determine
that time we'll see how we do in
the morning half of it so now's
the time for committee chairs to
make announcements says we're
military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill twenty
as triple amended of the title
health healthy workplaces Act be
referred to the Senate Judiciary
We do have further announcements
sent a seven run this agency
president consideration of that
referral we will meet at an
unusual time tomorrow's Senate
judiciary will meet at ten
that'll be at ten o'clock
tomorrow and Judiciary.
Further nonsense have senators
okay so the followed by Senator
Pinto then Senator Stefanics
I was gonna ask that the Senate
rules committee is meeting
tomorrow morning at ten o'clock
but the Senate rules committee
in light of that Senate rules
committee will be meeting
tomorrow morning at nine AM.
to Judiciary on time and
whatever time it takes between
nine and we the time that we
actually convene will be the
delay for Senate judiciary
Thank you Mr president sent
Indian rural culture affairs
will not be meeting tomorrow any
bills that refer to committee
will be rolled over to their
state thank you.
AM it's house bill one seventy
seven thank you very much.
Further announcements with
Senator Pirtle full by Senator
the subpoena Center for the Mr
president must consent introduce
working outside doing outdoors
and really loves playing with
this tractors Mr president
please will the body help me
welcome my page.
hour the Senate Public Affairs
Committee health and public
affairs committee will meet
today and really have to bills
left now so we'll probably pick
due to all the activity that's
going to happen committees
tomorrow Senate finance we're
going at six AM.
We we know somebody's going to
dinner tonight so that'll be an
bill two is finally wrapped up
the everything's cleaned up and
everything is printed correctly
we're not missing any esses
and then we are going to get HDR
We should appreciate that what
this body and everybody is doing
we put a lot of money out into
And I repeat in our future for
all everything that's going to
happen there could be cuts I
hope not I hope that the
executive order changes I hope
if we don't head down a
different path.
We know the roller coaster ride
of the New Mexico state a budget
and I don't want to go down that
road so thank you Mr president.
Senior center in the president
to send German notion I'll be
having a meeting at two o'clock
on Saturday on the right to work
committee.
announce of anybody else hasn't
heard but our Representative
Holland has been confirmed as
the new secretary of interior.
This is present Senator on this
is present what happens now.
For.
Senator Hernandez the oil wealth
is not in the chamber but that
That's a decision for the body
to make I'm sure Senator thank
you Mr president.
Any further announcements.
Senator Shendo.
consent that the Senate stand in
recess until eleven thirty
tomorrow morning.
Seeing no objection the Santo
etcetera resistor Levin thirty
tomorrow.
