Senator probe.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Brandt the pledge of allegiance
to be led today by senator bill
Burt and this is especially in
Spanish river today by Senator
Sedillo Lopez and the salute to
Is caught me off guard I was on
a phone call so.
You know as we are here and
hopefully not for very much
longer.
of Luke chapter two this
morning.
In those days Caesar Augustus
issued a decree that a census
should be taken of the entire
Roman world.
So Joseph also went up.
From the town of Nazareth in
Galilee to today
In Bethlehem the town of David
because he belonged to the house
time came for the baby to be
born and she gave birth to her
first born son.
She wrapped in clothes and
placed in a manger because there
We're we're so close to
celebrating the birth of your
son.
When you sent.
to live as a man.
We thank you for that we thank
you for caring enough about us
to do that.
More we just pray that you'll be
with us and help us to remember
in Jesus name we pray amen.
Ladies and gentleman of the
Senate and all those else
present.
Please face the flag join me in
the pledge allegiance to the
and the the oaths in these the
C. let go live with that if it's
easier but at the Los.
I salute the flag this.
welcome you back and we'll yield
to senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president good
afternoon unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business
announcements miscellaneous
Also before I kind of give a
road map for this afternoon and
evening ideal to other members
for announcements around that
order business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Lopez
Senator okay thank you Mr
president then unanimous consent
to allow cameras both on the
floor and also in the gallery.
No objections so ordered.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so for the members
we're gonna do three bills this
afternoon early evening evening
will then hear house bill eight
which is the house redistricting
plan we will need to get that
committee report red in I see
unanimous consent we gonna
business messages from the house
on that order business message
from the house the reader to
read the message.
Message from the house of
representatives Mr president I'm
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk.
The journal so the message from
the house has been received.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
full and signed by the officers
of the house in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the Senate
respectfully submitted please
the state M. Ortiz McCutchen
chief clerk the gentle show that
government elections an Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill nine.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business committee
report same with recommendation
that it to pass as amended.
Actually submitted Daniel A.
Ivey Soto chairman Senator Ivey
Soto mood after the committee
report Senator we have a motion
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to the fact that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous more on that order
business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth the
agency press or getting ready to
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president
so at this point we are going to
go to third reading of
legislation unanimous can't scan
that we go that our business
much Mr president and I do
believe that as of yesterday we
already had the
Course the motion and some
Senator right those present
we're under call the call is not
been filled in this bill we
can't take any action to all of
this.
Resonant.
US president I excuse surviving
yesterday with the exception of
the call okay.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so I
think we're in the same.
point four we are allowed to do
other business so Mister
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business
introduction of legislation.
Senate memorial one introduced
by senator Wirth and Senator
Baca and others.
one.
Senator Mario one has been
ordered not printed and referred
to the committee to be placed on
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president and I miss that we go
back to that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
the president's table in place
on today's calendar no objection
it is so ordered.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business third
Before we go to the reiterating
the memorial Senator Wirth will
send word to you the sponsor of
the memorial Mr presents and a
on final passage been taken it's
now subject to debate amendment
and substitution no objection.
Senator Wirth.
Mr president unanimous consent
A. M. I. movie gentleman to
twelve oh one PM the Senate will
come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee.
I I do request that our sergeant
at arms David the Czecho please
enter the chamber.
Mr president we need to call to
believe Mr pachuco is with
Senator Diamond right now and
they are a.
Senator Wirth Mr president we
now remove the call for David to
check all.
I think the worst thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent the Senate the
recreational Act replacing some
more one on final passage been
taken it's now subject debate
amendment or substitution.
Whereas the BJP Czecho began
working for the Senate in
nineteen eighty nine as a
committee attendant and worked
his way up to assistant to the
Republicans alike and we're as
David is unfailingly polite and
diplomatic as he keeps order in
the first for the quorum of the
state Senate and service to the
manner and calm Authority.
And disarms of all tile
situations rather than making
them worse with strong arm
tactics and whereas Davis many
and whereas David enjoys the
respect and affection of
everyone he works with and is
report with senators on both
sides of the aisle is truly
remarkable even with those who
do not share his deep abiding
David keep a Czecho for over
thirty years of service in the
Senate and be it further
resolved that the Senate note
specially David support of the
body during the trying days of
Amanda and his grandchildren for
the forbearance of David's
passion for service to the
Senate and legislature and the
state and be it further resolved
that the Senate given its best
a copy of this memorial the
presented to David need to
tackle in open session.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president
folks worked on that language
David you really have been the
perfect sergeant at arms of the
respect that we have for you is
mirrored by the respect you have
because again it's helped keep
us safe it's helped us work our
way through COVID.
And boy we've all had
challenging things like we've
tremendously I know you're not
going far away in the building.
but this is the last time that
you'll be down a sergeant of
arms and I just want to say on
behalf of the whole Senate our
on the whole family so David
thank you so much I yield to
senator boxer Senator Baca thank
you Mr presents not long ago
that I entered these chambers
for the first time.
been extraordinary you're never
wanting for and anything that is
needed in this chamber because
it was brought to you there is
always a helping hand whether be
attitude of of service and
attitude of humility of which is
an example for the entire state
to follow and so David what I
you certainly will be missed and
and will we'll hope that you'll
visit from time to time thank
you Mr president thank you
Senator Baca we do have other
senators who would like to speak
few comments about our good
friend.
Hearing no objection thank you
Mr president I just you know the
word appreciation up on the
board Mr president boy that's
we'll have a significant number
of needs and we're all coming
from different parts of the
state and you just really help
contribute to making this a
family.
that move and I really want to
just stand here and thank you
and and that's just one tiny
little thing that you do of the
other nine thousand things you
do to make this place home so
thank you very very much for
welcome here all the time this
is just one bunch as we all know
Mr president of senators in the
time you've been in this
building I can only imagine how
many different personalities you
Mexico sent a paper clip the
paper clip a bottle of water the
piece of paper some sand maybe a
hammer once in awhile and he can
very grateful for him sharing so
much with me and my family
whenever they've been here my
son's a right away recognize you
by the way the couple times
along the way and they were very
grateful for everything you've
president pro tem Senator
Stewart.
Next.
Thank you Mr president.
David you're just you're going
to hear this from all of us how
time and ask you to help them do
things that lucky for you they
usually bring you a plate of
cookies father also asking for
your help
thank you so much but we're
still going to be calling you on
you I have a feeling because
she'll still be around thank you
for all your years of service
too many sergeant at arms and
our years here thirty eight
years and not.
A lot of experience with some.
And you are by far the best.
had here on the floor was
Certainly some sergeant at arms
is that word is open and spares
you are.
In doing things.
And your staff has done the same
thing because you're in charge
of a lot of people here.
And I do appreciate you more
than you know.
to duplicate.
Because you read this place as a
sergeant of arms that was fair
to all thank you.
Etcetera etcetera.
David has instilled in all of
his staff the same sensibility
of trying to assist all of us
and whether it's moving our
also extended to helping me one
night a change a tire in the
garage and so this is something
that David and his staff.
Thanks for the less we have
Senator Pirtle photo by Senator
Moores in center how to me over
the biggest Ivey Soto Campos
Lopez and Senator Steinborn.
keep it keep it quick quick in
and brief in just just speak
about some of the the stories
that stick out in my mind and
one of them is the end of one of
And the he calls me on the phone
and says a Senator Pirtle pieces
ready.
I said well sergeant I won't be
home for supper.
it's already impossible and so
we had a good laugh about it but
everything from just making us
feel at home as seventeen
freshmen came in ten years ago
and helping us get situated in
right back at home in a
different office
one year my wife was here with
the kiddos and popped a tire in
the middle of Santa Fe and
walked over and I said I I don't
know what to do I can't leave
about a person that they'll do
anything for you and let you
know I'll do anything for you if
you ever and Rosalynn you need
help changing a tire you got my
cell phone thank you Mr
of four years Mr president one
third of this body was brand new
and the third vote I ever took
on this floor was to elect you
I'm really looking forward to
all continue to work with you
but there's a special
relationship all while you're
talking about the that call
there is a special call of and
call on that night but the you
went over a member of the were
you playing Mr president that
night we already done with bills
yellow shoes and everything
you're who are playing that
made sure they all put on ties
are for coming on the floor and
as a member it memory always
have crosses amigo and will
always stay in touch and all of
your brother.
but I want to thank you so much
for taking the time to make me
feel welcomed in the Senate
before even the first session
started I felt like I had a
friend in you and I know that I
have a friend in the if you're
a good buy I still owe you a red
originally and to love attended
Espanola and I'll be seeing you
soon my friend.
Thanks Senator Rodriguez.
Not work goes up.
There we go perfect thank you I
also want to expanding it stand
strong supporter David here to
are but most importantly for the
deep human being that you are.
The you're you're just so caring
truly deeply caring all the time
you're calm way of handling
then us we're not easy so thank
you for for all of that and your
impeccable work ethic has taught
us many things that no matter
how stressful we get what we
have how much we have on our
with this Mr president David
this last session during the
Corona virus pandemic was raging
we were trying to get our work
done in the finance committee we
needed to remember to call that
David and I said my meeting of
starting at one I need to know
what we have on the agenda who
can I get can you send somebody
I can't run over there on time
because my meeting will be
gonna run over to take the
packet remember that David I do
too I'll never forget that thank
you so much for all that you are
Thank you Mr president.
David this is a.
It's it's it's it's it's
bittersweet because you'll still
be here in the building.
Who's been elected.
By this chamber to be a
constitutional officer.
Your position as described in
article four section nine of the
pay for your position to no more
than six dollars per day.
And so but but one of the things
about being a part time
legislature.
That is a that's going to take
us take you away from us.
But as Senator Moores indicated.
You know you've been elected by
this chamber.
And that's not just a ceremonial
thing.
Because you are someone who
really is here.
For every single person.
minority for leisure as you are
unifying force.
As your personality.
Mr servant's heart.
There's someone there for us no
matter what it is.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Campos.
Because I really want to be like
David Pacheco.
In our lives we are.
Have various experiences.
Others come at the expense of.
Our fellow employees.
But with David but Czecho.
continues not to show it.
But to live as an example for
each and everyone of us.
Her issue.
David was therefore not only me
but for Lori and for our family.
About equity.
Eleven.
And most importantly about how
we can care for each other.
What I'm gonna pass on David.
Is from the bottom of my heart
the bottom of the hearts of my
family members.
done for us over all these years
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Campos Senator Lopez.
You know you are a friend to all
of us in this room.
But the extension that you do
bring to family was not and so
do have working here together
with everybody this and this
chamber makes has been this this
place work.
And with the
And it's not just so much you
is true.
You answer you get some we ask
for something and it's done.
Many times Mr president is still
hard to find in many communities
You have a love for who we are
here in this building making
sure that we continue to move
forward that there's just
nothing else that words can say.
for you not to be in this
chamber with us is truly we're
at a loss.
And just know that
again I had no idea
and and you are going to leave
some very big shoes to fill and
I and I hope whoever is going to
be filling them has been
Reflect back on on someone's
life for service or whatever all
the things that you help me with
and no matter what else you're
doing and I know I'm hearing
this from everybody you always
way of taking care of me and and
this chamber is just.
This is really appreciated and
and to all the sergeant at arms
I just want to say than the
staff you know one of the most
is it elevates just the
experience of being here and you
know those late nights when we
leave and there you are Dave
you're here.
And I know you're gonna be here
that you're in the building for
a second I thought after
listening money I you were going
to go and start a tire shop
because you know this is clearly
a twenty year.
for you by all means and I'm
very appreciative of your
servicer so thank you Mr
president Senator Steinborn
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president.
recognition or fame or or or a
knowledge of and the to do the
work and she said because then
people will notice if you do the
work they also notice if you
want to know it is noticed we
may not always say it but we
really notice it I remember how
welcome you made me feel when I
oriented me at least where my
office was what needed to
happen.
And I really appreciated that
and your many many kindnesses
Thank you Mr president and the
boy David are you going to be
mass.
it's always someone can always
feel someone someone's position.
because I think the mark of a
true leader.
Is someone who.
Leads by example.
how you think it's best to be
done and that's exactly what you
do.
No one does it with I think
Maybe just maybe not to the best
way it should be used but
there's a term called character
and no one expresses character
not only in the way you handle
And I don't think you can get
any better than that we'll miss
you and we thank you for all
that you do god bless.
Thank you senator Byrd.
Senator Tallman.
attitude you're always greeted
me with a smile and sometimes a
few kind words.
I see a Santo Domingo is left
the room but.
So this the other day
I needed something to be a
printed I don't have time to run
Hey most of thought I was
hungry.
Because he offered me a snack
and I was hungry.
So thank you David for that.
Thank you Madam Semenya's.
You know David let's see when I
my kids got in trouble in the
elevator.
You're there when my wife wanted
needed something or needed help
you were there so you're part of
care and love for the people in
this building and in this room.
I don't think of anybody ask you
anything you you would never
tell now.
And that says something about a
person a human being.
help us I mean and it was always
you that we relied on.
And you don't know how much that
means in my heart and my family
is hard.
Even if we weren't in session
Life moves on and and life
changes in I'm not happy about
the change
I think it should have been a
little more correctly but I
and if the people of New Mexico
the New exactly what you did for
this body every single day when
they're here.
They love you just as much to.
trouble in the elevator when
they're little.
Which is really funny by the and
I'll tell that story I mean the
the speaker and my kids were
friends in the speaker told my
charging people to get on the
elevator right.
So here comes David with two
boys in the state police and
they said a centerman knows your
sons were charging people get on
the elevator I said would you
was that meant a lot and so I
could talk all day but really my
heart you're in our hearts we
love being here part of our
family we appreciate you
anything that I can ever do for
Thank you Mr president and I do
just want to add my.
My voice to to to all the
wonderful thoughts and words of
appreciation for Mr but Czecho
David.
of respect for you and what this
has meant to you and and and
your thirty years of service.
I just want to thank you for all
you've done for for my family.
have come and the respect that
you and your staff have done to
make sure that they're taken
care of.
And and and they're on the way
you know of the respective
on or auto a lot of session we
can always count on you and you
always answer any always respond
in the you meet our needs so
have been said today about you
David and I keep hearing the
word family and what you've done
for the families of many of us
and and I think of us is just a
you here and and I think the
main thing I want to say is the
team that you surround yourself
with.
The it's the leadership to to
provide to them they are
Thank you senator Senator po.
Thank you Mr president as one of
the freshmen spent a short time
coming in on a pandemic not
having the public in the
building.
You know you and your team.
Have really reminded us of why
we're here.
You've been an example of
So I really appreciate you I
appreciate your team I know this
is a transition time it's always
tough.
I went through that retired from
the military like you'll be here
everyone else is said I've been
up here when it's not even that
interim committee and just drop
by my office and I see you in
your life hated anything.
And I really appreciate that
what you've done for all of us.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator Senator Griggs.
David I don't know how much
family I appreciate all of those
and I want to thank you for your
service to the Senate
because as you've heard
know as far as I'm concerned.
You have thank you.
Senator Pinto.
and resumed his place he said to
them do you understand what I
have done to you.
You call me teacher and lord and
also should do yes as I have
done to you.
My family is indebted to you.
For your work ethic.
Provided some relief as we
worried as he got older.
With me here in those that know
you.
I think that also continues.
around you it is something that
ripples it is very important.
And I think now we're gonna have
to put out a sign that says
Thank you Mr president thank you
David for just being such a
friendly face here like the
other freshmen have said it was
really challenging coming into
the Senate during a pandemic and
always love telling the story
about how more than anything my
greatest take away was how
amazing the staff was and that's
and compassion is and I'll
always think of you fondly and
anytime you're in Silvercity.
Please call me and we'll have
lunch.
Debate.
Our chief clerk like to speak on
it's because his bosses
somewhere out of state he's got
to give it up a David would
serve this body for the rest of
David do you know my feelings
for you.
Thank you.
Thank you any further debate for
the first time.
I was I'm shocked to hear that
that I just heard that.
I do know that this wasn't a
voluntary thing.
All the more to you David.
God bless you Senator Baca for a
second time Senator us to
present a and be remiss if I
got maybe Chris is present thank
you and look Greg has the keys.
Thank you Mr.
Any further debate senators.
David I want to say thank you
and I think every person who has
spoken sure the sentiments that
we all have felt for you for
years when I came into this
me as a member of this amazing
body.
You know you really
exemplify.
What it is that we should all
you you're running up there to
provide service.
And showing the humble person
that David is he didn't even
want to come into the chamber to
we've honored senators have
unexpectedly passed on.
And they were here to hear.
The amazing things are shared
family members were but those
I think that we messed many
throughout the years of we talk
about the Senate and house
basketball game is I'm not sure
people recognize amazing athlete
that we love you sincerely.
Dearly and we also strive to be
David Czecho thank you for your
service.
Senator Wirth.
also to say a few words some is
present I move this in a moral
one do now pass and I ask for a
roll call vote.
Senator is we're voting.
To your seats please.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator to run this Senator
savant is yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Stuart Ingle yes Senator
Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator Hermio yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Moores yes senator Munoz
senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator renewable yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator socio Senator Stefanics
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes and can we
also lieutenant governor to sign
also.
are not here be shown voting yes
on this memorial.
Mr president the lieutenant
governor.
Including the lieutenant
governor.
affirmative zero on the
negative.
Ceremonial one.
Has passed the Senate Senator
Wirth ladies and gentleman sent
Well it's been a great run and I
really appreciate everybody
having the face and that I could
do this job
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so we're still on that
item of business third reading
of legislation and I would.
So Mister president we are still
on third reading of legislation
what I'd like to do is you'll
Senator Brandt.
Senator Representative Mr
For the approval Senator Brandt.
This.
Center right yes Senator Baca
yes.
Senator Baca yes Senator Pirtle.
Senator Sanchez no Senator
greatness.
Yes Senator because yes senator
Byrd.
Senator yes Senator.
We still remained the call yield
to senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I would go back to
center Lopez back on Senate
floor such two percent Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
I stand for questions after my
presentation from yesterday.
Point of order Mr president
Senator.
So Mister president I believe
have we put the motion on the
substitute motion.
business serving legislation.
Anyone wishing to bank.
This present Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Wirth just for
clarification the call was not
taken off.
direction you want to go into
next thank you his residence
what we're gonna do is going to
read unanimous consent that the
Senate stand in recess until
five o'clock on will just stand
and will come back at five
done with Senate bill two and
house bill level.
Just say no objection the Senate
was senator recessed until five
PM.
think is a good idea so Mister
president
well we're still here at this
point unanimous consent we go
about our business committee
reports are that are the
recommendation that a do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Joseph Cervantes chairman.
Senator this move adoption is
present move adoption adoption
of the report any objections.
saying as senator Wirth thank
you Mr president having eleven
fifty nine AM in movies Jr until
twelve one PM the Senate will
come to order Senator Wirth
Senator Lopez Mr president I ask
Seeing no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
consensus and recess until five
o'clock and we'll check and see
where we are seeing no objection
the Senate to Senate recess to
five PM today.
