Executive message number
thirteen dear president pro
temper Stewart and members of
the Senate.
In accordance with article four
student regent to the northern
New Mexico college board of
regents for term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring on
December thirty one two thousand
twenty two.
twenty six Dr Daniel H. Lopez
for appointment to the western
New Mexico university board of
regents for term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring on
received.
That's also.
as amended has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
adopt.
See no objections the minutes
thank you the reader to read.
And Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
sentiment us.
Food out to the committee report
have a motion to dot the
committee report.
I
see no objections the committee
for has been adopted in the
journal so that it will they
announcements and miscellaneous
run that order business analysis
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Mr president so.
Tonight we are going to stay on
seven through twelve.
And then jump down the item
number eighteen.
And probably call it a night at
that point we had a late night
unanimous consent we go to that
order business third reading of
legislation and ideal to Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino for item number
seven Senate bill two nineteen
on that order business third
Senate bill two nineteen on
final passage is been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
just last year we passed part of
what this bill deals with and
that is allowing the students
that we have invested so much
them eligible for the lottery
scholarship.
We.
Help pay for their education is
at the colleges and universities
in the state.
And then when they graduated.
had made possible and so they
had to go to other states to
practice last year we passed a
bill that took care of those.
citizen.
We took care of that last year
but there were other professions
that were in the statute and so
have taken those out and so this
is a way we can make sure that
our investment in young people.
In those who who aren't eligible
Senator anticipate a seven as
we're debating Senate bill two
nineteen.
I don't listen to me.
Say no debate center participate
Senator is we are voting on
Senate bill ten nineteen to your
seats please.
Mr president.
Senator Lopez Mr president I Mr
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator surrounded yes Senator
to run this test Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator gray
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator your
vote.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
Shendo yes Senator sold.
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator graders.
Yes Senator Gallegos yes.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative one in the negative
Senator Padilla.
Thank you very much Mr president
I I I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
that all actions for placing
Center for their explained about
I thank you very much Mr
president this is a transparency
bill just insurers that any.
excellent amendment we thought
we would just throw it into a a
a substitute to make sure that
the bill was nice and clean when
it came down here I want to
thank
the Senate Judiciary substitute
just added some cleanup language
to make sure that anytime there
was an amendment that that also
had to be disclosed and then
also that how it would relate to
for Senate bill tool to anyone
wishing to debate.
Saying no debate etcetera
politicos thank you very much Mr
for Senate bill to to do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that we took a roll call
vote Mister president thank you
Colorado.
Senator Baca
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator should run to yes
Senator syringes yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
I'm sorry senator Neville.
Yes Senator Stewart a yes
Senator Penn Bill.
Yes Senator printer yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator communities.
Senator street is yes senator so
the the Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator Sweetser yes.
Thirty six by thirty six in the
affirmative.
The only negative Senate
next order of business item
number nine Senate Bill to ten.
As amended Senator Lopez.
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
See no objections Senate this
explained the bill
Mr president members of the
Senator souls when we were in
education and so we changed of a
may two shells so that the PED's
secretary would be sure that
adopted the Senate finance was
dealing with the issue that to
the a K. through eight
Mr president what this bill is
proposing of for us is to
are set with regards to how the
education takes place also for
those in grades four through
eight and then when they get to
high school Mr president members
part of their graduation so
again that would be for students
starting the year twenty twenty
three twenty four.
Mr president what this bill also
Senate is essentially meet kind
of figure out exactly how
working together just the
different time lines and what is
Senate of there is a council
that is already in existence.
That has membership from higher
education
already have Mr president
members of the Senate what I
call the base are ready of what
this council's work will be so
we're not starting from the
school system and of course in
other communities across our
state.
So that's just kind of an
overview Mister president and
I'll stand for any questions.
Thank you Mr president with the
bill sponsor calmly ill for a
few questions Senator Lopez
yield Mister president yes thank
you very much
You know a lot of fighting over
ethnic studies in other states
in fact the governor Gavin
And so looking into that I I
want to make sure we're not
going to follow in their
footsteps and have a bunch of of
Who who is going to develop this
curriculum.
Mr president Senator there is
already curriculum that is being
is curriculum that is being used
at the career enrichment center
by some of the and teachers who
are there highland high school
at three school heritage academy
Senate of course this doesn't
just pertain to achieve kind of
Chicana studies this also caught
covers native American studies
as well as Africano studies and
already has been doing some of
the work on gathering doing
their research and helping to
regards to ethnic studies.
Thank you and Mr president and
senator I guess I'm gonna try to
find some of those resources I'd
is one I guess so I want to make
sure I understand so what you're
saying is the for example how
high school or APS these.
Curricula that are currently
or or is it going to be kind of
the statewide how how how will
that work Mr president Senator
that's what the intent of the of
the council that we are creating
will be working together so
we're on the same page
communicating and reviewing what
is already being utilized in the
schools.
Okay thank you and Mister
president and and senator.
not necessarily changing that.
But I you know I I looked at a a
past memorial that that we had
passed for the this legislature
with you briefly today is
especially the deaf community I
see a lot of patients there
definitely are hearing and the
death Committee has obviously a
does that come up in this sort
of ethnic studies curriculum or
is that is that something that's
totally separate we're talking
about how to
you know how to communicate
part of the council there is
still one option available for
pandemic public education
department to appoint others
that are relevant so that could
this past secretary does have
available thank you Mr president
and and
Senator Lopez I yeah I and I
hope I hope they they do think
this is why governor Newsom veto
their ethnic studies bill is
there was a lot of fighting
about that their ethnic studies
curriculum had had some issues
reviewed and and and what what
the creek how the correct number
developed as far as and in in
California we have a very
different demographic in New
Mexico so I'm not I'm not I'm
I'm I'm realizing this is this
can be a bit apples and oranges
so that that still is a concern
of of money because of of what
has happened like I said in
California in fact twenty
with with Arab Americans as well
as Jewish Americans all twenty
very balanced approach and my
the the reason I'm debating this
bill as my constituents are very
we have a lot of a lot of home
schoolers we have a lot of
people who are very concerned
their kids to be you know trump
supporters they don't want
people teaching their kids to be
Bernie Sanders supporters they
don't want any sort of and they
want to very balance balanced
perspectives and I think that
that word is key for me even
though I I just have a concern
that as this is lived out
a certain worldview that is
being taught to the students and
that's what my constituents have
a have a big concern with is we
respectful to someone I mean
having an actual definitive
world view that is either
liberal or conservative and so
I actually purchase and I just
recently have done this with my
two oldest children.
Purchased what I consider more
mainstream textbooks.
that we have our values that
that me and my wife instill our
children.
And I want them to have both
perspectives I want to have a
because once again my
constituents have seen and I
receive a lot of complaints they
say my son came home from such
and such high school and this is
what the teacher taught them and
bill I'm I'm okay with that but
I I do urge caution to the PED
that we don't fall in
California's footsteps and have
need to really just consider
other people's perspectives and
other people's cultures and
sometimes it's very difficult.
rude.
And I've had explain its my
children were so you know what
in this culture that's not rude
they're not being rude they're
just acting in it and just in a
certain way that that they think
have to really understand each
other well so once again is that
multiple perspectives and giving
each other grace giving each
other grace re say look in your
studies has that type of
approach I'm concerned it won't.
but I really really hope that
will and I think if it does it
can be very helpful to our state
Okay add much more to the
discussion then that the doctor
did.
You know what he said it in such
a great way that.
Slanted some of this information
can get.
So you know he said it very
well.
And senator.
When it takes a whole world to
make additional go around.
You know many of our warriors
that come back from.
And yet it's the norm where they
go.
Yes the very nor.
And you know the native American
of these Spanish when they came
up here.
seems to then forced upon the
native American.
Because you know the.
The writing of history was wrong
even though of those particular
people that tort down.
So you know that's the kind of
stuff on on the FOR our.
This is currently the early
childhood education and care
Thank lesson capacity building
workshop for.
Have a communities.
To create early childhood hood
learning criteria.
Infused with the values of
I envision this to go to.
Probably the the northwest part
of the state up here.
Of the north east corner of the
state.
I see that maybe of cultures
different now do we want to
teach the culture the same
we're having a huge number of
people getting together.
So.
I agree about the Jewish
culture.
Well the all the time.
I ask for no comment.
President.
Thank you for the time.
Thank you Mr president I stand
in support of the bill and I
don't need to sponsor to yield a
I just want to thank you for
bringing to go forward.
And I do.
credit ethnic studies to where
high school students have the
opportunity to take some these
courses and also get college
credit so I think this is great
In the narrative of the tri
cultural myth.
Of just native Americans
Hispanic.
And white Americans living in
And I think that's what we want
to do and it might not be late
on in this bill but that's what
this is about.
As far as.
And.
For people of different
not about putting anyone in a
box.
Or anyone into fit into one
category.
You know I parallel this with
And that's what this type of
education does.
So I just want to thank the
sponsor again for this and I
with the sponsor yield I don't
know if his yield Mister
president yes.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator so from from what I'm
reading the bill is you are
correct.
Mister president senator there's
a total of four and a half
credit seven have credits that
are utilized for electives
within the high school
a requirement that they must
take the ethnic studies class.
Thank you Mr president you jump
ahead of me but for the time we
probably have me ask this
And we can just every year we
bring a bill the roads electors
to we're now we're down to seven
electives.
In four years.
So how is.
You know bandy gonna be
performed all the way through we
have we have students that are
Mr president Senator of this is
part of our discussion here
today but this is also something
that is very important as we
also but this is this is I think
an opportunity that we have
Mister president Senator Stewart
At that we begin to look
that we have here in New Mexico.
you Mr president Senators it is
when we try and and prepare
students for the world band is
we're giving our students to be
able to critically think of when
they get out into the world our
world is multi cultural Mister
go to college even to take some
of the classes to learn some of
this information that I have my
family is shared it but part of
current time history about who
we are here in New Mexico and to
me Mr president that is added
The fact of the matter is that
we're taking away an elective.
From our students who.
the help keep them interested in
school and maybe this should
have been active avid elective
or added as part of New Mexico
history which you've left in
here but
support the financial literacy
bill because we're requirement
taking away another elective.
if that one went through in this
went through would be down to
six and a half.
already have thank you Mr
president.
We do have further debate will
have center how to meal followed
by Senator Kernan center how to
meal Mr president thank you I'm
the specific ethnic groups in
which the classes being taught
but for everyone Mr president
these classes make a person more
aware of the global experiences
encouraging the students to
think critically about the
stories.
Stanford University published a
study that showed that students
who participate in ethnic
studies courses lead to better
grades expression the in math
tied into my curriculum ethnic
studies classes build a
foundation for students future
both educationally and
personally and I strongly
support this bill thank you Mr
don't oppose it all the idea
that you're bringing in the
benefit that this could provide
that I don't know if Senator
souls chairman of education's on
the floor tonight.
Kernan so thank you and and so
we have had conversation over
the last week or so about your
plans for the interim for L. E.
S. C. regarding graduation
plans are for the alias C. in
the interim.
Is to present and Senator Kernan
the way I view things are
graduation credits for high
doing that the ethnic studies is
certainly going to be part of it
it's going to be a year or two
in before we can do that and so
we're going to continue with the
system that we have until then
that conversation along with
financial literacy we've got to
figure out how we're going to
fit all of this in I think it's
important to do and I think the
presentation tonight has been
think it is important for for
all of us to understand cultures
from all around the world and
specifically to New Mexico but I
think it also make sense to
and certainly what we're
teaching K. through eight as
well so thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Kernan we do
have further debate will have
center Pinto followed by Senator
I believe you're on mute.
Yes thank you Mr president who's
playing tag team with the zoom
think it's more of a COVID in
standing in support of this.
that thanks studies is not there
to create a competition within
students that there is you know
ethnic pride and it you know the
put ever.
In this country and that we.
this past year.
Is that.
We're we should have something
that we would defend and when we
talk about teaching ethnic
studies I think the sooner it
other people within their that
have different cultures.
It'll take away that noise and
they will have a better
education they will be more
of culture within the classrooms
and they can take that with them
all the way through the whole
lifetime when state
become educated about you know
Is present with the sponsor
yield Senator yield.
Mr president yes.
This committee is going to be
set up the curriculum for a
class or
I understand it's
club but is it actually
classroom education and training
is that what you're doing with
this commission.
This committee study points are
Mister president senator are you
home from family I'm trying to
see how the dynamics would work
if you have a group of mixed
individuals or is it all
wanting clarity because all of
my.
thank studies came from my
parents my grandparents I'm
trying to understand why a
teacher would have to teach me
that have taught us the history
of our family and you know how
far back we go in centuries here
in New Mexico
but not every family not every
family here in the state of New
other than what is taught in
some of our our regular text
books about history which are
written on the other side of the
Mississippi.
Gallegos at some of our families
may not have been truly privy to
because of the way some of our
history through word of mouth
you know oral stories have come
How and what we did with our
native American families back
during the long walk families
Mr president center guy goes
that I think that the value that
ethnic studies brings to the
table is giving our students
here in New Mexico a true
Mister president.
Senator Gallegos because.
There are students who actually
graduation rates are how should
there were some reports given
during testimony in the
committees both here and of
course in the house.
About the value added that this
brings.
are and again I was blessed my
family knew a little bit with
her many families who have no
idea and our students deserve to
know that and other students to
join the class it's a it's it's
that's a different culture it's
part of that beginning to work
understand and live in the multi
cultural society we are.
history was a three inch book
I remember of the Holocaust was
not an inch maybe a half inch
thick now it's currently one.
we've taken water down and I'll
take the blame for that because
I am on school board our world
history and you look at it one
my colleagues used earlier a
the plaza and that is who I am.
My family came from Spain.
In I took offense to that
because I am in New Mexico.
The protesters Mr president
center guy goes ethnic studies
doesn't correct anything.
It's how is to bring an
opportunity for discussion and
learning.
was a very different perspective
on on history.
What my daughter goes to school
right now she goes to a dual
language immersion program for
up in the end is really fit
indicate you up in the twenty oh
seven as quickly because I
advocate you.
And to me that is part of where.
All of our students should have
another beautiful mixture of who
we are in the state.
When you go into the DNA test
Mister president senator my eyes
were opened.
told or that had to say in order
to maintain who we are in
society.
And to me from talking to a lot
of the students who have taken
the ethnic studies courses it
I'm twenty six percent
indigenous.
So that doesn't mean I came from
Spain.
I go back maybe several
generations somebody did but
You come up again you know that
the trail up north and other
things that happened so I'm not
Spanish.
And that's what I now have
the students who are actually
taking these ethnic studies
classes it is beautiful for them
to understand where the
that ethnic studies comparing
for all of our young people
thank you.
Center it them in online
I may yes you don't put your
pants look at the closest gas
and most like in the systems
that are you done the most
Mr president in center I guess
my thing with this a to just
give you more background I
graduated from west high school
in Denver Colorado we had a
graduating class of sixteen
hundred.
side of the Hispanic side of
temple and we're rated this
documentarian that documentation
thing did as the worst high
when they tried to intermix the
east side of the river which
predominately black with
Hispanics we had more fights in
that schools in.
You could believe.
and we're trying to learn
together and I really
appreciated the way our teachers
did that they didn't do that
through ethics studies they
taught us American history.
and in center the the way that
I'm looking at this I'm just I
guess I'm offended that we're
trying to keep things racially
twenty five we don't even to
stay on ethnic.
Explain to me.
Mr president and senator why we
to the students Mr president
center.
Mister president senator genders
very part of our culture here in
in in many different cultures.
you know that maybe there are
And I think that's added value
for our students to learn what
importance gender does bring.
It's not all matri of a does not
men and women who have made
wonderful inroads in many
different ways and those who
suffered it is part of what we
talk about Rosa Parks in all the
tragedy she had to go through.
I think with just the name would
provide the gender you're
don't understand why we keep
having to push this agenda to
picture that we recognize
everyone for their differences I
us by our ethnic cultures with
that are you.
Do have further debate Senator.
Thank you Mr president will
instruction on ethnic studies
relating to New Mexico history.
And then ethnic studies means
the inter disciplinary study of
multiple perspectives through
trying to understand the
paragraph it's it's a.
Quite confusing what does inter
disciplinary study mean.
so to me that is pretty in depth
ethnic studies because she's
learning Spanish.
when she was in kindergarten
what was age appropriate inter
in Spanish eight I owe you an
English she was learning both.
but you also use art and you
also use music all these other
are learning K. through three
and we all know this to Mister
senses through education.
And when you talk about age
appropriate.
There is already curricula this
being used in many of our
currently being used the same
through grades four through
eight.
So Mister president
this is not going back to them
to to the beginning there is
president I've had benefit
because my daughter goes to a a
dual language immersion program
this world perspective on who we
are and what makes this a
multicultural society so I know
it's a little long winded on
that but Mr president it's not
Thank you Mr president and the
in the Espanol tambien they are
not blow it mucho C. O. second
twenty in the second.
Thank you Mr president I still
that's a great idea many of you
Mr president members of the body
I understand that my wife's
heritage is also Hispanic next
with Caucasian so my children
important to us Mr president and
and members of the body that we
remind them of of where they
came from and how they got here
and how important it is to to
and show them around and and so
that they can see where we're
portion of their family came
from but I'm trying to
understand what what the term
make this state so great and so
diverse.
Mr president Senators I've
mentioned before gender is part
of who we are and culture there
are strengths that women have
brought to the table and that
that there's a discussion about
the gender making sure that
there's a balanced approach as
to what contributions women have
sure that there's an approach
balanced approach Mr president
from conversations I've had with
others on that have been part of
this council that is already in
So thank you Mr president so so.
The the word gender here's more
to look at maybe different
tribes and how within each tribe
our history in my in my family
the women were the strong winds.
you know my grant my great
grandmother had twenty one live
births.
Mexico I wouldn't be here if my
great grandmother was not a
strong woman.
And those are stories that many
of us have in every different
community in our state of New
Mexico and this balances out to
And thank you Mr I'm just wanted
to be clear on on what what the
term and and what we're going to
do I'm a mama's boy so you won't
find anybody that you know
women are some of the strongest
and bravest people on the planet
and and so I just wanted to make
sure that we weren't doing
something that wasn't intended.
move forward and and understand
that
You know we look at historical
experiences will my sister
called experiences only go back
about thirty five years I'm
gonna get carded.
great diverse place
I think we all remember fifth
grade New Mexico history.
And how exciting that was I
doubt any of us really remember
people and then I found myself
on Land Grant Committee going to
all these great places meeting
great people and and figuring
out that we're more alike than
we are different.
people of New Mexico hard R.
that we're different but we're
more alike than different
because we're all humans that we
need to strive to to treat each
other better I think we have I
just because I was one of the
few and getting beat up for for
being different.
That that's not acceptable.
Then it makes people stronger it
made me stronger.
Hamblen followed by Senator
Steinborn Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr chair Mister
president I'm working on getting
today you know what I really see
this is is that you know I have
actually no questions but more
of a committee and and I have to
acknowledge that as a white
gender they are and the culture
they observe thank you for
allowing me to be able to speak
today because it is an honor and
I'm humbled and also very
hundred years ago the women were
given the right to vote and that
it wasn't until the sixties that
women of color were given the
right to vote this conversation
matters when young people see
they see opportunities for them
as well as an out lesbian I
never saw anybody like me that
provided an example of success
support to young kids on our own
how to make sure they did the
best they could in school but
she had nothing to do with being
of someone being and as an
example who live their truth
from recognizing that we need to
provide exposure and education
about the rich culture in our
state and see how that affects
young people how that has shaped
those who have come before me
Having representation in our
school we will help reduce
suicide rates it will
demonstrate that there is a
place for all types of
backgrounds and students and it
And I look forward to supporting
this bill thank you Mr president
thank you Senator Lopez whether
the building we're Senator
Steinborn thank you Mr president
and and I don't need the Senator
people about my heritage about
educating others about me and
teaching my kids about their own
history and I had to do some
research on it and I found out
president body does that and I
just want to say.
You know to understand first of
all I I believe that our
differences and our our
multicultural state that we live
in is our strength we love to
celebrate every legislative
not understand differences.
That are defined in this bill is
what leads to hate what leads to
division actually what leads to
society informed enlightened and
kinder.
Civilization and society and and
it's the right thing to do
because history is taught.
you have that's everyone else's
history and it's all valid it's
just the perspective of the
person experiencing it.
Says this.
Thank you Mr president I just
want to stand up in support of
the bill and just say that a lot
of children are going to
this bill and a lot of people
are going to learn a lot with as
they go into college a lot of
the things that I learned in
college will be shocking to them
Any further debate centers.
Say no further debate Senator
Lopez to close on the bill.
I thank you very much Mr
president and I appreciate the
president Senators.
So with that Mr president I now
move that of Senate Bill to ten
as amended.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator to run this Senator
syringes yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond AS Senator
Duhigg all I'm sorry Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs no Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator how to meal Senator how
meal yes Senator Kernan.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris Senator Moores no
senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pro.
committees.
Senator should know Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn Senator
Steinborn is Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
By a vote of twenty four the
number.
Is present Representative to
make a point of order just.
Yeah our our rules specify that
you're gonna be in your office
you have a camera on.
background filter when you're in
your office.
So that we can actually make
sure you're in our office
because and this is a change our
rules and we need to make sure
that people actually in the
We're moving on to item number
ten.
Senate bill one twenty three
with emergency clause.
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
No objections Sierra X. sixteen
the bill.
Thank you Mr president members
on this this bill is very simple
it takes the definition of
health care practitioner
agreements and it adds the word
Thank you Mr president well with
my good friend from the ten
counties yield.
parquet.
The.
The emergency clause has to do
this is about non compete
clauses so the physician's
assistants and pharmacists would
immediately like to be covered
but emergency clause deals or
the contracts to work contracts
some on the nurse practitioner
someone might have signed
recently or within the last last
have already been signed between
these two parties Mister
president senator.
Thank you Mr president Senator
the other parties are already in
the statute for the non compete
during this of.
practitioners this really keeps
or Lyles the practitioners from
Texas from Arizona and from
Colorado to come over and to
practice in our states and not
occur it will happen later this
summer.
Mr president senator but you
said this is for the of these
providers who are in Texas are
signing a contract with the New
Mexico entity
and so which which not compete
are they trying to get out of
their current not compete out of
compete clause or provision in a
contract is defined in section
twenty four two dash two as one
that restricts the ability of
one of the name professionals to
professionals specifically the
physician's assistants and the
pharmacists to come in and not
worry about their current
contract.
contract any doctor nurse nurse
practitioner anyone else for
that matter signed with their
current employer in another
state so it doesn't free them
not not for people from out of
state so doesn't bring in new
providers this just freeze up
providers in New Mexico to
practice to move across the
analysis that indicates it is
the non compete clause from
another state but not being a
practicing attorney I would rely
upon anyone who is a practicing
sure anything that we pass in
this chamber would negate a
contract duly signed in a
different state between two
interesting home very soon time
on both sides of the drive
noncompete issue it's hard
easier recruit sometimes and
then and as frustrating spent
all this money and it also on
flexibility to move around the
state from which is not here in
order Mr president thank you.
Any further debate senators.
do now pass and I just for a
roll call the Senate is to seed
phase.
Senator Brandt give senator
Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
goes.
Yes.
Yes Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes senator I was
open.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Y. Pino Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator by the year.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator songes yes Senators
committees.
Senator smitteez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart Senator Stewart DS
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman.
Mr president Senator Lopez Mr
president unanimous consent to
panics thank you Mr president
members of the Senate moving on
to item number eleven Senate
bill thirty four Senator Kernan
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
See no objections in the current
explainable thank you Mr
president this is that
department of transportation
proposal and it adds to the
projects.
The New Mexico department of
transportation currently has
authority to procure
infrastructure projects using a
doctor designed deal procurement
utilize design build procurement
I'm one hundred percent state
funded projects.
Design build is the procurement
process for the department
design level and at that point
the department issues a new R.
F. P. for design builder that
will take on the remaining risk
for the project development to
take the project to completion
that level of fifty million and
I would like this opportunity to
do design build on state funded
projects and with that I'll
stand for questions Senator
Senate bill thirty four do now
pass and ask unanimous consent
of the Senate that the record
show that the rules been called
and all those present voted in
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Duhigg yes senator guy
goes.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzales.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal Senator had a
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris Senator Moores
yes senator one else.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Padilla Senator Stewart a test
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pro
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Tallman.
Yes my my vote Senator Tallman
as senator Wirth.
By a vote of thirty eight in the
affirmative a on the negative
Senate bill thirty four has
passed the Senate Senator Kernan
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr president just want
to take this opportunity to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward I'm very
familiar with this design and
build it to save money and
was a so she did with and
just a surprise that the state
is just now implementing this.
This type of of construction
thank you thank you senator for
safety act.
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president and
member so I ask unanimous
On final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate and amendments or
substitution at the center of
section fifteen I ask the reader
read the bill in full.
Okay.
We have been.
The rate of three.
An act relating to wildlife and
acting the wildlife conservation
and public safety act providing
for restrictions on the use of
traps snares and poisons
seventeen dash eleven dash one
new material short title chapter
seventeen article eleven NMSA
nineteen seventy eight may be
cited as the wildlife
conservation and public safety
definitions as used in the
wildlife conservation and public
safety act bona fide scientific
research into research project
that is not being conducted for
department subsection B. cage
trap means a trap that captures
a live animal debt but does not
grip an animal's body or body
part and is not intended to kill
Subsection D. depredation
trapping means the act setting
traps snares are poisons on
public land to reduce or prevent
damage caused by water left a
subsection F. ecosystem
management means actions that
are necessary to maintain or
increase the long term
sustainability and integrity of
an entire system of the thing
threatened or endangered species
subsection G. feral animal means
a domestic animal existing in an
untamed state outside captivity
employee agent or representative
of the body agency or political
subdivision when acting within
the scope of its governmental
duties but does not include an
leg or other Lynn including a
steel jawed leg hold trap a
padded jolly cold trap a
foothold trap and egg trap a
duffer trap and all those other
animal includes contabilidad
Representative other similar
traps.
Subsection Kate public land
means state owned land state
leased land lands held in trust
municipality but does not
include the interior of physical
structures are land belonging to
or held in trust for an Indian
nation tribe or pueblo
include use of a catch pole
leash or tether lawfully used by
a person to temporarily restrain
to re locate an animal
subsection M. trap includes a
New Mexico that is not under the
direct control of a human or in
captivity but does not include a
feral for escape domestic animal
and subsection O. wildlife
NMSA nineteen seventies nectar
to read.
Seventeen dash three dash eleven
dash three prohibit prohibitions
on public land it is a violation
of the wildlife conservation and
dash four NMSA nineteen seventy
eight section for a new section
seventeen dash eleven dash four
NMSA nineteen seventy eight is
an act to read.
archery equipment falconry
equipment or other implements in
hand when used as authorized by
law be the taking or control of
birds Fischer rodents not
and safety D. ecosystem
management conducted by the
department the United States
fish and Wildlife Service or
Conservancy district of the
state or its employee agent or
representative acting in the
department using nonlethal traps
or nonlethal snares.
But only when accompanied by
visible signs at the location of
each device notifying the public
authorized by law we're to abate
damages caused by any animal to
property crops or livestock
provided that one once the
damage has been debated use of
subsection H. rules members of a
federally recognized Indian
nation tribe or pueblo and
trapping is conducted solely for
religious or ceremonial purposes
section five a new section
the wildlife conservation and
public safety act is guilty of a
misdemeanor each individual
traps there are application of
wildlife poison shall constitute
a single violation of that act
court may consider appropriate
restitution to a state agency
that incurs costs in enforcing
the wildlife conservation and
public safety act section six
Thank you Mr president thank you
all to our reader.
L. and to the members so you
members so.
We have another with this so.
With this legislation for quite
a few years you know and I
realize that there's a whole lot
neighboring states you know
already have this enacted.
We have a more and more growth
to our state on the outdoors
recreation.
And by bringing this the next
month you know this given so our
state you know that stability
So Mr president members so with
this let me yield to my co
sponsor.
Senator McKenna.
Senator.
years I have been in the
round house as a citizen
lobbyist.
Advocating to remove the use of
leg hold traps snares M. forty
Mexico as a state senator and to
advocate for just be thirty two.
With you this evening.
as I've said I did purchase a
leg hold trap.
At a local retailer in
Albuquerque.
And they really are difficult
to.
Now if you will try imagining
trying to free a path for
yourself under this highly
stressful an incredibly painful
To visit with US wildlife
services.
That visit.
I was with the deputy director
His response was quite fat
flatly they work.
So I knew.
The advocacy to end them to end
body for hearing my opening
remarks and that of my colleague
Senator Gonzales.
all of us of without all will
stand for questions.
We do have a floor amendment.
The retreat.
Senate floor amendment number
Senator to move explained
amendment.
Move Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill thirty
two is twice amended.
that is not open to the public
and so Mr president members of
the body the reason this is
important is that there's a ton
of public land that's out in the
Roxy can't get access to where
humans can't be accessed one
because it's illegal it would be
trespassing if they were out
there so this ensures that the
land that are ranchers are
able to manage the coyotes that
honestly
eat baby calves so if you ever
seen a cute baby calf.
Sweet little baby calf lying in
the grass.
ranchers face every single day.
And so these are the tools that
they have to use because they
don't call it Wiley coyote for
it's important they have these
tools to protect their
livestock.
And so this would ensure that
the public land that that we are
banning trapping on is your
which is I think the intent of
the legislation in the
unintended consequence was it
was going to include even the
state section of land that my
to do thank you Mr president
thank you senator we are
debating senator member number
one.
Senator Gonzales.
Mr president and let me also
Mr president and members of.
You know we have had on this
discussion and the Senator
pearls bring some very very good
And if we have the information
you know may be that might be a
little bit easier to to
understand and to see a the full
intent of the amendment.
Senator Pirtle Mr president and
senator I believe New Mexico's
approximately forty percent
public land.
with the majority of that being
which is a smaller portion of
that is not large the amount of
public land that people actually
have access to is a much smaller
fraction I don't know this the
or is owned by the federal
government but people don't have
access to if they're not
supposed to be there with their
dog at all they're trespassing.
So this just ensures that that
intent which is which is Roxy's
law in the ceiling National
Forest where where they were
I believe on a walking trail I'm
You may call
center.
president and Senator Pirtle
have we have looked at the map
however.
Because we do not know how much
public land.
Would be included in the
twice amended.
Senator committee.
Thing is present also gonna have
a few minutes for the sponsor
the minutes you'll please for
And.
I had heard a lot of testimony
and I'm still interested I still
believe we could make this bill
propose dropping doesn't mean
all rural people are Travers I'm
not saying that but it's it's an
accurate generalization okay.
could we still allow that to be
you know vote for some types of
trapping I still think that's
possible to do.
And so I want to ask you some
district
So my constituents are within
Albuquerque they live in the the
foothill area and it's really
accessible to go out and hike on
the really just trails we have
happened and but once again I'm
very supportive of this is the
game and fish gamefish.
What they did is they banned
Senator bands trapping in the
Sandia's which were my district
the big city National Forest and
we have traps around trail heads
and we're people mountain by can
take their dogs and where they
hike
I think there there's a really
camping do all those things
okay.
Now at the same time I I have
heard testimony from a lot of
people that are a little further
out even even within my district
kind of it I and I think that's
what this man is trying to do so
If this man were adopted.
Would would trapping still be
amendment ensures is that we
don't have the unintended
consequence of getting the the
publicly owned land I think
that's where a lot of the
confusion is coming in this
of these ranches yes it's
publicly owned but it's been
leased and so they have the
surface rights to it and it's
treated no different than if I
leased to my farm you would have
the ones with the trails your
lakes those types of things
where I think you know this that
is the intent of this bill but
unintentionally goes way further
think that's an important
distinction between the two so
if it's a trail head open to the
public the traps would be banned
if it's a ranchers section down
the middle the Boondocks in the
the dogs cannot get there to get
in the traps.
Okay Mister president and
etcetera I think I understand
what you're.
Amendment is is doing so.
park I can take my kids for a
picnic
we can go hiking a little bit
that's not what you're talking
about is that correct.
Correct so it's the land that's
for the public to be there.
Okay Mr presence and I I believe
on support of the amendment I I
do.
out of respect for the Sanchez
what it does sound like is that
this is possibly.
Raging that urban rural divide a
little bit
I don't know but it sounds like
that's what it's doing I like to
continue to listen and see what
what other people have to say
but I do think it it sounds you
know because that was one of my
thoughts honestly.
do we want to consider that
and allow that
for some folks so anyway thank
you for interesting all continue
to listen to the debate thank
the amendment yield to a
question Senator Pirtle the old
agency president I'd gladly
yield of when Mr president
Senator when when a rancher or
and bird watching and and things
like that.
Mr president Senator no that's
that's the point of this
amendment is that if say you
leased some land from the BLM to
legally go there the the land
that that that I'm trying to
exclude is that type of land and
keep in place the land that
you're talking about the hiking
the recreational those types of
you're renting it so I mean I'm
not sure we need this two week
because to the public that's
private land.
Mr present if you look at a page
held in trust by the state lands
administered by the United
States for service the federal
bureau of land management the
National Park Service the United
States Department of Defense
state parks and any county or
land let's say a state park that
state on land but that's open to
the public so that when the
trapping but if it's state land
that a rancher ranch is that
he's paid lease on then that
trespassing updated but I had
another question then about the
construction of your amendment I
just wanted to check with you
because.
The way I read that less the
last half of the.
belonging to are held in trust
for an Indian nation it says or
doesn't say end.
So I think the physical
structures.
structures belonging to an
Because this is or rather than
and.
And Mister president and senator
the I didn't read that the
interior physical structures was
land three separate things.
Yeah it it just seems to me we
were said and if if if that you
sponsor yield Senator Pirtle
detailed Mr president I yield
thank you Mr president I I
believe I just heard you say
surface lease so so they've
leased the grant and State Land
that doesn't mean the public can
just wander out there and and do
as they may because they've
actually had at least just as if
think it can be confusing that
you know we're talking about
public land but there's a
distinction between publicly
owned and accessible to the
public.
Have cattle.
All over in their leases in
public land that I'm allowed.
wanna be real clear about that
and I think that really is the.
The reason I can't support of
the amendment I I see what
you're trying to do but we've
had some.
there and and we had a lot of
the attorney general's been very
involved in some of those cases
And so I I just think public
policy of multi use even in some
of our wilderness areas.
Are their cattle and its multi
use.
And so I appreciate you know
Our doesn't work because I I
really do think there's very let
me limited places where you
simply don't you can exclude the
dogs on your and in in very
remote area and someone settle
trap line that's that's what
the the vast majority for
leaders actually correct if if
the state land is up against the
highway you can walk in and that
is accessible and what I'm
land BLM land that is landlocked
and so it would be trespassing
if you had to walk across the
private land to access the
public land if there wasn't a
public roadway nearby and I
not accessible by the public so
they would still be trespassing
to get to it there is some
beautiful public land that is
accessible we all know what land
snares and things in those areas
but then there's a lot of remote
public land that of people do
not have access to that would
not apply.
of very remote sections of
public land for a private owner
is next to that public land and
so I've got access because I'm
the amendment I think it just
extends a problem in perhaps in
the most challenging place that
there is.
Which is in these remote areas
A public and private and and
when you have private land next
to public land nothing prevents
the person on the private land
from going on to that public
land and that's why that's the
do think it's a smaller.
Number of folks that are
accessing but again I just go
back to what I said public land
pose in the amendment.
Any other senators who wish to
debate Senator Steinborn on the
This becomes a very nuanced
issue Mr president colleagues
because the state land state
land this is a very interesting.
And had a policy that was kind
of hard self towards.
New Mexicans using what are
absolutely took a totally
different tact and said
absolutely they're opening New
Mexicans and created an outdoor
permitting system and they're
now raising revenue off of that
Is because those words not open
to the public can be open to.
You know.
Distinction in nuance of a
future land commission that
up front that state trust lands
are part of this so
The words not open to the public
or not.
Are not precise enough given the
undermine this law on millions
of acres of land.
So I don't think.
That's what's intended now Mr Mr
thank you Mr president Senator
Gonzales is dizzy Act apply to
private land.
you're not included in this but
to be very clear if you have a
lease a grazing lease on state
lands for federal lands it is
still public lands that the
on so forth and and there's
multiple use allowed on that
including grazing but anyway
hopefully that's helpful to the
discussion and I respectfully I
mean it you know private land is
respectfully stand in opposition
thank you Mr president Senator
Steinborn any anyone else
wishing to debate on the
amendment.
Si no further debate on the
That rocks he couldn't get to
and I apologize for for
Not being correct in the
beginning and and that was not
our public land that are not
accessible I have a map in the
minority office if you want to
go look at it with these little
school sections out where there
is quite a bit of private land
relentless and and all they want
to do is is it all as cattle and
sheep and then there's other
parts of the state where they
have a little bit more public
land but yet they have twenty
the land is is public it's going
to be landlocked but yet when
the cattle are in one past year
he can't protect his cattle you
can't protected she she can't
that on this off chance that
senator Wirth is backpacking in
some remote area in the middle
of nowhere and Senator Woods is
district wondering why he got
hurt and how he got there.
we're gonna remove the ranchers
ability.
To manage the predators.
The mountain lions the bobcats
that is public but is landlocked
is not included that doesn't
make it a a perfect bill still
has quite a bit of problems but
it makes it where it's not quite
Senator is we're voting on
Senate bill thirty two sites
amended Senate floor amendment
number one.
Two seeds.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria.
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg now Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzales no ma'am Senator
Gonzales no Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
No.
Senator Hamblen no Senator
Hemphill.
Soto Senator Ivey Soto no
Senator how to meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
Senator Pinto.
No antics by my doctor Senator
Pinto no Senator Pirtle.
Senator songes Senator songes
yes Senators committees.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
No Senator Sedillo Lopez no
Senator sure.
Senator souls no Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn now Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Dahlman.
Senator Barker yes.
Of sixteen in the affirmative
twenty one the negative senator
member number one has failed to
pass the Senate Senator Pinto
explained her vote.
protecting our animals thank
you.
Thank you so we're back on the
bill.
Senator thirty two this twice
Under the.
the second Senator talks about
poisons on public land.
Mr president and Mr sponsor
sentimentality of.
Yes I do.
they're called M. forty fours
and their sodium cyanide caps
capsules.
President.
president and senator.
President and Senator it's my
understanding there are poisons
used for prairie dogs.
My understanding is for instance
the Kirtland Air Force base is
allowed.
And unless they've changed their
President Senator would you like
to add Senator Gonzales Mister
president and a senator woods
Schools are also allowed to do
or yesterday or whenever it was
we talked a lot about pesticides
and commercial applicators and
Can be trained for that job so
Mister president.
And and Senators under your
bill.
Were any of those people that
been cool.
The definition you have for
wildlife.
Is that the normal definition is
Senator McKenna Senator Gonzales
which I would like to yield.
Senator can.
President and Senator Woods
And I'm sorry I've got a the I'm
not use and I'm using what do
you call a
Document that incorporates the
amendment so I don't have the
line number.
Now that's a pretty broad
definition.
For wildlife is that a common
definition Mr president and
senator.
response here I do now for
instance prairie dogs are
considered rodents and so
they're not covered by this
bill.
president's Senator Woods.
provided for this piece of
legislation.
Just by drafting by Legislative
Council.
And there are other definitions
but this is the one that is
As as was stated.
Okay a very no.
Is a road.
What what happens in the
country.
we sometimes get
said game warden comes out
there.
This law open right here and
he'll say well it's finally got
a vertebrae.
It's covered by this act.
And then.
But the losses wildlife.
So there's little hick up there.
But let's move on I don't wanna.
The little your time here and
youth time is of essence.
I do have a problem with the
definition of who can do the.
The.
New Mexico Attorney General
noted.
That the it could raise food
tend to concerned with respect
to state authority.
The problem with the exemptions.
Of federally recognized Indian
tribes.
That it would place.
As to their ethnicity we had a
bill just a minute ago about
that.
So I'm having a few problems.
Mr president.
Any further debate centers.
Senator Shendo followed by
Senator Diamond etcetera
etcetera.
This president the I know that
the.
This bill It it excludes the.
My question is no it's clues
then it's.
Or who would.
Manage that piece of or who will
be responsible for.
solely for religious or
ceremonial purposes Mister
president how how.
The in the Sanchez how would
that be managed or who would
The president and Senator Shendo
very good observation as a
matter of fact we do have one of
essentially president and
Senator Shendo
we would involve the department
of game and fish in
collaboration with the Secretary
here in New Mexico and they
would be allowed to.
Are trapped on.
On their land.
Their land but but this bill
This particular exclude him or
or allows them to travel on
public lands is that correct.
Whatever is being trapped.
Are these also
Animals that are either
President and Senator Shendo I'm
curious which speci you're
curious you're wondering about.
I know that under federal
sold for religious and
ceremonial purposes and then
there are animals that are
probably not protected by the
federal government that we also
used in our our ceremony so I'm
President and Senator Shendo
they would be animals that are
otherwise currently allowed to
be trapped for bears.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill thirty two as
amended amendment sponsored by
Senator Brenda G. McKenna.
freshman mistake here don't have
the right.
H..
I'll be right with you.
I just.
we we have a motion to Senator
member number one is Senate bill
thirty two is twice amended go
ahead and explain what the
amendment Senator.
clarifies under which direction
we would allow native American
tribes that are federally
recognized.
Thank you senator.
Are you included with the
explaining the amendment Senator
ammendment thank you thank you
Senator Woods any further debate
on the mend.
The Senator street is.
Senator
I had to questions about how
this would work.
President and senator Schmidt is
a yes only federally recognized
tribes tribal members would be
allowed.
feds.
Are we we're I guess we're
excluding those people is that
is a tribe can more than
anything since the need that was
recognized by memorial by the
state of New Mexico in two
thousand seven.
And they're not federally
But I do know that there
are so are folks that are not
recognized federally.
I'd rather say are they you know
they recognized by our state or
or at least it on add that in I
don't know how that would work
ask Miss America member about
the.
Lieutenant governor can help
with my microphone please.
Thank.
kind of do some some profiling I
mean there are some people that
look native American in on that
you can tell they're they're
probably American there's some
people that look I mean that
that this specific part of the
bill I I know what it's trying
to accomplish but
it practically when a game
warden goes out there.
enrolled in a tribe
proved to me that you're and
then they say okay you're you're
enrolled in a tribe you have
some sort of some sort of
know how it's gonna work
practically
so but those those points not
affect common only memorable yes
but I just want to bring that to
On the amendment senator Senator
Diamond on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president what the
sponsor of the amendment please
yield Kennedy of absolutely
thank you this amendment allows
grant heirs should we include
them as well.
President and US Senator Diamond
could you please of read the
question again please thank you.
Our president and Senator
Diamond.
This ammendment is specifically
for federally recognized Indian
tribes.
Thank you senator Mr president
rights to lands that that were
rightfully theirs thank you.
Senator Diamond.
Anyone else was in the building
on the amendment.
one to Senate bill thirty two as
twice amended and ask for a roll
call vote more voting.
Senator Munoz Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos.
Yes Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Yes Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator do
should be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Pirtle no Senator probe.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez VS
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Woods.
By a vote of thirty five in the
affirmative to the negative
Senate floor amendment number
one has been adopted the Senate
bill thirty two is now three
no just because the way it's
written we basically now have
language that says
that.
Members of a federally
Thank you senator we are back on
the bill with Senator Diamond
followed by Senator Gallegos on
the bill Senator Diamond thank
you Mr president what the
sponsor of the bill public
please yield.
Yes president.
to advising us when legislation
came our way but New Mexico
department of game fish has
never been one of those agencies
in fact they've always had a big
presence in the legislative
the game and fish play in the
crafting of this legislation.
Senator Diamond Senator
Gonzales.
Mr president and Senator Diamond
you know in contact so I don't
think that there has been an
absence you know from the game
and fish I always have seen them
you know
contacted them for information
and also for import we do have a
different director now at this
time but only the prior
director.
And the to.
and what specific input did they
find into this bill during those
public comment period what were
there specific suggestions to
make this bill better.
It's a little bit hard to answer
your question because so.
You know which I always thought
also that it was so.
You know.
And so in that remarks you know
but the always referred to that.
This is one of the tools that
Thank you Mr president and
senator the they did they did
kind of expressed some some
opposition and you know what
that's okay because like we said
last night taking a neutral
they may be opposed or pushing
back against legislation is that
it like this is because just
last year just months ago the
New Mexico department of game as
on public lands just months ago.
As a result substantial changes
were made to the trapping
regulations which took effect
trail heads public campgrounds
boat launches rest areas picnic
areas three hundred fifty feet
from any man made water sources
allowed the game and fish to see
if these these programs and
projects to address just this.
Have time to take effect in to
see the results of those you
we tossed one of our agencies to
come up with the study and then
months after doing so without
being able to even see the
results we bring legislation
Contradict the work of our game
commissioners.
And skilled staff of New Mexico
department of game and fish what
I feel like legislation like
asked them to go out and do.
I also went on this we've had a
lot of discussions lately about
the rural urban divide.
intent of this and how we're
gonna change the way that we
trap on public lands that are
near populated areas and I can't
disagree I can't disagree if
has a very different impacts to
different parts of the state
including my district.
We talk about the ruler and your
I don't see New Mexico
department of game and fish's
involvement arboriculture
livestock community the outdoor
sporting community and
specifically to track first one
But when we shut down
legislation like this.
There's winners and losers and
it puts us all at odds in New
Mexico and I'd I hate I hate to
be put in this position once
the needs of our areas thank
you.
Thank you Sir thank you senator
Simon.
We do have further debate
senator because.
some possible
Adverse effects and and
This presents an Senator I
understand that we've cleared
Mexico we do this as far as
trapping on on a regular basis.
Lying to me how.
I understand and let me of the
Is of the corridor.
Against rural and you have a lot
of constituents in rural area
Miss Mister president senator
Rural New Mexico four we have
Kyle to another populations of
animals it actually coming into
our homes in our areas to ravage
that population in place Mr
president center and there again
I just I'm trying to be able to
understand how we understand the
senator Senator Gonzales Mr
president no Senator Gallegos of
first of all you know this
doesn't apply to private
property.
So within that you know it he
would be you know to the
enforcement on the would be into
public lands.
there's a lot of state and
federal lands and that's why our
education system get so much
money from the Lea and Eddy
counties because a lot of ours
in my area Mr president center
I've got a live at the edge of
town and we always have Kyle ten
are not in our yard but in the
bill for I live in this state
and federal lands and I just see
that this would be
a hardship on our area in my
reminded yeah I've been a
citizen lobbyist but this type
of legislation for years and in
fact the.
The advocates for this did
that is why we do have exception
section F. I think it's on page
five.
Yes it's page five line sixteen
section of W.
The parade depredation trapping
part of a company by visible
signs of the location of each
device notifying the public of
the presence of such devices so
in fact the department of game
moreover president and Senator.
A cage traps can be used to
protect property crop crops and
safety by government using an
entity of any device.
and then also for eco assist
ecosystem management by the
Thank you for that Mr president
in center and and I can see
where that would help with
notification devices.
Of the.
The dog would have realized that
can be able to protect her paw
agency presentation.
Mr proven center
in your page five of the bill it
talks about on line eighteen.
The only the only one
Representative are Senator that
I do not believe that Roxy
encouraging sign the we had a
square trapped there and I was
her to protect her Paul I guess
as my original question.
Mr president and Senator
Gallegos I I think that I
speculate that would been a
actually sometimes on willing
because I get out ahead of us
and I don't know that the I
would have the time to call them
back and or to explain to me
discussions in the bill.
Yeah and and earlier Mr
president and etcetera you guys
talked about using science to
goes is the question do I as a
co sponsor of this legislation
believe trapping is a.
Scientific tool.
conservation use trapping as one
of their tools and just wondered
if that had come up in your
discussions and then consider.
Because it's been in use for
be used by when used by
professional wildlife managers
and scientists
as as a matter of fact
Reminds the body that there is
Mr president in senators I thank
you for that and and I guess my
my next point would be
In in part of the discussions it
often you have to check
contract.
Mr president and Senator
Gallegos I believe it's once
they felt that we're of the
trappers for abusing animals
because a we're not checking on
him and there may be this
presents Senator some that are
two bad apples put Mr president
center
we talked earlier and.
You know to me of about you know
our how good we have it here in
Senator.
Mr president and center Gallegos
I do not.
Mr president center I just want
to give you a little bit of
the ethics studies my
grandfather and give me that
property when I was fifteen
years old one of the things he
had me do early on it is to
population and also in the
waters which Thomas present
Senator and that actually
affects the Colorado.
Texas water contact even though
Senator so I would say that my
grandfather learned from his
father.
my father also learn from my
grandfather did I learn from my
grandfather so I can see that in
president and etcetera so with
that all yield I just have to
stand in opposition to your bill
because I think it's hurting a
larger group.
debate thank you Mr president
I guess Saturday because we do
have further debate Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president will
can can you briefly describe
What the legal way to to trap
what are the requirements.
For setting a trap within the
that has to be checked at least
twenty for a once every twenty
four hours on land and once
every forty eight hours if it's
Mr president and Senator Pirtle
what I do know is a trap part of
Senator Pirtle that we just want
to go to Center Gonzalez Sierra
Spence Ezzell join add to that.
And the of course you know there
you would have all you know the.
Procedures you know for for
McCain and senator Gonzalez I do
see you communicating you have
extra witnesses that you would
like to identify please.
thank you senator Senator
Pirtle.
So Mister president centerman
ask the question again maybe we
can get the answer that we need
what does somebody have to do to
be able to legally trapped in
game and fish rules including
those the trap sizes set backs
at cetera.
So Mister president senator I
guess I'm not going to get the
an ID ID tag has information on
the ID tag so that when
something arises something that
doesn't look right that they can
I'm gonna trap I have a Kyle
problem.
I've got a bobcat.
Well it's illegal to trap but.
Well why would I incriminate
myself.
You're going to create a system
where now we don't know who is
trapping who is setting the
traps illegally or
irresponsibly.
But Mr president members of the
body.
The system you're creating with
so much public land that is
remote.
You're just gonna have ranchers.
present members of the body what
what a baby calf looks like
whenever it's being eaten while
still alive it's not a pretty
sight.
And although we want to say all
lives of the baby elk.
The baby deer.
That are eaten alive a day old.
Mr president and and Sanchez if
there's not an ID tag how do you
how do you propose that we're
going to prove.
set a trap Mr president when
Senator McKenna.
Mr president and Senator Pirtle
it's my understanding game and
fish already deals with trap so
don't have ID's on them they
would violate this proposed bill
legislation would be found
guilty of a misdemeanor.
And Mister president and
traps with now no ID tags on
them.
Because people have to protect
our livestock.
You're not gonna be able to
prove anything and and I'm not a
lawyer I just play one on TV.
is forcing people to do this.
Without ID tags on the to on on
the traps that's all you're
doing.
It's going to be impossible.
You know.
This body before I got here
because we don't like the
illegal market bring into the
light.
But here we are outline traps
you just gonna force people.
To now set them illegally in
the body I would encourage you
to consider that.
That.
You know although last night we
had a spirited debate but you
don't have to have a federal
license to go buy a snare or any
of these things that are
necessary to protect our
livestock.
So I guarantee you that's what's
going to happen.
investment protect their heard
protect
Everything that that they've
worked very hard for.
And I understand that that that
was a tragic incident that
happened with with Roxy and I'm
I just find it interesting here
we are two nights in a row.
Continuing the same
conversation.
Brought in all the baby calves
that were born before the storm
brought him inside of his house.
Protect their herds.
So somehow outline traps on on
public land now that we know
these baby calves from these
predators.
That seek to destroy them.
Because it isn't a pretty sight.
It's not easy I don't run around
saying well look at me.
But I had to because sometimes.
People who go to whole foods or
sprouts or Walmart and get their
food off the shelf to understand
how it got there or what people
had to go through to get there.
But that's reality that we live
in.
And you know it's just that
that's just one thing just one
thing.
Okay so you took one to away
Two four years later taking away
another tool.
And Mister president I'm not
saying that you know anything's
right wrong or indifferent about
it.
coyote kill you don't get
reimbursed for.
At some point the state's going
to have to take ownership in and
say you know what we're
protecting these these tiles.
So I would just ask as we move
forward in I'm sure the next
sixty day will find some other
way that we can make it even
harder to grow.
this body Mr president to just.
Look around and see how many
sheep farms are there anymore
how many sheep herds do you
actually see.
feel that go outside and see the
sheep out.
But just because of predators
impregnation that you can't
raise sheep anymore New Mexico
a big part of New Mexico culture
sheep.
But yet we create things that
eliminate people's culture.
So maybe Mr president Senator.
Kindergarteners first graders
second graders and now third
graders you have education about
my culture.
And understanding what that
means.
It's troubling to me.
Ranchers like Senator Woods in
Senator Ingle myself.
Fewer and far between.
But why.
There's a lot of work Mister
president senator that goes into
keeping these calves alive in I
hope the point was well taken
that.
But when you make it impossible
to do what do you suggest Mr
president members of the body
for these ranchers and farmers
to do.
Si no further debate.
Senator Gonzales to close.
Thank you Mr president.
Do not pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record shows that the rule has
been called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca now Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator sure about this yes
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond now
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator had a meal now Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan now Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes.
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no senator pope
yeah Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez VS Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
I'm sorry.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Dahlman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
By a vote of twenty three in the
affirmative sixteen the negative
Senate bill thirty two or three
times amended has passed the
Senate.
Senator Gonzales and center
you to the members of the body.
Thank you we're gonna move on to
the next item that's item number
eighteen on today's calendar
Senate Judiciary Committee
for Senate bill seventy one be
removed.
I see no objection.
Senator Pirtle.
This presents a question to the
The question by Senator Pirtle I
know you guys have discussion on
that center part of the restated
question please.
Mr president is asking on
of the US senators who voted to
put the call on.
Need to either agree or and we
do unanimous consent not object
Senator.
Senator Pirtle Centerville
Senator Ingle etcetera smitteez
Senator Diamond and Senator
Baca.
Their group.
has objective.
Senator Padilla Mr present can
you restate the senators that
were on the call.
Is this for you Senator Padilla.
Senator Pirtle Centerville
Center Vegas Center smitteez and
Senator Diamond.
condylar.
Sierra that I did call for the
call then had seven senators
raise your hand and I started on
this side of the chamber and
that's why there is a seven
listed.
called for the call and six in
center condylar did call for the
call they resume make sure the
record is correct
my motion was unanimous consent.
That we remove the call
can remove the call otherwise
all seven would have to agree
etcetera condylar is not here.
That's correct and we did have
Senator committee also who is on
going to do that tonight so we
can do the bill first thing in
the morning I just want everyone
to know that we did visit with
senator Candelaria who is
absolutely fine and advise that
And senator senator Wirth we are
still on third reading of
legislation all you'll to you to
take this to the next I thank
you Mr just one more item item
number thirty one is Senator
the rules be suspended the
record show that all actions for
placing Senate joint resolution
thirteen on final passage has
been taken is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
In essence the Senate joint
resolution thirteen consolidates
ownership and operation of all
facilities of each of New
Senator debating Senator
resolution thirteen faster DOT
real property anyone with the
debate we have senator Morris
figures president would a
understand know what questions
about that are there any
legislators are elected
officials involved in this
transfer thank you very much Mr
president Senator Moores there
involved in this transfer.
Mr president senator Morris to
the best of my knowledge there
is no one who is going to
receive a broker fee or involved
thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Campos and for the new
members of this body at long
after I'm gone from this chamber
hope someone is listening and
avoid a lot of problems thank
you Senator Campos for your
transparency thank you Mr
president thank you Mr president
thank you very much Senator
Moores thank you senator Morris
and it also that Senator Lopez
thirteen.
I see none Senator Campos to
close thank you Mr president
members of the Senate I move
that Senate joint resolution
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator gray
goes Senator Gallegos yes
Senator Hickey Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris Senator Moores
yes senator one else.
Senator Neville.
yes senator for the.
Senator for the A. S. Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator probe
Senators committees.
Senator twenty CS Senator severe
Lopez yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
The firm is in the negative
Senate joint resolution thirteen
as fast Senator Campos thank you
very much Mr president members
read.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has concurred.
In the Senate amendments to
house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
Journal so the message from the
house is been received.
And Mister president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed house
bill one oh eight as amended by
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to thirty four as
amended by the house in requests
the concurrence of the Senate
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president unanimous consent to
go to that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
that order business senator
Wirth thank you Mr president so
This is lane is we'll start with
senator souls thank you Mr
president Senate education meets
at eight thirty in the morning
we first have a presentation on
the impact aid bills and then
we've got a number of bills some
tomorrow morning when we meet
tomorrow morning we will be
doing confirmations for regents
of the university of New Mexico
and then we'll be doing
this if you know.
Thank you Mr president the
Senate.
Health and public affairs
committee will meet tomorrow
afternoon following the floor
Senator just a.
Thank you Mr president I'm here
Senate judiciary committee will
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent the
Senate stand in recess until
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning
the no objection the Senate
Senate recess to eleven AM
Yeah.
The.
Right.
