Gonzalez.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hermio.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Stewart here.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator probe.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Mister president thank you
senators and ask for each of you
to rise for the indication to me
that today by senator Pete
Campos the pledge of allegiance
to be led today by Senator
What do you value most.
Is it strand.
Sustainability.
Or chairs possessions.
Think of the innocence of
children.
They draw hearts.
Find smiley faces.
They want us to let go.
Of the stress that we have
within us.
And they really want us to
experience.
It returns.
In a broader way.
And on another day.
The simple things are really
among.
That return to you.
A hundred fold.
A man.
From at eight eleven that the
Los estados Unidos that medica
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so just
on on do up front and all you'll
Senator Lopez just a plan here
redistricting and then will
probably be back later
potentially this evening and
I'll let everyone get an update
on where what we're thinking at
the end of today's session so
moisture leaving last night
about nine o'clock and it was
raining I don't I don't
appreciate the wind it's a
apparently I'm told
Representative the sign off my
you very much Mr president and
unanimous.
Consent to excuse us Senator
Gonzalez.
And Senator serve on this.
Mr president unanimous consent
to excuse Senator Schmedes
answer Diamond except the
purpose of call.
See no objections.
from all committees in late on
the president's table.
I
see no objections.
that's in Senator offices
committee so he might want to
have some say on.
Senator this is for the agency
present with the movie
remove House Bill eleven from
all committees and place it on
the president's table.
Senator if you can give us the
title of that House Berlin
Mr president center could you
explain of those sections of the
medical malpractice act that you
would remove from Judiciary in
other words what what what the
if you would be able to that
that bill was introduced in the
house on the north it's been
passed on the tent that's been
languishing over here for six
days now.
the surgeons they're all in a
serious panic mode.
Of I don't think that there's
anybody here that's actively
we're going to debate that at
this point time if so I'd like
to be able to debate the issue
with the good senator of the
reason the bill has remained in
the judiciary as long as it has
yet in effect in law and so
there's a proper procedure to do
so the house did not follow that
procedure and I confirm that
with Legislative Council
repeatedly so this bill really
I know that the house is
generally flawed and I won't
debate that with you but.
dilemma here Mister president is
that we don't know what the
changes are the the New Mexico
Medical Society doesn't know
what the changes are we don't
know the potential changes
anyway.
it's it's common at least
certainly in this chamber that
when there are issues like you
bring up.
That.
The groups that are most
Be it be consulted.
And and at the moment I don't
think they are consulted and
so if we bring it down and we
We can hammer out the amendments
that are needed.
Bring those floor amendments.
And make this.
The bill that not only protects
all of the patients in New
Both of us need little calming
Mr president so I know some
people think that I'm not the
calmest but in this case I'm
trying to lend to call.
legislation I have also spoken
with the speaker of the house
today on the legislation at some
length and I have met with the
representative lobbyist for the
applaud to any bill we could
avoid a lot of time working
committees by just bring
everything to the floor and
avoiding the committee process
entirely but the I think that's
body to oppose your motion.
Further debate Senator to to.
today is that we all go home.
and I also think that that this
could be solved in minutes.
If we if we talk to the medical
this evening and make it happen
so with that Mr president.
I move that we.
Senator have some of because we
do have others who would like to
here for many days and for many
watching at home there has been
a lot of activity
we've actually had a Judiciary
Committee meeting where we could
moving at a very snail pace and
so I think you know might
benefit the body where this is a
special session and we only have
save sometime save the taxpayers
of the state some money and
bring this to the floor work
that out the amendments could be
time but yet it's not going to
because it's not staffed and so
with that being said I think
that's the best way to handle it
basically have all the
judiciary few would yield
Senator wanted detailed.
Yes so you.
Mr president Senator is there
any way we can get a copy of of
Senator about us Representative
of course the goal is not to
surprise anybody by no
unexpected changes the committee
agenda was originally set for
caucuses of unknown duration I
spoke with the floor leader
about an hour to go to get an
understanding of what today
might look like I've been told
there might be there are threats
the agenda is subject to call of
the chair because I don't know
when we'll be off the floor
today on what we expect might be
a short debate on a simple bill
there's there's a there's no
secrets on this legislation
Senator share makes the point or
or try to make the point this
matter is simple unless Senator
pretty bogged down I think also
the good senators of more may
not be all prepared to address
the floor amendment that was
made the house and the basis for
that floor amendment why that
this requires some studying some
thought Michael heads and by
good committee members with the
time and and public hearing that
it deserves the suggestion that
we I pass a public hearing and
Senator Pirtle and and thank you
Mr president thank you for that
answered and you know I feel you
made a great point four for the
reason to do this on the floor
is that now this is been moved
to to a call of the chair and it
just seems like we've for the
citizens of the state to ensure
that January one they have
access to health care and that's
really what's at stake here is
the access to health care and
the rural part of the state and
so I would hate that the issue
of redistricting could somehow
get in the way of this very
important issue so we need to
because they will be able to
afford this malpractice
insurance.
You know I think a lot of the
debate yesterday about health
care and and how that should be
We have lots of members in this
body that I'd like to hear from
as we're making these proposed
amendments as to how they might
affect the law in effect the
brought up so I really would be
concerned that there might be
some unintended consequences
that might happen and I really
think this is an issue that the
Senator Hernandez was present
right now there's not been any
amendment submitted to the
committee I've been working on
an amendment and would propose
it to the committee when we meet
now and that time and so as I
said the agenda publisher was
for us to meet at three o'clock
we probably have a Judiciary
Committee meeting sometime after
the floor shortly after the
amendments or any amendments
proposed to the committee in
this bill is been on the side
for I think I
with the stated six days that
it's been over here so I I think
with the partisanship of of
drawing maps and in the process
of doing so so I think I would
ask the body to support this
motion I mean it's just laying
it on the president's table we
wanted to do and take care of on
the floor thank you Mr president
thank you I do have further
debate on the motion senator
Morris.
Thank you Mr president I rise in
know from our family is a owns a
pathology laboratory that
provides medical care around the
state of New Mexico
ophthalmology consultants of New
Mexico is the medical director
present we received our
insurance statement for next
year.
And come January first we will
not have insurance for the
doctors.
consultative Mexico on January
first can not show up to do
what's called frozen sections
are going to the us our surgery
centers and hospitals for like
body have a before December
thirty first because January
first if you have that cancer
surgery have a tumor removed one
And then has a tech would cut
slides of of the the what's
called the frozen section and
with all this will put it under
her no you didn't get the
margins are still from two were
left in your body.
January first our pathologist
can not go into the operating
This bill has been here for a
week I like to remind everyone
we created this crisis as a
whole.
lobbyist groups including this
bill during the pandemic when
our medical system is at its
wit's end.
laws last year to make it harder
to practice medicine in the
state of New Mexico during the
pandemic that is cost eight
hundred thousand flies in the
Like to remind that body that we
have two weekends within that
fifteen days we also have
Christmas Eve Christmas new
that time what I just of what
the time frame I just laid out
Mr president there's only eight
working days.
And as we all know that week
between Christmas and new year's
We created this problem and
we've been sitting on it for a
week now and we don't have time
time is up.
Maybe the insurance companies
breast tumors trying to remove
begin beginning of January.
That we're gonna have to deal
with as a state in the nation
surgeries are going to happen Mr
president.
members who had cancer
treatments.
We've all had family members
including members of this body
who had to go through those are
deals we made it incredibly hard
And it's heartening we got
doctors in this building we just
want to be able to practice come
Monday January let's move
forward let's get this done.
Let's move forward let's get
this bill passed and let's get
this done so as a state we can
move forward and make sure
Just Senator Steinborn.
Mr president I just want to say
one thing public service
announcement.
percentage of New Mexicans and
and have had this happen in case
you haven't heard our hospitals
are full capacity I can I can I
see you bet because of that this
talking about crisis situations
this is the nine hundred pound
gorilla in the room that we also
need to just continue to educate
New Mexicans if you got fully
vaccinated in the summer great
that if you are fully vaccinated
you're gonna have protection
against serious illness I have a
friend.
Well then to the same who just
passed away from COVID I just
found out about it.
in New Mexico and that threat
will go on the on December
thirty first so just appreciate
allow me that very important
public service announcement
thank you Mr president centers
time where we do have further
This is an incredibly complex
area.
The bill had some shortcomings
when it was put together last
enough and it really needs to be
vetted through a very
deliberative committee process
and so while I in in so many
Good comfort but another day or
so a deliberative thoughtful
process for some of these things
Mexico we will get this done we
want it done right.
We don't want to have to come
back again between Christmas and
new year's because Saddam wasn't
done quite right.
Because we have to get it fixed
all of my colleagues to not vote
for this motion but to rather
have it go to committee to be
thought through completely so we
don't have to come back here
and I've spoken before but I
just I just felt compelled to
remind Mike Senate colleagues in
particular center Moores who
bring brings up repeatedly as
debate we created this crisis
hospital association was the
trial lawyers was a number of
groups that were in that debate
and discussion and whoever was
not of that greater discussion
was the Judiciary Committee
could not change unhide dot and
I across city the Judiciary
Committee could not make any
changes to the group because it
was sacrosanct and so button
down and so tired was a crisis
until the last month I believe
or so and as part of this
we're dealing at least with the
issue that we're talking about
principally is because we didn't
trust the committee process
before and urged members to
continue to do so.
that the the process last year
was not correct and I do
disagree with the fact that the
medical society participated
see what the vote was on this
bill last year.
And you I apologize to my
colleagues for encouraging them
to vote for it because it was a
flawed bill last year and here
and I know it's difficult I know
it's a probably above my grade
level with regard to Judiciary
issues that have some comfort in
knowing that those amendments
we've had plenty of time in our
caucus and among us to be able
to talk about some of those
things but we've been told
nothing and I think that's why
it's been delayed and delayed
and this could have been taken
care of long before today.
So I'm not sure that everybody
that's needed at the table has
the rest of my Republicans on
this floor.
Everybody's going to make up
their own mind frankly I would
have been really pleased to be
able to know a little bit more
about what those changes are
understands the crisis and I
truly believe this will get done
but I just I'm sorry that the
process is come to this and I
encourage you to to whatever
happens on this for right now
Central for a second time.
And thank you Mr president.
I really do appreciate the the
represent I don't disagree that
that we don't need to look at
some changes but you know I want
to make sure that we have the
input of of everybody in this
room.
The backgrounds of every single
the changes that are going to be
made Dr Hickey Dr Schmidt
eighties Senator Moores other
people who have a different
perspective than just being an
attorney on on Judiciary
You know but it also brings to
light another issue that we've
had that we're seeing even now
in in the special session and
that's we're being told.
Pass it.
As it is we had a special
session where we passed a
cannabis bill that as you've
seen if if you unless you've
been.
good job of implementing.
The legislation and I guarantee
you.
We'll be back fixing that that
legislation as well just as we
are here.
As a separate and co equal
branch of government.
Is the right the law.
Now the governor has a balance
of power can veto the law.
But I'm starting to see more and
more a lack of courage of this
body who whenever I first got
elected.
Regardless of who was in
body talk about standing up to
democratic governors because it
is the right thing to do we are
the legislative branch.
And it's unfortunate I think
that's the part of this whole
process.
That is the most disappointing.
Is that we have lots of people
To be an equal.
Branch of government.
And so hopefully we can stand
up.
Thank you Mr president.
Si no further debate we do have
for the debate Senator Baca
president earlier when asked to
Mr president you stated that
there were no amendments
submitted by members of four
judiciary would Care to briefly
comment on what those proposed
changes would entail and I I
know it's a I know a we're not
some very intelligent people in
here so would be much
appreciated if you could just to
briefly comment on the changes
that you're considering making
appropriate to ask Senator about
is what those are but it is not
to debate the bill here on the
floor but just want to have
clarification on that Senator
to the question before the body
which is should this be in
Judiciary so Center for quite
simply this if you look at the
house bill as it came over of
statute the statute does not
become effective until January
one and so the house proposes to
strike language from a law that
does not exist and so the way to
be done and the house did not do
it the way Legislative Council
says it needs to be done so
that's one of the principal
issues Senator that they look
like a pretty extensive change
particular issue deal with
outpatient facilities and
independent providers and the
definition of independent
providers and outpatient health
becomes a secondary issue the
definition of both independent
provider and occurrence in the
those were also Rashed in the
last session and create
ambiguities that should be
was a floor amendment as I
pointed out in the house to push
back the effective dates for the
increases in the caps and that
Those those are the summary of
the proposed amendment thank.
Thank you Mr president I look
forward to a looking at those
many amendments as we go through
me was approved by the medical
association and so therefore I
would stink that there would be
really no issue to sending it
back since since the they felt
New Jersey to judiciary is and
so I'll leave it to him to maybe
explain to me what some of these
are in Judiciary Committee thank
couple of things one well I was
brought up that this should be a
deliberate and thoughtful
process and I submit to you that
if you are in this room and your
Our.
Only deliberate and thoughtful
if we are on Judiciary
Committee.
We're all on committees in each
committee requires
Judiciary Committee is in fact
present in this chamber so they
can still do what they need to
do they can still bring up the
Division it certainly is
possible that the chair of
Judiciary Committee become the
president at least during that
debate there's nothing provide
preventing that from happening
as well.
All I'm asking Mr president is
that would put piddling around
and do something useful and this
is probably.
I now move that house bill
eleven be removed from all
committees and placed on the
president's table by roll call
vote centers we have a motion on
the floor just for clarification
and informational purposes for
Committee the clerk to call the
roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Sharon does no Senator
Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg no senator gray
goes yes ma'am Senator Gallegos
yes Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Hemphill now Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
no Senator McKenna no Senator
McKenna no Senator Moores.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Yes.
should be no.
Senator Ortiz B. no no senator
for the.
Senator by the end no Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto no Senator Pirtle.
Senator songes yes Senators
committees Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Senator souls no Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics no
Senator Steinborn Senator
Steinborn no Senator Stewart.
Senator Woods yes senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz no.
native the motions failed
Senator thank you Mr president
thank you body hopefully we can
get this done today still
without further ado thank you
centers we're still in that
came up earlier just wanted to
point out to this body that one
year ago tomorrow I got my first
vaccine for the COVID shot one
year ago tomorrow as we go many
was a available to the public
since we were doing COVID
testing directly we're qualified
have you in as a first executive
for all officer in the state to
give accidental very public
vaccine to go do that also
because as was mentioned
hospitals are full right so
right now those hospitals are
full because of the late care on
office six percent of those many
cancers one away the music
continue to grow we're seeing
that in our E. ours and our our
merger rooms in our on hospital
have this what plenty of budget
for those COVID patients sense
we won't have cancer patients in
those hospitals let's move
forward to get your flu of flu
vaccine tomorrow or today on in
Scene and senator Wirth thank
you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
messages from the house floor
that order business message from
the house the reader to read the
message.
Mrs from the house of
the house in open session and
return same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk the
gentle so the message from the
house has been received.
Mr president the rules committee
to who has been referred house
for substitute for House state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill line has had it under
report any objection.
Seeing no objection Canadian
borders been adopted.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
fifty nine AM in move return to
twelve oh one PM the Senate will
come order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended another journal show
all those present in this
been read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee
there's no objections so ordered
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much Mr president president ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
the record show that all actions
for placing House for substitute
for House state government
elections in in the first
Soto to explain.
The bill.
I thank very much Mr president
and I'm as president the price
for the bill I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that I be
allowed to have an expert
witness to coming at us from
for substitute for House state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill line is the map for
the Public Education Commission.
This is how New Mexico get split
ten different ways I will note
that district I is a native
American voting district in this
Canadian substitutes is that in
our house.
Our state government elections
Indian Affairs representative of
night birds.
And on the floor of the house
Representative Lane want to make
sure that Aztec and Bloomfield
school districts work together
and so with that but otherwise
it is as it was passed by the
citizens redistricting committee
and so with that this president
sponsor field center so the deal
agency president be happy to.
Is present Senator could could
you just for educational
purposes since this is about the
Commission is the old state
school board R. the state school
board prior to a constitutional
amendment that was done in a
special election during the
put forth before the people a
proposal and special action that
the
that the of.
Education Commission.
And in the constitute it's a
constitutional office and in
part of the constitution they
after we after this body
approves Senator boy tunnels
bill some years back to create
charter schools originally
Public Education Commission with
very little to do other than
reviewing a five year plan.
and and so the legislature has
well but but they also now spend
most of their time overseeing
and working on authorizing
charter schools.
actually I do know that that is
possible if fate if a one of the
amendments that Senator sapien
Kerry to center by time as
original as this regarding
creation of the of the alley Aid
though the local educational
agency as a as a public body and
and also as a state board of
that they have to operate as a
charter school the the
contractor that with PC than the
PC is able to revoke their
charter.
the PC that we understand what
they do and what their role as
an education in the state they
really don't do a whole lot to
dictate to the public education
secretary what he can do what he
What what's the make up on the
representation as this map is
drawn up.
Senator this president and Sir
Thank you Mr president and
senator and
It is it does Albuquerque on
their own on this or the join
with with other areas or.
current maps for the Public
Education Commission.
the Albuquerque actually has a
fair number of the
That were adopted ten years ago
if you give me just a second.
they have
District
Eight goes into the east
mountains area districts six
Albuquerque all right now.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you senator I want to take a
minute just to make sure that
the and it looks like Rio Rancho
districts but just everyone is
understand how important the PCC
is when it comes to our charter
schools.
and those are some things that
certainly the sponsor explained
why it has taken Bloomfield are
together.
But I think this is an example
and I I don't have any
Farmington and Kirtland will
center consolidated.
Collaborate they work together
they're in the same market well
we ignore what a true community
yes.
As staff Bloomfield Farmington
and central consolidated school
districts are in fact.
from other sources.
And while I'm not going to
attempt to do anything with this
map or this bill.
I do think it's important that
Sometimes that should just be
the community.
Instead of trying to divide us
up.
And turn this into some kind of
Because I would submit to you Mr
president the San Juan county at
least and I believe most of the
state.
Doesn't have the terrible riff.
not gonna do anything to it I
just hope that we actually
consider that sometimes a
community is just a community of
interest.
You.
Thanks Senator we do have
thank you chairman of rules
for the with the good job
educating the Senator Brandt on
some of the education
commissions responsibility as
to the party of mileage at miss
present what is the current
period per diem at the
thought was president and
Senator Moores we actually in
that
One of the things I think
unintentionally that we did.
Was four hours or less and the
our members live within a
certain geographical radius.
For some other local public
bodies because we effectively
cut the per diem and mileage
rate in half.
article eight.
I'm sorry chapter ten article
eight section for our it's a of
forty five dollars of the
officer physically tends the
if the officer physically
attends the border Committee
meeting for four hours or more
during a single calendar day
soul so more efficient public
bodies actually we end of
that they would be getting they
would also then be able to get
our their per diem.
Thank you Mr president that's
not part of money how I think of
things Senator Ivy Soto delay
lease get those for cool red
license plate is elected
the call read license plates
And and I imagine as they're
driving back and forth from all
over the state to Santa Fe for
their meetings their number of
state police officers who think
into the radio station saying
senator from the district one
through ten is speeding down the
freeway might actually
department of education member
if we can get back to the actual
Senator Moores the the person
break down actually the the PC
creates a very
five district to.
The the PI is fifteen point one
percent for the Democrat party
that DVI is the yeah is this
district two and thank you of
for Health let let me explain
that.
The the DPA is fifty point one
and the harvest is forty nine
District for the DP I is fifty
one point nine percent and the
this is forty eight point one.
District six the DP I is forty
eight point one.
And the Arvest is fifty one
point nine.
District seven.
The the P. I. A. is fifty eight
is fifty eight point three.
The district line which is very
competitive the DP I is twenty
nine point four the this is
New Mexico by the way as a
statewide matter the DTI
statewide is fifty four point
two percent and the Armos is
forty five point eight percent.
Mr president and senator Morris
if you're counting in terms of
break down those districts with
greater than sixty percent.
Our districts with greater than
a a sixty percent R. P. I.
harvest court.
percent are of this as well and
then all of the rest of them are
are within the swings on a
between the two of them.
So much president to score would
contested race for entities ten
states mistrust of.
I think this president agency
president and s'mores actually
quite often we have trouble
of these districts are the ideal
population is
two hundred eleven thousand
seven hundred fifty two people
about all of these districts are
And so and so given that that
they're required the the
petition Department oftentimes
we have difficulty getting
people to even run for these
This election cycle are one of
the proposals is to reduce by
two thirds the number of
signatures that would be
legislators so it is up three
percent of the number of votes
for governor of if if your major
party three percent of the
number of votes for governor in
dropped by two thirds that will
actually allow a lot more people
to run a lot I'll allow a lot
more competitive races for the
seats if someone is running as a
governor County all of the votes
that were cast for governor.
And and and if you're running as
a as a declined to select or or
Up for governor in the last
general election for governor
counting all of the votes cast
for all parties and all
candidates for governor so so as
a consequence agency presidents
always have candidates for P. E.
C. but with the nature of these
maps that were adopting here and
the proposed change that will be
coming forth and and we'll see
how it does the legislative
presently Center Ivy Soto so if
no one runs for these offices
and their vacancies are the
parties and appointing someone
or who appoints the the office
And if the governor does make
the appointment the appointment
is full as until the next
general election so instead of
serving a four year term
presidential election.
out and get the signatures and
would have to then when that
election but then that would
only be for two more years
to complete the the rest of that
follow the appointments of the
majority of performance in those
districts France's one of
Susanna Martinez had to pick a
from a list of nominations from
I miss president and senator
Morris the governor's elliptical
over the governor wants there is
no nominating commission process
when there's a vacancy in office
Which was kind of a monstrosity
it went from the Colorado border
to the Mexican border including
the the counties of you Harding
That particular district there
was a vacancy because nobody ran
and the governor appointed a
Democrat is Democrat it's time
the governor appointed Democrat
because not very many people
voted in the democratic primary
for governor from all of those
counties and was unopposed on
the ballot and then also got
elected again
district line is much for
compact in district eight.
Although fairly large I think
it's fairly cohesive.
Senator Morris was president I
just remind Senator Ivey Soto
not Colorado to Mexico's
Colorado to Texas which I guess
you County touches all through
those points
So I guess it's going to be a
the for the easy fix that you're
position any time that no you
and I've talked about that in
the past wishing to create some
kind of commission I would pay
elected officials.
So we we can actually work on
that together look forward to
This president and senator
Morris that would be a district
I which is that American
performing and the.
the Senate rules committee from
Mister Gorman from the Navajo
Nation that that was a map as
that was proposed by them
will note and we did not get a
chance to ask if it offended
that when they when they the
house floor amendment you
the Navajo Nation of the native
American tradition Task Force
however there was no objection
that was raised as to the
districts Senator Moores was
to be over sixty percent to
qualify as a native of district
performance district this one's
only I believe you said fifty
six so it doesn't look like any
of the ten actually met that
so I believe that was a sixty so
if I'm not correct that by the
definition we received regarding
different readers rimac there
would be no native American
is considered the threshold
by the that America raise task
force of what they would
consider to be a native American
district and affect Mr Gorman
Our districts it is very
difficult to maintain those
percentages without getting into
a district that is overly are
obviously gerrymandered however
I do believe that by reuniting
Senator Ivey Soto always want
his co driver Soto Senator Ivey
Soto so those look like there is
under that definition before
numerical form district how many
one has a sixty five point two
percent are Hispanic population.
District six has a fifty point
eight percent Hispanic
that that sixty two percent
number is specific to native
Americans that we got at the
Senate rules committee Hispanic
district would be generally
Senator so the agency president
yes well two of them clearly
Hispanic it at sixty five sixty
districts out of ten from what
we're from the math were given
before that's very concerning in
the state we talked about with
our history in our diversity so
I'm very concerned that this map
originally a C. R. C. concept
correct Mr president etcetera
etcetera so Mister president
this is a C. R. C. concept that
other two maps presented by the
CRC that they do a better job of
having Hispanic and native
American participation in this
commission.
What
concept see.
Our under Concepcion sent
seven was sixty three point five
percent Hispanic and district
ten was fifty point six percent
Hispanic under that same concept
see.
And then if we look at concept a
that was also adopted by the CRC
percent Hispanic and again
district I was fifty two point
eight percent has spent native
American Senator Moores thank
dominance on the voting on that
they were submitted I think we
could do a lot better than that
none of these maps in this map
included meets a definition for
native American map
folks and I guess the question I
have is why was why did this map
get introduced versus the other
two maps Mr president what was
wrong with those other two maps
So as as turns out concept H.
was.
He was our.
Introduced.
reducing commission by Leonard
Gorman from the Navajo nation's
Human Rights Commission I won't
know that the part that the a
new sponsor in the state house
representatives was
oszyce from Gallup and is
Navajo ourselves she picked the
map that was submitted by the
Navajo Nation who writes
Commission.
these maps would
need after American
participation
or this presents under for their
for their be an African American
Hispanic.
Our population.
What statewide is is one point
nine percent.
percent district I.
Zero point six percent district
six one point zero percent
district seven one point six
percent.
Thank you thank you Mr president
center officer I'm I'm just
going to oppose this on a map
and your bill with the respect I
don't think it's a meets the
spirits and the cultural rich
cultural history we have to be
driven for
An Anglo probably progressive
and grow and grow perspective
district isn't going to be one
of all for native American
candidates
is what they told us so a lot of
concerns about this map I think
we need to reject this map and
in this on this map thank you Mr
president thanks in part to do
have further debate.
Senator Ingle followed by
Senator many of us centering on.
In center and this particular
board if I was on this and I
want to change some things in
education what would be my.
How much authority what I have
constituted and turns its
responsibilities.
You would have the ability to
advise the secretary on the five
year plan for education.
And then agency president
senator Ingle with regard to.
That that would affect all of
chartered by the Public
Education Commission so you
would have the opportunity to
impact what the contract looks
president if they have a
obligation to write contracts
and things they also have
control of salaries and
education curriculum.
so so Turner schools are article
eight B. of the public school
code which is chapter twenty two
of our statutes under the the
in this case each charter school
has its own governing board the
governing board makes all the
decisions with regard to hiring
equivalent not only the
superintendent but also the
custodian given the size of of
particular charter schools and
and then under article ten a of
charter school it's for the
chief executive officer the
director this had administer the
school to hire everybody else so
so the so the governing board
would not have authority with
enjoy your explanation so well
on the articles in the chapters
and things that you can call
recall on it to it just a.
Just must have a really great.
serving on this board Mr
president Sanders is a.
Very similar to what I think
about when I think about kissing
my sister.
It's okay but it's just not much
throughout here.
president I I do yield that I
and I will also let Senator
Ingle no as I do yield to
senator Munoz that
sometimes I have trouble
myself that the remote pine hill
Navajos in this map I just want
to make sure because there's a
little finger that comes out of
small accounting but I I verify
those precincts that the Ramon
Si no further debate Senator to
close on the bill.
Thank you very much Mr president
and you know we've we've lined
proposals to move away from
having a.
An education secretary go back
to a state superintendent of
instruction that would be hired
by the by the Public Education
look for their identity and and
and and I appreciate very much
the the debate today to be able
to talk about the work that they
do in the work that they could
do and also recognizing
Commission in this as in that
category and and so you know
that is something that I think
we should all be aware of and
within their their area in which
their elected
however our test today is
distracting these committees
Commission districts and that's
substitute for House Bill nine
do now pass and ask for a roll
call vote Senator seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd no.
Senator Campos.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria Senator should run
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzales.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs no Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Ingle passes Senator
Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan noted Senator
Lopez.
Senator Moores Senator Moores no
senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator renewable no Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator shows
Senator souls yes Senator
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle no.
Thirteen twenty five.
When I.
for House state government
actions and interferes Committee
for House Bill number on that
house bill nine has passed the
Senate centers of the I excuse
me Senator Baca texting is a
Hispanic Mr president in a state
that is forty eight percent
Hispanic I will continue to
object to these maps that are
based on diluting the Hispanic
colleagues I thought we might
make it to the six o'clock floor
session during that debate but I
guess we'll have time for
Judiciary before we come back
thank you very much.
unanimous consent we go that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous on that order
business analysis miscellaneous
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so I
seven o'clock and we will here
tonight Senate Judiciary
Committee sub two percent bill
to so ideal to Senator on days
to announce his committee
centers of this.
Santa Fe Senator says Kendrick
NM finance finance.
Three three twenty months of
finance.
This presents an is three twenty
two to be correct three twenty
two state the time again once
the please enter some of this
four thirty three thirty Senate
Senate rules committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning at nine
thirty to consider house bill
eight which is the state house
we're going on the floor when
you can a speak.
Senator Wirth Mr president can
certainly give everyone a sense
Senator speaks was for this one
make sure we have a long going
through debate and rules before
going to the floor of the bills
of two and half hours is enough
morning I don't know how late
we're going to go tonight but I
want to do so nine thirty to
make sure everybody had enough
time to be there refreshed.
When they got there for the
meeting so we're about nine
announcements.
I see no further announcements
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent the Senate stand in
recess until seven o'clock this
