It goes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president thank you for the
Santa Fe please remain standing
for the pledge of allegiance to
relate today by Senator quite a
Hemphill followed by the pledge
allegiance to Spanish defeated
today by Senator Lopez and the
begin this time together with
the printer so let us pray.
Precious lord.
We called you by many names in
another and respect each other
and work together for the good
of all.
This is stand for justice and
righteousness even when we are
tired and we can warn.
latest on still.
Take your hands.
Reminders of a great love for us
each one of us regardless of
party regardless of zip code.
and a more just and shining
world.
precious lord lead us in the
weeks to come latest in love
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico and the CS sample
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president good
afternoon everyone unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
fund that order business and
You know we are navigating.
A huge storm and trying to do
that in a safe way in a
respectful way and I just again
So on your desks you should have
the junior bill form which the
Senate finance committee has
approved
it's a supplemental general
twenty five no later than this
coming Monday January twenty
fourth at nine AM.
If you have questions on
structuring the language for the
Sali and the LFC analysts are
available to assist you and
certainly Center manuals can
also help answer questions as
they come up.
to seven thirty by invitation
only and with that I will yield
first to Senator Lopez and then
to other members on and give a
sense of where we're going to go
There is no objection cameras to
be allowed only on the floor and
Mister president if I may also
add some words to this unanimous
consent.
what was brought to my attention
yesterday is that there's some
concern of being raised from of
pictures that have been used for
those who've been in the gallery
of whether it's family business
or business otherwise right so
please no weirdness to be
careful I'm actually doing your
business on on the computer so
of the you know something that
was taking a picture of I won't
go into any further but at this
point Mister president I'm just
asking for cameras to be allowed
just on the floor.
Senator Wirth if you would
yield.
Senator Wirth will yield on the
instructions for the the cash
the general appropriations act.
tomorrow nine AM might be a
little tight to try to do if we
could make it noon or even five
o'clock would be even better is
that a flexible number that we
could to negotiate Mr president
get an answer to that question
before we come off the floor so
we know exactly if that option
and and again it seems very
reasonable to me and I
ask him to yield and I don't
hear the question I want to know
if nine AM could be negotiated
the state five PM that same day
Senator yes.
Mr president center I think we
by hand and so we want to make
sure that's correct I think five
PM because we're gonna be off
Friday it is not a big issue
just the staff is going to be a
little over work to get that
forms for but first call LFC and
their staff is standing by this
weekend and that number is nine
eight six forty five fifty nine
And then if not our staff
Adrian and Dawn are going to be
available to work on some stuff
maybe not every second of every
hour of the week and because our
forty two against two and so
correct as we can have it you
have any other questions was
another question Senator Novell
in that.
Centerville thank you Mr
discussions this morning
typically a stock counties have
been designated as state
agencies is that the case for
this because many of our local
programs could be administered
Well Mister president and
etcetera want to follow
constitution that's correct.
What we had I will tell you what
happened with with junior money
last year when we send it to
members on doing that because
Vito strikes could happen.
If if agencies are DFA gets
overwhelmed with junior money if
sure you're not creating any new
programs asking for any new
studies anything along those
lines will get rejected and then
on your rejections you're not
County with counties of dealing
with the funds but I can
understand that may be an issue
but local governments actually
kind of as an intermediary as I
understand with DFA to the
counties but
sure we get the money to where
it needs to be thank you Mr
president.
Thank you senator Neville we do
have a sentiment I see that you
did have other comments I wanted
to make.
that's reoccurring do not send
that to local agencies in
counties the reoccurring money
is so hard to track when we have
so many people doing that send
your one time money if you want
to buy police cars any
we've done it what we're
learning from our mistakes and
and we will make mistakes but
hopefully not very many that we
can't correct immediately so
just kind of bear with us and
and it's going to be a process
make an announcement Center for
the thanks very much Mr
president if the chair finance
would yield just one more
question Semenya's detailed.
Yes thank you Mr president is a
education institutions that
correct.
Yes I yes that is correct and so
Mr president does are they
associated with an actual number
or can you call it out by what
center what will you have to
call LFC because if you're gonna
go to U. N. M. than those are
PSP's.
You will not need to know that
and they'll be able to detail
that to you into the right
should be very cautious on how
they approach those so when
you're doing that make sure that
you have agreements with these
with these entities that they're
going to accept the money and do
everybody to hear that because
one of the appropriations will
one of the items that I listed
last year kind of got caught up
in what he's talking about thank
you.
Thank you we do have further
announcements centers the
office.
I am not clear about how
specific we to be with the
appropriation just as an example
if it's an appropriation to UNM
hospices sickness would be if
it says here that you are.
State agency only.
What what is meant by state
agencies are those the ones
Mr president UNM is in house
bill two so anybody that's in
house bill two that can receive
that funding either DFA U. N. M.
those are all house bill two
items we consider those state
and I wasn't real clear on the
answer.
It is if they are well funded
and house bill two.
And we didn't know that so our
our current intent is to
How are you.
I just feel that that's that's
affecting our decision making a
potential decision making.
This presents center some of
when you want to find something
either short or there over
funded or they're funded
and so you'll be able to
understand that when when people
help me but the language and.
Senator Pirtle for the day with
the exception of a call no
objection thank you Senator
Brandt further announcements.
the plan today once we get the
items off the table we need to
hear on third reading house bill
one which is the feed bill and
then we'll get the.
let's start unanimous consent we
go to that order business
messages from the governor when
that order business messages
from the governor the reader to
read.
Stewart and members of the
Senate pursuant to article four
section five B. two of the New
Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
university research park and
Economic Development Act and
designating research park
corporations as public employers
for the purpose of the public
employee bargaining Act.
eleven dear president pro
tempore a Stewart and members of
the Senate.
Pursuant to article four section
five B. two of the New Mexico
for the appointment of temporary
guardians contemporary
conservators for alleged
incapacitated persons and
clarifying reporting
requirements for these guardians
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president's
unanimous consent we go that our
business letters from the
Legislative Council ran that
president pro tempore a Stewart
and members of the Senate
pursuant to the bioscience
Development Act The New Mexico
Legislative Council has
appointed and submits to the
on June eighteen twenty twenty
three sincerely Raul Burciaga.
In general so the message from
has appointed and submits to the
Senate for confirmation sero
boys verts to the board of
directors of the New Mexico
bioscience Authority to serve
council service has been
received.
Dear president pro tempore a
Stewart and members of the
Senate pursuant to the
bioscience Development Act The
New Mexico Legislative Council
effective upon confirmation the
remainder of the term expiring
June eighteen twenty twenty I
sincerely Raul Burciaga the
journal so that the message from
council service has been
committee reports on that order
of business committee reports.
The reader to read.
Mr president your finance
committee to whom has been
Send me us move adoption of the
committee report.
We have a motion to adopt the
committee for.
Any objection.
analysis miscellaneous senator
Wirth thank you Mr president now
being eleven fifty nine AM I
move we adjourn until twelve or
one PM the Senate will come to
order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee there
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
third reading of legislation and
I yield the center one you'll
see for House Bill number one
passage is now subject to debate
amendment substitution etcetera
etcetera when asked to explain
the bill Mr president members of
legislature it's
It's about five million dollars
Some slight increases some
slight reversions five point
Thank you seven yes seven as
we're debating house bill one as
amended with emergency class
Senator Brandt.
The thing was present with
the chamber.
Semenya's I William.
Thank you Mr president what you
mentioned there were some
increases in some reversions can
you just quickly go over those.
amount of the reversions and
from me I just have the the
appropriated amounts from last
year we had versions and and I
think of roughly almost two
in Legislative Council has been
struggling a little bit because
we need to fix our pay band
problems in New Mexico and so as
a little bit of an increase to
set up for just one interim
committee for them to follow is
about twenty five thousand so as
we have so many interim
committees and so many days
The company from Rio Rancho
that's been doing the contract
to to do the webcasting and and
so I'm sure that's added some
cost to the interim committee
meetings
Bowers that separate sentiment
yes.
Mr president center that that's
approved by our council and in
legislators and so council has
said those payments.
Thank you Mr president so so CPO
doesn't have any control on that
like to do the rest the state
employees because we've got some
Senator yes Mr presence and you
are correct legislative
employees are exempt from the
state person.
Thank you Mr president and
state that need to be filled but
with the a radical inflation
that we're seeing and right and
wage increases around the the
look at some legislation dealing
with house bill does their
reviews because it is not
working I know that's a
different subject but since it
it popped up I thought I would
I think all of us would like to
get this passed so that our
staff can be paid thank you
Senator brand we do have further
debate with Senator.
But I just want to point out the
differences when spending money
last year because we weren't
here and we didn't travel and we
all hid and whatever it is we
did so this is a a good budget
much as I try to avoid agreeing
with senator Munoz in this
particular case I think that
that
A representative of Martinez
says a.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield.
Semenya's jailed yes.
Agassi it is it is this is this
what I think it is of money to
deal with the compilation
commission and the complexities
center some of the compilation
commission is an ongoing expense
it's always been there because
we self publish all our own
stuff and so that's why you're
seeing them in there for the
four hundred.
that we've done prior in house
bill one.
Okay as you know there needs to
be more money to deal with some
of the problems in in the
statute expect that would be an
Senator Sedillo office.
I thought that this is a
Legislative Council expense Mr
president.
that Representative Maestas has
a bill to to change some of that
compilation and and the council
is looking at that and so will
as council moves forward the
next time they meet they'll
Thank you Mr president and that
Chairman this is pretty
straightforward budget was that
it quite early in Senate finance
Mr chairman for the pleasure the
dollars in the special for that
could you tell us a the total
estimate of that completed
project Senator yes.
So Mister president center the
is processed and so the the
director has went to a different
states and review their systems
and decided then and councils
the term in which system to
make that change in Council
services so we'll have an easier
time drafting tracking and
technology driven built.
the debate.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president unanimous consent to
excuse senator by the Senator
Brandt thank you Mr president
the.
Would like to excuse senator
Baucus Senator Moores insertion
eighties Intel return to the
chamber.
bill one as amended with
emergency clause do now pass and
ask Miss consent of the Senate
the record show that the rules
being called and all those
present voted in the Fuhrman
except for.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
By a vote of thirty six and
affirmative there on the
negative house bill one as
amended with emergency clause
the body I I this helps our
Legislative Council it helps our
staff gets us through the
interim so really appreciate
that other than reimbursing us I
mean this part of the job and
report send that order of
business committee reports the
reader to read.
accordance with consider cost
additional provisions and thence
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
respectfully submitted Mimi
Stewart chair Senator Stewart Mr
there are no objection the
reader to read the committee
reports.
Senate bill thirty nine germane
and that's referred to the
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee.
that's referred to the Education
Committee Senate bill fifty
seven germane and that's
referred to the conservation
committee Senate bill fifty
Senate bill sixty germane and
that's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee Senate bill sixty two
germane and that's referred to
bill sixty four germane and
that's referred to the health
and public affairs committee
Senate bill sixty five germane
and that's referred to the
health of public affairs
seven germane and that's
referred to the health and
public affairs committee Senate
bill sixty eight germane and
that is referred to the tax
business and transportation
to the conservation committee
Senate bill seventy three
germane and that's referred to
the Education Committee Senate
and public affairs committee
Senate bill eighty two germane
and that's referred to the
Education Committee Senate bill
committee Senate bill eighty
seven germane and that's
referred to the conservation
committee Senate bill eighty
eight germane and that's
that's referred to the Education
Committee Senate bill ninety two
germane and that's referred to
the health and public affairs
the health and public affairs
committee Senate bill ninety
seven germane events referred to
the in the in rural and cultural
affairs committee Senate bill
Senator Stewart Mr president I
move adoption of the very
lengthy committee report thank
you sentences rent a motion to
adopt the committee reports any
objection.
South.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
representatives Mr president I
directed to inform the Senate
that the duly rules and gross
copy of house bill one as
amended with emergency clause
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk house of
representatives the journal show
that the message from the house
has been received.
emergency clause.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that over business
introduction of legislation find
Senate bill one oh three
introduced by Senator Padilla
and act relating to the
workforce solutions department
providing for criminal history
limited use and requiring
confidentiality of information
obtained through the background
checks providing four yield or
of denial or termination of
employment based upon
thousand seven chapter two
hundred section twenty three
providing a penalty Senate bill
one oh three.
Centers if I may ask a our staff
committees committee Senator
help the public affairs
committee that Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one oh
three.
Senate bill one oh four
providing alternative paths to
teacher licensure under certain
circumstances Senate bill one oh
four Senate bill one of far
having been read twice by title.
four Senate bill one of five
introduced by senator souls and
act relating to public school
finance changing the date of
school boards and governing
administration changing the
first reporting date for the
calculation of membership Senate
bill one oh five Senate bill one
of five having been read twice
Diamond and act relating to
taxation creating the short line
railroad modernization income
tax credit and the short line
railroad modernization corporate
transportation committee that
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one of six Senate bill one
oh seven introduced by senator
souls and Senator Duhigg and act
Mexico small loan act of
nineteen fifty five requiring a
license for certain lenders
changing certain reporting
requirements requiring notice
Committee that Senate bill one
oh seven.
Senate Bill.
One oh eight introduced by
Senator Padilla and act relating
to taxation exempting social
committees committee then
Senator acts Business the
transportation committee that
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one await.
Senate bill one oh nine
quality control act the
hazardous waste act the water
quality act the solid waste act
to increase civil penalties for
violations non compliance and
Senate committees committee then
Senate conservation committee
that Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one on line.
Senate bill one ten introduced
school districts in increasing
school bus driver compensation
Senate bill one hundred ten
Senate bill one ten having been
read twice by title is printed
and referred to the Senate
introduced by Senator Pirtle and
act making appropriation from
the appropriation contingency
fund to the department of
transportation for
infrastructure projects on a
that Senate bill Senate tax and
business transportation
committee and Senate finance
committee Senate bill one
eleven.
Senate bill one twelve
introduced by Senator Gonzalez
Senate bill one twelve Senate
bill one twelve having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee.
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill one
twelve.
Senate bill one thirteen
introduced by Senator moon yo's
and act relating to motor
by title is printed and referred
to the Senate committees
committee then Sierra X.
business transportation
committee vents Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one
thirteen.
Senate bill one fourteen
requiring the approval of the
Attorney General for executive
branch state agency contracts
for legal counsel revising the
procurement code exemption for
advertising eliminating the
approve sole source procurement
determinations limiting the term
of sole source of emergency
procurement to one year
providing additional
requirements for procurement
under existing contracts
conforming changes repealing
section thirteen dash one dash
nine eight point one of NMSA
nineteen seventy eight being
laws nineteen ninety eight
committees committee then
Senate's tax business
transportation committee then
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one fourteen.
Senate bill one fifteen
introduced by senator Tom and
and speech language pathologists
Senate bill one fifteen Senate
bill one fifteen having been
read twice by title is printed
referred to the Senate
committees committee that Senate
and Senator Griggs an act
relating to courts creating the
county courthouse buildings Fund
providing for grants to certain
counties record house projects
committee then Senate health and
public affairs committee pent
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one sixteen.
Senate bill one seventeen an act
relating to limitations of
actions.
of limitations for actions for
damages due to childhood sexual
abuse applying the elimination
of the statute of limitations
for actions for damages due to
childhood sexual abuse
committee then Senate health and
public affairs committee that
Senate Judiciary Committee
Senate bill one seventeen Senate
bill one eighteen introduced by
Senator Gonzalez for the
program fund Senate bill one
eighteen Senate bill one
eighteen having been read twice
by title is printed and referred
to the Senate committees
committee the Senate health and
Pino Senator survive does and
senator Munoz.
And act making appropriations
from the appropriation
contingency fund to establish a
school of public health at the
Then Senate health and public
Affairs Committee Vance Senate
finance Senate bill one
nineteen.
Senate bill one twenty
brandishing a firearm during the
commission of a non capital
felony Senate bill one twenty
Senate bill one twenty having
been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
introduced by senator guy Aigles
and others and act relating to
taxation exempting social
security income from income tax
Senate tax business
transportation committee then
Senate finance Senate bill one
twenty one.
Senate bill one twenty two
introduced by senator Munoz for
bill one twenty two Senate bill
one twenty two having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee then Senate
tax business the transportation
committee an act relating to
state agencies providing a new
sunset date for the state racing
commission Senate bill one
twenty three Senate bill one
Senate bill one twenty three.
Senate bill one twenty four
introduced by senator Munoz and
others relating to higher
scholarship act Senate bill one
twenty four Senate bill one
twenty four having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee and Senate
providing for a minimum hourly
wage rate of fifteen dollars for
state employees Senate bill one
twenty five Senate bill one
twenty five having been read
Senate bill one twenty six
introduced by Senator Gallegos
and others and act relating to
public employee retirement
including public safety tele
public safety tele communicators
Senate bill one twenty six
Senate bill one twenty six
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee that
that act relating to law
enforcement amending sections of
the NMSA nineteen seventy eight
to add members of the New Mexico
mounted patrol to definitions or
twenty seven Senate bill one
twenty seven having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee that Senate
Judiciary Committee.
Veterans Affairs Committee and
act relating to taxation
providing an income tax
deduction for certain uniformed
services retirees and their
transportation committee and
Senate finance Senate bill one
twenty eight.
Senate bill one twenty nine
introduced by senator smitteez
and act relating to financial
nineteen sixty to nineteen fifty
five requiring a license for
certain lenders changing certain
reporting requirements requiring
notice Senate bill one twenty
Committee Senate bill one twenty
nine.
Senate bill one thirty
introduced by senator harm meal
and others an act relating to
gas providing emergency
Senate bill one thirty having
been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee
sense Senate health and public
affairs committee then Senate
technical education loan for
service act creating a loan for
service program in the higher
education department providing
contract terms requiring
Senate committees committee that
Senate Education Committee then
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one thirty one.
Senate bill one thirty two
introduced by Senator Stewart
thirty two having been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee then Senate
Education Committee then Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one thirty two.
supporters of make a wish New
Mexico making appropriation
Senate bill one thirty three
Senate bill one thirty three
having been read twice by title
is printed referred to the
introduced by Senator Rodriguez
and Representative small and act
relating to public finance
allocating severance tax bonding
mortgage finance respond forty
to prioritize expanding or and
come bring certain balances in
the New Mexico housing trust
fund Senate bill one thirty four
Committee that Senate finance
Senate bill one thirty four.
Senate bill one thirty five
introduced by Senator Hemphill
and Senator Stewart and act
percent of the aggregate
recurring appropriations.
Senate bill one thirty five.
Senate bill one thirty five
Senate bill one thirty six
introduced by Senator Kernan and
others and act relating to
taxation excluding oil and gas
six Senate bill one thirty six
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee and
Senate tax visit transportation
committee and Senate finance
relating to taxation providing a
distribution of a certain amount
of the state gross receipts tax
imposed on certain services
requiring reporting of the
location of the seller we're
been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee then
Senate tax business and
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
providing that receipts from
payments of a Medicare
administrative contractor be
eligible for a gross receipts
tax deduction for certain
medical and health care services
Senate tech tax business the
transportation committee and
Senate finance committee Senate
bill one thirty eight.
Senate bill one thirty nine
introduced by Senator Stefanics
to continue to support statewide
agricultural educational
programs Senate bill one thirty
nine Senate bill one thirty nine
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
Representative Garrett and act
relating to higher education and
acting the opportunity
scholarship act amending
repealing and enacting sections
referred to the Senate
committees committee that Senate
Education Committee then Senate
finance Senate bill one forty.
article nine section fourteen of
the constitution of New Mexico
to permit under certain
conditions the state to expand
expended state funds for the
nonprofit organizations and
advancing community well being
Senate joint resolution seven.
Senate joint resolution seven
having been read twice by title
introduced by Senator Ivey Soto
and Senator Gonzalez a joint
resolution proposing to amend
the constitution of New Mexico
executive and judicial branches
of state government to remove
existing authority to set
salaries by law for elected
officers of the executive and
judicial branches of state
the authority of the legislative
of the legislatively appointed
members of the state ethics
commission to appoint two
members of different parties to
the state ethics commission
Senate joint resolution eight
Senate joint resolution nine
introduced by Senator Pirtle a
joint resolution proposing an
amendment to article one of the
a noose new state or join an
adjoining state.
Senate joint resolution nine
Senate joint resolution nine
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee and
extend the lease for the downs
at Albuquerque incorporated.
Senate joint resolution tab
Senate joint resolution ten
having been read twice by title
by senator smitteez a memorial
requesting the department of
health to conduct a study on the
feasibility of creating a center
for complex care for adults and
children with special healthcare
Senate rules committee and
Senate health and public affairs
committee sent a memorial nine.
Senate memorial ten.
regulation commission to conduct
and oversee a study to determine
the public right Karia
environmental and economic
benefits and costs and the
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee and
Senate tax business and
transportation committee Senate
memorial ten.
Senator Wirth.
You Mr president I think that's
all the work up on the table and
thanks the members for moving
house bill one so in terms of
able to announce their committee
meetings that is a schedule
ideal to committee chairs to
announce their committees.
Senator is aware that order
business and that's just
six thank you thank you senator
Senator.
Mr chairman I thought he'd
already yielded to the committee
chair Salwai told committee
chairs or done a few years
and we'll have an agenda of
about ten or twelve bills on on
Monday afternoon following the
floor session in room three
eleven.
to meet in the afternoon thank
you thank you senator Ortiz Pena
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president the
Senate tax business and
a after and we will have the
secretary of transportation to a
presentation and we may tackle
couple bills.
Thanks session Senator souls
thank you Mr president Senate
normal time and then on
Wednesday we will be here
starting to hear our bill so
Senate education Monday morning
at nine and then we'll start
hearing bills Wednesday at nine
processing and voting on some of
the confirmations where we did
the hearings over the.
Last week.
And we will also be hearing
bills there was a make a wish
bill in there so maybe we can
drop the referrals bring that
the finance and we'll just put
that I make a wish as we move
through the budget there's so
much money
agencies to hear.
As we move through have waiting
for house bill two on Monday we
will begin hearings again with
are Senate finance committee
will going today about thirty
minutes after the floor and then
we got four agencies need to
hear and Monday morning at nine.
colleagues if they would
consider
donating some of their junior
money to the poor shelter rescue
fund this really helps our
get the our wild horse
management bill through so
really appreciate your support
thank you thank you senator
McKenna Senator menulis.
as you look through these less
and you have donate a you you've
submitted for agencies last year
prior years maybe you weren't
here here your prior legislative
new has to be money or capital
money comes out you may have to
fund more to that same project
for them to get it completed.
We have about two point three
get worse and worse and we are
to the point on some of these
capital projects where we will
have to pay the IRS of federal
penalty if they don't move along
and so as you look through your
any questions you can reach up
to Council services and check
but if you fund projects in in
your communities and districts
check with them that they can
complete them.
a little scanned logical so
maybe a right word here but I do
want to thank all of you all for
your for your of the near
unanimous commitment yesterday
means that there are made from
all oil and gas and so I want to
thank you all and appreciate
your your support of that to a
very important industry and
well properly thank you Mr
president thank you senator
share any further announcements
Senators.
I see no further announcements
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
offices because it's a reminder
these are all of the folks that
have submitted forms for capital
outlay for your district so it's
important just that everyone
gets this I know some folks left
always appropriate to take a
moment to think.
The many many individuals and
agencies that have made this.
This process work and make this
Council and all the bill
drafters and folks up there the
legislative finance committee
legislative education study
committee legislative building
maintenance payroll proofreaders
miss love ari our new sergeant
at arms and her whole staff we
very much appreciate you to all
the folks that work for the
analysts and secretaries let's
just take a moment and give a
big clap to them and thank them
for everything they've done to
get us here thank you so much.
noon on Monday see no objections
the Senate to Senate races till
twelve PM Monday morning.
