Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator McCain here Senator
Moores.
Senator monos.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator folk.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
Thank you everyone to please
rise for the invocation to be
led today by Senator Kernan the
pledge allegiance to be led
Today I'm reading from psalm
sixty to one my soul finds rest
I thank god today we feel your
presence among us and we thank
you for the comfort you bring we
provide insurance in your word
that we are not alone as we
wisdom knowing that only good
comes from your guidance.
We pray that even in times of
disagreement we seek first to
understand others and then to be
understood.
those communities across
Arkansas Tennessee and Kentucky
who are suffering from
destruction and loss of life.
We pray for the first responders
We just call this in your line
in.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
Hello on that I this is those
will be those that medica.
The state of New Mexico and this
is.
Senator Wirth.
Kernan it's always good to just
pause and it's great to have you
leaders with the invocation we
appreciate that very much thank
you.
Just I think up front before I
couple of items on the table and
then we'll recess subject to
call the chairman Senate
Democrats are going to caucus
and then the plan is to have
end so with that I'd yield first
to.
Senator Lopez do you have
anything you need to do let me
yield to senator Munoz sentiment
us thank you Mr president I'd
sessions he will not return to
the chamber.
no objection thank you centerman
us Senator Lopez Mr president
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Gonzalez.
I see no further announcements
that one more nonsense centerman
us
Mr presents members of the
Senate finance when we go off
finance so thank you.
Thank you senator us.
Say no further nonsense senator
Wirth and just just one of the
things over and get a sense of
tomorrow and so again assuming
house bill two we'll see where
that is but we probably haven't
earlier morning say nine o'clock
floor session tomorrow if house
bill two comes out and we do
order business messages from the
house the reader to read the
message.
Message from the house of
representatives Mr president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed house
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president Ms consent we go about
our business committee reports
around that order of business
committee point the reader to
re.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill to do pass
respectfully submitted Joseph
Cervantes chairman.
Senator Hernandez I move
adoption.
Centers we have a motion to
go about our business
introduction of legislation on
that order business introduction
of legislation.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred Senate resolution to
has had it under consideration
reports that same has been doing
Hamblen Mr president I move the
adoption of the committee report
Senator have a motion to adopt
the committee report any
objection.
See no objection the committee
signed an open session Senate
resolution to.
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
establishing Representative
districts providing the method
for electing representatives
providing for the for the
filling of vacancies setting
precincts fixing the number
read twice by title is printed.
Excuse me is referred to Senate
rules committee that's house
bill eight.
Senator Wirth.
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
and just to clarify then Senator
can is going to make an
announcement but just before she
does when we're back in a little
meets tonight just to be clear
side you'll Senator McKenna.
Senate.
I thank you president
immediately after we are
adjourned from the floor the
president the party of Lincoln
who will I meet in room three
eleven right after the floor
session.
Thank you senator Morris.
Any further announcements.
objections the Senate to Senate
recess subject to the call of
the chair.
