Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Monero's.
Senator Neville.
Senator Senator o'neill.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator songes.
Senator committees.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Please stand for the invocation
to be given ten nights by our
very own senator Jerry or TCP
now please remain standing the
He always disappears.
Senator Michael Padilla.
And the pledge to the flag by
Senator Kernan.
We called you by many names.
We've known you in many writings
through the centuries.
The loving presence we rely on.
The unifying spirit we turn to.
When threatened with division.
sometimes we forget to trust in
your gentleness and in your
firmness.
But now father mother.
We pray you will soon as our
tensions we pray you will keep
us on your on your path.
Toward your one agency.
Comment though lanthanide on up
on that those systems we need
those Miss America is not a
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
seeing no objection were on
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president thank you a senator
Ortiz Pino
seven hours after we schedule
stars a little bit of a push but
we are at that time Madam
presents a couple of
announcements you see a lot of
know that Navajo Nation
president Jonathan as and First
Lady fifty earlier this were
both here so we're very sorry we
and then we're going to do
Senate memorial eight we're
gonna talk about that but I
think she's asked that we do
that tomorrow and I think what I
see here that on the floor and
take a vote on that very
president thank you members of
the body for lying to the.
Talk about American Indian day
and I thank you for the support
that has gone out of supporting
still going to to.
See them and hear them out as we
move forward and do these things
with the legislature and make it
a better sense of the great
So just just for the members
we're not gonna do any third
reading tonight really it's just
to do the work up on the table
and then let committee chairs
announce when will be in
If there's no objection were on
that order of Business messages
from the governor.
Senate executive message number
thirty five the honorable Mimi
Stewart president pro tempore a
hereby submit to the Senate
rules committee the following
nomination for appointment
Michael our third Hamann P. E.
for appointment as state
have all duties responsibilities
and authority of his office
during that time prior to final
action by the Senate
respectfully submitted Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
of the New Mexico constitution I
hereby submit to the Senate
rules committee the following
nominations for appointment
Arsenio Romero PhD for
reappointment to the New Mexico
Lujan Grisham governor the
channel show the message from
the governor has been received.
And the appointments are
referred to the rules committee.
messages from the house leader
all right message from the house
of representatives.
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house appropriations
McCutchen chief clerk the
channel show the message from
the house has been received.
Madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
madam president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill fifteen as
amended by the house a request
the concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Senator Peter Wirth thank you
madam president Ms because that
we go about our business
committee reports if there's no
objection were on that order of
business committee reports
reader role right madam
nose chair.
Senator Maloney of.
Us as consent that Senator very
loud all the requirements you
reports and that we vote on with
one thirty eight do pass Senate
bill one seventy two do pass
respectfully submitted George
one euros chair center manuals
move adoption the committee
they were acted upon
individually.
Madam president your tax
business and transportation
committee to who's been referred
Senate bill one hundred has had
it under consideration and
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Benny Shendo junior chair
Senator Hamblen madam president
I move the adoption of the
committee report.
Madam president your tax
business and transportation
committee to home is been
referred Senate bill one eleven
has had it under consideration a
report same with recommendation
report product option of the
committee report is our
objection seeing none the
committee report has been
adopted.
Resident your tax business and
transportation committee to whom
bill one thirty seven do pass
and that's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted Benny Shendo junior
chair Senator Hamblen madam
president I move the adoption of
business and transportation
committee to has been referred
Senate bill one fifty has had it
under consideration reports same
with recommendation that do past
events referred to the Judiciary
report is there a projection of
singing on the committee report
has been adopted.
Madam president your tax
business and transportation
committee to who's been referred
Senate bill one fifty five has
Hamblen madam president I move
the adoption of the committee
report on a favorable committee
report adoption of what.
Is there objection seeing none
the committee report is adopted.
that it do pass this referred to
the finance committee
respectfully submitted William
P. souls chair Senators souls
thank you madam chair I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
reader will read all the
committee reports Senate bill
one ninety I do pass and then
just referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
William P. souls chair.
Seeing none the committee report
is adopted.
Madam president your rules
committee has had under
consideration Senate executive
letter number six dated January
commencing upon confirmation of
expiring July fifteen twenty
twenty two your committee
recommends of the Senate confirm
disappointment respectfully
submitted Daniel A. Ivey Soto
reflect that they were act upon
individually.
If there's no objection the
reader will read all the
committee reports Senator
executive little number six
dated January fifteen twenty
twenty one the which the
July fifteen twenty twenty three
the committee recommends that
the Senate confirm
disappointment Senator executive
level number six dated January
fifteenth twenty twenty one the
expiring July fifteen twenty
twenty four the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm disappointment Senator
executive letter number twenty
six dated October five twenty
October five twenty twenty one
that expiring July twenty five
twenty twenty four your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirmed disappointment.
commencing upon confirmation to
be served at the pleasure of the
governor your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm disappointment Senator
executive message number twenty
commencing upon confirmation to
be served at the pleasure of the
governor the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm disappointment Senator
executive message number twenty
nine dated January twenty two
commencing upon confirmation to
be served at the pleasure of the
governor the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm disappointment Senator
executive message number twenty
five dated January twenty two
at the pleasure of the governor
the committee recommends that
the Senate confirm
disappointment Senator executive
message number twenty nine dated
January twenty two twenty twenty
pleasure of the governor the
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm disappointment
Senate executive message the
second set of executive letter
number eleven dated August
confirmation and expiring
January one twenty twenty three
the committee recommends that
the Senate confirm this
appointment.
term commencing upon
confirmation the expiring
January one twenty twenty four
the committee recommends that
the Senate confirm
disappointment Senator executive
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring July one twenty twenty
three your committee recommends
that the Senate confirm
disappointment amended Senate
executive letter number thirty
on July to twenty twenty one
that expiring July one twenty
twenty three the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirmed disappointment Senate
for a term commencing on
November fifteen twenty twenty
one expiring July one twenty
twenty five the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm disappointment Senator
commission for term commencing
on December ten twenty twenty
one that expiring July one
twenty twenty five the committee
recommends that the Senate
as a member of the coal surface
mining commission for a term
commencing upon confirmation to
be served at the pleasure of
the.
Enter your committee recommends
Baur as a member of the coal
surface mining commission for a
term commencing upon
confirmation to be served at the
pleasure of the governor your
committee recommends that the
Senate confirmed disappointment
a member of the commission for
deaf and hard of hearing persons
for term commencing upon
confirmation of expiring
December thirty one twenty
twenty five the committee
recommends that the Senate
job J. Hooper as a member of the
commission for deaf and hard of
hearing persons for term
commencing upon confirmation
expiring December thirty one
twenty twenty six your committee
William cuts Hawker as a member
of the environmental improvement
board for a term commencing on
February seventeen twenty twenty
one that expiring June thirty
nineteen what's the governor
makes the following appointment
Karen W. Garcia as a member of
the environmental improvement
board for a term commencing upon
confirmation that expiring
twenty two twenty nineteen Hey
what's the governor makes the
following appointment very
Patricio Ruiloba my.
as a member of the Human Rights
Commission for a term commencing
three dated October twenty two
twenty nineteen and what's the
governor makes the following
appointment Jacquelyn coal ash
as a member of the Human Rights
Commission for a term commencing
three dated October twenty two
twenty nineteen what's the
governor makes the following
appointment David Overstreet as
a member of the Human Rights
Commission for a term commencing
dated March for twenty twenty
one in which the governor makes
the following reappointment
Victor Polis as a member of the
Human Rights Commission for a
term commencing on January one
eight dated March for twenty
twenty one in which the governor
makes the following
reappointment very lame Leslie
as a member of the Human Rights
Commission for a term commencing
eight dated March for twenty
twenty one it was the governor
makes the following
reappointment Christopher
Baldwin as a member of the Human
Rights Commission for term
message number seventeen dated
January twenty one twenty twenty
two what's the governor makes
the following reappointment
Jessica Thompson as a member of
the Human Rights Commission for
Senate executive message number
seventeen it dated January
twenty one twenty twenty two the
which the governor makes the
following re appointment very
limited Miner as a member of the
confirmed this re appointment
Senator executive letter number
six dated may eighth twenty
twenty one in which the governor
makes the following appointment
five the committee recommends
that the Senate confirm
disappointment Senate executive
message number twenty nine dated
January twenty two twenty twenty
upon confirmation that expiring
January twenty five twenty
twenty four the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirmed disappointment Senate
executive message number twenty
of directors for a term
commencing upon confirmation
that expiring March one twenty
twenty four your committee
recommends that the Senate
confirm disappointment Senator
a member of the employers mutual
company board of directors for a
term commencing upon
confirmation of expiring January
one twenty twenty five your
committee recommends that the
appointment Samuel Baca as a
member of the employers mutual
company board of directors for a
term commencing upon
confirmation that expiring
January one twenty twenty five
your committee recommends that
appointment Patricia some of it
as a member of the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority for
term commencing on October
twenty eight twenty twenty one
expiring January one twenty
the governor makes the following
appointment angel Raaz as a
member of the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority for
term commencing on January to
fifteenth twenty twenty one they
which the governor makes the
following appointment Douglas
James how as a member of the New
Mexico renewable energy
executive letter number twenty
eight dated October five twenty
twenty one the what's the
governor makes the following
appointment Robert W. bush as a
member of the New Mexico
confirm disappointment sort of
executive letter number thirty
five dated December twenty eight
twenty twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
appointment Jeremy Daniel Lewis
twenty four the committee
recommends that the Senate
confirmed disappointment.
Senate executive letter number
fourteen dated may twenty seven
twenty twenty one it was the
one at expiring may twenty one
twenty twenty seven the
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm disappointment
Senate executive letter number
upon confirmation to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm
disappointment Senate executive
letter number four dated may
may twenty six twenty twenty
three your committee recommends
that the Senate confirm
disappointment Senator executive
letter number seven dated may
twenty twenty one expiring June
seventeen twenty twenty two your
committee recommends a Pacific
confirm disappointment Senate
executive message number
commencing on June eighteenth
twenty twenty one that expiring
June seventeen twenty twenty
five the committee recommends
that the Senate confirmed this
member of the technology
research collaborative for a
term commencing on Jan.
Right to twenty twenty two
expiring January one twenty
twenty four the committee
recommends that the Senate
re appointment mark P. Popovich
as a member of the technology
research collaborative for term
commencing on January two twenty
twenty two expiring January one
one twenty twenty two what's the
governor makes the following
reappointment job Clark as a
member of the technology
research collaborative for term
commencing on January two twenty
letter number thirty dated
October twenty seven twenty
twenty one the what's the
governor makes the following
appointment David Norton is a
member of the tourism commission
confirmed disappointment Senator
executive letter number thirty
dated October twenty seven
twenty eight twenty one which
the governor makes the following
appointment Benjamin Abreu's CO
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm disappointment
Senate executive letter number
twenty five dated September
twenty nine twenty twenty one in
which the governor makes the
twenty one at expiring September
twenty eight twenty twenty five.
I your committee recommends that
the Senate confirm
disappointment respectfully
state committee report seeing no
objection the committee report
has been adopted and the journal
will reflect that they were
acted upon individually.
business introduction of
legislation the reader will read
Senate memorial twenty two
introduced by senator Senator
Correa Hemphill a memorial to
Senate memorial twenty two have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed not referred
to committee and placed on the
Bills two and three and act
making general appropriations
and authorizing expenditures by
state agencies required by law.
House appropriations and finance
Two and three have been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate finance committee.
House Bill fifteen introduced by
similar tax levy by certain
tribes shall be limited to a
rate not less than the total of
the gross receipts tax rate and
local option gross receipts tax
by title is referred to.
The Senate tax business and
transportation committee thanks
to the Senate finance committee
house bill fifteen.
representative Bob Toya act
relating to government financing
creating the land grant received
assistance fund prescribing
duties providing for
twice by title is referred to
the.
Senate Indian rural and cultural
affairs and since to Senate.
Finance house bill eight.
our business announcements and
miscellaneous all right there's
no objection were on that order
of business announcements and
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you madam president so we
just rented house bill fifteen
the table so for committees
we're going to be on the floor
tomorrow at one o'clock so now's
the time to announce committees
for tomorrow and maybe tonight.
president if the floor we floor
leader would yield please
Senator Wirth Dale madam
president I am happy to.
Thank you madam president and I
don't know if we need to do that
order on on holding that till
tomorrow.
So then present I'm happy to do
that I just ask unanimous
consent that we hold House Bill
back on fifteen looking at it
and re doing it tomorrow seeing
none we've done that business
Senator Wirth.
scheduled for today the entire
agenda will just be rolled over
to our Monday Monday meeting
that completes all the Senate
bills that we had so it
of you who who want to members
of the committee there there the
food we had prepared for
tonight's meeting is available
in those in Senate suite three
hundred my office go up there
dinners of I guess it's first
come first serve okay not don't
rush everyone Senator Duhigg.
Thank you madam president the
Senate judiciary committee will
Senator Hamblen madam president
the tax business and
transportation committee will
meet tomorrow morning at nine
o'clock in the same room same
bat time same bat channel.
I think that's three twenty one
committee on Monday to the floor
so we'll send you items to
double check on your junior bill
as we send that over to the
house make sure everything is
correct before we send that over
what will pay and thirty I I
just want to see if they're
paying attention Friday night
the Senate finance will meet
tomorrow at nine thirty the
get their capital in tonight if
you did not get your capital and
let me know and Pete Campos will
Senator Campos will help you
spend that.
people but make sure your
capital is in and needs to be in
so we can get that forty time
frame again Senate finance will
will be meeting we have a lot of
Make sure that we're going to
talk to agencies on Monday and
see what they need and we're
gonna wrap up house bill two in
order to get it ready and and
close of the session.
will meet Monday morning as
regularly scheduled thank you.
Excuse me.
Due to a lack of available
meetings tomorrow morning your
Other announcements and
miscellaneous business Senator
to meet today will meet tomorrow
at ten o'clock in room three
eleven I'm sorry Katie I'd tell
you to make the most of it yeah
we'll do three eleven tomorrow
we're in a different room so
three eleven Senate Judiciary
Committee members thank you.
Any other announcements anybody
want to redo their announcement.
And and announced on the Senate
floor that today marks the one
year anniversary of fallen
officer Derian chair at that was
murdered just outside Deming
just want to tell all of the a
law enforcement officers that
are here that we honor his
memory and we continue to pray
for him his family and all of
our law enforcement officers and
Yes Senators field rice for a
moment of silence.
Thank you all.
Any other announcements are
American history month so just
want to recognize that thank
you.
Thank you for that seen her all
day on Twitter Senator Ventus
AS you madam chair you know very
well we've been having a lot of
hearings in the Senate Judiciary
Committee the session and we've
heard from a lot of police
officers.
Chiefs we've heard from the rank
and file.
respected as a profession any
longer we're we're talking about
hiring more of them by offering
them more money and that's going
to be an important part of what
we do this session I'm sure
only part of the job.
And then I was the sponsor of
the camera legislation.
Now was the sponsor of the civil
rights legislation.
were not intended to be a slight
to law enforcement officers
those were not intended to be a
disrespect to them in any way
shape or form or lack of support
I wanted to know on this day a
they do is essential I hope you
remember that I hope will
continue to honor that and we
see a law enforcement officer I
see the state police here in the
chambers we see them on the road
to.
let's remember that throwing
money at salaries is only the
beginning of showing respect.
week we couldn't say enough
words to to talk about how much
we value madam chair members I I
appreciate the chamber and you
give me a couple moments but I
want you know we we talk to them
and we want them to know we have
their back.
and I hope this chamber will
look for every opportunity to
show that thank you madam
president.
Thank you senator serve on K.
anyone else Senator Sedillo
senator Linda Lopez for their
work on reversing of missing and
murdered murdered and missing
indigenous women
the event today was extremely
members and I think it's really
important that we listen to
those voices as well and again I
simply want to commend the
sponsors of the legislation
senator.
Okay any other announcements for
miscellaneous.
I see none senator Wirth thank
you madam president thanks
everyone with that unanimous
