Senator Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senator
Diamond.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth Senator Woods.
given today by Reverend Dr Harry
everts the First Presbyterian
Church in Santa Fe please remain
standing for the pledge of
allegiance to relate today by
senator Neville.
Everybody the this is very
average calling from Ann Arbor
Michigan where is cold and snowy
These are vision god of our
lives.
Speak to us of your vision for
New Mexico.
We see children flourishing in
those who are hungry and without
Speak to us of your vision.
Recent community safe and
thriving in as is distressed by
drugs and violence
interventional despair.
Speech was so god of your
vision.
Even our and wisdom of god of
our lives as we talk today.
resume today in our desire to
care deeply for one another and
for the state in which we all
call home.
In the name of all that is just
Salute the flag the state of New
Mexico.
start things off all yield to
senator Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr president good
morning to you as well and all
the members unanimous consent we
Presbyterian Church here in
Santa Fe although not from there
today I will assure you that it
feels very cold and snowy here
appreciate
the moisture R. Mr president's
due to the weather and the O. H.
employees that are snowed in
you should all have received
your funding sheet last night
with instructions via email.
three point one million dollars
It is suggested particularly for
the newer members doing this
that you work with other
legislative members in your
respective counties to fund
the process please call Michelle
Jeske at the council service at
nine eight six four six five
two.
Today senator souls.
national Blue Ribbon designation
and I think each senator is
going to speak about that honor
it's my understanding that those
officials are over in the house
The central valley electrical
coop farmers electrical co op
low carbon fuel coalition Otero
county electric coop and
continental divide electric
coop.
Is having a legislative dinner
at Rio Chama Abiquiu room six to
nine by invitation only with
that Mr president I would yield
no objection cameras are to be
about only on the floor Senator
Lopez thank you Mr president and
then unanimous consent to excuse
purposes the recipients of the
Blue Ribbon schools are with
this in the gallery so at any
point that you would like to do
that we can move forward with
that.
Senator Wirth.
Some of the present I think it's
chairman the Blue Ribbon awards
date back to Terrel bell award
for outstanding leadership as a
teacher principal as
superintendent of state
commissioner of education the
firm believer that education is
a powerful and liberating force
in people's lives.
Principles chosen as the Terrel
their students to develop
academically emotionally.
Physically socially and
culturally these principles are
shown that with effective
Blue Ribbon schools of
application process.
The US department of education
together with the national
association of elementary school
principals association for
Right the secretary Terrel H.
bell held education is as high
as priority trusting that all
students would find it does he
have their personal key to
And so with that explanation as
to what that award is it's my
honor and pleasure to recognize
the gets to school district
school board president Laura
Salazar for lotus vice president
Danielle because CEO secretary
happening down in Gadsden they
are exceeding the regression
line for how well their students
are doing and that's a term in
statistics that means they're
help me in recognizing this
Travis Dempsey at a school board
members from the Gadsden
district for their continued
great success on behalf of our
children.
Yield to Senator Kernan for the
Hobbs school district Senator
Kernan thank you Mr president
and I'm very pleased today to
program which recognizes public
and private elementary middle
and high schools based on their
overall academic excellence or
their progress in closing the
communities and creating safe
and welcoming schools where
students master challenging and
engagement engaging content
Coronado elementary is an
tell you their leadership their
principal their teachers and all
the students come together to to
really work hard to achieve such
you're up there I have
Principal Lara I tell teacher
Candace Castillo.
I have president of the school
appreciation for the hard work
of Coronado elementary in our
school board thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr president I am not
sure if the Farmington school
board made it today because well
some of you might have noticed
this note.
Pam Schrader who is a principal
anticipate a who's a teacher of
the media team which includes
though I don't think they're up
there they might be watching so
please welcome them to Santa Fe.
they're in the building and
they're super there
superintendent school board
member Opry Tucker as well as
Los Lunas superintendent Arsenio
I'm gonna go back to some of the
souls Center souls thank you Mr
president children make up
approximately forty percent of
our population but they're a
Santa Fe for training of new
school board members but also to
come in lobby us for the needs
for those children please be
watching for them make them
continue to represent our
children every day in those
districts and I know that there
are several members of the Los
crucis school board.
the building in the next couple
of days thank you Mr president.
Senator by the.
capital I want to welcome my
school board the Albuquerque
public school board went through
quite the election a couple of
months ago and also wanted just
congratulate my school board
member a Yolanda Montoya Cordova
Senator Hemphill thank you Mr
president I too want to stand up
as a former educator and thank
all of you up there and I also
want to welcome my school boards
were here from Espanola public
with us on his appointment
yesterday thank you doctor sent
health for your leadership thank
you Mr president.
Thank you senator.
around the state thirteen school
districts and the board members
work very very hard in rural
areas sometimes with not as much
money as other school districts
Further announcements Senators.
Center male.
not a good year for us annual
basketball game.
It's extremely unfortunate
because it's a worthy cause and
an important legislative
tradition bottom line is it's a
decision but in a joint joint
statement echoed by the house.
Today we just we just have to
wait however I just want to
that's the kind of commitment we
need we've got a year to prepare
Senate Republican hit the
weights.
The flying Shendo is going to
even jump higher next time we
that trophy back okay but again
with no game this year
apologies.
Thank you for that information
center on their.
Alamogordo public schools is up
in the gallery a doctor kiddos
more we like to knowledge and
his assistant call Colleen
dangle there she is yes she's
Thank you Mr president I've had
a few school board members come
by and see me today but I would
like to welcome all the school
board member from my district
you Mr president thank you
senator Wirth.
Any further announcements.
order that Senator Stewart the
finance up for Senate bill
fourteen and then Senator Ivey
Soto will pick back up on Senate
bill six and I know he's handed
out the amendments on everyone's
reader to read the report.
Mr president your finance
committee to home is been
referred Senate bill one has had
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
to about three to four any
objection.
See no objections the committee
for has been adopted.
Mr president your conservation
committee to home is been
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth the fed ex chair
Senators appendix Mr president I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
Joint Memorial to do pass
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
to FedEx chair Senators of annex
Mr president I move adoption of
Mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
is been referred Senate bill one
oh three has had it under
consideration and report same
Ortiz a Pino chair Senator this
pandemic Mr president ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion and that the journal
committee Senate bill one fifty
six do not pass but that Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
six do pass events referred to
the finance committee Senate
bill one seventy one do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee Senate bill one
Gerald Ortiz a Pino chair
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Mr
president I move the adoption of
the committee reporters have a
motion to that the committee
report and injection.
Seeing no objection the
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion of the
journal reflect their actions
upon individually no objections
the reader to read the committee
reports Senate joint resolution
about as chair Senator thank.
that move adoption of the
committee reports centers we
have a motion to that's pretty
important objection this present
point of order says Senator
object to the committee report
Senator.
There was a motion to that's
thirty point seeing no objection
two has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that Senate
Education Committee substitute
for Senate bill two five two is
thence to the finance committee
respectfully submitted William
P. souls chair Senators souls.
See no objections the committee
report has been adopted.
Mr president your committees
committee to whom is been
referred Senate bill two eleven
has had it under consideration
Senator Stewart.
This present ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
put on them with month one
the finance committee Senate
bill two thirteen germane and
that's referred to the finance
committee Senate Bill to fifteen
present move adoption the
committee report have a motion
to that's right for.
Any objection.
I see no objection the Canadian
forces been adopted as journal
show that they were acted upon
and miscellaneous on that order
of Business announces
miscellaneous an ideal to
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president like to
Senators Senator panics thank
you Mr president in the past day
or so you might have found a
pair of gloves on your desks in
tried a mall on thank you.
Thanks to FedEx.
Any further announcements
Senators.
third reading of legislation
ideals Senator Stewart for item
number one on that that order
business serving legislation
Senator Stewart thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
fourteen as amended.
On final passage has been taken
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution see no
objections center Stewart to
in the house until the end they
didn't have time to pass it all
right I'll review for the body
what it does.
I think that was sergeant
honesty's escort thanks for when
it's into the chamber.
Thank you Mr president Senator
Pirtle and thank you just
clarification of the body what
So Mr president and members of
the Senate and twenty eighteen
fourteen percent of New Mexicos
greenhouse gas emissions.
transportation sector is
achievable now in part by
focusing on the fuels
themselves.
greenhouse gas emissions profile
that includes production
shipping and use so this act
requires a carbon intensity
reduction of fuel to New Mexico
by an estimated eighteen point
five million metric tons of CO
two that's like taking five
hundred and seventy thousand
not fuel retailers like gas
stations.
So there are multiple multiple
ways to meet the standard in
fuels with credits purchased
from generators of low carbon
intensity fuels like hydrogen
electricity and renewable
offering this by the governor
and the secretary of education
of environment can eight of
state up.
twenty eight so we believe that
this bill will produce cleaner
air.
It will help the first of five
diversified the fuel market to
And with that Mr president I'm
open for questions.
Thank Senator Stewart Senators
we're debating Senate finance
committee since two percent a
tax business transportation
committee substitute for Senate
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president.
If the good senator sponsored
proteome would yield for a
Senator Stewart
How much will it cost to
implement this program Mr
president.
to be looking at a five to six
full time equivalent employees
when this begins we certainly
have up to twenty four months
for these provisions and
two certainly enough for the
department to get started.
Senator Woods.
Mr president thank you
And the US energy information
H. agency estimates say.
We use about five billion
dollars worth of fuel for
Mr president and I know these
are just things that were done
in twenty twenty one.
nearly thirty dollars a tonne of
CO two.
And the prices are expected
increase in the future.
emissions in New Mexico or one
hundred and thirteen point six
million tons per year.
A twenty percent reduction in
those emissions would equal to
It would be six hundred and
eighty million dollars a year.
Mr president and senator who
would pay those cost.
that have done this already
there's a half a dozen that are
trying to add to that over a ten
year period for California they
clean fuel standard now there's
plenty of market pricing that
produces high gas costs in
California including they're
those kinds of prices at the
pump in fact I'll give you an
example of
Rate last week.
A dollar and a half less per
gallon of gas at the pump then
the high plan F. and all.
Another example is in the
renewable diesel market.
By for renewable diesel in
states with the clean fuel
standard is currently forty
cents cheaper.
gas up maybe Oregon has
suggested it's three point seven
cents per gallon so of course we
doing it and we just don't
believe that
all of the chicken Littles are
going around saying gas is going
to go up there is no basis in
those facts.
Department estimated that twenty
twenty one and it also says that
the environmental Department.
made those statements I'm just
reading.
why is there no limit on the
registration fee under the act
Mr president and senator Senator
Mexico not just transportation
fifty three percent of that is
from oil and gas and I apologize
to you will you repeat your
question again.
registration fees under the act
Mr president Senator Senator
Stewart Mr present those fees
have not been set up yet
for you now it's too early.
Senator Wirth.
It's my understanding that we're
passing a concept would you
would you say that Mr president
Senator we're just kind of
passing a concept of what we
want to do Senator Stewart Mr
so in that goes on for four or
five pages a with the
requirements and the outline of
the program.
Senate finance ask you about
What would happen to a
interstate trucker iffy fill up
out of state in droves
completely across the state in
him because he did not you know
what there is a a weight
distance tax of different permit
tax but would be another tax on
filled up and came into New
Mexico this does not apply to
retail gas it doesn't apply to
the cashier gone your car truck
that's why we have so many
companies wanting to work with
us because they make that kind
of fuel but a trucker coming
through it has nothing to do
Mister president and senator.
So from what I and understand
none of these costs pass along
to the end consumer someone else
pays these but not the end
consumer not the guy that buys
Senator Stewart Mr president
there there's cost to set up the
program there's costs to run the
program and that's what we're
doing in New Mexico once this
concerns and we will have
lowered our carbon intensity in
missions by a significant
amounts.
And those emissions is what
and the water all over the
northeast so that is the reason
behind one of the reasons behind
bet you anything that if we did
a poll New Mexicans and said
would you like cleaner air less
The president.
Mr president center what's on
our I don't mean to cut the good
Are we talking about like.
T. eighty five Matt and adding
of.
president Senator but for going
right Senator Mr president in
part that's certainly one way we
can do it that's being done
right now there's plenty of
sometimes Google will completely
lied to you and I understand
that.
But I did read that cars that
I know that that I don't drive
the vehicle that old but I have
some out on that all important
that are that old and I was
that have those cars and then
you probably don't have the
answer to that because that's a
taxed revenue question of but
sure that's way off be question
and I don't mean to.
To handle the deal that for Mr
president so.
I have you know I guess you can
Is that if the environmental
Department statement is true.
The producer the blender cannot
absorb those cost I agree with
there probably will be companies
companies in.
But the citizens of the state of
New Mexico will pay for Mr
president thank you very much
for the time spent thank you
You know what we we've talked
about this for a long time even
just in this brief conversation
with talked about clean air
In the eighteen fifties we were
start have an energy crisis.
We're running out of of energy
there were headlines about all
And we were in fact running out
of the fuel source that we had
eighteen fifties that was way
oil.
That I think most of us in this
room here most people in the
We also found that that stuff
that was just annoying when
somebody hit it specially in
Pennsylvania which we currently
called oil.
That was used in your home cold
used for transportation Quarles
used for factories.
And think about the pollution
then.
Thousands of little bitty stole
of.
trains which was by far by far
superior transportation and
anything we've had before.
And then we started the
industrial revolution with
But then.
Other thing started to happen.
And you know that was a huge
improvement over the pollution.
When the automobile came into
into play in the in in the
world.
Because it was on the road
administrative and sometimes
even stepped in it even though
you tried not to.
Mules donkeys all of those had
the same kind of pollution.
And then the flies would step in
and walk around in eighty little
plate on your spoon and even
landing your soup.
Your vegetables walk around on
that with the little pollution
was now on their feet.
But that wasn't good enough.
You know today that those
I know the good Senator that's
that's doing this what around
nineteen sixty.
But just imagine.
One percent.
Has decreased dramatically since
nineteen sixty.
Even though we have almost
tripled to the number of
vehicles on the road.
Ninety percent less pollution.
You know there's a couple of
things Mr president that really
really make our lives better.
Some kind of energy.
Today those are.
The the energy's electricity
But most of it comes from coal
fired power plants the
differences between the coal
that was used in the eighteen
hundreds and the call today is
It's not just going up in the
world like it used to.
We don't have little little.
Franklin stoves in the middle of
our house did you put a lump of
And keep us a lot warmer.
You know the difference between
this this capitol building and
one in the Denver and in many
other places.
Coal burning in the basement.
And it went up through the
rotunda in heated the building.
That's what happened when they
And for warmer we can control it
we can set the thermostat and
say gosh I wanted to be sixty
eight degrees right it will stay
sixty degrees are pretty darn
close all time.
Such a big difference in what
has happened over over history
such a big difference.
He.
Refrigeration is one of the best
But once we have refrigeration
we could keep food.
It didn't what it didn't cause
us illness.
We have food we have an
abundance of food thanks to the
one percent of the people in
America that actually grow the
food.
That all of that growth.
Growing food.
Comes from the proper management
And then on top of that we put
it in the refrigerator so it's
things good so not all starving
to death because the food
rotted.
We have food that we can keep
for a long time.
that they were ways to to to
take care food you consulted.
You could try it.
But none of those were good
compared to what we have today.
Indoor plumbing another amazing
invention.
The amazing invention that had
some fits and starts getting
here especially the sewage
systems but the sewage systems
It was pollution similar to the
pollution in the street except
now the four flights were
walking around in your
droppings.
While the room was filled with
the stench of your droppings.
In in the morning is that out
the window into the street.
No water itself doesn't take
electricity but moving that
water from where it is to where
you want it does we have pumps
to make all that happen.
We can wash our hands.
We can wash our hands for twenty
seconds with foaming soap.
Every twenty minutes if that's
what we want to do.
hands in the same basin.
But now we have running water.
Again that saves lives that
reduction and life expectancy
and comfort and even education.
And all of those advances came
None of them refrigeration was
not ordered by the government
running water was not ordered by
the government.
The movement away from whale oil
was not ordered by the
But the interesting part of that
is most of those standards were
actually supported by the
industry because they had
already achieved that.
They didn't force innovation.
We allow innovation.
We got out of the way of
The people with the free money
said get to do stuff and if they
runs in America we had home runs
in New Mexico.
The most of us don't recognize.
And yet Mr president.
I think this bill is really just
kind of some virtue signaling
that Hey we care.
And I'm great with a we care we
ought to care.
to define what in fact is clean
air.
How do we define that.
It's not this bill.
In committee when we ask
questions like that the answer
It'll be in regulation.
Well how are we going to know
when we got there.
And Mr president if you compare
early nineteen hundreds it is
way cleaner.
Why because we don't have
hundreds a little coal stoves in
every house and every office
spewing out.
In that time.
We've added vehicles we've added
factories we've added offices
and yet the air here is cleaner
From the on field for coal.
We still use coal absolutely
because coal is a great source
of energy.
We've taken out almost
everything.
And we're even there we can take
out more.
You know Mr president the free
The free market found a way to
even take the CO two of coal
fired power plants.
So if you were to look at coal
fired power plants let's just
take one include it in their
that you measure coming out of a
power plant.
Is measured as a trace element
at San Juan generating station.
Except CO two.
wants to build this who is not a
fly by night company.
But a major international
company.
They're now promising that they
five percent reduction yet we
still hate coal.
How can that be.
How can that be.
The free market figured out how
to take out.
secretary regulations that have
been absolutely undefined.
Nor cap.
In this bill.
create thousands of jobs.
And yet we've had a bio fuel
standard.
I think for twenty years.
Might be a little bit wrong on
single job in New Mexico.
We already have.
A refinery in Artesia that is
Because.
They want to have cleaner they
live there.
Electric vehicles are coming.
They're coming soon there here
now.
But they're coming because of
the free market.
The free market includes the
what the customer wants not just
what the in the industry wants.
innovation every year they're
getting faster and stronger and
can go further.
Almost like Superman leave a
single a building in a single
bound there were there were
Not because our law said so.
But even then we got to be
careful where we go in here.
Because we have people
absolutely hate fossil fuels.
But those same fossil fuels.
All of the plastics.
To go in that electric vehicle
So you can't just throw away
fossil fuels otherwise you don't
have electric vehicles.
And then how do you charge those
electric vehicles.
We would need two hundred more
San Juan generating stations.
Not less.
pave the entire state of New
Mexico.
To replace half of the American
fleet we would have more wind
farms than we have important
forms.
It doesn't make sense to me.
The other thing that doesn't
make sense to me is what is New
Mexico's share of whatever
How can we how can we claim that
we're doing something when we're
doing nothing what are the
greenhouse gases come from.
our oceans right now today those
are far greater greenhouse gas
generators thank anything that
New Mexico could do.
want to all let's buy more stuff
from China.
Let them pollute the world as
long as we're not.
what it's going to do is kill
thousands of jobs it might
create different jobs.
But it's also going to create
destroy thousands of jobs this
diversity as you may not have
heard Mr president but I live in
and oil gas generating area.
And I love oil and gas.
I love coal.
Because right now we have lots
of money thanks to oil and gas.
But my guess is in two years.
The prices will drop.
I would like to see other
industries come here other
manufacturers come here but I
fear that once you have this
New Mexico's beautiful.
It's got beautiful clean air
it's got beautiful mountains.
It has bio diversity that's
almost unheard of.
we're too stupid to be able to
operate in our state so we have
to bang us with a hammer instead
of letting us innovate.
So I actually looked up the
California rules.
And I couldn't read on because
for too long.
Four hundred and fifty to four
Clearly written by attorneys.
They just go around in circles
on things.
Wasn't in the bill.
In fact there's no guidance in
the bill.
No guidance at all.
Will completely surrender.
Our responsibilities in our
obligations.
We've had our share of Democrats
and progressives we also sure
Republicans.
And I know you all think that
What you gonna do when all of a
sudden without any guidance from
this law from this bill.
The Republican governor Matt
appoints a cabinet secretary who
We don't care if you're
progressive governor or
conservative governor.
Go out there don't want to do.
Because we haven't thought this
through.
There's no definition in this
bill what clean areas.
What does that mean.
How do you measure it.
Yes there are some standards
that are out there.
Through the EPA.
Carbon monoxide.
In almost every day somebody
somewhere.
Is outside of that standard.
We got a close.
We can lock up the more of the.
What we gonna do we have to
track down the truck that came
through from from Arizona to
believe that it was Senator Ivy
Soto but he might correct me if
I'm wrong.
Who pointed out.
That a law.
suggestion but it's not in here
what the financial.
We're going to create a
standard.
We're gonna tell people we have
the standard.
But either we don't enforce it
Do we really want to just
surrender our authority as the
New Mexico state Senate.
That we're going to force
innovation.
Which means that we will only
innovate with the governor wants
innovated.
Which limits.
unicorns and great better better
fuel supply but if we're not
allowed to even think that way
how can we get this.
I don't know.
innovations not allowed.
Even if they can get better next
year.
Squashing innovation we're
taking the free market and
saying that is useless and only
the cabinet secretaries smart
The idea here is fine.
I promise the idea.
I have a problem both the idea.
Because I'm pretty sure I heard
you know what the votes are.
In the votes are there for.
Political reasons not since call
Care less about the pressures
some of you may have noticed
that.
I understand.
The gas cannot.
Something done to impress.
Not to cure.
In this bill.
Other than to get on the
newspaper in the news and say
we've done something.
That bothers me so much Mr
president.
I really do wish.
other about how to do this.
And we need to.
You Mr president.
There were two of us yesterday
who were wearing kilts on the
floor.
Which is why they can't stay
free.
But what I would ask you Mr
president.
Hi to work out a solution that
actually makes some sense for us
because none of us in this room
or opposed to clean air.
No consultation with the
industry that are out there.
The existing industry.
association I I PNM they're
opposed to this why because they
are actually New Mexicans.
In a word about our ad community
raise the price of food.
They know that it's going to
raise the price.
again again.
Again.
Mr president if we're going to
do this.
At least for a few days.
So that the various clans can
meet with each other.
And defeat the enemy which is
not us.
But this bill just tears apart
even more.
It doesn't make anything better
for any of us.
What it does is make me stand up
here and see how long I can
I want us to decide what really
is the standard and how do we
have a bill that really sets the
standard that we can enforce.
chamber pots and then.
I don't want to go back to a
time.
When we don't have
refrigeration.
At some point we paid up
industry enough that they say
we're gonna stop.
The innovators will keep trying
to innovate.
And I applaud you for that.
especially in the last few
years.
They just beat are small.
Mom and pop New Mexico
businesses.
Those are the businesses that
we're going to punish with this
and other bills that are coming
and bills that we did last year.
We didn't consider that either.
But here we are again divided
ourselves into separate plans so
we can war with each other.
Instead of facing an enemy.
I know that the side of the
chamber.
It's not the regnant side of the
chamber.
Doesn't mean we shouldn't try to
work together.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico and is the symbol
of perfect friendship.
We have some nice people over
here talk to them.
Mr president I think we can do
some good things here.
life for all of us just a little
bit worse.
All maybe it doesn't destroy
anybody but maybe it does.
And who's going to be hurt by
that.
Well.
Probably the poorest of us.
she can buy food taken on
putting refrigerator so you have
something to eat a few days.
That's what's going to hurt the
most.
The people with the most money
missed the mark who we helping
who were hurting are we helping
the big international business
isn't harming or local are we
helping people somewhere else in
the world and harming ourselves
What I think almost everybody
probably everybody in this room.
Not only in this room but in the
state of New Mexico want.
We can do wonderful things Mr
president.
And if I had a request it would
be that we lay this aside for
today.
regulations should cap or put
the floor on.
Let us talk about how we.
As the Senate.
Mexico where we have given up
our fourteen we've turned it
over to an unemployed unelected
nameless and frequently
revolving bureaucratic changes
what they want done.
president can fix that.
We can fix that today.
I just not hearing this bill
right now.
But the industries that are out
there.
Sit down.
Talk about things make room for
That's not free.
It is not freedom.
We've seen this all over the
place.
And it's super businesses then
have the governing bodies right
laws to protect the super
businesses.
In somewhere in here there's a
currently the people are keeping
all of the homes in New Mexico
warm on this very very cold
week.
Your our your ox and your meal
don't want to go out there
national anymore you do.
They will if you push them hard
enough.
We have those same businesses
that have already taken steps
dramatic steps.
To improve the quality of what
they put out to not only make
We have to make room.
We have to make room for real
You probably know.
That I have enough hot air to
keep this room warm for four
hours.
And so with that Mr president.
I will stop.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield Senator yield I
yes.
Thank you Mr president senator I
do have a few questions
Senator Stewart Mr president
senator there there are multiple
goals there's a public health
goals there's an economy goal
there's an environmental.
employers fewer asthma attacks
heart attacks decrease lung
cancer rates.
Avoid premature deaths from
cardiovascular pulmonary
move here or expand here one of
them already has a building and
Clovis that they're going to
turn into a fuel production
facility.
be consumer choice at the pump.
It is transformed dairy and
forest waste streams and to
renewable natural gas.
Senator share reminded us about.
It hopefully will help stabilize
our boom and bust economy we
have now for the environment
emissions to meet state park
it's New Mexico has the highest
greenhouse gas emissions in the
hydrogen and alternative fuel
vehicles and it protects our
state lands and air quality
which are critically important
to industries like outdoor
recreation.
jobs during this period four
hundred seventy million in
weights.
what I really like is the amount
health it's the economy it's
economic development it's jobs
it's cleaner air and a clear
environment.
pump that I hear that correctly.
So Mister president by looking
at other states and by really
delving into the data it will be
about three point seven percent
that's their estimate although
it's it's
they think it's going to be less
than that the twenty eight
companies that want to do
certainly are not going to want
to have their fuel too high for
consumers and remember there
will always be a consumer
choice.
used for this particular type of
fuel and trying to understand
that I I actually have a lot of
family lives in California so I
honestly try not to do as much
as possible.
but there's no special pump
house are going to be consumer
choice Senator Mr president
Three nineteen that compared to.
it's only in LA you know maybe
that's the only place this is
being done because I don't go to
southern California I I actually
drive through Nevada to avoid
southern California because well
high in California is because
the taxes in California.
And so I looked that up so just
so we can compare apples to
apples New Mexico's gasoline tax
Which is a I think that's a
thirty three cent difference.
Health California does have a
sales tax on there's which adds
about ten cents.
three.
They also at a fee of fifteen
cents for greenhouse gas which
is basically this programs that
two different fees on a gallon
of gasoline in California.
that put this out in November so
I I believe that because it
wasn't done by you know the the
new station you would not
accept.
That's a dollar thirty six
higher than the average price of
gas in New Mexico.
So the state it's not gonna
affect the gas prices here
and it will affected greatly and
let's just be honest to that
affects mostly.
Is the low income in our state
They're the ones who can't
afford to go out and buy.
Electric car.
They can barely afford.
Because they may not be able
afford it.
Gas prices will go up they will
skyrocket.
And that's just the truth.
Yes they have a different cost
for their taxes.
But not that much different.
In the state.
That has one of the lowest
average incomes in the country
you're voting for another tax on
Because they can't afford to go
out and get the car that you
want them to buy.
Is the car you want in the by
average cost is fifty six
thousand dollars.
cost to them they're going to
add this cost them every single
day.
And you're claiming.
It's.
To.
There's barely been any change
at all for the increased cost.
To California.
But.
And I believe surviving
incorrect correct me but what we
did you guys get the award not
too long ago for the cleanest
air in the country.
Yeah you have one.
Photograph that was taken from
space one time.
of the cleanest air in the act
in the country.
What will this do for missions
worldwide.
Thank.
When I was a kid I used to drive
down to LA my sister went to
college in riverside.
Now.
There's pretty darn clean in LA.
It's not perfect because there's
a lot of people that live there.
But it's pretty clean.
To clean up the pollution in our
country.
But we're not the big polluters.
The fact of the matter is the
big polluters.
It's not the U. S..
We've done a great job and we
continue to and we will continue
to.
comes right in California.
Look it up it happens with the
right when.
The right direction.
times I mean they were right you
know when they closed down the
forest to logging.
Over now.
Then we find out later that had
The owls in force in the United
States.
I guess maybe we should put up
some kind of barrier so the
Alice couldn't fly to to to the
US.
environmental groups.
We burn down.
That's the wise way you talk
about pollution.
We are charged to maintain and
to manage.
Our environment absolutely.
But let's not just take.
figure out what is the best way
to increase our.
Our environmental footprint.
Tell you the greatest investment
we can make this to send some
people over to China and Russia
and India and some of the other
countries.
Instead of the ones that we use
to use a hundred years ago
that's the technology they're
still using.
up here and talk about how much
we care about them we put in
little special programs for
them.
But our actions.
I don't care about them at all.
That's not caring about the low
and middle income families in
our state.
And that's exactly what this
does thank you Mr president.
Think centre brand we do have
you know I I think there's been
a lot of.
important things pointed out
today.
about what is the overall
impact.
Of putting food.
That we take for granted in this
country Mr president.
With our food.
Our corner soybeans things like
that.
five percent of what they make
on food.
If the price of corn just goes
up a little bit.
And I think that that gets lost
in in the conversation whenever
we we have these pie in the sky
You look at the last two years
with.
The COVID shut downs the
lockdowns.
This bill at this time could not
be more tone deaf.
To what is happening with trying
to do logistics and get.
high.
People are struggling already
Mister president two four the
higher cost of everything.
moment in ignore the fact that
people are hurting.
People are having to pay more
for stuff.
The pay raises that they're
getting are going to cover the
higher cost of getting by.
make their own laws regarding
this.
So somebody's coming in they're
gonna cross New Mexico the field
but the last truck stop in
Texas.
Are going to have these trucks
stopping to fill up.
Buy food groceries maybe get a
souvenir T. shirt.
the second across the line into
Arizona.
We're in Colorado.
And that's a reality.
When we increase the price.
Talk of will take a cow manure
and turn it into energy.
Full what am I gonna do on my
farm Mister president we take
we can grow the food for the
world what happens if you take
that away.
To turn it into methane or
something along those lines.
speak about that on the floor.
Many times.
I think there's a disconnect
with.
How dependent farmers are.
From natural gas.
And right now we're looking just
because of the logistical
logistical issues.
So if my fertilizer goes up
double my seat because because
of double now my fuel to run my
Either comes on a truck or a
train or a boat.
It goes up.
And that's the part that I think
should give everybody a little
corn for a gallon of milk.
For a trade of potatoes.
They don't get the set the price
the.
They take what they get they
don't throw a fit Mr president.
sustainable I mean make their
land payment.
It seems in these unprecedented
times.
We couldn't.
bill tells the people.
Of the state.
That we know you're suffering we
know prices are going up we know
The price of everything will go
up from this Mr president
everything is touched by
transportation fuel every single
thing you buy.
So hopefully when you make your
Thank you Mr president I'll be
really brief and I I do have
just a couple of questions for
clarification if the man protium
vindicated in interesting coming
are any of those companies in
the refining business.
Mr Mister president senator.
with regard to to moving in this
direction is is the costs that I
think will be incurred and
I think I'd mentioned in
committee when I reached out to
direction which is a wonderful
thing but thinking about the
percent of fuel coming from
refiners such as the one in Big
purchased the credits in order
to bring the fuel and sell it to
the retailer in New Mexico so
there will be a cost to that
there will be a cost in in
changing how fuel is refined and
and I think that's where I'm
worried about the cost increase
that he's gonna pass that cost
on to the retailer who is then
in turn gonna pass it on to the
customer so how do we not
So Mister president and senator.
on clean fuels I think it shows
us that it can be done of we
have these twenty eight
companies want to move here to
clearly showing you get a dollar
and a half off if you use the.
Cleaner fuel E. eighty five
to sell fuel here those twenty
eight companies have certainly
told us that certainly
go up and so we will be working
on making sure that doesn't
happen and in addition.
Remember that we have the
who can so there's mechanisms to
lower the cost for everyone if
you do that credit training
thank you Mr president and thank
you but I still believe that.
because the other fuel is more
expensive.
Because they have to purchase
the credit in order to sell it
so it is all about the credits
and that's what's going to
simply because they're gonna
have to I credit or to to do it
I I have one other question with
regard and this is for your
expert
I want to know how the
department is going to quantify.
years we're going to be able to
say that we can one hundred
percent
agree that any reduction is
other measures that are
occurring you did you indicated
that fifty percent of emissions
currently occurring in the oil
and gas industry today but I
will tell you.
now that will provide the energy
necessary to drill using
electric rigs and this goes back
to what Senator share mentioned
And we're pushing this forward
we're going to have a high cost
here with little assurance that
we're going to make a tremendous
coming have.
Plans to build another refinery
we've got our teacher this
building one but it takes years
to do that.
And.
going on in New Mexico I'm.
I guess with that I I really
just in concerns that yes it's
forward and I think we're gonna
see that occurred.
You know the biggest a creator
of emissions just like senator
Here said it's a shipping
shows you how many ships are on
the seas currently they're the
biggest polluters and what we're
gonna do in New Mexico is going
to cost our people a lot of
money and I don't think we're
going to make a significant
Mr president thank you with the
Madam protein meal.
Senator deal yes.
This presents center I'm just a
the bill because it didn't come
to our committee but Mr
president center I understand.
This would make us what I
have several of them that are
right behind us.
Mr.
In center I appreciate that I I
was just trying to figure out
why we would want to be
And David Boies our state
climate.
Climatologists and states that
New Mexico's Hayes.
Is from small to and with the
winds.
Oregon and California so would
we not.
Better spend our time talking to
them about cleaning their
And and I'm wondering if we're
just not.
Portion this for different
reasons to be politically
correct you know nationally for
to be on the leading edge of.
Larry Scott dance math in stated
that we New Mexico or one one
thousand.
Mr president this is a priority
because we live in New Mexico
and we have the ability to lower
the San Juan County the air you
breathe may put your health at
risk with the big fat F..
So I I don't know where you're
getting your information but the
about the smoke
You know we've had wildfires in
January California.
climate change and heating up of
the planet and putting and
missions into the air so
nothing.
that's innovative that's forward
thinking and that just grabs the
issues around climate change and
tries to squeeze on them.
We need to be stewards of our
part of the solution not part of
the problem we spent almost two
years talking to stakeholders
about this we've had seventy
Is because the secretary
continues to talk to people of
the latest where the utilities
they had just one or two things
to put in this bill this has
communities that often live next
to highways that live next to
highway ten that don't get the
benefit of clean air and clean
do this to to help clean up the
air by lowering the ten infants
of our fuel.
Mexico in New Mexico yes
Representative Scott said is
only one one thousand.
The global
Explain that to me and also let
me know how.
That is paid for the cost.
Senator present these are not
tax credits.
income and everything to do with
the carbon intensity of the
fuels agency presentation I
misspoke it was the the credits
Senator Mr president yes trading
credits not tax credits then to
I just explained that I misspoke
Mr president I'm trying to find
these are designed to help
companies a lower their carbon
intensity of their fuels so it
doesn't cost the state it's a
certainly have biomass that they
could use to lower the carbon
intensity of fuels so it's a
mechanism it's a market
develop totally now if you read
section three of the bill it
will tell you what we have to do
to get there.
Send us Mr president etcetera I
cost then how would I do that.
Senator Stewart Mr present the
market will determine price.
Mr president we don't have that
now because we haven't started
program this program doesn't
exist yet.
Senator Wirth Mr presence
president senator sent shares
thing for it'll be.
A promulgate in rules later so
I'll leave that alone but thank
you for that miss madam pro
using this day to talk about the
one industry.
It helps our education The most.
In this bill I don't see how it
doesn't hurt.
costs going up a look at just a
huge amount of expense to those
here in New Mexico in Mr
president center just to tell
you use years back.
The only find out that that was
a bad idea.
Thank remnants are still
standing.
My family never made any
the little but look back on this
and see the same failure without
a field.
Thank you senator us we're
Senator Griggs.
made in there one of them.
Is that it's a fourteen percent
of the stage greenhouse gas
for a question Senator yes.
Thank you Mr president and
senator how much do we believe.
If this if this bill is passed
and standards are implemented.
Senator Mr president we we
certainly do believe missions
will go down otherwise we
believe this will affect the
entire state and we will see
lower emissions and.
We also are going to have a
reductions credits will have to
be verified by a third party up
quantifying our mission
reductions so we will have
experts looking it won't just be
all sides I believe on these
issues
but I yes do we know Mr
president centered we know how
I don't know have that right
now.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president and in
gonna accomplish by using this
here to reduce greenhouse gas
from transportation
except maybe for the that the
areas surrounding Albuquerque
here so we're we have more
vehicles there.
everything in New Mexico GMO
free.
Some of the discussion regarding
that is all the product that
million people the the fact that
there's forty five million
people in California Oregon
would mean that why in the world
about this particular bill and
Senator Kernan head on and on it
when she's talking about the
refinery in Big Spring.
refineries may or may not choose
to make fuel to meet that
standard because New Mexico has
two million people.
The information that you have is
going to is going to be
we're doing is we're we're about
to pass a bill that's going to
drive up the cost of some of
the.
Some of the poorest people in
the in the country that live in
increased prices on on few food
and almost everything else that
we're seeing today is going to
be is going to be a struggle is
increase costs like like some
folks would have us believe
although the other experts
should look at it believe that
it will.
hash mortgage and my hope is
that maybe those worms warts
orders Biggs I think they are so
thank you Mr president center.
Thank you senator exempt centers
Thank you
A man for chairman Mr president
I did have to to step out
briefly so forgive me if this
redundant but
or or eco fuels are however we
like to refer to that
Mr president and and Madam pro
tem um it could with this bill
Senator Mr president that's
certainly one way to comply with
this.
Thank you Mr president then for
to all of the massive land
grazing that has gone on to
support the bio fuel industry
and this is there and this has
huge concern of of money
once again and I've I've hard on
this before about these very.
Low density energy sources and
necessarily prove causation for
sure.
But
They have shown that in the
Midwest where tons of land was
demand.
I would like to know where that
bodies of feels good is is going
to come from I'm not aware of
any of these types of projects
farms in New Mexico and okay.
Other areas in the United States
and so if there populations are
going to be harmed I mean maybe
our populations in the heart I I
don't know but I just wanted to
our Environment Department and
if the if the hope I don't know
if they're watching this I would
hope that they would pay
attention to that I think it's
in the heart of track it's not
their job to to track what what
should at least you know for
people that are they're
listening or any stakeholders I
think it's something we should
look at how are we complicit in
all of this massive massive land
it it's a legitimate concern I
have no problem with some sort
of other innovation that's maybe
not gonna take up as much land
maybe not gonna harm as much of
our natural habitats and then we
I eighty they concern that I
share about
what we are doing.
With our land in the name of of
energy we start to to utilize
our environment.
And so I would I would hope that
we would look at that issue how
much land are we complicit in
we introducing into the
environment okay how.
Nonnative are we really supposed
to be growing that much corn is
think deeply about that issue
and then my my only other
My only other concern I want to
bring up the Mr president and
respect your prior answer about
that this is not a tax and I I I
certainly see where you're
coming from with the the carbon
credits so I'm not gonna harp on
a tax or a bird in a financial
burden that disproportionately
affects the poor.
in as a as a.
know with thirty cents gas or
whatever the increase may be I
know this is been mentioned
before but it may not affect
someone like me as much but
and I know that settlement for
time I know you would be very
sensitive to that to that issue
and I know because I've I've
heard you speak a number of
other issues.
With gas prices that you would
be sensitive to that and and try
to address that in some other
way.
However I would I would question
You know that there's a man
there's another interest here
right so the the interest is you
know we're going to clean up the
environment or we're going to
release less fossil fuels and I
I have no interest in really
I I I just have a have a concern
about that
and so I wanted a voice that
especially.
Mr president M. and then pro tem
Albuquerque because of crime
issues and they commute in quite
a bit
this disproportionally and I I
just want everyone to understand
this I mean this this sort of a
bill is going to
about the pros and cons of
living in these mountains and
people say yeah you know you
gotta drive more but
You are you know it's it's it's
worth it I mean there's trade
Mr president thank you and
pretend.
Senator Ingle.
Thank you Mr president there's
Senator R. and then and now it
says here there's some mention
of.
Of we're is ethanol gonna be
planning part of this.
Just curious to by the biggest
ethanol plant motivation
southwest was located in my in
my district and I'm certainly
the ethanol industry has been
for years
I think our highway departments
tax break on it was about
fifteen million a year and over
the years the state of New
incentive on that but that's
ending to.
And yes in all industries was
put in at a time when we had so
they can grow a lot of sugar
because that's what makes
alcohol cheaper than anything
else the sugar or sugar cane
excuse me but I'm a I am worried
our border state to buy drugs
because the industry can operate
New Mexico.
And the problem is is will
continue to have this even more
every hour.
But I don't have big tractors
and I don't farm near what I
used to but
tractors burn eight to ten
gallons of fuel in our.
people to buy fuel where they
can get it cheaper and we have a
lot of that right now and they
can bring that fuel over and
this bill won't stop that.
continue to buy it out of state
you keep going over there I know
Albuquerque does have a problem
with the chair atmosphere in
there because of the mountains
that surrounded and there's lots
hour that keep the wind moving
the atmosphere moving and we
don't have the the problem
sometimes that our cities have
but the costs go on for all of
us and we have to be very
age and height and they closed.
Unemployment is a hell of a lot
bigger problems sometimes in the
state and many others that we
have so everything we do here
far as keeping people employed
thank you.
Thank you Senator Ingle Senator
Baca.
Thank you Mr president what a
I'm I heard you talk about gas
emissions and my director went
one night when repeating you
that you said we were one of the
highest emitters is that is that
what you said Mr president.
Senator Baca thank you Mr
president and but overall I look
at this other chart by the P.
and it says we're not even in
the top twenty Mister president
air what that limit is within
the bill.
Senator Stewart Mr president at
that's not in the bill what is
in the bill is a requirement to
forty that is the goal those are
the goals that we would like to
me and those are the goals that
were trying to reach.
Senator Baca thank you Mr
could you of Mister president
Madam pro tempore V. in the bill
where is for it establishes some
standard for clean water.
this is about transportation
fuels.
Thank you thank you Mr president
and the you know I just wanted
to point that out to the body
this this really isn't concerned
about the fuel we use.
Picks winners and losers.
Just a simple search from our
our most plan a government
actually quotes two thousand
eighteen.
And since two thousand eighteen
we have went down twenty two
point six percent twenty two
our job let's compare ourselves
to California while we're at it.
California uses a three hundred
and Dave emitted three hundred
fifty five point five million
The difference that we are in
the United States is point eight
six percent that is what New
In an aggressive manner.
To set up a tax on fuel.
same up on the same wi with
California Oregon and Washington
well I hate to tell you Mr
president in California the
median income for households
seventy two thousand.
New Mexico let's keep our fuel
prices low fuel affects
everything.
You wanna you if you want to
protect under privileged people
By doing that we may yes we're
going to be on on on the same
level as California on the same
part with their economic a I
mean there Vire mental grandeur
And where do you get your food
you get at the store where do
you get your clothes you get at
the store who takes it there
think about these things they
all get there with fuel.
That approve our economy.
That our citizens to take money
out of their pockets just so we
Getting into the pockets of New
Mexicans.
Under the guise of a clean
climate and I have one last
thing Mr president.
For the right to the to the
money that was granted to spread
by the federal government and
the right to appropriated as set
out in the constitution.
Would see that power again and
again and again and here's
another example to a
gubernatorial body of highly
partisan appointees.
our jobs here and we set policy
in place.
Mr president here's an example
right here where we're not doing
it or passing off all these
rules to an unelected body so
I wish that we would reconsider
these bills.
Mr president before we
Stewart to close.
So New Mexico is one of twenty
six states in the US climate
alliance each state is reducing
the U. S. economy.
This clean fuel standards act.
Is an innovative approach to
reducing greenhouse gas
Everyone is concerned about the
price at the pump everything
we've seen in the states have
done it and all of our studies
health we anticipate that being
very significant Senate bill
fourteen from proves you can
have strong environmental
policies and promote good
businesses.
I move that the Senate finance
committee sets two percent tax
business tax committee
substitute for Senate bill
The.
Senator seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt
now senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Gallegos Now Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to me or.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator Neil yes senator to
subpoena.
Senator Pirtle no Senator probe.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator songes.
Senator shared now Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Stewart Senator Stewart is
Senator Tallman.
Senator Senator Tallman yes
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth DS Senator Woods.
a two percent tax business
transportation committee so it's
two percent of the fourteen as
amended has passed the Senate
Senator chair and senator Tom in
requests to explain to vote
of the people in this room that
actually produce food bank it
will.
Sierra.
Thank thank you Mr president
Free market is one of the most
underserved.
Under understood mis understood
economic concepts.
The cost of gasoline has gone
from a dollar thirty in nineteen
ninety two today's about three
dollar average.
The cost of health care.
Fifty sixty years later it's.
Eighteen to twenty percent of
our GNP which means it's gone up
going bankrupt from the cost of
gasoline.
The number one reason people go
bankrupt is because they can't
realization of we're gonna be
able to Senator Ivey Soto.
I thank very much for is present
agency present ask us some of
the set up of the record show
that all actions for placing
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
bill were back.
So this is a bill we heard
yesterday and we brought the
amendment that we promised would
bring and so if you'd like to
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six.
I move Senate floor amendment
number one to set up for a
Senate finance committee
substitute presentable number
six with the mercy Clause and
share forgiving everybody time
to read it.
the
So.
Amendment number one and seven
of the absentee of the mail
ballots that come in that
neither one of them would be
allowed to be a a watcher I I
mean I mean wouldn't allow to be
allowed to be a candidate
find the threshold for local
governments to have to district
and a single member districts to
a uniform level instead of ten
thousand total population
applicables our number.
Eight there is a provision that
simply requires that when the
verification process is is being
confirmed by the election board
number nine is simply changing
where we had watcher or observer
initiative an challenger or
watcher number ten Legislative
provisions related to mill run
to Conservancy district that
we're still in the bill.
Number twelve.
Deals with salt water
conservation districts where
Until the next regular
collection and it just verifies
that when we talk about the
appointment we're talking part
but appointments when elected
position verses an appointment
to an appointed position.
busy this year with the
election.
Number seventeen has to do with
and Margie CDC.
identified and asked if we could
go ahead and.
I have the appeal because they
were no longer necessary.
And then at the very and number
eighteen and nineteen.
to be happy to stand for
questions and I would yield to
sponsor die Senator Diamond as
to whether not this is a
friendly amendment Senator
Diamond do you.
they've done an awful lot of
work here and I think this
looks pretty good to me but I
did have Mister president one of
the sponsors would be would
hard in bringing this ammendment
I really wanted this to leave
the Senate and the the best
fashion possible can I just ask
on the item number eleven.
as a result of striking that are
taking that section on that
point.
I think this president Senator
Padilla no the sections one
eighteen through one twenty two
comment in the rules committee
that.
Not that that I'd be happy to to
be because of the uniqueness of
a lot of these sections of law
that were written way back in
in and and and and I was going
through and we make sure that we
got a hold of everything so
those are unique to the middle
Rio Grande Conservancy district.
endorsed this bill and they
appreciate very much the changes
that are being made and the
sections that apply to them.
Thank you Mr president and so
I'm not the scholar in law like
you are Mister president and I
really don't really appreciate
you on that matter
Anything related to to answer
I think article eleven Ted's are
like fourteen or thirteen in in
chapter five there is there is
nothing in this bill related to
chapter five there's nothing in
you.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president and I
want to thank the sponsors for
coming with this ammendment and
the SB six overall is a great
bill that makes critical changes
that are going to improve
elections of met in
administration of elections in
Si no further debate on the
amendment etcetera so to close
on the amendment.
I think very much Mr president
Mr president.
I do think the body first of all
for the discussion we had
two and try to make sure that we
work with all the different
stakeholders that had concerns
so that would all be resolved
and so with that Mr president I
There's been a request for
unanimous consent percent floor
amendment number one to Senate
I see none we've adopted the
amendment.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Madam.
A president.
Then Senator Ivey Soto
question on and because it's a
question that's an oddity.
But I'd like to find out about
and this is about.
The election from last year
In the world.
Did we have more votes out of
three counties in the state of
New Mexico than we had
population.
those numbers I would like to
see those numbers I'm not aware
of any county where we have more
votes than we have population.
have those numbers in front of
me that was a question that was
brought to me so I will bring
those to you Senator Ivey Soto
the other question I have.
that one man one vote R. one
voter one vote.
And.
The only problem with that.
So would you mind madam
president Senator Ivey Soto.
Would you mind explaining how
that is a deviation off one man
much then present center what's
first of all there's nothing in
this bill that addresses ranked
choice voting however since
you've asked the question.
people to rank.
The the candidates and then we
require a majority vote.
In order for someone to be
elect.
So in round one every single
person gets only one vote and
that is the vote that they've
indicated for their for their
top candidate.
whoever the vote loss vote
getter was we look to see to
those the people who voted for
that list okay did they mark a
second choice of the dead we
drop the Los we'll get our we go
everybody gets one vote now I
want to.
Compare and contrast that with
what happened incentive other
party for their election this
year.
in the in the first round right
on the election day everybody
had one vote.
And everybody who showed up.
Got one vote.
But I'm like the ranked choice
voting system.
a very different population of
people than those who showed up.
On the first day.
The number of people who voted.
On the second day was a much
days we can all very easily said
oh my goodness yes or one person
one vote on the state one person
one vote on that day.
Except one person one vote the
people who showed up on the
first day.
realize the day of the of the
run off they didn't see it
important to show up at that
point.
And so with the ranked choice
voting system what happens is in
showed up on election day you
get to weigh in on round two.
You get to weigh in on round
three if you go that far.
And therefore that your vote
voting absent report that says
there's factual voting and the
state there's no factual voting
and and right choice.
And and it is effectively the
Senator Woods.
So.
Madam chair the way I understand
that
is that all done within the
That that's done you know I
can't resist the thought madam
president that is not current
like Poland.
The is that tabulation done
within the machine.
Or is it done elsewhere.
There are.
clear results of round one.
And then when you go to ground
too because these paper ballots
we can always re create this.
Whether separated by hand or by
the computer you have the clear
clearly tell everybody these
were the votes in round one.
These were the votes in round
two.
And now this is how we got to a
madam chair is that is a local
option.
For local election or can you do
that.
So is it a local option for
primary election statewide
primary election for that one
local.
Okay.
I believe section seventeen it
is a local option for
municipalities only.
Okay.
Thank you very much madam
thank you very much madam
president.
This bill has been a lot of work
it's been a lot of collaboration
as the results of the amendment
that we brought in today that
Senator Diamond and ice and blue
are a Representative Lewis
representative Nibert and
representative of land we've all
president with that I move that
the Senate finance committee
says two percent of Bill number
six as amended with the
emergency clause do now pass.
of hands.
We are voting on Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill six thousand ended with the
emergency clause senators to
By a vote of thirty nine in the
affirmative and none in the
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much madam president there is I
think at this moment probably no
more divisive issue in the
United States of America today
issue that has unanimous support
of this chamber.
Thank you very much and I would
yield the Senator Diamond.
Third.
Thank you madam president and
of our election laws and it's a
pleasure to work with you guys
and getting that done for the
greater good of all New Mexicans
today so thank you.
Thank you senator done.
Committee reports.
If there's no objections were on
the order of business committee
reports the reader to read.
Madam president you're in the in
that do pass as amended and
that's referred to.
Please stand by.
respectfully submitted Shannon
Pinto chair Senators o'neill yes
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
reports Senate bill one ninety
one do pass events referred to
the finance committee
respectfully submitted Shannon
Pinto chair.
Move adoption of the committee
reports that we're an adoption
of the committee report from
Indian rural and cultural
affairs is our objection seeing
none with Dr the committee
There's no objection were on
that order business introduction
of legislation reader to read.
Senate memorial twenty
introduced by Senator Lopez and
reform task force to study and
make recommendations for
amendments to the children's
code Senate memorial twenty.
Senate memorial twenty one
introduced by Senator Gonzalez a
memorial recognizing Hispanics
Hispanic culture traditions and
perspectives in strengthening
the advancement of the
conservation of public lands and
waters for future generations
No is ordered placed on the
president's table Senate
memorial twenty one.
There's no objection or on that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous Senator Wirth
thank you madam president so
now's the time to announce
committees I see there are
tomorrow will be in at noon
tomorrow on the floor without
any of the other chairs to
announce committees and I'll
take advantage right now to say
committees committee will be
meeting at eleven forty five in
room three twenty six.
Sorry about that.
Members of Senator sells thank
you madam chair is Senate
breakfast prior to that we only
have I think two bills on the
the agenda but please take note
nine thirty not nine o'clock in
Either fifteen minutes the
afters or caucus or four o'clock
we'll just play it by ear.
Thank you other announcements
in my email so I had to call
back up the council make sure
you have your capital forms if
you have a project in this
happened to me if you have a
project from your district that
happens a just a heads up for
tomorrow Center Brandt Senator
Kernan and we're gonna have your
bills and Senate finance and
we're gonna get house bill two
they're doing it right now the
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much madam president and I've
two things actually the first is
an announcement with regard to
the Senate rules committee
have I think forty some people
to vote on in terms of conferees
is people where we've already
had a hearing on them so that
should not take actually too
long to to be able to do the
committee the Senate memorial
eighteen is an honorary.
Is a memorial event honoring
nature it does not call upon
anyone to do anything.
and relatives and so I would
like to ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that we dropped the
referral to the rules committee
percent or more letting.
have to make the second motion
on that Mr president.
I think that I can just move
that the move to the present
time.
We removed from all committees.
I move the Santo moral eighteen
be removed from all committees
and move to the president's
table manners consent says any
objection to moving sent
Senator Gonzalez thank you madam
chair in the two things once
again I mentioned this yesterday
but
You know when we really do see
And the the other one is so an
update from Chris Staggs the
thirty seven inches and it's
still snowing that tells Q.
valley.
there's a March planned that
will begin at the plaza and you
see the fire on your desk there
and they will be coming to the
capital so I know we couldn't
list everybody that wanted to
president with the ski report
from Senator Gonzales in the
snow conditions I do think that
it's important that we started
circulating a petition to
Senator Wirth is the floor
to promote New Mexico tourism
agency present settlement for
madam president thank you.
Senator Wirth well then
president think centers of this
is going to be great opportunity
president just a unanimous
consent is to make an
announcement.
Seeing no objection go ahead
thank you madam chair tomorrow
consider red ties are acceptable
justice and that management
thank you madam president.
Thank you other announcements.
for that there's a memo that the
rain Montoya Helen our office
put together that should have
been distributed to all the
members that have any questions
about that come see us but it
just explains how those process
in recess until noon tomorrow.
Be careful out there.
