If they gave on the new gavel
here in the Senate floor so
thank you Senators cels for that
generous gift Senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr president the
unanimous consent we go to that
In addition I I do think us
Senator souls.
Senator souls if we could I I do
think I'd like to stand up just
a moment of silence Senator
incredible Senator Steinborn
shared with us an incredible
outdoorsman member the game
commission and I just think if
we could all just have a moment
of silence for center sold his
Thank you Mr president and the
just to somebody who knew David
souls myself and Senator
Steinborn really credit I feel
And how excited they are to see
you that's how David was about
the organ mountains desert peaks
national monument and the level
of information and knowledge and
I'm correct thank you wrote at
least one book right bill
and so it's it's really it's an
incredible loss and and I think
president it is it is a true
loss to our community and and
our hearts are out to Senator
souls thanks Senator Hamblen
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
Good man Mr president colleagues
that's the first thing you know
about David is he was a
genuinely good man always had a
game commission he was founded
numerous sportsman organizations
passionate about the north
American model of fair chase and
and ethics and.
David which is what he looked
like always smiling but I I I
would always joke with David he
was the Indiana Jones Dona Ana
state of New Mexico Dona Ana
County and I could just tell you
stories beyond stories of what
this exploring what this
beautiful soul did for the state
he's a he's a person that we
should recognize for his
contributions to the state of
New Mexico and bill my love to
you and your whole family and
the souls family is a family of
and David was amongst the best
of us so.
My deep condolences to the souls
family this tragic loss thank
you Mr.
Just as an update here's where
we are and what we're gonna do
tonight
Senate bill one of will be read
in in just a minute and then
there will be a.
Broader link the committee
report the needs to get put
together on that which will need
to get down in order to get that
if we take a break at some point
I have the finance committee go
up and do that tonight or maybe
do it tomorrow morning will kind
of stay tuned on that so with
that Mr presidents unanimous
Mr president.
Mr president your tax business
and transportation committee to
Senator Shendo of.
Representative I moved up to the
committee report and as we have
a motion to doubt the committee
report.
I
announcements miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president nabbing eleven fifty
nine AM I move we adjourn until
twelve or one PM the Senate will
come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the chairman has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
calendar number one of the one
item on there is Senate bill
one.
with emergency clause leader
changes that Senator Hemphill
Senator Griggs with that Mr
supplemental calendar deliver to
us up here.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so
unanimous consent we go that
order business third reading of
legislation and ideal to Senator
meet your phones are put on
vibrate and those that are
participating the Israel to have
your cameras on when you're
speaking in your microphones off
We get all the right the right
staff.
Mr president I move that the
Senate bill one.
Be put on its final passage now
subject to debate amendment or
to assist the state and local
governments to recruit large
projects with over three hundred
and fifty million dollars in
those construction cost to be
fifty percent of it to be
rebated back to the project and
fifty percent more would be
provided to the the general
fund.
Project can move forward.
And with with that I will pass
it over to the cosponsored.
this opportunity to introduce
Senate bill one along with
Senator Craig's this evening
this is legislation that will
construction at the approval of
that economic development
department and the county or
municipality just like senator
Greg stated and so that's what
feedback from the senators and
Senate staff so I ask I hope
that the Senate can't will
support this proposal and give
us a real chance to complete
questions thank you Senator
Hemphill centers we're debating
Senate bill one with emergency
clause and we'll start with
senator by the.
before then and I'll tell you Mr
president this is the right move
at the right time I think this
is really a great move one of
the questions I had in committee
and I when I was looking at the
legislation is to president was
a good move for the state
because this is going to start
up other you know hundreds of at
of smaller businesses that are
secondary and tertiary to these
much larger projects that are
Mexico for all of us and all of
those suppliers all those
wonderful things are gonna
happen to New Mexico as a result
of this legislation and the fact
that it's a bipartisan move is
something we should celebrate
thank you Mr president center
behind the scenes before we
convene again I had there are a
couple questions are brought up
and I wanted to maybe give them
on the public record about
industry and needed to get all
the breaks I can get.
I don't care which one answers
the question but with one of the
senators please feel.
Senator Hemphill to begin
producing your expert witnesses
of.
I'm Mr president I ask unanimous
objections so ordered Senator
does your expert witness to that
question.
Repeated.
I think we get the answer let's
So Mister president and senator
you can use the higher be
simultaneously.
or is any particular industry
can be oil and gas coal any of
those nasty things that a lot of
people don't like could they be
part of this assuming they meet
all the other permitting and so
forth.
Senator Hemphill thank you Mr
president and senator so there
are no changes under lead us so
I don't have the leader of the
statue right in front of me can
you tell me what are there any
significant restrictions Senator
Kernan has one with okay.
Voting for something we
understand.
will find something
to the states and said that it
would not be retail companies
purposes what about that.
are value added industry so the
that's what would be
eligible.
Which I assume that a refinery
would be evaluated company it
Senator Hemphill sent Mr
president and senators so
extractive industries do not
qualify.
Senate Bill.
that's corrected is in statute.
So that would include the copper
of Meg manganese all those kind
of things other things we money
in the state.
you Mr president and senators so
that is correct but if another
company wanted to take that
product and created into
gasoline or diesel.
Yes Mr president center that's
not what our note state but
that's a.
all all rural turn it back to
you Mr president thank you
yield for some questions Senator
Griggs deals.
I'll be happy to yield.
You Mr president I guess my
first question would be it is
all this money and G. R. T.
in the you know who's a
Who's developing project is over
three hundred and fifty million
dollars.
Will pay tax gross receipts tax
Fifty percent of that tax
revenue that was generated will
be paid back to the qualifying
into the as part of the
incentive to bring the project
to New Mexico.
going to be used for anything
other than infrastructure is
gonna be used for construction
is going to be used throughout
the whole project or is the G.
T. attributable to construction
and infrastructure on that
project are the only questions
of that that are that are
available for the issue rebated
infrastructure and Lita is
designed for infrastructure
projects and leading in to the
the project then we would be
violating the entity nation
clause because we would be
giving R. G. R. T.
Decided to sell out the project
and and I know nation because we
take into that percentage
Senator maybe you can get your
expert witness on the phone a
red in there is on the paper the
Ninety million dollars in
initiatives.
What is our percentage match in
this initiative.
For the three hundred fifty
project in G. R. T. compared to
what Arizona did on the twenty
million.
Seven yes it you requested that
expert witness provide an answer
to one able to Senator gonna
Hemphill to as an expert witness
Yes this presents center I do
and and I talked to the
secretary about it so it was
ninety million dollars
and so what percentage maybe ask
your expert witness if we had a
twenty million dollar project
and give them ninety million
what percentage of that is to
twenty million.
So Senator Hemphill so Mister
president and senator
that's less than one percent on
twenty million dollars worth
investment in Arizona if we
spent three hundred fifty
million dollars and just issues
Mr presents and I think you
worked LFC correct.
Mr president and Senator Griggs
go ahead the
half of the city's and county's
incremental G. R. T. that they
can.
Allow have to be from sure why
already committed to bonding so
they'll be to from the state
basically and then there will be
Centerman yes.
In center good center for
maternal County so I think the
statewide guarantee matches
one six two for the statewide
percentage so I I think we're a
little fuller numbers I want the
best investment for the best
return that we can get in New
Mexico.
cities and the counties for this
portion of the G. R. T. because
we're going to kick in our
portion and hold them harmless
in the state what percentage on
a three hundred fifty million
about G. R. T. which is always
been kind of an issue.
Is the fact that.
The state charges four percent
immediately revert re uh or sent
back to cities so much president
Senator
Bill folgen Eddie who is the
head of the municipal league
And Mister president senator Mr
folgen Eddie used to always tell
me it was five point one two
five for two to five whatever
was in the state sure wish for
five point two two five for you
can say it was for so Mister
president and and senator if
half half of five point two is
has on top of that page might be
to.
Sage will be more like three or
four and half of that will be to
show then you're going to add
most part it's going to be
around four percent.
And then you can Mr president
center for percent of three
hundred fifty million.
seven one forty
so.
In which a hundred in our one
point four million.
returned the the argument on
some of this stuff is.
That if you I mean it's that's
the but for argument if you
don't find this will they come.
If they don't come you're not
out anything because they didn't
come in the first place.
Sentiment yes so Mister
had discussions with the
secretary about let's put a
hundred million dollars in lead
if if we want to play baseball
let's play in the big leagues.
conversation came up and said
let's put fifty million dollars
in Lita and let's play let's go
to the major leagues and let's
play.
watch what we do in New Mexico
and say well let's give up
fourteen million dollars of four
percent.
Of of our G. R. T. investment
New Mexico during the COVID is
create jobs.
Give are college educated
students a chance to stay in New
Mexico.
Keep my children lieutenant
chairman of finance do not poke
holes in our G. R. T. system
because we already have two main
tax credits that that have come
and gone and aren't used and we
going to book two hundred
million dollars.
One hundred million dollars for
job creation and other hundred
million to change our tax and
and
And other kids don't have a
chance for the future of New
Mexico we're never going to
change.
And and job creation is very
Go to work at four in the
morning.
And do that but if you don't
keep those New Mexico jobs here
of our colleges don't open which
I I don't like this bill because
the percentages that we're
having to give up for
investments in New Mexico.
completely understand but when I
watch us get out done by other
states as a twenty million
dollar investment for one
percent or ninety million
Because it is tough out there
right now everybody thinks
because we're opening it the
world's disconnect come up
forty percent if you look at the
economic tractor dot org.
Job applications for high
employment high wage jobs are
down in New Mexico.
you before we wrap up.
Semenya's thank you I sent rigs
have you have you find my
questions hostile or
inappropriate.
And when you have a mask and we
have all these other little
things in between me and you the
ability to hear you is not very
good sometimes show a you know
it's a it's just a little bit of
a challenge sometimes.
Senator yes well Senator Griggs
I I just you know we all get in
the situation and are turning
When we do this in New Mexico
what is the best way to do
economic development.
And should we put the money
where our mouth is and we play
growth in New Mexico I think we
got a change so thank you Mr
president they sent us for the
informational purposes of the
body will have Senator Kernan of
a center to see panel and
apologize for that I guess some
misunderstood and and maybe some
information that I've been
receiving over the day maybe was
incorrect but but as I look at
definition of qualifying entity.
I wonder if you could show me in
there we're all and gas would
not fit in.
It's in the definition for
economic based jobs.
Mister president senator could
So Mister president and senator
my expert witness is pulling it
up.
looking for that now two five
ten fifteen.
That to me please.
Mister president senator.
If you would agree that Mister
president senator.
describes full time.
Full time economic based jobs.
it describes manufacturing jobs
or jobs.
That service.
I'm.
Senator Kernan so Mister
president senator I am just
looking at the qualifying unity
Senator Hemphill Mr president
and senator yes so would you
agree that in the mining
interests industry that
Senator Hemphill Mr president
and senator yes so number two
qualifying entities so I and and
I'm not going to pursue it but
but it really concerns me I
thought I was under the
impression that there were some
projects in my area in
particular and I'm certainly not
that that's not the case maybe I
missed president would Senator
grygiel Senator Griggs D. yield.
Representative are you.
Present the only the only thing
I can point to I Mister
president senator that I believe
that
Maybe two to twelve it's got to
be during governor Martinez
administration there was a a
project.
assistance and.
The governor would not provide
that assistance I thank you Mr
president center you probably
To me it certainly appears as
though
oil and gas related projects
and I guess I'm on I do
apologize because session of
just these questions more
directly.
In committee I know it's really
difficult when you have an
expert on the phone it's just
that leads and and what we're
trying to do here is probably
good for a lot of other
industries and and I accept that
and I know there's a lot of
support for this I am concerned
this.
I guess my only other concern is
that it requires.
Three parties to agree and that
also in a little bit worried
that this is so open ended that
you know the ten years and it
just kind of repeats itself on a
continuing basis so those are my
Thank you Mr president and then
when I first heard about this
bill the thing that came to mind
was the debates we've had in
this body over tax increment
If we don't offer this this
incentive so it's not like we're
giving up money it's like we
have an opportunity to get some
we're giving up tax revenue that
wouldn't exist if this project
didn't take place so I think
this is very sound I I I I'm not
petroleum but the processing of
it in the refinery wouldn't
qualified.
I'm no expert on leader for sure
but but it seems like there's so
something we're we're gonna turn
back a portion of what would
have ordinarily come to us back
to them so that they can
like it should be but I'll leave
that to the experts on that area
thank you Mr president just
introduce a pandemic we do have
for the debate will go to
senator Wirth followed by
I yield thank you Mr president
there was a Representative
representation that somehow
under this bill local
So Mister president and senator
basically said this for this to
work under this bill the state
has to be on board the county
has to be on board and the
municipality has to be on board
the municipality would do and
the county would do and I think
that you know it's important to
stay.
This idea that we're giving up
for money I agree completely
dynamic scoring when you do this
and the village of Los Lunas did
this with Facebook they gave up
seventy five percent of their G.
R. T. on construction and the
return has been extraordinary to
ripple effect that factors in
and so this to to to look at
this just in isolation and say
well yes this does cost X.
amount of dollars well that's
tool in the toolbox and I agree
that we should do all of the
above and I think you know
putting in a hundred million
dollars if we have the ability
large companies three hundred
fifty million dollar plus is a
major major deal that are that
are looking at our state right
now and if this puts us over the
R. T. kind of carve out of the
kind of the base code it's being
used to incentivize the company
to come here and once that ten
picture here in the of what
comes when we do something like
this thank you.
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
Want to Senator Tallman.
wants to respond to it I'm very
familiar with this type of.
Economic development incentive
the heavy use another cities
that we used to.
There is on a twenty billion
dollar project gave up ninety
million.
Which is a little less than one
half of one percent the simple
half of percent were it two
thirds of one percent I don't
see is that that much difference
between what we're proposing to
do here and what they're doing
Senator Pirtle on the chamber
we're going to go to Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
for making an investment that's
how America works to invest you
get a return and here's where
the return comes speaking of G.
R. T. so.
spending and the G. R. T. grows
and comes back and feels
anything again that's not
missing you never have it in the
those houses income tax
increases whatever it is it's
going to get built has to get
distributed that creates new
get to dynamic scoring that's
how the country works that's how
the CBO works the Congressional
Budget Office they do dynamic
but saying that to be put it
there meet the investment on
that is probably a ten time
return so it's a phenomenal
opportunity in the state and I
here it's not maximized they
could have been maximized had we
been able to put some money up
front
for
Thank you we do have a floor
amendment.
I'm just have a little moments
of the floor amendment can hand
it be handed out to the members
and then we'll have the chief
The chief for to raise.
Senator move the amendment
Senator Steinborn if you move
the amendment but not explain it
until all the members have that
amendment in hand Senator
Steinborn.
Is present a movie amendment for
Senator Steinborn to explain
with amendment as thank you Mr
president colleagues and I want
to be very clear I support the
bill I support the concept I
fifty percent amount that on an
expenditure of three hundred
fifty million dollars we must
incentivize it at a fifty
percent tax threshold not only
our department to negotiate and
frankly that negotiation helps
you extract a better deal.
And the and it may not be
just a we can improve upon it by
adding the words up to fifty
percent at the state level and
at the local level I've been
same amount but I a number one I
don't necessarily agree with
that because sometimes on leader
deals they don't pay the same
amount of fact they rarely do.
but beyond that Mister chair
for the state to do that fifty
percent it just gives them the
flexibility in the local
government to do up to and that
just seems to make more sense
Senator Senator Griggs Mr
president and Senator Hemphill
Senator Hemphill so Mister
president and senator this would
be considered an unfriendly
amendment because it creates a
Senate is renovating Senate
floor amendment number one.
Say no further debate.
again we don't fund Lita unable
fifty fifty state local let
alone at this level dollar
amount and the.
But you have to say Mr president
amendment fixing that if the
body agreed to this change.
maybe that's a better way to do
it at this point.
When we just go ahead and do
you gonna move this amendment
withdrawing this amendment.
Are there others on those the
board for debate.
Okay the bill yes Sir Senator
okay.
Well in that case a.
been withdrawn we're back on the
bill will have Senator Arnold.
Thank you Mr president will
sponsor you.
Senator Griggs emailed Mr
president either one of the four
yield I'm sure.
you know awaiting approval that
would meet the three hundred
fifty million threshold.
Mr president and Senator
And Mister president and and
senator I I guess we weren't
able to find out.
Who specifically that is is that
correct Mr president.
and showed to to allow their
names to be discussed here would
be an appropriate.
And Mr president and members of
the body I think that's that's
to give a tax break for
companies that are already in
line to
create business and spend money
and and do things within.
front that are gross receipts
tax statutes are horrible.
They.
basically prevent business from
Whatever it is if a business
goes into a building downtown
and they renovate the building.
They pay gross receipts tax.
On all the construction
material.
that New Mexico and how we treat
businesses whenever they move
and expand add
manufacturing equipment whether
these textiles I I think that's
what this legislation really
does is it brings to the front.
That we really need to take a
long hard look at how we tax in
was time that we modernize Tax
in New Mexico as well.
I would urge the body to reject
this piece of legislation I
tax business and manufacturing.
And make the tough decisions
that we need to because.
We have a lot of manufacturing
full gross receipts tax and then
there property taxes gonna be
assessed at a higher rate.
And we're basically to punish
them for doing and creating and
On how to create a system that
boost economic growth thank you
Mr president thanks in part we
do have another floor amendment.
Steinborn Senator were to move
it and explain the amendment
thank you Mr president because
okay to this is the same
amendment we just saw except I
that of up to fifty percent so
that's the only other change
beyond that Mr president again
Pollock's what this amendment
does is it it doesn't set.
And committing the local and
state government to that same
number instead it says up to so
we empower.
Thank you of our economic
Or they may be in different
positions to be able to commit
their local match and so this
just makes good sense it makes
good negotiating sense and also
it that covered I have to say
all we have to give fifty
percent because the law says
that no no they have to defend
it they have to do a good deal
they have latitude and we're
Questions thank you senator
debating senator member number
one and I yield to this Sanchez
Senator gonna Hemphill.
Thank you Mr president and
unfriendly amendment.
Senator debating senator member
number one anyone wishing to
bait with Senator Hickey.
Senator get it abate the
said a well we're only given
thirty percent but state you go
ahead and do fifty or they all
have to be consistent.
Senator Steinborn Mr president
that they may they set out what
it says at the beginning they
may do this but then they say in
an amount equal to so if they
give it it seems to require it
Senator taking.
Mr president and Senator
Steinborn so they had they they
they have to be the same under
side having to negotiate
multiple piece is going to be a
disincentive
a soap if at all kind of goes
together they can do their
numbers and so forth easier and
just want to clarify so that I
know the Senator understands the
amendment correctly it doesn't
Senate at the same level the
bill right now sits at the same
end up if it were to pass under
law you could end up with
different match contribution
rates for the state and local
just to be clear.
Any further debate senators.
floor amendment to Senate bill
one.
do now be voted on by roll call
vote thank you senator Senator
Stewart on the Senate floor.
That the Senate floor amendment.
To a number one to Senate bill
one
to now be voted on by roll call
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt
now senator Byrd senator Byrd
Duhigg Senator Duhigg now
senator gray goes.
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales now
Hickey Senator Hickey now
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto now Senator
no Senator McKenna no senator
Morris.
I'm sorry.
Senator Moores yes senator one
else.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
for the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator songes yes Senators
committees.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator to the.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls no Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Wirth Senator Wirth now Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods now Senator severe
Lopez yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes.
Senator Pinto.
By a vote.
close and I will go to Senator
Brandt centre somehow thank you
Mr president colleagues to
discuss Senator Representative.
Senator Hemphill yield Mister
president senator I yield.
Senator appreciated I was not
able to hear the debate in
to be able to hear the of upper
downs of the of the.
Appropriations for later.
economic development Department
website and the reported
quarterly to the LFC.
Senator Gallegos.
question is present and center
is I understand the G. R. T. is
going to go back to or the
credit for it's going to be back
Senator Hemphill.
department and the local
governments the minutes of
polity and the county
governments they review those
projects.
subcontractor general contractor
their lawns actually paying the
G. R. T..
But the owner benefits from that
is that how I understand that
this press.
They would work with the
contractors to get that paid.
for the G. R. T. paid by the
hours and wages and all the
purchases is that hello I
understand that.
So Mister president and Senator
the company gets credit for
that.
Mr president center that's my
This presents center I
understand that the benefit has
to go to the owner but I'm just
trying to figure out how the
the company gets the credit
because they are the ones that
are paying the contractor the
company pays the contractor.
Senator.
all the G. R. T. out of that I'm
trying to figure out how that G.
R. T. rate gets credited back to
the owner.
For the cattle billing piece
this presents.
documentation from the
contractors.
Senator gave us.
Thank you for that Mr president
Senator Griggs would yield
Senator Griggs deals Mr
president are you.
So Mister president I'll try and
capture to clean up to be able
to be a viable company would
they be allowed to be under this
leader of funding Mr president
Mr president Senator Griggs I
appreciate that and and I guess
my next question was there's a
little bit of discrepancies in
the way I was trying to read the
little bit of confidence and
that we would be.
Not able to use that Mr presents
a.
gas would be eligible extraction
is not eligible.
But a refinery could be
qualified for insurance as long
as everybody agreed to fund.
and guests come in New Mexico
would not but the the actual
production side would so I
appreciate that Mr president
center of those are all the
yield Representative Dale Mr
president I yield and thank you
Mr president and it is correct
that that we cannot disclose who
at least disclose if any of
these businesses donated to the
governor or the governor's
campaign.
Mr president Senator to the best
of my expert witness John Clark
stowage.
with businesses that we don't
know who they are we don't know
if they've donated.
We don't know
where they're building.
million dollars of public money.
Eleven million dollars at a
minimum.
That's a three hundred fifty
million dollar project so if
it's a larger project we're
gonna give away more of that.
But we're expected to vote on
this at eight forty PM on the
first day of a special session.
When.
This is an in the sunshine.
It's in the dark.
So we we don't know if they did
or did not donate because we
careful what we're doing in a
special session.
To vote on at eight forty PM a
forty one now.
Of public money that would go to
roads but water lines.
But a broadband would like to
say broadband that's a fun word.
donated to people in this room.
People in the next chamber over.
For people on the fourth floor.
So that we need to be very
have you whatever jargon.
We want to use.
So we need to be very very very
careful as we move forward on
this piece of legislation.
our DeLorean go eighty miles per
hour and come back right here at
this moment change or vote.
Because I think a lot of people
are gonna take about vote
tonight.
But what most of us should be
against is the norm in New
Mexico which is a sweetheart
deals.
These deals that are just for
the elite that have a project
Specially tonight.
You look at this and say you
know do we know where this is
going to do we know who's
getting this money do we know
So I would urge everybody I know
this is my second time up.
But I just felt it important
enough to to bring that up that
we don't know if they donated we
don't know if they did I'm not
saying there is impropriety
I can tell you yeah I spent the
weekend down in Travis county
and you know we have plenty of
cows down there in plenty of a
newer this stinks worse than
anything I smelt all week in.
And so I would urge the body to
reject this.
Until the thirty day that we can
get the answers that we need
thank you Mr president.
a bill that will help us to
attract it's a tool to help us
attract large businesses in New
Senate bill one do now pass and
I ask for a roll call vote that
is where voting tier seats
please.
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt no
senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator sure on this Senator
yes Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator had a meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Moores Senator Moores no senator
Munoz senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator renewable yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator due
Senator Pirtle no Senator pro.
Senator pro yes Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
senator Sanchez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
clause has passed the Senate go
to center guy goes and Senator
time want to expand the vote and
I would Senator Griggs.
Senator Gallegos
centers I appreciate the
this is opportunities as reason
for my line of questioning on it
this would affect some the oil
and gas industry so that way we
president because I just have to
say this is a teachable moment
it throughout our session for
people say god I wish I knew who
is behind this I wish I knew who
bills they've lobbied on the
position they've taken.
So if you really want that
knowledge you want that
transparency.
Let pass that into law there was
that we can understand.
You know what's at work and all
the bills that we passed thank
you Mr president.
Senator X..
Thank you Mr president ever
communities across the state.
We downward Erro has been very
fortunate to be able to take
advantage of certain projects
have been able to be funded by
particular approach which
present this particular approach
was passed by the Elmore city
commission in order to help
bring and and allow other
ways it went.
but.
Fortunately the bill passed the
bills ready to move on and I
believe it could be beneficial
Thank you Mr president and thank
you members of the body I just
I'm grateful to have this
opportunity to introduce a bill
with Senator Griggs thank you
At this present ask that we go
about our business messages from
the house that order of Business
messages from the house the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz Mahajan chief clerk
journal show the message from
the house has been received
House bill one introduced by
of the first special session of
the fifty fifty legislature
making appropriation from the
general fund for necessary
executive and judicial branch
House bill one having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate finance committee
that's house bill one.
the committee report on Senate
bill two we're gonna take a
recess until nine thirty the
Senate finance committee is
going to go up in here house
the floor so that's the plan
with that unanimous consent we
stand in recess until nine
thirty tonight.
Senator way if we got
members the Senate finance you
have a the email link for this
new meeting at the top of their
email.
There is a little bit of
difference of what came out of
bill passes there is some money
for R. L. the so we get this
clear they all need money to
enforce the regulations and the
bill and we'll be back in a few
minutes and we'll probably go in
ten minutes after we're done
after the floor Senator many of
us Senator Wirth.
