Senator Candelaria.
Senator serve on this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator McKenna.
Here.
Senator Morris.
Senator Munoz.
Senator by the.
Senator Pinto.
Senator printers.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold or.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
Would like to for performance Mr
Senator is it can all please
rise.
For the indication to be led
today by senator Pete Campos.
McKenna Senator Campos.
Thank you very much Mr
president.
First of all I've been praying
for each of you.
notice the positive changes in
yourself.
During the past couple of weeks.
Your resilience.
strength as a way to soar.
It it's actually our quick
recovery.
Humbles us and gives us the
destination of good health and
happiness.
We are all pilots for humankind.
And are provided with the skills
Payment.
Members of the Senate staff and
honored guests please face the
flag on the diocesan join me in
and to the Republic for which it
stands.
Nation under god indivisible
with liberty and justice for
all.
I salute the flag of the state
yield to senator Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr president good
afternoon everyone a unanimous
consent we go about our business
and ask Miss miscellaneous on
that order business senator
and.
it's important to just pause and
we appreciate you sharing words
with us this morning.
Mr presidents
Senator Wirth a unanimous
consent to excuse Senator
Gonzales and center Ivey Soto.
See no objections so ordered
senator Wirth I thank you Mr
make an announcement Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to excuse their diamond
except for personal call and now
I ask unanimous consent that we
remove Senate memorial number
eighteen that Senator pintos
memorials item number six that's
on the president's table on
to get the committee reports
introduced and then we have a
string of confirmations I think
there's forty nine confirmations
that were red and we're
certainly not gonna do forty
On once they come down we will
go to third reading and do
items number one and two.
Number six.
do another bill just depending
on how we're doing.
So with that Mr president
unanimous consent we go to that
order business committee
reports.
three has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that do pass
respectfully submitted George
when you propose chair senator
the report Senate bill one
thirty four do pass Senate bill
one forty four as amended do
pass respectfully submitted
forces been adopted as journal
show that they were acted upon
individually.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president with that I would
some folks have offered pension
if we need to do that so ideal
the scent of our meal center how
to mail thank you Mr president I
want to start off with the
border Authority and so Mr
Authority I now yield to Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics
thank you Mr president pursuant
to Senate executive a number six
dated January fifteenth twenty
no objections Senator Stefanics
to explain the conferee thank
you Mr president members of the
body
Right now Alexander Sierra is a
pigments he's also been at
several other companies he's
bilingual and he has served in a
variety of positions cross
See note no debate Senator
fantasy because Mr president I
just that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment about
Alexander ECA to to the border
Semenya's tier C. please.
fifteenth twenty twenty two has
been duly confirmed by the New
Mexico state Senate Senator
fenics thank you Mr president
and I know we all congratulate
to the border Authority I now
yield to senator semantics.
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
president pursuant to Senate
executive letter number six
I
see no objections centers to
fenics to explain.
Thank you Mr president members
we probably are all familiar
has of lifelong experience at
the border and will serve well
on the border Authority and I
stand for questions.
appointment of Sally Stahlman so
lease to the border Authority.
Centers where voting two seats.
If you wish to vote no please
I have over twenty five the
July fifteenth twenty twenty
four has been duly confirmed by
the Senate Senator banks thank
you Mr president and I know that
we all congratulate Sallee stone
and so least in her new
appointment thank you thank you
Authority and now yielded to
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt
as president the move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
that she will do a fantastic job
on the border Authority and hope
that the Senate will join me in
confirming her and I asked the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of.
Linda Smolinske.
Mr president I a asked the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of.
Linda for Ron ski and asked for
By a vote of twenty five in the
affirmative here on the negative
state Senate Senator Brandt.
Thank you members of the Senate
and I hope that you'll forgive
my butchering her last name.
Thank you for the for the
border Authority and now I yield
to myself.
Senator had a more explain
pursuant to Senate executive
letter number twenty six dated
October fifth twenty twenty one
We're debating Center Hotmail Mr
president it gives me great
pleasure to speak about Ramona
who is a proud alumnus of just
come on to high school in yes
is the owner of the law office
of Martinez OPEC and so Mister
president if there any other
members who want to say anything
about this appointee.
Senator is is there any debate
Senator is here sees please
we're voting if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
Martinez Celebrex as a member of
the border Authority for term
commencing on October fifth
twenty twenty one and expiring
July twenty fifth twenty twenty
four has been duly confirmed by
been appointed to the
construction industry
commission.
I now yield to Senator Campos.
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr president
of Mr tem misli Senator is a
rare Senator Campos I apologized
to his land thank you very much
to the construction industry
construction industry commission
and again where open to debate
communication thoughts and ideas
and all the other things that we
Saying then Senator Campos a
close thank you very much Mr
president
So I asked the Senate to hereby
confirm the appointment sorry
centers we're voting to your
seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Griggs.
By a vote of twenty five the
affirmative zero on the negative
the appointment of Tim nicely as
President and what we'll do is
pass along our congratulations
to Mr nicely thank you.
Senator had a meal Mr president
Stefanics at the Mr president
pursuant to Senate executive
message number twenty nine dated
January twenty second to twenty
twenty I move that the Senate do
thank you Mr president members
he is a project manager
estimator safety officer he has
Seven we're debating the
confirmation of Philip remit is
anyone wishing to debate.
State then Senator Stefanics to
close Mr president I just at the
vote no please raise your hand.
commission for a term commencing
upon confirmation to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
has been confirmed by the state
Senate Senator Stefanics.
to the construction industry
commission I now yield to
Senator Shendo Senator Shendo.
Center how to mail.
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of John McKinstry.
Senator media wish to explain.
thank you center have you.
If there's any other debate and
saying that other debates that
have made a close thank you Mr
president I just that the Senate
do hereby confirm the
pleasure of the governor has
duly been confirmed by the state
Senate center how to mail thank
you Mr president.
Senator had a meal Mr president
I hereby submit the credentials
to Senate executive message
number twenty nine dated January
twenty second twenty twenty I
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of pap
Pamela Frew and to the
Pamela Frew and is an architect
she is involved in solar
survival architecture and has
Saying no debate Senator FedEx
because Mr Mr president I asked
at the Senate do hereby confirm
the appointment of Pamela Frew
affirmative zero on the nature
of the appointment of how my
friend as a member of the
construction industry commission
chairman commencing upon
confirmation to be served at the
pleasure of the governor has
of James Borrego who has been
appointed to the construction
industry commission I now yield
to senator Rodriguez Senator
Rodriguez thank you Mr president
pursuant to Senate executive
industry commission see no
objections center the biggest to
explain thank you Mr president
many of you may know James but
he's a president owner of
committees and boards and so on
I can't say enough about it for
the sake of time I'm going to
continue and and move on with
this so I'll wait for any
president I asked at the Senate
do hereby come from the
appointment of James but but by
a show of hands Senator seeds
please the rest of our renewable
By a vote of twenty three in the
affirmative on the nature of the
appointment of James but as a
member of the construction
industry commission for term
commencing upon confirmation to
credentials of Andrew Burke who
has been appointed to the New
Mexico finance authority I now
yield to senator souls.
Same Science Center to see no
objections Senator souls
explained a conferee for the New
Mexico finance authorities
out of the main university he is
a man of high standing and knows
lots about money and things and
so we would be an excellent
person for the New Mexico
finance authority.
appointment of inner J. Burke to
the finance authority and ask
for show hands Senator sees
please if you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
negative the employment of
Andrew J. Burke as a member of
the New Mexico finance authority
for term commencing upon
confirmation expiring June of
January first twenty twenty
three has been confirmed by the
credentials of more and Suazo
who has been appointed to the
New Mexico finance authority I
now yield to Senator Campos
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr president pursuant sent
also to the New Mexico finance
authority.
See no objections Senator Campos
to explain thank you very much
Mr president Mr Suazo has over
thirty two years of successful
New Mexico and I know that if he
is confirmed that he will do a
good job in this position thank
you Mr president thank you
Senator Campos anyone wishing to
debate.
Mexico finance authority Senator
seats please if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
of runs laws all as a member of
the New Mexico finance authority
for term committed upon
confirmation and expiring
January first twenty twenty four
has been duly confirmed by the
I hereby submit the credentials
of Erik J. Baur who has been
appointed to the mining
commission I now yield to
Senator Hemphill Senator
November fifteenth twenty twenty
one I move that the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of Erich Bauer to the mining
commission see no objections
Senator Collett Hemphill to
explain.
Mexico and I stand for questions
or comments seven we're debating
anyone wishing to debate.
I see no debate senator could
no please raise your hand.
By a vote of twenty five the
first twenty twenty five has
been doing for by the New Mexico
state Senate center command
field.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the Senate body
exit to the Senate executive
letter dated October fifth
twenty twenty one I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Kathleen M.
great addition to this
commission.
Saying no any of any debate
Senator see no debate center at
a meal to close.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
twenty one and expiring July
first twenty twenty three has
been doing for by the New Mexico
state Senate senator how to meal
Mr president and members of the
Senate.
Thank you Mr president pursuant
to executive letter number
twenty nine dated January twenty
two twenty twenty I move that
Mr president the Mr printer a
lives in my district I hope no
one to hold that against him but
he graduated from Cornell
University and he got his
Colorado North Carolina and the
Navajo Nation.
he currently is an Indian
probate judge with the US
department of interior.
Senate here.
Do confirm the appointment of
Roderick Ventura Senator is here
suits please if you wish to vote
no.
Please raise your hand.
affirmative zero negative the
employment rate driven to a as a
member of the money commission
for term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring July
first twenty twenty three has
I hereby submit the credentials
of just Paul Paul gill who has
been appointed to the mining
commission I now yield to
Senator Kernan Senator Kernan
confirm the appointment of just
Paul Paul guilt to the mining
commission.
I see no objections Senator
Kernan to explain thank you Mr
associated with my site for many
many years he received a master
of business administration from
the university of Regina in
so he's very experienced in the
area of mining he has a
responsible for the safety and
the protection of the quality of
the
mining association he's been a
member of that board for for
some time I would encourage the
body to
Support this nomination thank
of jazz pop Paul gill.
Senator is tier seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
the appointment of just Paul
Paul ask you as a member of the
mining commission for a term
commencing on December tenth
twenty twenty one and expiring
July first twenty twenty five
Senator Hotmail Mr president I
hereby submit the credentials of
Erik J. Baur who has been
appointed to the call surface
twenty second twenty twenty I
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Erich
Bauer to the coal surface mining
commission.
the commission and I stand for
questions any debate senators.
Senator Woods.
Mexico.
Two one we still have a mining
commission with that name on.
This question just a thought
thank you Mr president thank you
confirm the appointment of Eric
J. Baur to the coal surface
mining commission Senator seats
if you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator Brandt.
By a vote of twenty five the
affirmative zero the negative
the appointment of Eric J. Baur
as a member of the coal surface
you Mr president thank you
members of the body.
Senator had a meal Mr president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Kathleen M. Funchess who has
been appointed to the coal
surface mining commission.
twenty two I move that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Kathleen Ms
Sanches to the coal surface
mining commission.
Senator is we're debating.
Saying no debate center how to
meet a close.
Mr president I just at the
Senate do hereby confirm the
By a vote of twenty five in the
affirmative on the negative the
appointment of Kathleen M.
Sanches as a member of the coal
surface mining commission for a
meal Mr president I hereby
submit the credentials of
Francis the hill who has been
appointed to the commission for
the deaf and hard of hearing
confirm the appointment of
Francis Vigil.
To the.
Well commission for the deaf and
hard of hearing persons.
This commission thank you Mr
president thank you senator pope
any further debate.
I see no debate.
raising of hands Senators tier
seats and you wish to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
hearing persons for term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring December thirty first
twenty twenty five has been
confirmed by the state Senate
Senator pope.
the commission for the deaf and
hard of hearing persons I now
yield to senator of this Senator
Rodriguez.
appointment of John J. Hooper to
the commission for the deaf and
hard of hearing persons thank
you center there is see no
objections center Rodriguez to
different parts different
agencies and departments at the
state level and has done a great
job and he is now retired so I'm
happy he's still willing to
Senior center there is a close
thank you Mr president I asked
is that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of John
J. Hooper by a show of hands.
I ordered twenty five deferment
is there on the negative the
appointment of John J. Hooper is
thank you Mr president members
of the Senate Senator had a
meal.
Mr president I hereby submit the
to amended Senate executive
letter number fourteen dated
February fourteenth twenty
twenty I move the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of Karen W. Garcia to the
environmental improvement for
department working on
environmental issues also was an
analyst for our Senate
conservation committee for many
years and I am happy to
recommend a for this position
as for show of hands Senator is
your seats please and wish to
vote no.
Please raise your hand.
of the environmental improvement
board for tournaments and I
confirmation expiring January
first twenty twenty five has
been confirmed by the state
Senate senator Wirth thank you
who has been appointed to the
environmental improvement board
I now yield to Senator McKenna
Senator McKenna.
Good afternoon Mr president
William K. hunger to the
environmental improvement board.
I see no objections Senator
McKenna to explain.
district nine he had he earned
his master's in science
environmental science that is
and he's a.
And executive level
variety of geographic locations
across a wide range of program
areas he has a very has had a
very long career at the
environmental protection agency.
centers we're debating anyone
wishing to debate.
See no debate Senator McKenna to
close thank you Mr president I
ask that the Senate do hereby
I vote.
employment of William Kurt cuts
hunger as a member of the
environmental improvement board
for term commencing on Feb or
seventeen twenty twenty one and
expiring June thirtieth twenty
twenty five has been confirmed
meal Mr president I hereby
submit the credentials of
Jessica Thompson who has been
appointed to the Human Rights
Commission I now yield to
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt.
Jessica Thompson.
To the Human Rights Commission.
I see no objections center rent
Thank you senator rand Senators
anyone wishing to debate.
Senator Woods.
Hi you Mr president I have often
wondered.
look like.
What are
those who were nominating
because some of us guys connect
remember faces better than
Scene then Senator Brandt to
close.
Mr president I asked the Senate
do hereby confirm the
appointment of Jessica Thompson.
By a vote of twenty four in the
affirmative there on the
negative the appointment of
Jessica Thompson as a member of
Thank Senator had a meal Mr
president I hereby submit the
credentials of merry Linda Meyer
who has been appointed to the
move that the Senate do slide
here confirm the appointment of
merry Linda Meyer to the Human
Rights Commission.
think we'll do New Mexico a
great service on this
commission.
Thank you Senator centers we're
debating anyone wishing to
debate.
slide show events Senator seeds
please if you wish to vote no
please raise your hand.
negative the appointment of the
a merry Linda Meyer as a member
of the Human Rights Commission
for term commencing on January
first twenty twenty two and
expiring December thirty first
twenty twenty five has been
credentials of Mary Patricia
Sheldon Mayer who has been
appointed to the Human Rights
Commission and I yield to
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
shield wire to the Human Rights
Commission.
I see no objections senator
Wirth to explain thank you Mr
president Michelle more is
wishing the debate centers.
Same then Senator were to close
thank you Mr president I ask
Senator here I confirm the
appointment of merry Patricia
By a vote of twenty five in the
affirmative on the negative the
twenty twenty three has been
confirmed by the Senate.
Senator Wirth thank you members
congratulations to Michelle
Meier thanks for her service and
thanks the members for the vote
Senator Campos thank you for
thank you very much Mr president
I move the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
Jacqueline.
lashed to the Human Rights
of Jacqueline coal ash to the
Human Rights Commission.
Thank you see no objections
Senator Campos explained thank
auditor and she continues to
really involve people within the
community in fact her
dissertation is entitled African
analysis Mr president this is a
highly qualified individual with
a commitment to serve here in
New Mexico so we are open to
questions thank you Senator
the appointment of Dr Jacqueline
coal ash and ask for show hands
Senators tier seats if you wish
to vote no.
Please raise your hand.
I have a lot of twenty six in
the affirmative on the negative
the appointment of Jacqueline
call us as a member of the Human
Rights Commission for term
commencing about confirmation
and expiring December thirty
credentials of David Overstreet
who has been appointed to the
Human Rights Commission and I
yield to senator Byrd Senator
Burt thank you Mr president them
to the Human Rights Commission.
See no objections revert to
explain.
Thank you Mr president the.
the university of Alabama.
his work to as both the public
defender's office as well as
private sector as an attorney he
great addition to the Human
Rights Commission.
Thank you senator Byrd anyone
wishing to debate.
Seen no debate.
senators if you wish to vote no
please raise your hand.
Commission for term commencing
upon confirmation and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty four has been duly
confirmed by the state Senate.
Commission I now yield to
senator pope Senator.
This present Mr president
pursuant to Senate is active
armor fourteen dated may twenty
seven twenty twenty one I move
thank you Mr president Mr
posters really has the passion
to serve in this position and I
believe in New Mexico will serve
well to have him serving us
position thank you thank you
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Victor polls to
the Human Rights Commission and
I ask for a.
And.
By a vote of twenty seven the
affirmative zero the negative
the appointment of Victor follow
says a member of the Human
Thank you Mr president thank you
did send Senator mail thank you
Mr president I hereby submit the
executives letter number eight
dated March fourth twenty twenty
one I move that the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of merry lane Leslie to the
in private practice but before
that she was the telos Committee
attorney and she also is a
mediator
and I'd stand for questions.
Senator is we're debating.
to the Human Rights Commission.
Senator seats please.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
the apartment a merry lane
Leslie is a member of the Human
Rights Commission for term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring December thirty first
twenty twenty four has been
appointed to the Human Rights
Commission I now yield to
Senator McKenna Senator McKenna.
Thank you Mr president.
Christopher Bowman to the Human
Rights Commission.
I see no objections Senator
McKenna to explain.
Mr president Mr Bowman is
the U. S. Mexico law institute.
Since earning his law degree at
the Case Western Reserve
University yes practice law in
creative solutions to help
resolve complex legal problems
of significant consequences to
his clients.
Thank you Mr president I ask
that the Senate do hereby
confirm the re appointment of Mr
Christopher Borman.
Thank you senators tier seats
By a vote of twenty six in the
affirmative zero on the negative
the appointment of Christopher
Baumann as a member of the Human
Rights Commission for term
Mr president congratulations to
Mr Bowman thank you seven
McKenna so how do you thank you
Mr president that's going to
conclude confirmations for this
afternoon I yield to senator
and transportation committee to
home is been referred Senate
bill forty two has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendations that do not
Shendo thank you Mr president I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the three to be allowed
to re all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion and that the very fact
as amended Senate bill one forty
one do pass Senate bill one
sixty two passed and that's
Committee Senate bill one thirty
five.
Report same without
recommendation infants referred
to the finance committee
respectfully submitted Benny
Seeing no objection the
committee part of an adopted a
journal show that they're acted
upon individually.
Senator Wirth.
adjourn until twelve or one PM
the Senate will come to order
Senator Stefanics Mr president I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended that their
general show that all those
that the general has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
judiciary.
No objection it is so ordered
Judiciary to wrap up
and when we get to third reading
we're gonna do items one two
six and then I think we'll jump
so with that I think.
Just until Senate judiciary's
downing I miss that we go back
to send our meal and we're gonna
knock off a whole bunch of these
confirmations Senator Wirth M.
down so we is that unanimous
consent we go about our business
third reading of legislation and
ideal to Senator Stewart for
Senate bill number one.
record show that all action for
placing Senate bill one on final
passage has been taken that's
now subject to debate amendment
allowed to expert witness our
newly confirmed secretary of
education Kurt Steinhaus.
See no objection secretary St
house welcome to the chamber.
To increase salaries to.
Minimum fifty thousand for tier
one sixty thousand for tier two
principals their salaries will
increase also.
So I've been wanting to change
the set three tier system for
quite awhile it really has taken
gas revenue for helping us
enhance our ability to pay for
things that are important this
year like teacher salaries and
Senator Kernan thank you very
very much Mr president I
appreciate the Madam pro tempore
effort knowledge that I really
do and I think this I think this
New Mexico we're making a big
effort to to be competitive I
still think when you include in
teacher salaries the the budget
that they have regarding
first step I'm glad you
clarified the issue about
principals and assistant
principals because they are tied
to this
I really am pleased and and
sponsor yield Senator Stewart
detailed I'd be happy to yield
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president and answer I
appreciate
keep seeing a lot of bills
you actually thank you all and
gas industry then to go for
providing the income for the US
but we keep seeing bills that
are going to kill the oil and
Senator Stewart.
Mr president Senator well I
don't believe that's going to
happen any time soon and we are
economy and we're doing a good
job about that we now have well
maybe in a few weeks we'll have
a clean fuel standard that's
bringing twenty eight companies
Of which so far has not had any
votes against it there's always
a first time I believe that this
step really will recruit
teachers will retain them and
all thought we'd be done by now
and yet what they're dealing
with now are huge absences when
there's COVID in their schools
and still a necessity be
believe this shows a respect to
the profession these are
essential workers as essential
workers I believe they should be
shape to continue the salaries
moving forward no matter where
the funding comes from so I'm
optimistic.
Thank you Representative thank
you so much Mister president
thank you senator
But you brought up several
things.
Just now one is you call
teachers essential workers I
agree with you but apparently
the governor didn't and they've
she's had a change of heart on
and it was actually quite a slap
in the face to our teachers who
were not considered essential
workers at the time so I really
hope that she's changed her mind
on that.
we have seen an in almost every
other state
that we don't have the working
conditions in those schools and
and it's going to take years for
our new secretary of education
to try to recover from those
things it's gonna be very
difficult to get teachers I read
who talks about you know the
pace nice and.
We do need to raise teacher pay
the pay is nice.
And I really hope.
That are administrative there's
throughout the state are
superintendents and our
principals and our vice
The cause problems in because a
lot of them and so I hope
they'll stand with them I really
explain to me how someone goes
from tier two to tier three
again.
And are we gonna actually
require that they do the
mentoring that that the law
you have to have been a teacher
for a minimum of six years a you
need to either have a master's
degree or national board
ones that are involved in our
teacher residencies so they're
already stepping up and being
leaders in level three.
the system's been in longer than
that and I will tell you the
practicality at least then
unless it is change last ten
years was that level three
teachers weren't actually being
I I appreciate the commitment
they made to the national board
certification I'm a huge
supporter that program.
I appreciate the commitment they
made to get a master's degree
so I agree with you on that I
just hope it happens
Mr president Senator what kind
of
What what kind of a evaluations
senator teachers are evaluated
by their direct supervisor
majority of the time that is
principles occasionally it's an
They're they're asked what they
want to work on that here of
what a professional development
they might like to take part in
they signed with that direct
training on how to evaluate
teachers we've at least this
year up a little bit more
reasonable notice in the amount
of time and how many times they
for younger teachers for
teachers in the first three
years they have to have more
extensive evaluation and then to
move also I've failed to mention
justify their teaching methods
they have to look at the a low
achieving student middle
cheating student high achieving
students and talk about how they
work with them through the
the pandemic the high stakes
testing of we have a bit of a
gap in a student achievement we
middle of the year and the end
of the year which is a focus on
growth and focus on growth is
the best way to evaluate
teachers so we have a variety of
years so I'm glad to hear that
and doing those three
evaluations and actually looking
at the growth of each individual
student within that teachers
the way that we have responded
to the pandemic again not
necessarily out of necessity
because that's what we decided
to do
but and and I'm sure that you
would be glad to have her back
in the classroom but
I I do believe our teachers need
and I've had those conversations
We need to make sure that we're
not just paying more for that
we're actually getting results
this is part of changing that
but we also have to bring some
accountability and so I really
hope that we will do that and
maybe some other things we need
unfortunately the LFC has
decided not to do that recent
years and I really hope we can
get back to that because we were
stop happening so I want to
commend you for that work and I
want to commend you
Manna pro tem for always being
an advocate for teachers we may
not always agree.
on the list center by the.
Thank you very much Mr president
I am.
Thrilled with what we're about
to do here in just a couple
she's made it her life's work to
build a public education in New
Mexico but but if she would
yield I would appreciate that
Senator detailed happy to yield
center for the thank you Mr
even on the in in the states
with which we compete most for a
public school teachers Senator.
Mr president you know I I I wish
starting salary and average
salary
US average is above us Colorado
Texas Utah all above us
What happens is that we're
having a teacher shortage
nationwide you know the pandemic
hasn't just impacted New Mexico
so.
Kernan about the issue is just
going to cross the line into
Texas and they don't have a
state equalization guarantee
they use property taxes I'm
is higher but it's not
significant but those border
towns have much higher salaries
and they they like to take our
bilingual teachers we produce
I think this will put us much
higher among all all surrounding
states but but that's just me
hoping it does it's not really
that we've done a lot to our
teachers and placed a lot on
their backs over the last couple
years we have a sense for what
this this massive historic
positive changes going to do
making up for any of that with
this this change.
Senator Stewart.
So Mister president I'm I'm I'm
dental vision retirement is all
gone up quite a bit for these
New Mexico public employees and
does this does this help to
capture some of that with this
We certainly try to adjust those
health care costs so the budget
certainly has a significant
funding to pay for those
increased costs it seems as
it will help on those other
costs it it definitely will.
Thank you Mr president thank you
to the sponsor our our protein
teachers they have done some
Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious
amazing things and we have
expected so much of them this I
hope is a new high water mark
the body to support this support
your public teachers and give me
a hug and thank every time you
see him thank you Senator the
bank and as a wonderful use of
linguistics Senator Padilla.
wanna rise and thank her and
thank the governor for really
the leadership on this effort I
was just sitting.
done and our teachers deserve
every bit of this and certainly
for.
All of those teachers in the
trenches we owe them a huge
looking at teaching as a career
what a great message we really
value.
This profession and understand
how important it is and so I
just commend.
it's a it's a big moment for our
state thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator Wirth Senator
Woods.
Thank you Mr president if the
how many ways can you think of
that.
We can
how can you hire in as a teacher
I mean you can go to college and
get a teacher's degree.
Mr president senator so we have
a pretty robust alternative
teacher licensure pathway state
take a few courses you start at
the at tier one you certainly
are required to learn some of
who want to work in the public
schools
so so some folks think that it's
much better to get four years of
a teaching degree I'm one of
we lose a lot of them in the
first few years they may of.
Had an idealistic idea of what
it's like to teach and then they
We're getting like four to five
hundred teachers years it's it's
four to five hundred teachers a
year that we certify through our
alternative licensure program.
have to have to commend to
alternative and.
If I got already have a master's
degree or even a Ph.D are they
be an alternative path in the
alternative pathway
I'm gonna have to ask my experts
the final question.
Senator.
that is that we have a system
they start at level one act
three years and that they can
take up to five years if after
five years they're not ready to
there three years anymore then
if you have your master's or PhD
or something else then the on
your seventy year you move in to
Mr president so
it all hinges on a dossier then.
To move up to the next level.
you are you being successful you
know and as I say half of those
alternative teachers don't don't
last more than a few years but
if you like in your being
Senator Wirth and what I'm
getting at Mister president.
You do not have to get a
master's degree of to move from
the dossier so you never have to
get more education formal
education other than the
The.
president no to move into level
three you have to have a
master's degree or at a national
board certification.
to move in to level three you
don't have to have more
education to go from one to two
but you do from two to three.
questions of the sponsor I just
want to thank her thank you
Senator Stewart for bringing
this up Sir Senator Woods I
myself was an educator who
started on the alternative
licensure program back in two
dollars a year before tears were
established and so I then had to
make a decision when my dad died
and my mom needed help with a
state of the teacher at twenty
thousand dollars a year or come
make New Mexico more competitive
and create increase the average
salary for educators the putting
the state on par with the
national average is important so
we can attract quality students
than twenty thousand dollars a
year Senator Stewart I'd still
be in the classroom and both you
and I know as former educators
teachers will still be using a
portion of their money with this
of comments and I've got a
question or two every year
before the session starts I go
and spend that Friday in my old
high school talking with
And as a result some of the
students really perked up.
Because they were listening that
with a bachelor's degree they
Mexico in every community for
those students.
The teacher of that class well
as the Los crucis teacher of the
year a few years ago he has
thousand dollars a year for
level three teachers he is
probably going to stay in the
classroom another three to four
years.
This particular bill not only
years so that they can help our
students this bill is truly
transformational for the state
of New Mexico.
And Mister president if the
If this bill is goes is enacted
is there a mechanism for
tracking additional people
coming into the profession it is
a mechanism for tracking those
them we are tracking them now
about five years ago I just
stand good one.
The fact that the former
executive director of the E. R.
the number one reason was the.
Perceived unfair teacher
evaluation system and right
behind it was pay so although
we've got a new secretary who is
all about data has always been
about date I think he has a
master's degree and technical
that computer science so we will
about the crisis we have in our
school with the lack of teachers
over a thousand openings right
now.
Numerous long term substitutes
teaching in our schools if we're
have a thousand openings right
now we have a crisis this
particular bill works to fix the
crisis on both ends it
encourages people to come into
the profession it keeps people
that in moving our state forward
please support it thank you
Senate souls just for
informational purposes for the
body we do have senator Clemente
full of US senators to phonics
Senator Rodriguez Senator
Thank you.
we're both because teachers and
one room schoolhouse.
And the.
Thank you and the so of both my
parents were high school
And she was responsible for me
getting the highest the grading
Javonte that year the New York
state regions in the fifties it
had standardized testing in New
York state since the fifties.
percent of the applicants were
accepted.
Although she didn't have a very
good experience.
But the other three three
reasons the the have a mention
for a.
The PED keeps track of that the
teach those stated that probably
will be LS turnover and number
performance so thank you for
bringing this forward I support
this bill thank you thank you
Sierra we do have Senator fund
expects.
Thank you Mr president I'd like
things came up teachers are
really dedicated they oftentimes
work on holidays and weekends to
fill their portfolios that they
is required for their
dryers so this school this raise
this bump up is going to
tremendously help the quality of
life and I thank you very much
Thank you very much Mr president
I do stand is trying support of
a long time but it took that
strong commitment and
perseverance hard work and
determination from Senator
Stewart and the governor here to
they're expected to be sometimes
nurses sometimes parents
sometimes counselors and on and
on the demands continue to grow
beginning to something that
needs to continue for teachers
when you think about it the
change that we're making his
pretty significant and it is
transformational and I like that
pay as we know it doesn't it's
not as much as we thought thank
you to Senator Stewart for doing
this and thank you Mr president
I hope we get this bill passed
as soon thank you senator other
to make COVID like many of my
colleagues because we feel that
this bill is long overdue I
think many of us agree that this
bill is long overdue and we're
in a position as I've said many
especially after the last two
and a half years understand that
our teachers have sacrificed a
lot I have seventy choose who
live on my street.
gets to teach them about caring
for one another I have a NASA
who gets to teach at Sierra
middle school kids in journalism
they do the news casts a line
Sierra middle school Linda is a
vice principal who lives two
doors down from me who works on
supporting her teachers every
day at her school matter of fact
because we didn't pay them what
they were worth.
Now we are able to pay them what
they are worth and I think we
Welcome recognizing when there
were issues with their mental
health because I think we also
have to agree that each of our
students in each of our teachers
are having more stress is added
to their already busy schedules
and so I would ask my colleagues
here in the Senate if you would
just join me in a moment this is
stand with me and applaud our
teachers for what they've gone
through these last two years.
thank the sponsor for this bill.
I think this is in my brief
tenure here one of the most
common sense bills that we've
ever done so thank you and also
Thank you Mr president I too
want to join my colleagues in
congratulating our pro tem and
Representative Sarinana for
it's days like this.
That
the takes me aback because this
is history making and so I'm
just so proud of the educators
but many times they're the first
ones to to suspect something's
going on with our students
whether be abuse.
Lack of fuel food security.
secure and some were even living
out of their car with their
parents.
And living near a hot spot so
planning their lesson plans
keeping trying to keep up with
their professional development
they're also watching out for
their kids in their classroom
about their well being.
say you yes we can do this so
thank you very much.
Thank you senator Canada we do
have for the debate center
cutting him he'll.
education a really long time
twenty eight years started
teaching kindergarten back in
nineteen ninety four and I work
with educators every day and I
know that the last two years
have been.
recruit and retain those
teachers goes a long way and
making sure that our children
have that solid figure in our
the students and the teachers
and also the educators and our
families so being able to retain
those teachers is going to go up
a really really long way and
the debate Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I just
stand in support of this bill as
well our greatest resource is
our children and I believe that
involved in getting this bill
I'm I'm thrilled to have the
option of up for today thank you
any further debate senators.
Si no further debate sinister to
Senator Stewart I apologize no
problem so Mister president.
I told Dr Stein house when I
started that I'm not gonna talk
this bill it is so exciting I
want to thank the governor it
wasn't until she came out strong
that the budget people paid
now pass and to ask for a roll
call vote.
Senator this tier seats where
voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd VS Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
Senator Gregers yes Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator good.
Senator Griggs CS Senator
Hamblen.
Senator had a meal Senator had a
more yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
LCS deployment Senator Monero's
yes senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope yes Senator propias
Senator Rodriguez.
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Tallman yes Senator Tallman yes
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Lopez and Mr president
I'd like to X. Q. Senator
o'neill.
See no objections.
Senate bill one has passed the
New Mexico state Senate Senator
Stewart.
Senator Morris centerman us once
It changes people's lives it
changes their families lives
they go to work every day we
drop our kids off every single
day at the school thinking we're
you never know what our budget
cycle looks like but we have
might may monumental change in
New Mexico with this so thank
you Mr president thank you
senator Senator Stewart I just I
think the body thank you Mr
Senator Kernan thank you very
much I ask unanimous consent of
the Senate that the record show
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president this man
this legislation addresses an
amendment to section seven dash
nine dash seventy seven.
Point one and deals with the New
Medicare beneficiaries
legislation enacted in twenty
sixteen amended this section and
created confusion regarding the
continued applicability of the
of Texas for nursing homes and
hospices.
They drafted the language before
you and work with the taxation
and revenue department on the
language before you the
the legislation introduced in
the twenty sixteen legislative
session they agreed with the
recommendation to amend the same
section of law so that it
clearly stated the ability for
and hospice providers in the
exemption should be taken on a
going forward basis so this
legislation deals with this
issue on a going forward basis
in corrects language to make it
questions thank you senator and
says we're debating Senate bill
one thirty eight.
I have Senator Stefanics.
Thank you Mr president I like to
Si no further debate Senator
Kernan to close thank you Mr
president I'm if that Senate
bill one thirty eight do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
show fans Senator seats please
we're voting.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
affirmative on the negative
Senate bill one thirty eight has
passed the Senate Senator Kernan
thank you very much Mr president
thank you Senator about this
final passage of and taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution see no
objections Senator about this
explained the bill there is
present because this is part of
at least one year before the
have to stand for election the
goal here right now is to assure
that the public is evaluating
judges after they spent some
time on the bench as opposed to
appointee would be required to
stand for election in June and
or November of this year and
that's the one and only
opportunity the public really
a private sector attorneys to be
able to apply for judgeships
because now if you're in the
private sector you have to shut
down your practice give up your
cases of reassign your person
improve the Judith of the
judiciary and some diversity on
on the courts and Mr president I
do have a floor amendment and
Sorry center let me have the
right to read it first and then
we'll have you moving explaining
the reader to read Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
joint resolution free amendment
See no objections Senator about
this explain what the amendment
as thank you Mr president when
we're on the rules committee
there was a good suggestion that
my original proposal and
committee thought that the idea
was strong enough that it should
apply to all of District Court
judges as well to the floor
amendment street simply strikes
the word appellate out of the
title so the fact of the
Senator Moores the U. S.
president with the chair
Judiciary Committee meeting
yield Senator want to steal yeah
so you members present thank you
Mr chairman are you mentioned at
the rules committee I felt that
Senator about this Mr president
and I think he's probably
referring to me and I think it's
just sore because.
We have an agreement Jones
this is just a personal was a
personal slight to me but I will
try to take it to heart I I I
think this is a good idea I'm
not a member the rules committee
I really miss being with you
senators.
Si no further debate on the
amendment Senator mantas to
close on the amendment the
agency president I just that the
Senate approved house floor I'm
It says about this year you may
want to request a unanimous
consent to get out let's just do
that we missed present I think
we'll probably get that so I ask
unanimous consent senators is
been a motion for unanimous
amended we're back on the bill
in the debate on the bill.
Senator Steinborn.
So thank you Mr president with
the gentleman yield for a
Steinborn Sir Mister president
don't don't don't get me started
we'll we'll go there
but now I I just you know it's
funny I I think there was a
similar bill like this several
years ago and I kind of have the
have to serve for election was
that is that would be an
exception with no other elected
official is that correct Mr
the individual serves of the
ness of our next election out no
that's in in our case Senator of
those of us in the Senate that
might be four years in other
words if we're appointed at the
or two of the general election
the other big difference of
course is the judiciary in the
selection process is very unique
because with judges there's a
one time election there's one
analogy that you're trying to
all of their elected offices the
judge the way we elect judges is
very unique.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president yeah and
president I guess I just tend to
believe that it's a it's a
democratically elected position
if that's the structure of it
and just like the corollary
would be as a state
representative for example thank
the public he takes a crucial
option away from the public and
that could be good and that I
mean that can be that can.
That can be good and bad I
suppose the democracies never
center so they'll office.
Thank you Mr president I stand
in strong support of this bill
because the other thing that
happens with the judiciary is
when somebody gets appointed
they really don't end up doing
flow of the cases and then it
does is also the one time that
the public gets to vote on them
they don't know anything about
them.
And with at least with one year
quality of of the judges has
well has increased
The product productivity of the
judges when they first get
appointed as a learned the
position so with that I stand in
strong support thank you thank
Senator Steinborn voting no.
three as amended has passed the
Senate Senator on this.
Thank you Mr president was the
Senate most of you.
placing Senate bill forty one as
amended with an emergency clause
on final passage has been taken
so subject to debate amendment
or substitution see no
attorney working with our labor
unions.
See no objection a sergeant also
please escort the expert witness
into the chamber.
and an unfortunate consequence
of that so we have a regional
Medical Center of the employs
about six hundred people.
are not allowed to for me you so
we have six hundred health care
workers the only health care
workers in New Mexico who do not
have a legal right to workplace
representation.
allowed to join a union a so
this bill a simply adds a
provision into that for P. to
statute that allows health care
Mister president I do have
amendment.
When it's time thank you senator
Stewart we do have a floor
amendment the reader to read the
amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
Senate foreman at number one to
Senate bill forty one yeah
that's fine with him and the
Senator I thank you Mr president
so this is almost the exact
the weather and not able to be
here so it just changes the
words a little bit so that it's
easier to understand so we're
if the there are there if the
Medical Center owns operates or
manages a health care facility
or employs individuals who work
at a health care facility
essentially what this ammendment
majority of them are small we've
got a couple at U. N. M. we have
one in New Mexico state we have
one in New Mexico tech this
Saying no debate Senator Wirth
to close on the amendment.
Mr present ask unanimous consent
I see no objections Senate bill
forty one as amended with
emergency clause.
Has had just sent a formal one
Senator Hernandez vigorous
presidents present we know we
should take some pause and and
really begin to realize what
we've done with this enabling
statute not this particular bill
these creatures.
We we made a half pregnant which
is where described in the
committee we said that they're
inspection of public records or
for gross receipts tax there's a
long list of things for which
they exempt themselves from
state law and are not considered
a state actors and then and then
laws including the furnishing of
goods and services and risk
management Fund purposes in any
particular of some interest.
To those of us are lawyers
then they're exempted from other
state laws and so that's why you
use the description of them as
they're they're absolutely have
pregnant they're they're halfway
in as a state agency or branch
from the other parts so well
Senator Stewart is is that the
clarifying one important part of
that.
That concept in these entities I
think it's important for us to
recognize we really should be
because once again there's a
question about how the
constitution relates to this but
with the amendment I support but
what Senator is doing with
amendment and and ultimately a
be bargaining and should be
entitled to protections by you
have the quickest and best way
to get there with the with the
least litigation I'm I'm not
Morris thank you Mr president on
our and we want to work with the
senator Sanchez that in one of
the things that he madam is that
these organizations and the
universe is in general and go
great for profit subsidiaries
for profit organizations
underneath so I grew Senator
Sanchez these organizations of
the way the universe is a set up
these are organizations are
competing the marketplace
continue to take a look at
I do agree with Senator Sanchez
of these organizations and
universities in general
committees cortical nonprofits
are really guys is very
aggressive for profits are
followed by Senator Woods
Senator Baca thank you Mr
president with the sponsor of
the bill please you Senator Dale
yes.
Thank you Mr president and thank
even remotely affected by what
we do here today.
Senator Stuart Thomas present
yes.
Senator Baca thank you Mr
president can you can you tell
Act agreed with the employees
that they are public employees
and should be able to bargain
through our public employee
bargaining Act at UNM disagrees
objection to this bill Mr
president and and really why I
can't supported today just that
answer right there is in direct
conflict with our constitution
article four section thirty four
Court case that is ongoing that
admittedly by the sponsor Mr
president would affect that
litigation I would say by taking
this act we would taking this
president what I would say is it
would invite litigation based on
this we would invite a lawsuit
based on this bill for violating
that that constitutional
highlighted but I think that's
the main premise is that you
know we have to we have to have
some respect for constitution
and for the rules that we have a
we can just override them in
of that case as was just stated
by the sponsor thank you Mr
president thank you senator
boxer we do have Senator what's
next.
Little.
Thank you so please.
Well me the sake of.
Trying to get this in my head.
The.
Mr president there state
them this would agree with the
public employee bargaining Act
that their public employees and
allow them to be part of that
system.
Because I think that is a public
employee.
Retirement fund.
Would you know you said it was
a.
Are they under a negotiation
with the
Public.
their retirement package Mr
president.
Senator.
Mr president right now they have
like a four oh one K..
That you don't anticipate and
become an and the P. E. R. A.
whatsoever the and so that part
they are not a public employee.
Pension system UNM hospitals.
So they're not part of any of
those systems.
Senator Wirth okay.
sisters are halfway halfway
halfway halfway.
And.
What exactly would we make to
halfway halfway halfway.
Si no further debate Senator
Stewart to close.
Thank you Mr president I just
want to say a couple of things
that provision simply states
that the legislature if we do
amend the law that amendment
will not effect the pending
case.
So this won't affect the pending
More attorneys than the ones we
have they just disagree with the
way we're interpreting that so I
just throw that out there and
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
the negative by show of hands
Senator is here suits these more
voting if you wish to vote no
Woods voting no Senator share
voting no Senator Baca voting no
Senator Brandt voting no senator
Byrd voting now.
emergency clause has passed the
Senate Senator Stewart.
Thank you so much Mr president
members of the Senate thank you
Senator Stewart Senator Pinto.
action for placing House
memorial eighteen.
On final patches has been taken
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution no
objections center Pinto to
So we have the missing held
against your will.
And back during the long walk.
Thirties their homes were burned
to the ground.
So just displacing people to
another place.
Might be a slight.
To reach that level of genocide
or that attempt on genocide.
But today.
I am here.
And then that difference to I am
a woman and to make it even
smaller incremental I am Navajo.
One of the steps.
And for those families with
victims the missing and murdered
the families.
Is to recognize what is going on
with the.
rise every morning with the
state they have.
To continue to bring awareness
to their members of their
families.
That are missing or murdered.
But in that to Senate bill
twelve which complements.
This part of the healing that
has to go forward.
The case of where we are now.
Hold down women and children to
it's intended to do that.
But we have structural
discrimination.
And what we think.
That the policies and procedures
Is it neutral.
If the bill directly.
Addressing the missing and
murdered indigenous women.
And yet that process in the
ceiling for these families it's
want to enter it again and not
heard.
Communications with those all
involved with this plight to
address this issue.
And what we know there are gaps.
numbers down.
Thank you Mr president.
And I feel for thank you
jass followed by Senator Lopez
and Senator Lopez.
Senator me us thank you Mr
president thank you responsive
for bringing this forward this
you start talking to a family
member and say I'm looking for
so and so and and in the word
and and they spread the word out
those families are still
grieving it and searching for
their family members have never
returned.
and so it's it's a big issue.
gone and we look and we look and
and you never know where they're
at and and sometimes we never
find them and so I thank the
sponsor bring this forward.
Thank you senator Senator Lopez.
thank you Senator Pinto
for your your words of the
heart.
that you have shared with us.
Mr chairman members of the
Force MMI W. R. task force and
Mr chairman members of the
committee if I may I would also
reference
former senator John Pinto.
And the atrocities insured by
the Disney.
And of course as Senator Pinto
has just mentioned the
The Senate there's always much
work to still be done.
And when we do talk about
process of respect.
And Mr president members of the
Senate
To to recognize and honor what
is mentioned in this memorial
does carry back for issues of
systemic racism.
Brought upon the delay people.
And others in the state of New
Mexico.
As part of the history that we
must acknowledge and understand.
can understand graphs with and
hold it in your heart
we don't move very much that you
don't move farther forward.
again Senator Pinto I support
you.
forwarded from the task force
and two years and work and
moving forward of how we can
recognize and Mr president is
called institutionalizing an
Issue that we do have in the
state thank you.
We do have further debate
Senator civile office.
with the coalition to stop
violence against native women.
And in that context I really
learned a lot about missing and
murdered indigenous women.
Missing and murdered indigenous
women.
And Senate Christine by the bill
was and objected in April of
nineteen eighty six when she was
Her relatives was stabbed
thirteen times.
That case is not been resolved.
And we all read about Ashley
Mike which was better
publicized.
not been solved and we have not
had justice in these cases and
this memorial is a very
important step in in trying to
seek justice for those cases and
that that built up gets heard
because.
These families need justice
thank you Mr president do have
further debate Senator Brandt.
yesterday to speak with present
as and to talk to him at length
and we actually talked about
this issue mainly and about the
overlooked for years in our
country we've ignored it.
On the federal level and state
level.
And that's what's happened.
I want you all to think for a
minute about what you would do.
If one of your family members
just disappeared.
even trying to find your sister.
Your mother your daughter.
How would that make you feel.
communities and help them.
When it comes to this issue no
one.
No matter the color of their
skin.
And so I thank you for bringing
this memorial I thank you for
drawing our attention to this
and I hope that we will do what
is necessary.
To find out what is happening.
for perpetrating this injustice
upon them thank you Mr president
thank you senator panto for
bringing us thank you senator
grants we have sent a McKenna
followed by Senator fan extend
appreciate all the supporting
words that I've heard thus far
from my colleagues I want to
thank senator Linda Lopez and
I was really heartened to see.
the unit chief join us at the
event yesterday he's part of the
Haaland so it's heartening to
see that we have attention on
this tragedy at the federal
level and here in our state.
And together they align nicely
with the governor's call to
address crime in New Mexico.
And with that I'd like to see
Are still discriminated against
along with black people.
And other people of color.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator Senator
fenics.
bringing this forward and I was
honored to be at the rally
yesterday and meet some of the
family members of the missing
speak on legislation and to be
here to let us all know of their
commitment to this process as
well.
come from it doesn't matter the
color of our skin all people are
valuable and when somebody goes
missing it should affect us all
thank you very much Senator
Pinto.
on that American women face
murder rates that are more than
ten times the national average
there's widespread anger and
sadness of my community and in
ones are missing.
Babies are growing up without
mothers mothers without
daughters and grandmothers
without granddaughters for
native America this that's one
indigenous women who are missing
and murdered and my thoughts are
with their family thank you Mr
president thanks in advance
Senator pope.
Thank you Mr president I rise in
Go outside in the rally outside
the doors and I just have to say
it was very emotional for me.
That are missing or that have
been murder that we don't even
know.
One of the women her sister.
All over the country.
And we can't allow.
The federal the state the
jurisdictional arguments who's
And I don't like to say that
it's bring you justice I I just
to me it's.
Holding those accountable
because they're not going to be
able to come back.
I've heard that in the
discussions outside.
But as a society.
We have to respect each other
more.
So you need to understand how
these families feel.
But when some people are missing
at the national news it's a it's
a nationwide manhunt.
So thank you Mr president.
Thanks hope center Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president I rise
and support as well Senator
communities where our tribal
brothers and sisters in our
women and children they know
about it.
Because they see the missing
every day they see their absence
every day.
Apache tribes of you moving this
memorial forward is a step
forward.
In writing the horrible
atrocities that are native
American communities have
Thank you Mr president I I
stand in strong support of the
Senate memorial eighteen I want
to thank Senator Pinto for bring
comments have been said the this
is a huge issue in any country
not on the not only in this
state but also around the world
noted just communities.
Of who's responsibility is it
and I think you've heard Mr
president that if all lives
matter.
And we can make this work.
put another you know hundreds of
cops in Albuquerque yet
undeniable nation these police
officers are covering hundreds
of square miles one themselves
reality that we face in our
tribal communities.
And I hope that we as we move
forward that we can really bring
light to these issues that we're
thank you Mr president thank you
senator Shendo any further
debate Senators Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr president
I want to thank Senator Pinto as
away from the topic that we're
talking about in general with
regard to to the missing persons
in in your area and I think this
conversation that we've had
today very important one and
I'll take it back with me and
and share this with the people
that I represent because we just
Si no further debate Senator
Pinto to close.
Thank you thank you Mr president
and thank you for all the
support and the words even from
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show of hands
Senator seats where voting.
Mr president Senator Wirth if
it's appropriate said I ask
unanimous consent that it showed
off forty two and the lieutenant
governor voted in support of
this.
By a vote of forty during the
formative.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent that
our biz introduction of
legislation on that order
business introduction of
legislation.
The reader Terry.
fifteen twenty twenty two
missing and unidentified persons
day in the Senate Senate
memorial twenty three.
Senate memorial twenty four
introduced by Senator Campos
Senator Stefanics and Senator
Lopez a memorial declaring
February eight twenty twenty two
hunger Senate memorial twenty
four Senate memorial twenty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed not refer
to committee to be placed on the
president's table center model
relating to taxation providing
the gross receipts sales or
similar tax levied by certain
tribes shall be limited to a
rate not less than the total of
House Bill fifteen having been
read red tie having been read
twice by title.
Is referred to the Senate and in
rural and cultural affairs
X. I'm gonna present house with
miscellaneous or on that order
business senator Wirth thank you
Mr president just so for the
members we are not going to meet
tomorrow on the floor so this
for committee members to make
their announcements percentage
shares.
Senator Lopez.
I'm Mr president
Senator Lopez can you give us
the title that bill.
Senate bill twelve sorry.
I think was present in centers
urged members to reject the
motion and.
You know I appreciate the last
debate ice I stood silent
From all lands and all histories
is truth.
There's a place for truth.
judiciary order with our staff
and the sponsor for an hour
going through the building great
detail line by line page by
page.
To me with the attorney
general's office because we
should realize what this bill
does this bill deals with the
jurisdiction of the Attorney
General would yield a two
million dollar appropriation of
These missing individuals.
We all support so I have my
staff meet with the attorney
general's office who drafted the
bill.
And they thought it was a
general's authority legal
authority.
An expected again after the
report I got for my staff to
that it Attorney General meeting
went well.
language just language in
drafting which is what we
typically do in Judiciary.
I was then told an hour before
the committee meeting all of the
suggestions all the
engine issue today we were late
coming down to the floor we had
a lot of bills on the agenda we
work hard.
We we lost our day yesterday.
Because of the the work in
And because the work that would
be required on Senate bill
twelve in the Judiciary
Committee would take time and
debate and discussion because of
our agenda yesterday coming off
Members of the Senate.
I'm gonna turning left taken to
do the best I can hear.
Sometimes my work as well
work as an attorney for my
opposition to anyone of your
initiatives is because of your
race or your gender.
Or where you come from.
I want a piece of legislation
empowers the Attorney General.
It has legal implications.
When a bill a proposes to
all the language in the bill.
But I have questions.
When I was unable.
Through my efforts.
When I spoke this morning.
And he asked me to give him a
couple of days to look at the
bill.
the bill.
What my motivations behind full
not bill.
But I hope you'll keep in mind.
The efforts that I made on the
And then the rejection of all of
those efforts.
And then.
The fact that I would go to the
next step and go to the Attorney
General myself.
And ask for him to intervene.
The members of this chamber to
respect the committee process.
I don't know that you need me to
explain every bill and every
reason I do what I do I don't
know if you need me to explain
Earlier to Senator Lopez was
very magnanimous and was very
agreeable accepting to numerous
amendments to an important piece
of legislation it's dear to her.
justice who was in the
committee.
And state trial judges who are
the committee who accepted those
amendments.
As making for better legislation
I appreciate Senator Lopez for
You've given me a wonderful
staff a great team of attorneys
brilliant attorneys up there you
work with them.
stand here today as well.
But you have my commitment.
In my report.
But I spoke to Hector Balderas
this morning.
And I hope you place yourself in
my shoes and realize.
My efforts are noble.
Well intended.
We do have further debate with
senator Wirth followed by
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr president I also
rise in opposition to this
And quite frankly there was
chaos as a result of that
we've come a long way I didn't
serve as over the house right
Bill number because of its
importance and I just want
members to understand that when
we get votes like this it's not
about the bill that that's at
issue it's about this chamber
think when we follow that
process we work better as a body
and so I just for the newer
members I just want to explain
why I'm not going to support
Thank you Mr president members
of the body.
The chair we are the ones that
decide what will be heard in
committee.
actually actually had a hearing.
And was actually heard in the
committee.
Bills actually given an
opportunity just many other
bills have been given.
Is about the task force that was
established by this body to come
up with recommendations and
this present moment is adequate
and if that was the case why are
all these women missing and
murdered.
And we are in this we have this
Deliberated this bill and I
believe in the AG's office they
have lawyers to.
breakdown in communication.
And yet.
What I got was a.
It seems Martin to take a
different turn as they were out
of time.
And I am sponsoring it on behalf
of the task force.
And in order for us to make this
a statewide initiative it has to
That there will be something in
place that deliberately in
statute says that those
processes that we need to attack
this you don't need that you
don't need this.
And it's already there.
We.
had to go in there and find out
I was taken off the agenda.
So that we don't have time for
you we don't have time for your
bill.
Five minutes less than five
minutes.
So here I am.
Many months.
That this body again the duty to
come up with recommendations to
Thank you Mr president I want to
stand and then respond to the
committee chairs of.
absolute faith is the committee
chairs
Respect for each and everyone in
the chamber no matter what their
I believe the problem is far
short sessions and our and our
even our our the.
No sessions are sixty day
confusing I've been here three
years and I I still just it's
confusing to me what you're
supposed to do when people have
told to change the bill and you
don't agree with that.
So I think I think the problem
is is just the fact that we are
work these out and so this is a
bill of extraordinary
importance.
And it's just it's just sitting
without movement apparently and
bigger systemic problem that we
should we should address I know
we're dealing we're dealing with
the issue of pay for legislators
but that's not why we're week
legislature we're a week
the Attorney General to get back
on a bill that they participated
with the task force on this time
is simply going to run out.
And so what I.
has to go over to the house and
I know that senator of the we we
the last Senator Ivey Soto to
fix it before went over there.
concerned that we don't have
time.
if it gets bottled up.
And so I I'm gonna support
moving it forward because I have
seems pretty straightforward to
me course I'm not a Judiciary so
I don't know what the issues
were the were raised
But I do really want you to know
and I I think that that's really
important to say.
Thank you Mr president.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president Jim I
judiciary is going to disagree
with
All of the changes that I'm
aware of that have been
contemplated.
policy goal in this bill as
effectively as possible I'm not
aware of any substantive
disagreement all of us
sure it gets done as well as
possible I I and which which
happens all the time in our
committee
with Senator Lopez is bill today
frankly time is an issue and and
if we can go into committee with
with Senator Pinto knowing
exactly what the changes are
having approved that being
comfortable with them that
be as thoughtful about it as as
we should be.
Than that I.
I'm having trouble understanding
why why that is not a good
approach because we want to make
Nothing thank you Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr president and yes I
have made the motion and Mr
chair you know stating it's it's
always the intent of those of us
in committees to make sure that
the bills that come out are in
good form nothing perfect but
they're in good form.
in the public with my guess my
expert witnesses present.
And I do believe that is a
request that had been made for
Mr president I'm supporting it
might my co sponsor I I signed
on and honor to Senator Pinto
asked me to sign on is to give
us a hearing let the task force
because not everybody is privy
to what we do up here Mr
president for me it's also an
opportunity with this motion
however the turnout maybe is
that we have to educate and work
president members of the Senate
for us to at least have a
hearing and again in reference
to my bill we had a public
hearing today and the amendments
were presented in the public
thank you.
Senate bill twelve in a show of
hands Mr press question the
removal of Senate bill twelve
from Judiciary Committee a yes
vote is to remove it from Senate
Overall in requests for roll
call the clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd
senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senator Campos no Senator con
the Mahdia.
goes no ma'am Senator guide
there's no Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs knows Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hickey now Senators
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Moores Senator Moores no senator
Munoz.
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Well yes Senator Rodriguez.
I'm sorry.
Senator Schmidt is no senators
of their Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes under share.
Senator sure no Senator Shendo.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
No explainable Senator Steinborn
now Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
center Steinborn to explain his
vote thank you Mr president and
voted against the motion only
because what little I know about
the bill it sounds like it does
colleagues I do think our quote
process needs improvement in the
Senate.
Something I've been struggling
I'm a member of the majority
party.
And I do think it's a real
problem we only have a thirty
to bring up ideas those ideas
need to be run through the
process brought up brought down.
and
So I understand the frustration
and I understand the system.
And then and then the committee
process would work probably more
like it should.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Steinborn center worth.
announcements now's the time to
do that Senator souls full by
Senator Hamblen etcetera cels
thank you Mr president Senate
education will meet at nine
o'clock on Monday I think we
committee announcements so I can
wait until after all the
committee announcements if
that's alright Senator handling
proceed we don't have anyone at
this point in time is a half I
would like to recognize Gabriel
whole bean who is one of the
holding from the town of Anthony
thank you again for being here.
Senator Steinborn.
been and I just want to I want
to give a nod to once again
David souls who who's our bill
souls brother who passed away
who was a game commissioner who
was awaiting appointment
us who have the privilege of
knowing him bills and felt and
again to swallow we've had
confirmation that wanted to tip
the hat to to our our friend
for the junior bill language we
need to run out there and wrap
that up so junior bail can be
drafted and and we can get out
of the committee on Monday into
the floor and and move that
and and clarify that so we can
get the capitol building after
it
Mr chairman and Mr president.
You know when I first came here.
And we have an we have a process
problem here and a lot of the
process comes from council
because we as legislators go up
there and tell to draft the bill
and even though it's on
here so as we move forward.
We want to think about fixing
the process and there's drafting
rules and council for what they
can do and what they contain we
have passed any bill in the
world that you want and you'll
still be just as frustrated as
you are here today when bills
are being heard.
and it does take time and it is
consuming and it is activating
and it is contentious and it is
a policy that we need to fix in
some way shape or form.
and how it needs to work and
that's the most important thing
that we can do thank you Mr
president
I'm gonna center how to mail
thank you Mr president the
Senate rules committee will meet
Senator.
Thank you Mr president
committees committee will meet
on Monday morning at eleven
fifteen and room three twenty
six.
end of a long week and I think
it's always important as we do
to just take a moment and thank
everyone that makes this place
Building services including
security our chief clerk our
staff front office staff rostrum
calendar copy room ENE I. T.
including analysts and
secretaries without all of you
we could never do this were
obviously doing an awful lot the
very short period of time and I
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president with that
unanimous consent the Senate and
