Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator probe.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
Thank you just that all the
senators please rise from
indication.
standing for the pledge of
allegiance to be led today by
Senator Hickey the pledge of
allegiance to Spanish to be
there today by Senator put it
Hemphill and the salute to New
you for a new day.
Thank you for this moment to
gather to bring.
To move our hearts and our minds
to.
Do the right.
Probably and kindly.
Many hurts and divisions within
us and among us.
So that we can continue to forge
bonds of communion and peace as
brothers and sisters.
that you allow your spirit to
descend upon us now as we.
Take a moment to be grateful for
your presence among us.
And each one of us.
I salute the flag of the state
but again the morning by
yielding to senator Wirth thank
you Mr president good morning
unanimous consent we go to that
over business announcements and
miscellaneous I see no
dealing with some really serious
family issues Senator share
we're just welcoming you back I
know you've been dealing with
some challenging family matters
to have you here no that's an
ongoing issue R. Mr president
thanks to our father millennials
I think.
Senator millennials will you'll
about father millennials at this
of also animus consent to allow
a camera on the floor and in the
gallery seeing no objection so
ordered Senator Brandt.
Thing is present in asked sent
to excuse or diamonds are for
want to thank father Matt then
use the money thought it was
gonna be a trick but it's
actually not and father you're
still with us I believe in and I
I think you have a story to tell
us but I'll let him go into that
Yeah.
That kind of funny thank.
Last summer I got to go
Christian with the George when
use my last name is Maximilian
George knew that I also had a.
Natalie grandfather Mexico but
also the grand father who's from
Ireland you it was a.
You have a great love for this
Really my family's been gone
through quite a bit of.
Interesting stuff because of the
different currents is
misunderstanding taking place
in.
In the culture.
having.
We've been some kind of a white
supremacist or something and
that was part of growing up it
is the.
work you guys are doing and
dollars you give me this
opportunity today and I hope you
keep all of us.
Your prayers and know that we
George Williams.
And so it is just kind of a
weird circle and and father Matt
we appreciate you appreciate
your prayer today and and and
NMAA consent to excuse senator
Steinborn seeing no objection so
ordered.
We are that our business so
you'll to Senator where
Hemphill.
born he was very tiny only
weighed four pounds he was two
weeks overdue had blond curly
hair and big blue eyes but he
That day I joined a an exclusive
club.
That all parents who have
children with disabilities join.
members of that club.
Nicholas has overcome so many
overwhelming obstacles and it's
Batman because Batman is this
hero.
And necklace is my hero.
And he's why I am here in the
state Senate.
and Senate Judiciary.
Senate bill one ninety that.
will update the disability the
on to this and the members of
the committee and the staff
especially Phillip who worked so
hard and K. so much of their
Nicholas and he thinks you and I
just want to wish them a very
Happy Birthday.
And I wish that I could be with
him today.
But I'm at Sen honor to serve
challenges including having his
leg amputated when he was for a
year of chemotherapy
nightly G. two feeds for six
One of the things the of one of
many things is that life is a
guests.
And we need to use it wisely and
where we can agree on on issues
and move forward to lift our
communities up and left our
state at so thank you Mr
president have members.
Thank you senator any further
announcements Senators.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president unanimous consent to
The president's and thank you to
senator Correa Hemphill we are
thrilled.
You are here and certainly to
given the the virus were not
singing the session but we are
thinking about him and we're
just thrilled that.
He has allowed his mom to be
here with us.
kind of at that point the
session when when members are
jumping all over between
committees and meetings so we'll
start with item number one want
to get the third reading and
we go about our business
messages from the house in that
order of Business message from
the house reiterate.
for House consumer and public
affairs committee substitute for
house bill two eighty six as
amended by the house.
How's Education Committee
substitute for House Bill three
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill three hundred.
House Bill to twenty three and
house joint memorial I in
requests the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
reports.
And that order of business
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted George K. Munoz
chairman.
Senator Rodriguez move approval
of the committee report thank
report we have a motion to adopt
the committee report.
See no objection the committee
report has been adopted and Mr
president your finance committee
to whom has been referred Senate
pass respectfully submitted
senator George K. Munoz chair.
Senator Rodriguez.
Approval of the committee report
has been referred house bill
seventy six as amended has had
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Senator Elizabeth
report Senator we have a motion
to that the committee report.
Seeing no objection the
committee report has been
adopted.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
Respectfully submitted Senator
Joseph Cervantes chair.
This residents concerned some
three W. LED with all the
committee point of impact on one
motion that the return reflect
And Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill one ninety do not
pass but that Senate Judiciary
so the move adoption of the
report Representative
opportunity for.
No objection the committee fort
has been adopted and the journal
so that they were acted upon
individually.
And as I mentioned were gonna
jump around a little because
we've got members waiting for
amendments and not here so we're
gonna start with item number
four Senator Neville Senate bill
on members in the chamber also
just a reminder please mute or
put your cell phones on vibrate.
One item number four
Centerville.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president I'm asking them
explained about.
Mr president this is a.
Comment the.
Six of for some of our leaders
contractors around the state not
and as a result they can't
always meet the obligations of
the contract for the leader of
funds so this bill allows them
Thank you Centerville centers
we're debating Senate bill two
eighty one.
Anyone wishing to debate.
Senate office Mr president
chairman of the Senate Bill
number two eighty one do now
pass and I ask for a roll call
vote.
Senator CSCs please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos Senator Campos
yes senator Candelaria.
Senator to run this.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Senator how to meal Senator huh
I'm here yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Neville yes Senator o'neill.
Senator Neil yes senator do you
should be no.
Senator by the.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator songes yes Senators
committees.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Byrd yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes.
Thirty two.
Thank you Mr president so next
up we're gonna go item number
six Senate finance committee sub
two percent eleven Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart.
passage has been taken now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution no objection
Senator to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president.
economy public health and our
environment.
We're estimating forty six point
three million annually and
government have already heard
from new businesses who want to
come to New Mexico and others
that are here that want to
expand.
committed to cleaner energy and
less emissions.
We're estimating.
Six point eight million tons in
reduction permanent missions
We know we need to tackle the
transportation sector to meet
New Mexico's mission goals as
well as improve air quality for
environment and combat climate
Lujan Grisham through an
executive order that she signed
in twenty nineteen.
Also result in a substantial
decrease in emissions from the
reduction in the carbon
intensity and transportation
fuels the clean fuel standard
act requires that reduction by
Those businesses that refined
Bullen make work import
transportation fuel are covered
by the act this is not applaud
reducing carbon intensity of the
fuel itself or by purchasing
credits.
The idea of generating credits
as where we introduce the market
mechanism to reduce our
generation if you can reduce
carbon emissions you can
generate credits.
So clean fuel standard for
enjoying a resurgence was states
Put in place by California and
Oregon.
They see clean fuel standards
opportunity the way we're
looking at to decarbonise the
transportation sector.
to adopt rules implementing the
standard the New Mexico
environment department is then
required to draft the rules to
implement the clean fuel
standard.
time to get the standards
correct.
And they would these rules would
follow and they would begin
January one twenty twenty four.
businesses who stood up to
support it I want to read to you
some of them because they're New
Mexico businesses or businesses
dairy sector would excel at
credit generation as with oil
and gas.
Joe Merlino liver Ted power
an outsized portion of the
hydrogen economy.
This is the high do not panic
could account for twenty percent
of worldwide energy consumption
highly trained workforce ideal
subsurface features for
sequestration and hydrogen
storage makes New Mexico perfect
place.
He says a large part of our
fuels now will be shipped to
California.
Because of their clean fuel
standards.
in Albuquerque helps to clean up
the air set set.
He said likely their operational
be followed by many companies
coming to New Mexico if they
supports the saying is as
flexible meaningful cost
effective way to reduce
emissions.
See if this will spur investment
in New Mexico creating new jobs.
Mike d'antonio Xcel energy.
From clean energy the nation's
largest provider of renewable
natural gas transportation fuel
says they're doing great
They want to expand in New
Mexico because of this bill.
Spat header from the renewable
energy group north America's
two hundred twenty million and
other plants across the country.
With states with more support of
public policy.
He says they invest in states
New Mexico open either lacks the
transition or get in on the
ground floor this bill would
help us get in on the ground
floor.
gas partially from New Mexico
and you look forward to selling
this product in New Mexico.
Bill mid cap rocky mountain
farmers union.
New Mexico farmers recognize
they play a part in reducing
emissions and they look forward
renewable natural gas says
implementation would support
widespread deployment of various
technologies and associated
PNM is in support can use
collation of sustainable
communities what's this bill
Terry Cole greater Albuquerque
Terry Marone natural gas
vehicles for America.
Major step in transitioning to
our alternative fuel vehicles is
the clean fuel standard.
making process we appreciate the
annual review in the
legislation.
And finally one of the most
exciting to me.
From they tech Albuquerque
hydrogen fuel company.
They recently have raised a
hundred fifty seven million.
They say on site hydrogen from
hundred million in California
over the next three years
because of their clean fuel
standard they would love to make
these investments in New Mexico.
Yes go anticipates adding up to
five hundred jobs to build
hydrogen generators.
Senator Stewart Senators we're
debating Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill eleven Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr president
is this doing a little bit of
research on this bill I I I went
back and counted check gas
prices in California which is
implemented this and I believe
before this one in tax committee
and and we look at gas prices
gasoline prices across the
country in California was number
one the costliest gasoline in
regard to to Texas on on
gasoline a state by state but
but my biggest concern is what
we're gonna do to gas prices in
we're still not going to be at
the top we're going to move up a
few notches and that's going to
be a cost it's going to be borne
by by people that spent a large
I worry about I know the
supplier for fuel in my part of
the state.
I think it comes from Big Spring
Texas and so help me understand
they have quite a few stations
up in the Albuquerque area as
well so it's not just southeast
New Mexico but tell me what that
providers going to have to do
with regard to providing the
this program in place no nothing
changes and tell them so we are
hiring experts were looking at
other states we're looking at
possibility to earn credits but
eventually by the time the rules
going to a place take place and
the rulemaking will be extensive
their carbon intensity for
talking ten percent in the next
ten years quite reasonable and
they will start buying of their
be a hot commodity so I believe
that with all these companies
wanting to come to New Mexico
and do business here that we're
gonna have plenty of fuel that
way that a that a refined to
meet the standards in New Mexico
in order to to continue to
deliver fuel to New Mexico if
they do not do that then
currently doing in and that's my
concern because if they change
their refining that that's
that's going to cost I would
imagine a significant amount of
money for the refinery and that
cost is going to be passed on to
that are producing the blended
gasoline that you're talking
about right now.
I'm just not I I don't know that
answer and practice present
many how many refineries do we
currently have that are now
right this moment producing the
blended fuel that we're going to
need in two years.
Mr president center there is one
refinery in New Mexico making it
right now and our teacher so
Mister president I I.
Not going to say that's
and that would be of Navajo and
but I don't think it's in place
now so
I I don't know that they're
going to have the capability to
the facilities to do it in New
Mexico can you ask Mister
president and Madam protium how
long and how would refinery B.
signed and then tell me Mr
president then pro tem how long
would it take to actually build
the facility.
So Mister president Senator
we're we're talking about having
of these industries come back
online that's the easier more
Mr president and senator they
support the bill maybe remember
we're we're going to take enough
of it it's been so many people
they they can be up and running
soon.
So Mister president thank you
and and I just think these are
things we need to consider and I
think Senator Ingle probably
responded that if I could which
would you like me to yield
Senator I'd like to guild Center
Ingle on that particular
Some future when diesel prices
got up around.
All four dollars a gallon the
the fuel that they were going to
be made out of
The the ability of the United
States to you know we found so
much more oil through horizontal
drilling and things like that.
The plant in Clovis that was
things to go with bio diesel and
then they're also begin to have
problems with biodiesel in
colder climates with the when
it's made out of fat products at
party will stop that the the
that fact that close plant from
starting its operation.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Who is interested in incoming
but as I read through those
letters I was look what I was
looking for was a commitment to
invest I mean it's one thing to
that's going to be required with
regard to these fuels and
I also want to say that this is
one of those pieces of
around and sell and I I don't
have a problem with that I mean
I think that what they have done
in the industry to be in that
industry they are doing the
right thing and I'm very proud
of the work that they're doing
because they are reducing the
footprint and I hope everyone
through our tax system without
having to go to a cap and trade
state so I know this bill's
going in the right direction
it's that with regard to
in companies that that are
supported they're basically
charging stations for electric
vehicles and I saw numerous
letters from those companies
that want to come in and they're
supportive of this legislation.
But if we're going to move to a
completely electric vehicle
state with charging stations I'm
not sure why anyone would come
so I think if I were an investor
I would be very careful about
thinking about moving to New
Mexico.
To invest in a blended fuel
facility when the.
with that I do appreciate the
sponsor I think we had a good
conversation
it's one of those things that I
see the good in our state the
concerned and you know we'll
thoughtful about any world that
they put in place remembering at
the end of the day of many of
our low income people are going
to potentially struggle with
is present
I just want to share the body my
my deep concerns for what we're
doing to the environment in this
billion additional pounds of
nitrogen
Into the soil.
In the Midwest.
What we end up with we end up
with a five thousand eight
you know it it's it's it just.
We we filled in wetlands we
destroyed our B. populations.
talking about I've had huge
concern we're gonna continue to
ravage our environment and and
here's the here's the reason and
this is all I'm gonna say.
When you have an energy dense
many years thousands and
thousands of years whatever
nature has done that for us and
we extracted resource we don't
have to.
work and energy managing we when
we burn fuel maybe we use energy
and expended energy tons of
energy to condense that very
Energy sparse source such as
done that for us that's why
ultimately so much cleaner
because we can't overcome the
efficiency of thousands and
thousands of years of nature we
just can't do is not going to
happen never will these
blended fuel fuel has less
carbon well not really not if
you not if you talk about
killing off our State floor in
the Gulf in New Mexico
destroying lakes in the Midwest
earth please consider that I
truly believe that about fifteen
years from now we will have
unanimous understanding of this
and we'll be talking about a
completely different strategy
Pirtle the agency present will
sponsor you Senator Stewart
deal.
Yes thank you Mr president
senator I just want to clarify
did I understand that that our
So Mister president senator
we're we're not putting in
requirements that Texas.
may or may not have.
trucks go through New Mexico
every day taking clean fuel to
California because they have a
clean fuel standard by the way
lower today after their ten year
clean fuel standard.
So Mister president senator
How many states are gonna have
this requirement of a special
blend of fuel.
like a special New Mexico fuel
it's the companies that are
over the country if we put in
this clean fuel standard here
many more of them will come here
so anybody can buy the fuel that
that California did need to do
it people are lining up to
deliver fuel to California.
And Mister president senator so
there's nothing in here that
these the exact standards have
not been set certainly this
legislation anticipates and
wants to have a ten percent
environmental improvement board
and rulemaking with
stakeholders that the New Mexico
environment department will be
require they could require a
certain percentage of bio diesel
in the state of New Mexico.
for whatever fuel they're
making.
Mr president senator with that
Rick include.
Biodiesel.
by the Mister president senator
that standard could be set by
the E. I. B. the amount of the
percentage.
several years the environmental
approval four wheels start
setting those standards but the
rulemaking will happen with the
environment department so
So Mister president senator
please ask your expert if the E.
I. B. or Environment Department
whoever's making the rules.
This present now that's not the
focus that's not what they're
doing.
The president now.
And Mister president senator can
you point me to the specifics
about the bill that we preclude
that and do not allow them to
There there's nothing in the
bill that says anything that
you're talking about it's a
credits from businesses that do
have that.
So Mister president senator how
do you get one of these credits.
Also Mister president and
And and you'll get credits if
you have fuels that are lower
carbon intensity.
So Mister president senator
through the Chicago board of
This presents the market will be
set here in New Mexico this will
want to come here all of those
businesses that I mentioned this
will be done with New Mexico
experts New Mexico people this
To the exact verbiage the exact
paragraph that won't allow or
somehow.
Limits.
Nothing about a particular full
of fuel anywhere in the bill.
it was stated that there's not
gonna be special blends of fuel
required but we're not putting
anything in place to prevent
that we've all seen what's
when the refinery the one
refinery that provided a certain
blend of fuel went down the
price of fuel their increased
exponentially so I think that's
but the intent is to do carbon
credits Mr president Senator so
we're we're not really going to
senator that they're gonna buy
clean clean something claim
credits from somebody that that
improves and I understand that
correctly.
here already want to expand here
or are going to move here.
As soon as we announced we were
going to look at a clean fuel
that want to do this kind of
blending for clean fuels and it
will be done with New Mexico
standards and we're taking two
anywhere near my question
But so the way I see it is we're
doing this so that large.
S. and P. five hundred
companies.
And the residents of New Mexico
we're gonna have to pay for this
Mr present the poorest of the
poor.
Those that.
Commute to work.
the body to take a close look at
this.
That that's what it appears to
me is what we're doing.
That we're doing this so that
these large corporations.
Will move into the mix into New
They already struggle enough
paycheck to paycheck.
We're gonna increase the cost of
their fuel.
We do have a floor amendment the
reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
eleven.
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill eleven.
See no objections Senator Pirtle
to explain.
You Mr president and if you look
at page six line twenty.
this one late into the day so
this cleans it up to where it
really gets to I think what the
intent was and so it would read
We're debating Center for member
number one Senator Stewart.
Also Mister president this isn't
on friendly and then.
That is promulgating rules to
implement the clean fuel
standard.
credit generation that benefit
disproportionately impacted
environmental justice in rural
communities and reduce
over our state all over our
country really that we need to
pay attention to.
We need to ensure that the
policies that we're putting in
place help these communities
context of the bill and it's
always important to pay
attention to what's happening to
our communities and New Mexico
so this is an unfriendly
amendment.
Thank you Mr president you have
the Senator Pirtle this is this
is a point that I made.
When we're in finance you know
and finance.
You know benefit this important
this proportionally lady
impacted environmental justice
Senator Pirtle hi in your you're
a businessman.
Now if you were taxed so you
were taxed to be on this board.
But they're trying to form here.
What is your idea Senator Pirtle
and and Mr president.
Your idea how you put that
quantitative number on that Mr
You you can't quantify that the
way it's written.
You know in in my opinion as a
businessman I disproportionately
pay.
too many taxes.
As to what the percentage is
going to be that I'm gonna pay I
might feel that is
disproportionate that doesn't
make it so that's why this word
opinion.
How do you put opinion in
statute Mr president Senator
Woods is is a good question
that's why we're we're needing
to strike it so it it reads much
talking about Mr president
Senator.
And and Mr president center you
know I I agree with you I just
the the sponsor to explain this
to me.
this bill on the consumers all
the state.
And when we put such vague
but how do you do we have the
card is this going to be a
challenge I guess that's a good
question I don't.
I don't see.
formula.
A plus B. equals C. in front of
you.
And ask you.
environmental justice in that a
plus B. equals C. formula.
this language work quite well of
the disproportionately impacted
my only question to you or to
anyone would be which side of
the equation do you want to be
tell me which side you want to
be on it we can litigate that
side of those are general terms
the rest of it though rural
communities.
As you stated the other two were
somewhat general very defensible
however we'd like to go.
No thank you Senator Baca Mr
We have center sure they'll go
back center Stewart for second
time Senator.
sponsor of the bill Senator
hello I'm sorry.
You want to debate on the
amendment senator.
No he already confused then of
course present.
Senator Stewart.
In his first comment was welcome
to my world and then he said
there are federal and state
models.
The environment department uses
and a grant documents it's a
constant pool in environmental
planning and design that's used
is used up all the time this
kind of language is becoming
more prevalent because it's more
and more important for us to
There is no further debate on
the amendment center part of the
clothes on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president you know
and that last point made by the
can use the models Mr president
members of the body that was
just described.
That's their job we haven't
changed where the benefit is
members of the body to determine
where it should go and they're
gonna use that.
To provide the rural communities
where they can reduce the
cumulative impacts.
one Senate finance committee sub
two percent bill eleven ask for
unanimous consent roll call.
We'll drop the unanimous consent
the chamber the clerk to call
the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg now senator gray
goes.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
No Senator Hemphill no Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez no Senator
McKenna.
Senator Moores senator Morris
yes senator Munoz
In New Mexico Senator need to be
no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
Yes Senator Pirtle yes Senator
probe.
Senator probe no Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez now senator
Sanchez.
Senator share yes Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo Now Senator
shoulder Senator shows no
Senator Stefanics Senator
Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman are senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth now Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Yes.
number one has failed to pass
the Senate.
We address to president members
of the body thank you Sir for a
we're back on the bill.
We have Senator Woods followed
of questions yes ordeal I think
the president.
When we start talking about
fuel.
I've got to figure here that in
my analysis I just wondered if
your forces saying Mr president
and senator.
seen fuel go up in other states.
as I said in my original
comments California has been
doing this for I think ten years
clean fuel standard correlates
to increase in prices at the
pump will be using materials and
things and New Mexico that we
in Los crucis we always knew he
was driving causes them like
peanuts.
So there are ways to make clean
one percent we heard from in the
first committee from one of
Scott Hedrick renewable energy
group he said that the price
So you know we do have some
studies that sort of worst case
scenarios it's that fear based
arguments.
refineries are businesses
businesses take rational actions
to meet the standard so this is
competitive and now we're
offering market based credits
pay at the pump and we're New
Mexico we keep our gas prices
low.
Thank you for that insurance
And also the US energy
information agency's.
Estimate.
That we are spending five
president.
A five percent increase on five
billion.
Is two hundred and fifty million
per year.
gas pump that means whoever puts
that gas in that tank will be
paying that much more for fuel.
Where are we getting the money
to bring all these companies in.
If we don't get money to bring
companies in why would they
come.
past sets that market price.
She said it would be a
competitive market I just Kerr
it would be in New Mexico
market.
To Mr president I'm not gonna.
To to
go much further than this.
You know this this deal.
When when they introduced the
cap and trade back in the day of
And if you couldn't.
In in your business without
reducing emissions.
If you are supplying fuel that
don't meet the standard you have
to purchase a credit whenever
you have to purchase a credit
that.
I a.
The I would be happy and I will
sit down but I would be happy if
the sponsor would like to
do this that third parties would
be the ones that would be
evaluating things that third
parties would be coming into the
million dollars annually thank
you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Woods we do
have further debate Senator
Gallegos.
on the floor but I'm just trying
to understand
could you tell me Mr president
then pro tem with your can think
So Mister president the the bill
calls for a ten percent
reduction in the carbon
isn't really a decided yet
because of the process we have
set up to take part time bring
in the experts really look at
So I can tell you that all
around us refineries are already
moving to this in Texas in our
state in another's because it's
better for the environment and
Thank you for that Mr prison in
center I guess my my next
question on just to follow up on
that is do we know how much
in New Mexico currently.
So Mister present the the
transportation sector is our
transportation sector is second
Mr president.
Senator know what I was actually
trying to get is the tons
produced for the transportation
don't have that we do have an
estimate of how much of this is
going to reduce that I mentioned
that my opening statement that
reduction of carbon emissions
from the transportation sector
our second largest emitter of
greenhouse gas.
US Carmen in transportation are
there yes totals are in terms.
This presents.
because Mr president and senator
I guess my thought is that New
Mexico is a real minor player in
this and I just and and I'll get
to my next question but
nineteen eighty vehicles do not
have the updated emissions and
and other items on their vehicle
because they will have to pay
for this and lose of their
president center that the grant
gas prices in New Mexico were
low and that this would not
affect that is that my
interpretation correct on this
because there's so much fear
around that
what I can tell you that in
California the gas prices are
high but they're lower than they
about the price of gas that New
Mexico seems to be on the low
end compared to others I can
also tell you that in California
believe irises seventeen cents
and is the lowest in the western
States.
Mr presence and we've got the
tax coming up that'll help us
involves one of fifty cents
interim to offset that.
And I'm fortunate my truck
you Senator miles to the gallon
Clean fuels of standard do you
think I will lose miles per
gallon is a redo this I I know
this presents etcetera with the
biodiesel you lose power I'm
question there is just no data
you know we're we're two years
away from the start of this
program there's a lot of work
for us to do we'll know more by
companies if you know this guy
was going to fall like it's been
said it might do so there's just
no evidence that a clean fuel
all around us are already moving
to do this so I doubt you would
have refinery moving to clean up
their fuel if they thought that
one the first in Colorado try to
build and at all payout plant in
at that time they didn't think
the ethanol addition in there
would reduce mileage and
your clean fuel standards with
that product be able to be put
into the pipeline.
This presents.
put into a pipeline there may be
some pipelines that we that we
will need to change or upgrade
to handle clean feel.
upgrading those lines and
picking and cleaning getting
perfected for that but I guess
my biggest fear was that we're
trying to reduce.
A way of transporting that and
that just puts more trucks on
the highway and what that'll
yield Mister president thank
thank you senator goes.
Any further debate we have
session.
questions and some points of the
sponsor would yield.
Senator.
Certainly we've missed you here
for a few days Senator glad
you're back
Some.
Mr president Senator.
It seems to me that there's only
one reason to do this and this
game or however you put it.
How does this the other thing
credits is there anything else
that puts us in the game.
Mr present there are so many
which I am very concerned about.
But certainly this is going to
bring businesses to New Mexico
we talk all the time about
this so it's for our economy
it's for public health my
daughter has as more she moved
to another state.
we need to have cleaner air we
pages.
So Mister president senator.
All those companies can do this
today there's nothing stopping
any of them from doing this no
losses fell shall not do this.
business because they can't
today.
We don't need this bills to tell
them they can't they can't been
doing all this right now.
whatever's not valuable but when
you talk about these businesses
making rational decisions.
Is there anything other than the
incentivizes these businesses
to come to New Mexico.
we we use incentives all
throughout our government some
so what the companies are saying
is that this is their chance to
invest in New Mexico the they
they're just really excited to
to do on site hydrogen from
natural natural gas they can be
the same class as gasoline and
diesel they're looking to invest
The what's that five hundred
jobs.
Pasco so we're incentivizing
businesses because we want to
protect our environment we want
Mr president Senator I just
wanted to make sure that that we
really we're talking about
incentivizing them by another
corporate welfare effort here
and cons as I see this.
The the blue hydrogen is what
you get out it when you crack
the natural gas and blue
than anything else we have out
there it's also of of of a
relatively new technology.
San Juan County natural gas I
hope unless we make it more
difficult to get to page.
Which is another bill it's on
the way.
but assuming that we don't
perfectly in place to do this.
But they can't do it today.
There's nothing stopping them.
So these credits this this
But we talk about in here
transportation fuels.
And while we've spoken mostly
about.
Things like gasoline or diesel a
Thomas present I I don't think I
would call it a fuel now I will
tell you that.
With your comments at the
will incentivize not just big
corporations but people like
I don't disagree that biotech in
Pasco when not to worry about
that
But there's bigger things here
and you know all the time.
same thing.
Except for the oil and gas
industry doesn't have any
different corporate welfare than
any other industry of the use
different names for some of
their deductions but.
toward electric vehicles and and
even that the in the testimony
you know we have to reduce our
carbon by moving to electricity
that's why I ask is is is one of
Mr president this this really is
private money changing hands the
first talking about welfare you
know this is this is a market
based mechanism to improve the
Mr president so on page.
On page four.
substitute of a substitute with
an amended amendment that
amended the substitute so it's
difficult to figure out exactly
what we're doing I'm tryin but
certainly in finance we we stood
Not really knowing how but on
page four it says transportation
fuel means electricity.
Or a liquid or gaseous fuel that
So electricity is a
transportation fuel.
But there are some things that
are very very very low carbon.
is acceptable
Power plant.
Source of power way to make our.
Thomas present that has
something to do with this bill
a much better job than we do of
having very small nuclear power
plants of for small cities from
carbon fuel standards that we're
trying to get to hear.
And yes I agree a we don't build
nuclear power plants in in in
America anymore because we've
that's that's beside the point
so if this is if the if it's
sent electricity it says right
here on page four means of
transportation fuel means
electricity and other stuff.
because well when we did the ETA
the the energy transition act we
actually drew the line of carbon
high enough so that the natural
Natural gas a good low carbon
fuel source.
To want to pick certain winners
and and losers depending on the
day you know just what time of
day it is no carbon intensity
which is another one of these
Just because the carbon is is
emitted when when electricity is
generated or anything's
generated for that matter.
And so we talk about that but
different losers last year.
in certainly you know only of
some of you may recall that was
somebody somebody on the floor
A dramatically by about ninety
percent of of of coal fired
power plant.
is well there's no measure in
For transportation on page four.
Mr president apologize can you
And now we have a a the
technology which is called
carbon capture technology you
capture this the CO two right
The transportation fuel source
to use.
Of coal fired power plant with
carbon sequestration.
we'll probably have a too high
of a carbon intensity but at
this point this bill does not
eliminate any fuels and I I
because we don't have this
program up and running yet so I
hope I answered your question.
Okay.
Mr president and senator but we
and if you combine of the entire
life cycle of wind and solar
will be lower than that to life
cycle meaning that you build it
you use it and then you dispose
natural gas as well as bio fuels
all of that would be included in
here as long as those things
could bring that the carbon
intensity down.
but if we need our goal probably
then increase it so it depends
this will be this will apply to
any transportation fuel that we
amount that you can't go over
and if you generate more of this
fuel than others and you will be
technologies like carbon capture
and sequestration brand new
technology.
In in in fact based on this I
think that's going to be the
investment into the state of New
Mexico right away.
And that's very cool I think
forty six million dollar
investment New Mexico will help
us a lot.
the state of New Mexico not just
investment revenue to the state
of New Mexico from the oil and
gas industry
directly and then include all of
forty six million versus two
billion.
There's another company that
would have mentioned that they
they sent me an email they were
all excited the they said that
I'd like to point out Mister
president Senator the California
has.
About twenty times the
population of New Mexico.
So that hundred million dollars
they invested in California if
you do the math out it's it's
maybe five million dollars in
New Mexico.
If it's equivalent now maybe New
I just want to point that out.
So.
There's there's also a bunch of
things here to see if I can find
them real quickly.
Hydra floral hydrating floral
park.
here but but do you know Mr
president anybody in rural what
we actually use hi to floor
carbon carbon for today.
state get so hot for the summer
months.
Yes exactly Mr president that we
use in our refrigerators and
freezers we use in our air
protection equipment to almost
all of these are in some kind of
contained in the area.
Mr president right here it says
that these are these are some of
the nasty greenhouse gases.
Identifies Ms greenhouse gases
So Mister president that's.
Thank you for carbons are part
of the problem with greenhouse
The big red cloud over the four
corners area because of the
methane.
Well that's a much a bigger
issue than hi the floor carpets.
Not there today nobody knows
where it came from we couldn't
pinpoint it needed it's gone
can't find it again there's
tremendous amounts of methane
spot San Juan county is a yes it
showed up in every article you
read refers back to the article
before it refers back to the
article nobody can find that
dude now.
so we also have so for.
so for hexafluoride listed here
is one of the nasty mediaeval
greenhouse gases.
This press I'm gonna have to ask
my expert about that.
And it's also used for retinal
repairs your honor I when
there's of retinal separation
things like that was a very
important medical uses but Mr
Such as your computer and your
phone.
The washing machine the LED
light bulbs we've been told we
have to buy so we can save
electricity.
need a way out on this nitrous
oxide.
Citing here as is one of the
nasty evil greenhouse gas but
that's natural.
their.
It's interesting on merger talks
I'd.
The World Health Organization
has that listed as one of the
that's an essential medicine.
It's also used it's been
So those are approved with that
it's also used in rocket motors.
And we have the space port.
We certainly don't want to do
anything to harm rocket to
Maybe.
I can't read it.
And
There was the there was the
question about gas prices.
What was gonna happen with those
gas prices.
that's the that's the the tab on
the Oregon state website Oregon
staff report that in twenty
nineteen the LCS that's low
Further the program was only for
this this program there would
only achieve fifteen percent of
the final mandated target
by over seventeen cents per
gallon now what do I read from
Oregon because Oregon is not
exactly Texas or any other red
state.
seventeen cent increase.
And so I just I just wanted to
share with the with the state of
we don't have an effect on the
climb absolutely whatever humans
do have an effect on something.
There's no doubt.
And certainly we've had some
decibel I was serious.
But nature's very powerful.
And we we all panicked and
everything that went out with
all all of the fish and all the
birds and everything Alaska
Don by the way is also made from
oil and gas industry but but
that's that's beside the point
that we had to use oil and gas
to clean up the oil spill.
We also have the deep horizon
are the deep water horizon which
was a up.
Offshore oil platform in the
Gulf of Mexico it had a
out of that before they were
able to cap it was a lot.
And yet if you go out there
today try looking for that oil
deep rising deepwater horizon
oil spill so much oil.
Everybody panicking all of the
wildlife in the Gulf of Mexico
is going to die all of the fish
was a huge effort to do that.
But all of oil is gone.
What they found is that there is
actually algae out there that
bad absolutely.
But very powerful.
Very very powerful.
The Boy Scouts when we had Boy
Scouts.
Had this thing to leave their
area better than it was when
they arrived.
But there was nothing in there
is that you can't do something.
So all I do I did want to have
clean air and clean water I've
wish we had more of that banter.
But this this bill.
Senate bill eleven.
the right way to run a railroad.
This really has only one purpose
and that is that is the the
carbon credits.
Interesting thing here and I I I
thought about this after we
after the.
energy transition that debate.
problem was Mister president
they didn't ask for any tax
credits from us us thing from us
every other industry comes into
New Mexico says will come if.
corporate welfare.
But their problem is for
anything they want to pay yes.
about cleaning the environment
or anything like that yeah the
the the companies will take
advantage of it absolutely
absolutely Pasco would love it.
use of natural gas in San Juan
County.
But this bill isn't about
cleaning up the world.
This bill is about.
Carbon credits.
even I think it's stupid.
But that's what this bill is
about Mr president and I would
like the world to know that yes
there's incentives in here.
It might even benefit the planet
may be.
But this bill is really about
carbon credits.
That's what this bill is about.
Corporate welfare I don't know
maybe we ought to just be good
stewards of the land instead of
corporate welfare thank you Mr
president.
Think centre share further
dash sponsored question but I I
think some of the stuff that we
we've.
Determined through the course of
the debate and we heard this and
Fuel cost will go up.
And we had testimony that and
you know we had a we had
substantial numbers thrown out
I would urge in many ways that
this particular bill would be in
a bill that we could talk about
almost in a in a vacuum.
But we do have a a gasoline tax
bill.
It's going to probably increase
cost consumers.
We've got other bills that are
the the cost to our consumers in
New Mexico.
this bill I think along with
at least vehicles that are not
not gasoline powered.
Which in turn will then create
somebody more show the the roads
will be able to be taken care
of.
I believe this is a great this
it is as envisioned.
I think one of the things that
the environment department of
the environment department but
the economic development
department they're encouraging
Raise the cost on a on a high
paying jobs because those jobs
facing higher or higher income
tax.
do all the other things at the
same time we might be able to to
come to may be a better
consensus
involved in the process enough.
I don't know.
I'm not I'm not gonna try to
really debate that because I
don't I don't know but they're
this will affect you know
gasoline sales show bye bye the
tribe's and will it give them
a competitive advantage to other
Thank you Mr president Sanchez
on and again I don't know for
sure I'm on the right bill but
at on Senate finance committee
substitute.
We have
on the floor at the lien will
just the fact that we had
created.
president Sanchez looks like it
Also Mister president you you
have to think of not only the
environmental improvement board
which has expertise and good
staff but you have to also
with the internal improvement
truly that we have a situation
where we she.
should have good understanding.
You know we're the guys that
should appear and we're the guys
that should be engaged in and I
believe show
Mr president sponsor again I
appreciate your your answers I
just believe that that's a
that's certainly part of the
bill that that we're getting not
That the the checker ten
secretary Kenny believes it will
do because those will be
positive for New Mexico.
But I certainly hope that the.
Thank you Mr president I want to
thank the the senators that had
questions on that debated with
me I've I'm just really excited
about this bill
I can't think of another bill
we're we've had twenty two
people company state form of ID
in New Mexico we've already got
passes we will have to look at
it and watch it we will be
involved in the next few years.
With that we just say one thing
amendment late and saying this
is one simple bill actually
suggest that you read it it's
really good right with that Mr
president I move that the Senate
Yes it's plays the clerk to call
the roll.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
sure about this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
ODS Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hickey.
you where are you.
Our little Shiba.
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz please now yes
Senator Stewart here Senator for
the areas Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn as Senator
Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Who.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
By a vote of twenty five in the
affirmative fourteen the
negative Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill eleven has passed the
Senate Senator Stewart thank you
from the top see how we're
doing.
Senator Gallegos Mr president I
would ask that.
four oh four.
The lost.
On final passage is been taken
the house is subject to debate
have got a make a wish
foundation.
A license plate and I've had it
in the house a few years we
found a technical glitch Mr
could realize that they're the
money that.
Was in the bill was not going to
questions Senator debating
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
four.
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president will the
senator please yield that is to
yield discretion I will thank
you Mr president of so.
So of you and I had several
conversations about that a if we
have a make a wish foundation
plate and I know we have plates
for other.
Kind of good causes in the state
and I and I'm almost sure that
really important point but if we
I guess Senator you're kind of
content to roll with the bill
kind of in the structure I would
like to do that is in that right
plate they will probably believe
that they're making some sort of
contribution towards supporting
make a wish and that should
certainly be what we enable.
So with that I welcome other
Thank you Mr president I just I
rise and support I was unable to
support the bill in the Senate
finance Jennifer the opposite
reason which is that while I I
think in its current form this
the weight the the function of
the state to be used as part of
Fund raising effort.
because at some point a line in
the sand has to be drawn.
And so I think that this is a
good compromise in the sense
that it demonstrates the state
support but I do think there are
serious anti donation clause
issues if the state is raising
money and then transferring
part of the expectation of
certain non profits in their
development efforts is state
request to my first year from
nonprofit groups for vehicles or
something and these are all good
ideas but at the end of the day
this is public money and you
know we need to just be careful
about you know the type of
support we offer as a state yes
we can you know put us on a
license plate to show our
support but but when it gets to
State process is just to act as
senators point about making
direct fund transfers
I would I would respectfully
oppose that on that note and
thank you Mr president.
Thanks a lot I would like to
You may remove jacket Senators
we have Senator Pirtle followed
by Senator Brandt.
And for the second time Senator
Steinborn Senator Pirtle.
Mr president in center I do not
know I've personally done three
many great causes and so I'm not
going to debate the merits of
the cause but I I do urged the
body to be careful moving
forward we've basically used our
But creating the special plates
cost money because anyone in
business knows the larger the
operation the more efficient
cheaper you can get things and
created if the usage is not very
high we definitely need to look
at that doing a little different
I think we passed the isotopes
need to be careful and cautious
in in doing these plates thank
you Mr president thank you
Senator Pirtle Senator Brandt.
I think you have done three of
them and I think I voted no on
all of them and so I'm probably
going to continue to do that
because I just don't believe
that we need to have all the
think that the state needs to be
doing that it does cost the
state a lot of money we have
literally warehouses full of
specialty plates and it's just
that's probably the way we ought
to go
and that's not what this does I
was looking at the F. I. R.
those present to kind of address
the autism plate.
Twenty five dollar fee on that
plate that money goes to the
Department of Health for autism.
Research and expenses around the
you know the The New Mexico
Lobos and probably the same
thing with state and so those
are the ways that they're able
to raise money with plates but
and I would probably well
actually don't do bumper
stickers but if they do the
vinyl Kling I'd be glad to put
one on my truck thank you.
Thanks Senator Brandt Senator
Ivey Soto.
Please stop the madness we have
way too many license plates.
one two three.
Let's all agree let's all jump
for joy.
And what are we gonna do one
right to life New Mexico wants
would have a license plate turns
out the but it does have to go
to us is just for people to show
that they have that they support
the organization.
a plate such as this where the
money doesn't go to the
organization doesn't go to
research all it does is it goes
to the parliament why to create
the plates.
the ten dollars.
So I appreciate the sentiment.
I appreciate the desire to
Si no further debate.
Senator Gallegos to close.
And I move that the Senate
You are for this reddit is soon
please mute to.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria motion occurs
around this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Hamblen Senator Hamblen
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino now
Senator by the year.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Yes Senator share yes Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
shoals.
Senator shows no Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Tallman now senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth now Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
of the negative Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill for all four has passed the
Senate.
I'm gonna go to center again
this summer go to Senator Baca
center gave us thank you Mr
we could all rise and give him a
round.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill eighty.
Senator poll.
Thank you Mr president I ask
on final passage be taken is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution thank you senator
pope saying no objection.
the other side of the aisle will
put that on my mailers in the
future so that's okay.
So good morning.
Act the acronym for crown means
create a respectful and open
world for natural hair this bill
is cosponsored by senators Lopez
city a Lopez Shendo and Pinto
Black women and in some cases
black men are still suffering
from workplace bias against our
natural hair styles.
These workplace biases and
corporate grooming policies
A research study conducted by
dove showed that black women are
thirty percent more likely to be
made aware of a formal workplace
appearance policy.
Black women are also eighty
Finally black women are one and
a half times more likely to be
sent home from the workplace
because of their hair.
But it's an equity issue as it
has a social and economic cost.
This bill seeks to remedy this
legislation without already
being passed in the US house of
representatives representatives
and recently by the City of
Albuquerque by unanimous vote.
The bill we're introducing today
I have felt discrimination as a
child myself and school.
This may come to support to a
surprise to many my colleagues
here in the Senate.
being teased and being asked you
know does velcro stick to my
hair.
Or the one time when.
My mother actually corner of my
hair and.
And this is still happening in
twenty twenty one we've even
seen national stories across the
country we have a young man who
respect all New Mexicans.
So let's make sure we and
discrimination on race pace
hairstyles cultural here dresses
Mr president I would like.
If possible provide permission
to allow my expert who's on on
Thank you Mr president and now I
am ready for any questions.
Senator is we're debating Senate
Judiciary Committee substance
percent ability.
you Mr preservationist and in
support of this ability to
committee and I applaud you for
bringing this I think it's a
it's a very interesting
conversation educational
conversation one thing you
to cut his I think he says
locks.
and so this is a serious
question I was high school
wrestler also in there were
safety standards so I'm I'm
confused about that that
statement you know prefers we
weren't allowed to have back in
was but unfortunately it took me
a little while to grow stubble.
Mr of the Mister president
senator Wirth your wrestler.
young man the reason we can use
double you know things is
because you would.
use that
it was actually a safety measure
and so the ref would actually go
around making sure we are males
are caught on we had stumbled
here was a
is that what happened in the
up and and you're right even a
basketball they're checking for
nails and things like that
because you know someone to get
so you know I I can't with
certainty say
the was it a safety issue at
that time but I guess my comment
on that would be if this was a
I would think that the coaches
are really
strict about those kind of
things are really good about
that so I agree with you if you
have been a safety issue thank
you for explaining a little more
but just want to clarify Mr
president Senator Woods the so
the rest of the coaches at anime
would still be able to allow to
I mean when we're more tools my
beard or any kind of style here
because when I was seventeen
wrestling I would've.
This presently that that was one
match of the still some safety
ways that you address safety and
safety would always come first
if someone had a long hair or
locks I mean they we need to you
know maybe pull it up just like
in a restaurant right it's just
the safety issues
present great answers and thank
you for a educated me on that
thank you.
Senator Moores further debate
will have senator Candelaria
followed by Senator McKenna
address why having a state law
on this topic is so important as
some of the disks discussion on
this issue has made clear as a
seek to discipline or punish
students for wearing religious
or cultural hairstyles and so
absent a state law like this
Senator pope would yield center
for yes Representative thank you
Mr president I guess I guess my
challenges this I just want to
make sure in this debate.
because I do believe Mr
president under the Human Rights
Act if a public entity a school
I'm dealing with I have a young
client she's incredibly
courageous and she is instructed
me to assert a federal civil
rights claim against Albuquerque
strands kind of died through but
not nothing that.
You would look at and say well
this disrupts the educational
environment while this is going
to make it impossible for kids
students had neon green hair
bright bright bright neon green
hair and that student in face
any discipline.
Only the African American child
But there are many litigants and
many folks who have been using
for many years the Human Rights
Act to address this type of
discrimination I think this
circumstantial evidence to try
to Mexico ace but I just wanted
to to stand up and send support
Senator pope but also just
remind us that by doing this we
our desire here is to further
clarify but not in any way to
take away remedies that people
are already seeking in the point
under existing law we want
Mr president Senator Candelaria
so I first want to grew with
your statement that we're doing
that act this does not supersede
or or block.
Any type.
Of legal matters that you're
that that our current president
Mr president I raise that
lawyers in the room get to do is
argue legislative intent in
front of a judge and often times
when you have when you're
litigating a case and then that
meant to really.
Really expand justice would be
used by public entities are
doing well since the legislature
put this and now obviously in
for us as we are crafting this
bill to understand its intent
which is to open wide the
courthouse doors not to shut
them off the people so thank you
Mr president and thank you
an opportunity for redress thank
you.
Thank you senator for we do have
Senator McKenna next.
really proud of those of us who
are also supporting him.
I'm really proud of New Mexico
can pass this legislation Mister
brothers and I.
You probably want to compare
whose hair is longer because all
three of us have long hair.
how long are here was because as
a trainee we were not allowed to
have here.
The for the females longer than
the back of the book brought
not comply with that rule didn't
make any sense to me.
And I got.
Thank you what is called the
demerit when I was.
Still a trainee.
A hotel told him unless he cut
his hair.
He could not work for them this
was a temporary summer jobs.
And he was told.
that airline thank you very much
Mr president.
Thanks to any further debate
Senators Senator Lopez.
illustrates how important this
is it's got to aspects that are
very important the education
piece we're teachers will get
trained about the importance of
bring claims and that I think
will be transformative for so
many people that have
that have been harmed and I
agree with senator Candelaria
everyone so with that I just a
I'm proud to be a co sponsoring
this bill and I stand up to
commend senator pope's
also stand in support my
colleague senator pope and of.
For your leadership for sharing
your experience and of course
this is talking about
us to be able and for me Mr
president for us to even have to
do a bill like this that allows
people to express themselves and
be who they are.
The law will help in so many
different ways Mr president and
I'm still hopeful that the next
generations that come after us
will be able to have that whole
further debate centers.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr president and I
don't need the Senator to yield
but they too can take this
don't you don't cut a child's
hair until they speak it's a
symbol of
reaching that pinnacle and then
the next phase especially for
better word to describe it as
being asked to be a god mother
to several young ladies that
part is also when you tie their
there's very sacred it is
something that you want to say
value but that you respect it.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president and I
don't need my great new
I'll tell you we need some
protection but but.
But I really appreciate this
bill senator and thank you for
caring and things here
leadership is always that you
brought to this chamber in the
state.
Thank you Mr president I I you
know I think a lot of people who
Are getting to know me ever
known me recently you know a
very quiet person.
it's impacted me personally so I
really want to thank the
sponsors.
But I really want to tell the
story of how this bill got here.
You know we started from the
Two black students.
Albuquerque high.
He reached out to Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
even elected and passing the
baton on this to lead on this.
But I also want to thank the New
Mexico Black central organizing
committee this is a group of
I move that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty.
Do now pass and I ask for a roll
call vote centers where voting
Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
Hermio.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris Senator Moores yes
Senator manos.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the year.
Senator Stewart AS Senator Pinto
yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez yes Senators
Windies Senator Schmidt is yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator shows yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes.
By a vote of thirty seven the
affirmative on the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
explain your vote.
I apologize senator Byrd to
explain his vote thank you Mr
president.
And thank you Senator for
bringing for this bill.
in a lot of different forms.
And so I was more than happy to
support this bill today.
legislation to do this when it
should be common sense and
common courtesy thank you Mr
president thank you senator
Byrd.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so just
to eight and see how we're doing
so with that I would be able to
Senator Steinborn for item
number three Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president
And all actions then take is now
subject to debate amendment
substitution no objection
Senator Steinborn to explain the
bill thank you Mr president
colleagues.
state role in overseeing the
waste isolation pilot plant.
And kind of monitor it and and
advocate on behalf of the state
disposal of high level nuclear
waste in the state of New
Mexico.
So the difference in this bill
between current law.
Is we're asking them to look at.
This simply has it look at the
application from the public
safety health environmental
aspects.
nuclear fuel and right now there
is a proposal to ship the entire
countries spent nuclear fuel in
in New Mexico.
But it's an area of federal law
may not have authority to
regulate it but we sure as heck
should look at it we should look
at the impacts we should be
reporting back to us legislative
body we should be asking the
get by us without us even being
aware so Mister president it has
them look at federal
applications for high level
waste and to report to us the
other important thing it does is
is the committee that the we
have created two.
Look at radioactive and
hazardous materials currently
this task force is just required
to report to the legislature
reminder we are on third reading
to make sure that the volume is
kept down to minimum.
We're debating said ability to.
As two times amended with
gladly yield so Mister presence
editor help me remember because
I really do not know about the
task force tell me when that was
put in place who sits on it.
Mr president center for the task
force I believe this law was
created in the early eighties it
was created with the federal
government at the inception of
the waste isolation plant
of recognizing that there was
department.
Of the transportation
department.
What this bill also adds I'm
glad you brought up because I
get a mention that is we have
of this particular material and
we're adding the Indian Affairs
Department and the State Land
Office who wanted to be added
and it's an appointment.
Thank you so thank you very much
currently since we have not
added in the high level what
exactly do they do on a regular
basis with regard to their
duties well Mister president
facilities of which we have one
we have and and so there's not
really a need for them to meet
very regularly because they are
it so in fact there still you
know that there is not a
required scheduled interval in
this law for the task force to
secretary why not he said
because you don't require as to
and I said the same thing about
why they hadn't evaluated whole
to.
And I said should we change a
on their last meeting and I
guess in discussing economic
issue mentioned they they really
haven't had much to deal with
with regard to quit because
really since its inception we've
was made to at the lab so have
they have they are their
equipment or records of what
they discussed over the last
fifteen years thank you Mr
president senator no they're not
economic mean we had the one
with the message package waste
we also had a truck that caught
on fire down there and
course they're now trying to
improve the ventilation system
and there's opposition to
providing cleaner air down there
so we you know there's always
something going on.
waste a.
provides those applications I
mean is there something in here
that requires a private company
Regulatory Commission and are
publicly available so Mister
president you there's nothing
that you would have to say to to
available is what I think I hear
you saying Mr president center
that's what and that's what I
believe it's just that what the
bill before you says they shall
review federal license
applications so there the
them and I think you were there
maybe when they came to Hobbs
actually for radioactive meeting
and this is with us individually
as legislators and a actually
of the in our State members of
the people that work for the N.
R. C. they are highly highly
trained with great expertise in
that particular area and so I'm
better than than what they have.
Mr president Senator it actually
well we have officials in our
Environment Department inner
energy minerals natural
resources department for quite
have a staff member of the
Energy minerals not natural
resource department deals with
nothing but these types of
issues related to web so it's
only appropriate that we look
my last statement of course you
mentioned that the previous
administration did not utilize
the task force that was in place
with regard to oversight over
put up and just ministrations do
and certainly down in my area of
which obviously we're gonna need
diversification over the next
five or six years
in opposition so I think it
would probably depend on
these individuals that sit on
that task forces or anything to
prevent them from looking at
that application now it's
already on on the website for
better position now to have an
educated Legislature educated
citizenry on the proposal number
one and because we never got a
would be a century this would be
when those applications give
filed we're going to require
them to to come into action I
think what I'll also do Mr
president centers get agencies
much and and Mister president
senator the Holtec project
though it didn't have a name at
the time of the Lee Eddy County
alliance is been in has been
state between our two counties
and it was certainly no surprise
with their intent was over the
the many many many years so I
think that was under the
administration certainly can sit
down and pull up those
applications and go through them
but I would just a guess I would
say that the NRC is probably
they've done this that that's
Gallegos and Senator Griggs
Senator Ingle thank you.
President present the.
Which Senator Steinborn Neil
think sometimes we just ask for
the information we can get it
but also rose reading in our
office and according to the
analysis I've read two different
places the environmental
Mister president senator I I've
had multiple conversations with
these departments and they
believe that they can manage
with the resources that they
have now.
In my years here I've heard
those statements before hand and
I'm not saying they're mistaken
but by the same token when
there's something that's added
like this I've never seen an
I just really think we could
probably.
Of I I just really can't support
association for the folks that
are against it from the areas
will be a small piece of change
and I really I I I just really
think in my this is not the
first time I've heard this in my
Thanks Santo Domingo Santo
Domingo's.
This present with the spot for
you Senator Steinborn surprise
on a global you.
understanding this of four
hundred thirty four hundred
ninety thousand dollar reviews
at correct the Garcia.
find out and I'm looking for
their farm now what the total
cost was two.
Make this happen do you have
that.
Mr president center you know as
environment department has filed
extensive comments track with
the draft environmental impact
statement with the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission has has a
State Land Office frankly I have
with that Mr president I think I
think there's there's far less
work to do here and and and I I
think it would cost a fraction
present and I apologize if this
man asked but I know that to
send a lab shows a lot of
technical reviews for David
Garcia are we questioning their
this bill.
Mr presence and and I'm gonna
apologize what are we trying to
do with the task force and
when it comes to spent fuel but
what it does do is it requires
us to at least put our hand out
of the sand and look at these
applications that's all the the
the bill to us is to review the
colleagues we're talking about a
proposal now.
To literally ship and thousands
up to ten thousand casts a dry
cask storage by armed guard on
rail through all parts in New
against his proposal even the
governor Texas came out against
the proposal on the other side
of the border as has our
governor.
Because there's no permanent
storage facility.
casts were to corroded what
would happen so all this task
force does which is not
important at all very important
is that when these applications
come down the pike including
what we have now that they
Agency presentation and etcetera
and and I know I've been in some
of the committees were you
talked about the test from Spain
to Colorado and back in the
the Sandia thing understood
sandhills the testers and would
your task force.
A look into that details see if
they were correct or if that was
non preordained outcome kind of
an impact study to look at the
performance certainly of the
publicly available information
of what's out there on the
performance look at the
develop brand new cars for so
it's a yeah I think they'll look
at if they do a good job the
look at all available
information and consider the
think through the the people at
Sandia the did the first test
and I I regard him highly
because of what their knowledges
would we as a state have other
expertise and I can certainly
acquire that expertise and
certainly further more in our
best interest to do so because
state because our communities to
have this place Roland by us are
going to be living with it for
decades so we have the expertise
we can get the expertise and
it's in our interest to do so is
present.
will not give us any kind of
oversight information because
it's Texas location that's four
miles from my house in the whole
tech is forty five miles from my
you just missed present so
little understanding the reason
I have fear for the task force
you may be able to add to this
is when we built task force last
invited in a legislature could
not get into here the do the
discussion of task force and I'm
thinking about open government
and it made it really hard for
of my fear here would be open to
us enough that we could
participate and understand
what's going on behind the
don't know that they have to
have open meetings certainly you
now companies like called tech
have teams of this they know how
Thank you Mr president center I
will yield.
Senator Griggs.
gentleman once just.
Thank you Mr president sponsored
on the.
On page three I think it is down
at the bottom.
We've got the the definition of
that more closely ties to the
the whole tech project I believe
Mr president Senator but it's
been my understanding that the
federal government and the NRC
of these these fuel rods that we
believe right now are highly
radioactive and fictitious
definition is or has it come out
and does this mean more that
definition Mr president Senator
no I haven't and certainly you
Sponsor can you tell me right
now what the the proposed budget
amount for the state this year
is going to be.
because just minutes ago we
discussion it bill eleven.
Which was described as a
economic development bill.
In southeast New Mexico.
also gonna bring high paying
jobs to New Mexico.
But the whole tech project
answer to the federal government
charge to provide short term and
long term solutions to the
storage of nuclear by product.
From each country once again.
New Mexico has been on the
forefront of lots of things
And ask for a level of
compensation for answering this
call.
It's only fair.
governor.
And I want to suggest to the
body.
A fair compensation amount.
The New Mexico once again has
answered the call New Mexico has
stepped up and said.
The we in our discussions.
With the federal government.
With our governor and president
by.
Because Mr president I believe.
That that's fair.
Has decided match from in Nevada
decided that's not it.
The New Mexico says you know
what we believe we can do it we
With with step in a up with our
government.
And our president and discussing
this particular issue.
But I think we can do a lot.
I think we could fix wrote we
can ensure the challenged early
childhood.
We can sit there and answer the
But Mr president and senator.
This is an opportunity.
Whether or not it's doable
whether that's the right amount.
But I think that it's you know
It's just a fair thing to talk
about.
Thank you Mr president and thank
a center for bringing this bill
for a just curious.
What is it about the at the Lee
County region
This is an ideal location for
the world and on that they
believe is suitable to this
facility I would not go so far
as to say it is a suitable that
is still being evaluated by the
proposed site and has not been
approved yet I will I mean but I
believe they believe it's
suitable for.
Thank thank you Mr thank you Mr
president thank you for that
So.
degraded by the oil and gas
industry.
This presents and I'm not going
final question it to the
majority of the citizens in
southeast.
Mexico support this project.
Mr president that's a great
question Senator they haven't
pulled the citizens I will tell
which is situated right there
next to this thing and next to
the proposed one in Texas there
government passed a resolution
opposed to it many community
profoundly affect the citizens
of the state.
And frankly it's not right it's
not right that the state is not
out in front becoming educated
itself and then educating us so
The question talks about the
suitability the area I
understand this waste is going
to come in nationally this has
what's being considered is of
ended right after the
legislative session.
Most citizens dimino about let
alone have an opportunity to
comment on it so I think a lot
all across the state.
including the City of
Albuquerque the city of Los
crucis.
Santa Fe County.
chapters within the Navajo
certainly a license hasn't been
granted yet.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr president thank you
said just one quick can I think
it's really a sad commentary on
wanted to even entertain the.
Agreeing and proving projects
such as this thank you Mr
president thank you senator.
and and education gap and I
believe that's absolutely true.
In the state.
With the Manhattan Project
happened.
In a state that's got almost a
perfect place to store waste in
a nation that has waste piling
up literally in fifty five
gallon drums sitting on the top
We have such an amazing
opportunity.
Because we all are the white
place.
With the right place to deal
with this.
Unbelievably the right place to
deal with this if we don't do it
who will.
Your commands being closed down.
And it's just sitting there.
Wherever it was it just sits
there.
here here we have a chance to
deal with it absolutely
positively in a positive useful
productive manner.
It all happened right here.
She was born here.
In fact Mr president if we
Safely.
And then we can dispose of
whatever radio activity there
was.
All within the boundaries of the
state of New Mexico and we could
Now granted there are other and
probably better ways to build
nuclear reactors.
Then with uranium.
point we have to deal with it
somebody's going to have to deal
with it we talk about
generations to come.
Well.
Over here when the Manhattan
Project.
Was done in Los Alamos New
Mexico.
enough to have remembered it.
We can do it.
And it troubles me Mr president.
We do have an education gap.
That's something that we can
solve.
We really have some ignorance
gap we don't know.
The difference.
But we could.
It's not that hard.
For some of you you weren't here
then.
Of the fifty five gallon drum
sitting at Los Alamos rotting.
A whole bunch of other things
that we need to worry about
cleaning up.
Here's something that we can
solve we can solve it right now.
Us for anything they want to pay
us only I'm sorry that's why we
can't let it happen I get that
now I I keep forgetting that the
only way you can do business in
the state of New Mexico is to
get the taxpayers to give you
money.
We could be a world leader.
On every level of this.
The first nuclear disaster yes
you know how many people died
three mile island.
Nine.
All the safeties work.
The Russians intentionally
turned off the safety so
trouble.
That was a disaster.
I personally think New Mexicans
are smarter than that we won't
Is waste material.
That has to go somewhere.
Why not put it in a place.
safe that's what science says.
Panic and fear state run.
Sciences put it right here.
I'm just I'm just so concerned
here Mister president.
That we get in all of these
emotional debates.
We don't really think through.
You know they've developed these
rail cars to carry this this
nuclear waste this radioactive
waste.
Why am them as hard as they
could.
To make sure that they could
sustain.
Twice what ever kind of rail
accident could happen.
We can transport any kind of
radioactive waste.
And now we want to go into panic
mode again.
And it just doesn't make sense
to me.
Should we think through some
We can collect it we can
transported we can store it
perpetually right here in New
Mexico.
In what we're building till
today this will leave about word
is.
Bill right right there.
It does get into the ground and
in the air with each passing day
each day we don't deal with
this.
This problem gets worse in New
Mexico has the opportunity to
think anywhere in the country.
And yet we still want to panic.
Senator Woods.
Is present with my neighbors
please feel.
Etcetera I are.
In an ideal thank you very much
waste means highly radioactive
materials.
And we compare that to low level
waste and and the what I like
about the low level waste is it
is it has a a number on there it
considered radioactive so the is
that implying that.
High level waste is greater than
Mr president Senator I'm not an
expert in the technical
definition of high level waste
as has has been said I mean
question what why am asking it
I don't I'm not an expert either
I don't know what the numbers
are
now there's you know plutonium
and other other things that are
used but
I'm just wondering if if I have
to just technology progresses
because of spent nuclear fuel
then you get detained for a high
level but what if it's actually
low level what what if what if
it comes out of spent fuel and
it's less than one hundred and
that would be a very long time
away because of we don't have
any of that kind of those type
of reactors and and the country.
America to go that direction and
so they know that the the
radioactive materials produced
as a by product of reactions
including spent nuclear fuel so
at the point at which we're
talking about materials that
federally a in a word written in
interfacing with with the Feds
here is this definition of high
level waste is it the same as
the federal definition of high
level waste.
federal definitions and you know
again we're adding spent nuclear
fuel which according to federal
definitions is high level waste
okay thank you Mr president I
Zero or or you know negligible
then we have numbers for the
negligible we have numbers for
the low level but we don't
really have a number here for
high level so it's not the could
lower yeah at some point and and
you have we don't have it now
that's fine but once again we
for these things in statute and
as we've seen we have statutes
we don't update for fifty years
and at some point you know I'm
actually you know change that so
just want to bring that up for
you if if that is it is a
concern to you or not I I don't
know and like I said I don't I
don't I'm just don't have the
the.
Senator Steinborn Mr Badru G.
you'll for question or to
establish Mister president
senator gladly.
Thank you Mr president.
Shared one of those top security
clearance badges.
And worked around a lot of this.
Nuclear energy both the
And at that time it was already
converted to the department of
energy.
You know before that it was
Atomic Energy Commission that
that who ran that.
And I was wondering if you would
consider putting as one of these
members.
A nuclear physicist.
On the.
And and Senator van with.
Thank you Mr president Senator
you know right now it doesn't it
So I think that the we kind of
have it structured in an
appropriate way at this point
and
You know certainly they can
consult and bring and others and
Any further debate centers.
Si no further debate Senator
Steinborn to close on the bill.
This proposal is a bad idea for
New Mexico I think this
proposals a good proposal for
the city Mexico fine this bill
diligence you would expect from
your state government.
On an issue of this consequence
of an application it's gonna be
forty years with no permanent
facility in sight.
County city of Gallup McKinley
county city of bland several
chapters of the Navajo Nation
all public health of governors
all totaling about forty percent
the back.
It's all this bill does
colleagues and it requires that
this task force report to us at
least annually so we can know
what the heck is going on and
end.
Thanks responsible due diligence
for a citizens.
So I hope we passage.
With that Mr president.
you thank you Senator more all
senators to the chamber to your
seats please.
We're voting on Senate related
to this twice amended with
emergency clause.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria now senator
Sharon this.
Senator Gallegos Now Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs Senator
Griggs now Senator Hamblen
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan now Senator
Lopez.
nose.
Senator monitors no senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Yes.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator suite is now senators so
they are Lopez yes explain my
vote Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Stefanics Senator Representative
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Twenty three seventeen.
I wrote a whole.
By a vote of twenty three in the
affirmative eighteen the
negative Senate bill eighty two
is twice amended yes with
Senator Simon I'm gonna have
centers the O. Lopez explained
her vote the ability to call
center city office.
Thank you Mr president I voted
States the rest of the country
that we are open to being.
The.
The.
least try to get us a seat at
the table but this is dangerous
stuff and it worries me that
we're exposing our communities
to it thank you Mr president.
Senator Munoz thank you Mr
president asked man's consent of
the Senate the record show that
all action for placing Senate
bill three fifteen is amended on
years ago when we transferred
the motor trans Department to to
the department of public safety
or the state police we did not
the transportation fund the
state police fund is currently
over funded by about a hundred
and twenty so it's funded a
hundred twenty six percent it's
over funded we cannot make that
have debate we'll have center
but they have followed by
Senator Woods Senator Padilla
thank you very much Mr president
don't need the Sanchez deal I
just wanted to thank him for his
of the worst funded items or
portions of this funded about
fifty nine or sixty percent the
transfer over to the the move
that this will make is to a fund
it's at about a hundred twenty
seven percent of funding and as
Solvency in in the funds were
the most more badly needed so I
just want to thank the sponsor
for taking special care of these
things and and making this
happen for the state of New
Mexico and protecting all these
funds thank you.
thing and it was a direct he was
directly affected by this and it
would just not right it's just
not fair.
And so I thank you Sir for for
say and it's a correction that's
needed thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator was any
further debate senators.
that the record show that all
those present voted by a roll
call the Senate is tier seats
where voting on Senate bill
three fifteen as amended.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes Senator con
that idea.
Yes ma'am Senator Gallegos yes
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes senator I was
older.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator huh I'm here
yes Senator Kernan.
yes senator one of.
Yes senator one LCS senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator Schmidt is yes senator
so they're Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart Senator sure DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
three fifteen as amended has
passed the Senate serving us
thank you Mr president members
of the body I really think
Senator for that lively debate
on that bill.
for Senate bill one twenty seven
as amended now you'll to Senator
Lopez.
I thank you very much Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
bill thank you very much madam
president
members of the Senate
There's just a little bit of
history to go with this measure
that we have in front of us
about how this has come to be in
that we are
discussing today.
Madam president there was a task
force that was created.
the group who was assigned to
the task force to look review
and see what we could do to
improve representation of our
families a when they come into
Senate you know we tried on
number of initiatives to try and
improve the family
representation and making sure
that those who are representing
members of the Senate is the
outcome of the work that we did
for those two years with
meetings and madam president yes
I was honored to be assigned to
that task force so I'm intimate
propose that we have an office
of family representation and
advocacy.
And madam president for.
What we are attempting to do is
Mexico you know we do have of
contracts with those who do
provide services lawyers
guardian Adlai items they're
contracted with the state of New
guarding at light Ms who
sometimes I think have of them
purchase a a different point of
view as to what their job is and
what their role is so we haven't
really had as much
there has been some question if
you have of your garden if item
assigned for the child who will
be representing of course maybe
of those persons who will be
representing the parents of that
will be kind of where we will
keep the two separate.
important that we have the
accountability to making sure
madam president I know that it
we were of course in front of
Senate finance and we had.
Justice the C. we also had the
honorable judge Delaney from the
sixth judicial district who also
served as chair of the task
force with us retired justice
president who were working with
us and try to make sure that
this comes to fruition.
There is money as you will read
madam president members of the
Senate that does cover the costs
Price tag of up to close to
seventeen million dollars but in
meeting with secretary Scrase
Medicaid will be able to Fund
for reimbursement for medically
necessary clinical services
title for easy money's of course
Senator Kernan to debates bill
thank you very much and Madam
put a pretend madam president
so this office would have staff
attorneys available to assist
parents with regard to children
that are in CYFD custody.
involved in custody cases the
guardian ad light items they are
not there under the AOC is that
correct currently madam
new office or what I'm not quite
sure student agency what
Madam president members of the
Senate and senator this will be
the office of Family
representation of course will be
and and independent still of
course working with the
session it is a constitutional
amendment that would set it
separately similar madam
president Senator what we did
with the public defender's
office but that measure has not
have a discussion and see if the
constitutional amendment would
be heard voted and sent to the
voters to kind of follow the
path that we did madam president
president senator and so right
now it's administratively
attached where because and the
reason I ask this on actually
sponsoring legislation that
CYFD to some extent but the
problem is is administratively
attached to R. L. D. E. which
causes it not to be particularly
somewhere to some department so
is it in the bill to which
department or agency it is
attached.
Madam president senator this of
For we are looking has sunk I'm
trying I just got the bill vote
my apologies madam president.
And the
anywhere but it still has to
have an attachment and so at it
and I keep pushing that because
the the problem with the
can have an agency or an office
that's not attached at some
point and and so I don't know
who maybe the the drive after
could provide that could be
And so madam president and
senators so they would have
authority over this particular
office madam president senator
yes.
more we do to to insert some
sort of legislative authority or
something to to hold CYFD
accountable is is a good thing
frustrated my bill has not been
heard so so I don't oppose this
but I think that that what we
need to do is a bodies to figure
Mexico and so I think maybe this
could be a first step for you do
have some separation outside of
the department outside of the
trying to figure out exactly you
know pulling pulling the
guardian Act at lives and
putting them in one one place.
I think part of this has to be
the problem that maybe this is
the first step so I'll keep
listening and maybe understand
I've not seen the bill
certainly think that we need to
listening and I appreciate your
your help on this thank you.
Thank you so.
Senator next will have Senator
the bill and I was also
Honored when senator Linda Lopez
who was very involved in this
task force graciously agreed and
the reason I know that she asked
me is because of my experience
court has a hundred and I
believe it's a hundred and ten
attorneys on contract but the
administrative office of the
courts doesn't have the capacity
working on this work in one
place so that they can support
each other they can cover each
other's cases they can of if
necessary they learn from each
and that is a huge step forward
for us I think that the other
thing that this this bill will
do is is especially because it's
not going to there's a lot of
different contracts so I'm very
honored that the sponsored let
me up put my name on this bill
and I also that of a stand ready
and family representation thank
you.
Thank you senator next for here
from the Santo terrier to the
pandemic.
Judiciary from the version we
saw in in ****
but it but it particularly
during your presentation.
Senator Lopez a question came up
Madam president yes the.
Right now I mean in and even the
The FIR talks about currently
families and children are
represented by guardians of
What currently is looking
forward what what they take care
of our children who are are in
child welfare cases and that's
where the guardian Adlai item is
Is in effect the the prosecutor
in these the child welfare cases
are the ones that have state
attorneys who work with the
have a court appointed contract
attorney a guardian ad line item
representing their interests.
And the families are on their
own.
Your bill would begin providing
representation for the families.
But the interests of the
families and the kids.
The kid has a guardian ad light
in protecting his or her
interests.
Which may involve getting the
kid away from that family.
But we're is this is your bill
that was in my opening remarks
is that
You do have a conflict if you
have within the same house as I
called it the house where you
in for in Judiciary where this
particular office would contract
with those attorneys who would
then be representing the parents
that there still is a degree of
separation so that you don't
No interest should we say and
then of course with CYFD and
again for the child for their
welfare so there is that but
that's the separation that would
the FIR talks about staff
attorneys and contracted
tourney's is that envisioned in
your bill that there would be a
combination of full time lawyers
the funding that we find so yes
we will have staff attorneys
again that will be providing the
services necessary for the
children and again at with the
would be coming from and how we
could at least assure that there
will be continued funding for
this office just in case we have
a downtown downturn in the
economy so I think it was
And and then the madam president
and and Senator Lopez the.
I think it's good that that
there's contract and that would
defender's public defenders in
the in the dust but
I I could for see a problem if
if there are some staff
maybe they're perfectly capable
of turning to switch off and on
the interests of the kid or in
this case the interests of the
family in the other case but it
Who would be the children's
advocates the the guardians of
light in or you could contract
with other lawyers who would be
more family advocates but if
know if you wanted to respond to
that.
Madam president Senator and and
those are concerns that were
raised during our our task force
The office itself there will be
assurances that there is a
separation of course it is a
fine line but as the offices
created again for how much
funding is available to be sure
interests of the children and
madam president senator and in
no with regards to an abuse and
neglect a case parents are
actually
are required to make sure that
It helps me madam president
Senator Lopez the other the
other concern I have is that the
funding looks like it's going to
be through CYFD.
For E. funding coming from the
The family advocates are
sometimes the the children's
advocates are are are at at odds
with and or or their
I mean I know that the the best
interests of the child are
always of uppermost in
everybody's mind but they don't
always agree on what that looks
It is very hard to commit to the
future I know because of
budgetary in in imprecision in
the future but if we could fund
the parties in the litigation
that they're dealing with.
Madam president Senator and that
would be to help with the the
constitutional amendment I know
cycle to maybe have it put out
as we did for the the public
defender so there truly is those
degrees of separation that
actually puts it into its own
opportunity for us to create
this office and began at
organizing a putting it together
and I do suspect madam president
senator that once it's done and
they come back in front of us
thank you Senator Lopez I share
Senator Kernan is concerned that
that that or her sentiment that
this is a really good thing to a
really important step we just
have to make sure that the
proceed in a in a way that truly
represents the best interests of
the child but also protects the
family's interests I've seen all
too many times when the family
got trampled in these
proceedings thank you madam
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one twenty seven as amended
amended amendment sponsored by
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one twenty seven as
amended.
The.
So this needs to explain the
amendment thank you madam
president I was just listening
the best interests of the
children there's the the for the
family advocacy child advocacy
I'm certainly no expert on this
but I think I just kind of
thought well we're setting up
never saw that were in the best
interest of the child and so I
was just hoping we could put
that in there and it is just
making me feel a bit better
about creating this new office
committee I think I understand
the intent of racing to ensure
the best interests of children
but madam president Senator
always in the best interest of
the children of the child so I
think even to explicitly listed
on here I I really don't think
it's necessary because that's
The lotus thank you madam
president if you look at where
the amendment will be added set
of right now to develop and
continuously approve practice
you're creating the kind of a
the odd little ambiguity there
because child welfare best
practices are something that we
that's everything that the code
photo of focuses on so I think
it it actually creates an
ambiguity where there is not one
now.
Any other debate on the
amendment.
With the sponsor of the
amendment yield ideal then
present.
Madam presence Senator.
in your experience.
So C. as of late.
Madam presence Senator
To give you an honest answer I I
don't know however I have heard
not in the best interest of the
child and I think this is really
a lot like I said with the prior
debate I wasn't planning on
running a floor amendment but I
kind of some of the did the the
parents
issues and things like that are
arena really really focus on on
the children and sometimes I
think it is a little difficult
that I've heard in a variety of
bills this session.
And so madam president Senator
do you think it hurts anything
or cause any damage to the bill
you to ensure the best interests
of children.
Madam president centered I know
I don't think it hurts anything
and I I don't think it's
ambiguous I think that you know
what legislators about and
that's why I'm running this
amendment madam president
senator thank you and I I
appreciate that and I agree.
That doesn't hurt anything about
Spent eight years on a really
great committee chaired by
senator Ortiz Pino.
And I think every year we heard
four stories in that committee.
And to make sure that the best
practices that they're following
our.
To ensure the best interest of
children thank you madam
president.
present I I think and I hope
that it's it's clear what we're
trying to do here so with that I
would move foreman number one to
Senate Judiciary Committee
Right we are on a roll call vote
on an amendment number one the
clerk will call the roll.
Senator Campos now senator
Candelaria.
I'm sorry.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
sure on this Senator Diamond
Senator Gonzalez Senator
Gonzales now Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto no Senator how
Senator Moores yes Senator my
nose.
Senator one else.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator by the.
Senator by the amount Senator
Pinto.
Senator Pinto now Senator Pirtle
Senator Rodriguez now senator
Sanchez.
Senator songes yes senator
smitteez.
Senator Schmidt is yes senator
so they're Lopez no Senator
Senator shows no Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics no Senator
Steinborn.
No Senator Steinborn no Senator
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes.
Five photos eighteen to twenty
two amendment number one has
failed to pass the Senate.
statement right here with six
bullet points and no where does
it say best interest of the
child that concerns me thank you
madam president thank you
members of the body really
In prison and with the senator
yield.
Madam president yes.
For the winners over CYFD in
inotes children but just had a
real quick question.
Then president and Senator.
If this goes through.
Of how the parents train tells
Attorney would interact.
president Senator is you would
not have the same supervisors
supervising the children's
attorney attorneys as well as
those who are contracted to
represent the parents so there
that in in thank you for
clarification now my next point
was would they both be held to
the same facility at CYFD.
first year of implementation as
we put together this office
madam president senator.
you know so I cannot I can
answer in the affirmative if
will be for every
For every office.
Thank you for that madam
president and senator I guess my
thoughts are on my my wife and I
provide the parents attorney the
information for the trials
details so.
I guess we'll wait watch but I
Seeing none Senator Lopez to
close I thank you madam
president and I appreciate the
questions this is something
that I firmly believe that is
about representation of our
children but madam president
members of the Senate it we were
talking about CYFD this is not a
it is the hope of course that we
can find other ways is for with
regards to the funding aspects
but we are still interrelated
and within the relationship of
how we take care of our children
and if they don't get out this
time I know that will continue
to work on this I do have faith
there are children youth and
families has moved of on the
president members of the Senate
this is one option option that
we have and I know that this
will strengthen the
representation for our children
and madam president members of
look on page two line sixteen it
talks about to developing
continuously approve practice
models and standards based on
procedural fairness and provide
positive outcomes for children
and their families and madam
president of course it will
include decreased to possibly
the numbers for New Mexico has
been on the the downside with
regards to family reunification
with support services that we
can offer to families making
sure that they they have those
but I won't I think this is our
first step that we can truly
make some change for our
children's safety for their care
but also for the families of who
we want to make sure that they
amended do not pass and I ask
for a roll call.
We are on final passage of
Senate Judiciary Committee
substantive percent of the line
twenty seven as amended.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator control is
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris Senator Moores no
Senator manos.
senator Ortiz we know Senator do
supremo yes senator for the
year.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
syringes senator Sanchez no
Senators committees.
Senator Schmidt is now Senator
and.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Cervantes yes
Senator Steinborn.
Yes right.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Stewart this Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Campos.
Senator meetings to explain his
foot madam president I would
have voted yes for this bill of
the man had been adopted and I I
Senator Lopez thank you very
much madam president and members
of the Senate I appreciate the
conversation and thank you to my
co sponsors Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
If there's no objection it is so
order a committee reports.
Madam president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
Respectfully submitted Senator
Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino chairman.
Mister press madam president ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
There's no okay so no objections
so ordered for the reader all
right Senate bill three forty
Senate bill three fifty five to
pass and enter for to the
Judiciary Committee.
House bill twenty two as amended
do pass.
House bill one forty six do pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
House health and Human Services
Committee substitute for house
bill one forty seven.
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
And house bill one ninety six as
amended do pass respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
Y. Pino chairman Ortiz Y. Pino
Any objections seeing no
objection the committee report
has been adopted.
Madam president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill forty eight do pass
and it's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Joseph Cervantes
chairman.
objection the racial right house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill for as amended do
pass as amended respectfully
objections the committee report
has been adopted.
So that Sir Peter Wirth thank
you madam president unanimous
consent we go to that our
business introduction of
House Bill to sixty eight
introduced by Representative
Hochman the hill.
An act relating to workers
compensation.
Permitting employers to rebut
that presumption.
Prohibiting workers compensation
insurers from using Corona virus
disease two thousand nineteen
claims in developing rating
the Senate Judiciary Committee
House Bill two sixty eight.
How's Education Committee
substitute for House Bill three
thirty one.
And act relating to the public
for effectively Corona virus
disease two thousand nineteen
pandemic on transportation.
Making temporary adjustments to
transportation distributions
house Education Committee
House joint memorial I
introduced by Representative
Stapleton.
He Joint Memorial requesting the
legislative education study
formula and to provide
recommendations to the fifty
fifth legislature second session
house joint memorial I start
tomorrow I have you read twice
by title is.
And act relating to motor
vehicles.
Creating the nontraditional
communication or disability
registry to improve the safety
disability registry House Bill
two twenty three House Bill to
twenty three having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate tax business and
transportation committee house
state leadership management and
pipeline program in the state
personnel office requiring
evaluation and development of
training for certain abilities
requiring a report.
committee house state government
elections in Indian Affairs of
the House Bill three hundred.
House bill one eighty nine
introduced by Representative
Miguel P. Garcia.
pursuant to the community
governance attorney act house
bill one eighty nine house bill
one eighty nine having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate Education Committee
house bill one eighty nine.
And act relating to law
enforcement creating the law
enforcement certification board
changing the entity responsible
for police officer in tele
communicator certification
Amending the composition of the
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy board amending the
powers and duties of the
director of the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy board.
Changing the appeal process for
members and reserve police
officers survivors fund minimum
balance repealing section nine
dash nineteen dash eleven NMSA
nineteen seventy eight being
point one and a missing nineteen
seventy eight being laws
nineteen seventy nine chapter
two oh to section forty five is
amended pertaining to the
removal of New Mexico Law
sections one through eleven
pertaining to the peace officers
employer employee relations act.
House Judiciary Committee
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for house bill two
eighty six having been read
twice by title is hereby
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee madam president.
directly affects our law
enforcement officers.
it had a lot of dissenting votes
on the house side.
Okay thank you madam president.
You're welcome house consumer
and the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
consumer public affairs may
government enacting the
improvement special assessment
act authorizing counties to
impose administering disbursed
special assessments to encourage
the development of certain
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee house bill two ninety
nine madam president.
A yield Senator.
That's correct Senator and it
was Senate Judiciary Committee
that's correct Senate Judiciary
Committee so madam president I
believe Senate judiciary is
appropriate but it does deal
Senator Peter Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so this
is creating a new special
assessment improvement act and
referral in effect means the
bill does not have a chance to
pass and so again because it has
to go to Senate Judiciary and I
the the body at this point that
the understanding again those is
that we've been a week earlier
there's no question what about
the both but just at this point
given the need to go to Senate
Just to I think that only got
one one referral Senator I don't
believe we sent any bills to
more than one committee.
something that that I have been
sitting down with leadership on
the other side of been reviewing
all the bills and so we've been
changing some of the referrals
Madam president will will the
minority leader deals because I
need to just touch base with you
yield I certainly would madam
president meals.
Does it make sense that this
should go to tax first Mister
president senator.
madam president and senator yeah
single committee referrals and I
think to an extent the he has a
point.
However there are some bills
madam president that I think are
they go to to committee
referrals I think some of them
just require the additional
scrutiny otherwise some madam
president we come to a point
where.
rule across the board and to to
give some.
You know some credit to to my
counterpart he has referred some
of the bills to to committee
So I understand that we want to
move things through but I also
understand that the public does
not get a chance to to talk to
us really I mean we get some
emails but.
And in this particular bill and
and many of them in fact when
they have significant dissenting
votes that means there's
something in there that we ought
are practically the same
committee but but in this case
it makes sense to me to have
more people looking at a bill
that appears to have.
of the dissenting votes and
because I think it's useful for
more of us to know what's going
on and could have less of us
that it's still should go to to
tax.
So madam president I move that
this go to
To tax and I ask that I get to
make all the votes and it failed
twenty seven fifteen.
Sir Peter Wirth any comments.
since I've been up here talked
about how important and sacred
the committee process is.
Some of us haven't even gotten
And yet we're giving bills from
the other side won Committee
referral now I think as long as
we all agree.
That they only need to go to one
And we may want this bill to get
through.
and it may not need.
A double referral may not need
both committees to look at it
fine.
In these two bills and specially
this one.
We decided well maybe it's not
quite as important this time.
Senator Wirth is on the tax
committee with me.
And I'm enjoying having him
there.
And he's got some of the
To have the review both
committees.
We have agreed on about.
Eighty percent of the bills.
As I look at the bill their
problems with the bill their
concerns with the bill I will
tell you let's uh in education.
The Senate is the more delivered
a body.
We look a little bit more in
detail.
Things seem to get through the
Madam president the Sir worth I
would implore you.
On this bill to please
reconsider thank you.
The argument and understand the
argument that's being made I
would note that I mean this is a
bill that has to go to Senate
Judiciary last night Senate
Judiciary spent three hours
the fact that it's getting sent
the Senate Judiciary I think is
a very good chance it doesn't
even get heard given what's on
their agenda and everything
Senator Brandt I think you and I
should look let's look I like to
sit down with you on this bill
you know especially if it comes
out of Senate Judiciary let's
just take a look at it and make
agree with you so I just I you
know I'm certainly willing to do
that but again at this stage I
do not want to give it a second
referral.
Yes Sir Peter Wirth thank you
madam president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
And just for committees will be
at eleven o'clock tomorrow we'll
see about whether we need to do
a second later session tomorrow
although Senate judiciary as I
I'm thinking now about five
o'clock so that the committees
during the both days during the
day can meet so that's kind of
I would like to highlight our
very own Lenore not on hope
Lenore is not only the chief
clerk of the New Mexico state
Senate she's a strong leader who
Lenore came to the roundhouse
forty five years ago when her
eldest daughter was asked to
serve as a page.
It was on that date with the
late senator Munoz chuckle on
for him unfortunately senator
Chuck on passed away two days
before Lenore started her career
right here in the row yes.
In her forty five years in the
enrolling in a growth in Clark
proofreader deputy chief clerk
and of course our chief clerk
she has performed each job with
friend.
Mr president of madam president
and senators please help me in
thanking Lenore for all that she
does for the Senate and for the
state of New Mexico.
Madam president I wishing all
the women here in the Senate
chambers happy women's history
month Eleanor thank you for all
Education Committee will meet at
eight thirty in the morning our
usual time we've got a fairly
full slate of things I suspect
will be able to get through most
of them which means we should
your Judiciary Committee will be
meeting tomorrow I guess we have
a couple bills on that agenda
and half hour after the floor
at nine AM we will be
finalising some region
nominations just have a state
investment council nomination
and a few bills that will be
The thank you madam president
your Senate tax business and
transportation committee will be
meeting at five o'clock.
And we've got quite a few bill
so
I'm taller than Shendo.
Thank you madam chair Senate
financial going thirty minutes
afterwards we're going to hear
from Representative small and we
will begin to have spreadsheets
the feds approve the one point
six billion dollars for New
Mexico we'll have some
directly to counties to cities
to school districts all over the
map a money coming is just on
prepare ourselves for what's
coming in the future so
everybody wants to have a new
program everybody wants to have
a little bit more money here
we've tried to work with the
either bad recover completely or
or we're going to see major cuts
again I mean a hundred million
dollar hole is almost a billion
dollars for the time we figure
it all out so I think everybody
have it all.
You madam president thank you
senator any other announcements
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr or
madam president his old habits
Die Hard I apologize for that
you know I just wanted everybody
have in large that we might
consider you know allowing the
little pirtle kids to come in
here and run around a little bit
next week you know it's been
quite lonely for me to not have
groups that if if that was
allowed you know it really
warmed my heart and and
hopefully the hearts of of many
of the members in this building
to see those little kids playing
with cars and stuff on the floor
announcements Senator share.
Thank you madam president I'm
sure you thought I was going to
talk about the political prop
that surrounds this building but
I'm not going to mention the
fence at all.
But I would I would like to move
that house bill four be referred
back to Senate finance.
and I think that this is an
Senator Ivy Soto first thank you
very much of Madam president
then president asking us some of
the Senate that the record
reflect that the motion is acted
upon a vote of twenty seven
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president and.
You know I think so this the
Senate sponsor of house bill
four wasn't able to be here
arguments that are to be made
for the motion we can do this
however you'd like but they'll
be back on Saturday
and so again that's just a
would be because of this motion
can we just keep it off the
calendar until this debate has
been completed with the sponsor.
will assure you right now we're
not going to hear it tell the
sponsor the Senate sponsor is
back and he's back on Saturday
and so again you know my senses
motion and if you agree to delay
but again you certainly can make
the motion Matthew if you'd
like.
Okay madam president I I I will
make the motion to refer it back
finance before we actually hear
Madam present just an agreement
between us is makes me happy
madam president thank you and
All right any other
announcements Senator Peter
Wirth thank you madam president
unanimous consent the sense in
recess until eleven o'clock
tomorrow morning seeing no
