Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez resident
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Morris.
Senator monos.
Senator Provia.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold or.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
We lacked three four core madam
president.
Senators we are lacking a quorum
on the Senate chamber if you
will please come to the floor of
the Senate.
There is one.
president.
Please stand for the invocation
to be given this morning my
Given by led by Representative
had a meal.
The pledge in Spanish to be led
by Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and the
today and thanksgiving for your
presence among us.
We ask that you bless the
efforts of these chosen men and
women as a discuss and decide
what is best for the citizens of
But their godly us most
especially for your divine grace
upon the servants that the
decisions they make benefit all
the democracy that makes this
country and state great.
And now may the lord bless you
and keep you the lord make his
Yes good morning everyone
Senator Peter Wirth good morning
miscellaneous Senator work thank
you madam president thank you
father print for your words and
your special blessings which I
know
we all will send to the
pretty good musicians up there
up at the front so I appreciate
that as well but we just the
chance to share a moment and and
put everything in perspective so
And at this point I yield to
Senator Lopez and then we get
done with announcements I'll
give everyone a sense of what
we're gonna do.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
majority floor leader and madam
Lopez thank you madam president
and then unanimous consent to
excuse Senators Pinto o'neill
Thank you other announcements.
Senator Wirth.
substitutes which is on
everyone's desk and that'll be
item number one also just well
we'll do the work up on the
So with that madam president
unanimous consent we go about
our business messages from the
governor.
There's no objection we hear
messages from the governor the
reader will read.
tempore a Stewart and members of
the Senate in accordance with
article I section five of the
New Mexico constitution I hereby
withdraw the following
Senate rules committee on
January twenty two twenty twenty
through Senate executive message
number twenty nine respectfully
submitted Michelle Lujan Grisham
The reader will right.
What time with the okay Senator
Wirth thank you madam president
is that we go about our business
messages from the house.
two as amended by the house and
request the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
president unanimous consent
gonna business committee reports
if there's no objection on that
order of business committee
reports the reader will agree.
So can you read the motion to
accept the mall.
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually.
Senate bill thirty six do pass
Senate bill forty eight do not
pass but that Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
Gonzales.
Madam president I would ask that
we.
Adopt all the reporters percent.
We're in adoption of favorable
that they are acted upon
individually.
Madam president your rules
committee to whom is better for
Senate bill one seventy eight
respectfully submitted Daniel A.
Ivey Soto chair Senator had a
male madam president I move
adoption of the committee
report.
four has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that do pass
respectfully submitted Joe's of
You should have not only one all
right moved up to committee
report I think we should have
to.
The option of the state verbal
commit a report seeing no
objection the committee report
is adopted.
consideration the report same
with recommendation that do not
pass but that Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
eighty I do pass and that's
US senator Tom can you do the
committee report.
This move adoption.
This Madam chair move the
adoption of the.
Committee report.
One of the option of a favorable
committee report seeing no
Madam president your health of
public affairs committee to whom
is been referred Senate memorial
one has had it under
Madam president I move I ask
unanimous consent that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with the single
Senate bill one ninety seven to
pass infants referred to the
finance committee Senate bill
to eleven do pass events
the committee report what are
the options a favorable
committee report is there
objection seen on the committee
report is adopted and the
journal reflect each one I was
if there's no objection we are
on that order of business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Wirth.
You madam president I would like
to again announce
someone is doing a mentorship a
class and also is a writer for
the Santa Fe New Mexican
generation next page and she's
been having fun kind of.
Really get a feel for this and
Sir Wirth I thank you madam
presents a what we're gonna do
is just a few confirmations up
front.
Labor and industrial commission
have been through rules and we
had I think forty nine
confirmations come down so we do
a.
A little quicker than we
normally do I just so people
understand so with that
unanimous consent with that our
hereby submit the credentials of
James the Baylor E. Horst who
has been appointed to the labor
and industrial commission I now
yielded to Senator McKenna to
letter number six dated may
twenty one twenty twenty one I
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Mr
Is there debate on the
confirmation.
Seeing none center McKenna to
close.
Yes madam president Mr James
Edward.
served from apprentice to
operations manager he has
contributed to the sex
successful completion of
hundreds of projects from multi
I asked the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Mr
James the Baylor Eichorst.
and industrial commission.
To your seats if you wish to
vote now please raise your hand.
affirmative not that none of the
negative the appointment of
James C. Baylor I cursed as a
member of the labor industrial
commission for term commencing
on may eighteen twenty twenty
president New Mexico hearty
congratulations to Mr Baylor I
coursed.
Senator Hotmail madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
Senator Campos thank you very
much madam president.
Pursuant to S. N. executive
message number twenty nine dated
January the twenty second twenty
Senator Campos to present the
confirmation conferee thank you
very much madam president and to
start talking about this
confirmation.
Stina is highly credentialed she
is an individual who continues
to serve the state well
regardless in the position that
care for quite a few decades and
and so I she moves forward in
this position this of course is
going to be another one for she
definitely can help each and
confirmation Senator Lopez I
thank you madam president and
thank you Senator Campos for
presenting Christina madam
president members of the Senate
Santa Rosa for the hospital
she's done wonderful work
specially we talk about rural
health
she has I think done magic with
have history she and I of course
Valley high school but also when
she and her husband Jose former
state representative Campos
to see the the fellow Latina
because in this type of position
thank you madam president.
There's further debate on the
confirmations Senator Stefan X.
initiate their first hospital
she is not only come to do a
presentation to the county
commission but to all the
interested parties throughout
Seeing none Senator Campos close
thank you very much madam
president as you can tell
Christina is a very valued
Senator is we're voting on the
confirmation of Kristin are
compost to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
upon confirmation expiring Jan
January twenty fifth twenty
twenty four has been duly
confirmed by the Senate.
Senator Campos thank you very
president thank you senator
Senator Hotmail madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Rhonda guilty and Lopez has
been appointed to the employers
message number twenty nine dated
January twenty second twenty
twenty I move that the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of Rhonda Gilliland Lopez to the
madam president members of the
Senate
miss Gillen Lopez of course has
been act long time in our
community not just in the
Association and again brings I
think a wealth of information
and experience to this
particular board of directors.
president so I now ask that the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Rhonda kids in
Lopez.
Senators we are voting on the
By a vote of twenty seven in the
affirmative seer on the naked of
twenty four has been duly
confirmed by the Senate.
Senator Lopez and madam
president thank you members of
Raby who has been appointed to
the employers mutual company
board of directors and I yield
to Senator Lopez.
Lopez I thank you madam
president pursuant to Senate
Raby due to Mexico employers
mutual company board of
directors.
Senator Lopez to explain the
conferee thank you very much
community here in New Mexico but
also in Albuquerque she is the
founder president principle of
contract associates incorporated
and madam president I strongly
recommend that the Senate vote
in favor of miss already.
Thank you Sir debate on the
confirmation Senator o'neill
company and playing a lot of New
Mexicans and I have to say I
have the privilege of and of
representing her entire family
before I vote I was make sure
I'm okay with the rabies I thank
you.
Thank you any other debate.
Seeing none Senator Lopez to
confirmation of money at that a
go wrong right the senators to
your seat if you wish to vote no
please raise your hands.
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative is here in the
negative the appointment of
money at the eico Arabia as a
member of the employers mutual
company board of directors for
members of the Senate and
congratulations by the.
Senator had a meal madam
president I hereby submit the
credentials of some well Baca
pursuant to Senate executive
number twenty nine dated January
twenty second twenty twenty I
move that the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of some
all Baca to the employers mutual
a you know extensive background
and I believe this is a great
appointment and he will serve on
this commission well and serve
us in the state of New Mexico.
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of seminal Baca.
Centers we're voting on the
confirmation of Samuel Bach us
to your seats if you wish to
By a vote of twenty nine in the
affirmative seer on the negative
the appointment of Samuel Baca
Senate.
Senator pope.
I like to think of the body and
listen gradually Mr Baca.
Of there's no objection were on
that order business
announcements miscellaneous
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president so we are going to go
to the third reading
unanimous consent without our
business third reading of
legislation and you'll to
Senator Shendo for the Senate
floor sob to Senate bill thirty
nine as amended if there's no
rules be suspended that the
record show that all action for
placing a Senate bill thirty
nine of as amended on final
passage has been taken that is
now subject to date remember
not pass incentive for
substitute for Senate bill
thirty nine A. B. adopted in
place on final passage and said
that the debate amendment or
substitution.
The senator to explain the
substitute is to instead of
eliminating the cap that we are
increasing it to six million
Debate on the floor substitute.
bill the Senate floor
substitutes for Senate bill
thirty nine
do now pass and asking them to
set the Senate that the Senate
records show that all.
except those will be the
negative by show of hands.
Centers we are voting on a an
adoption of the floor
substitute.
that is correct this is just on
the motion to swap out the bill
with the floor subset.
Thirty two.
substitute but nobody's telling
me exactly how many but we see
no hands up so we are now on a
fourth substitute for Senate
cap of three million dollars as
it was on the original we are
increasing the cap to six
million dollars.
Debate on the bill.
Senate bill of the scope of the
Senate floor substitute for
Senate bill thirty nine
do now pass Nascimento said of
the Senate that the record show
that the rule has been called
than all those present voting
Senate bill thirty nine a tear
seats if you wish to vote now
please raise your hands.
By a vote of thirty four in the
Fuhrman of none of the negative.
thank you madam president and
members of the body.
Thank you next we will go to
item number two Senator
Gonzalez.
Of I'm not sure.
to excuse those people from
voting.
Senator Wirth do we have any
committees meeting we need to
excuse people for.
Thank you madam president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
let the record show that all
action for placing Senate.
Senator Gonzales to explain the
bill.
Thank you madam president at
this point I would ask for your
consent to allow money expert
expert witness thank you madam
president is cabinet Elizabeth
grow Groginsky.
Seeing no objection as a
the Senate bill thirty eight as
amended all.
Of madam president members on
this is authorization bill the
responsibilities as mandated by
federal law and by state by the
state early childhood education
and care act of two thousand
Madam chair at this point I
would like to have Michael
sponsor also if.
If she wishes to contribute to
president this is an important
bill because it will provide the
ECECD full and clear authority
to conduct the departments
essential functions and
responsibilities that are
matters that are related to
families and young children
thank you madam president.
Thank you Senator Gonzales are
you with that are developers
Thank you very much madam
president Senator Gonzales
Senator could I have helped
don't have any questions I just
wanted to thank the Department
for truly following through and
put in the legislation and be so
prescriptive so I'm just
thrilled that they've actually
gotten all of this done and put
the plan together and I've been
to their offices I I see they're
just very busy over there doing
the right thing and I think
and I'd like to excuse Center
Josh Sanchez Gregg Schmedes
Senator Ingle answer sure.
Thank you madam president I move
that Senate bill through thirty
eight some of the do not passed
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands.
Centers where voting on Senate
bill thirty eight as amended to
a just really want to
acknowledge and thank the body
for this so
what we have done in our state
with our early childhood program
come to New Mexico our families
and to our academic part in a to
our public education so with
the I just wish to acknowledge
and thank all the members and
Swim moving on now Senator
Brandt for item number three.
As soon as consent of the Senate
the records show all action for
bill.
Thank you madam president this
bill makes it
Illegal to discriminate against
There is an amendment just a
very small amount on the bill.
Madam president I move Senate
floor amendment number one to
Senate bill one fifty eight.
Brandt so I think I'm supposed
to say the rate will raise and
he'll read the amendment that
will come back to you.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill one fifty
number one to Senate bill one
fifty eight as amended with our
across thank you senator and I
can explain the amendment thank
you madam president after
under the disability definition
we had it under three or more of
the following areas
and that's really the
requirement to get on the DD
these areas you are disabled and
so we don't want any disabled
person to not receive a organ
transplant.
A debate on the amendment.
that unanimous consent thank
madam president I move unanimous
consent on Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
bill one fifty eight as amended
with marks across.
Is there any objection to the
bill any debate on the amended
bill.
Seeing none Senator Brandt to
close.
all those present voting in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of
hands.
Centers we're voting on Senate
bill one fifty eight as amended
Senator Shendo if you could go
Center male.
I.
My vote of thirty five in the
affirmative none of the
this bill it just reaffirms that
we value all lives in New Mexico
no matter if they're disabled or
not thank you very much thank
you senator next we'll go to
Consent of the Senate that the
record so that all action for
placing Senate bill forty three
of on final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
experts the knowledge will send
of be escorted into.
And of who is your expert only
Wilson she seated outside all
right seeing no objection the.
Thank you madam president.
This bill does two very
important things advanced life
without parole has a sense of
a hearing happens every five
years unless mandated to happen
earlier by other provision of
law.
for twenty years starting with
Justice Boston to make this a
legislative policy decision.
And just.
And it.
Its crimes.
This is.
I ask I ask for support for this
bill.
we do have an amendment.
Senator Pirtle to move and then
explain the amendment to Senate
floor amendment number one.
knew from any governmental
entity force from the district
attorney's this would make it a
little bit more palatable for
them I'm not quite sure I can't
speak on their behalf as to
of sixty years and moving all
the way down to fifteen which is
a pretty large jump and this
would simply put it at twenty
years.
Debate on the amendment after.
asked to change it from ten to
fifteen of in response to
concerns from victims and
response to
they were not organized but
various dust
adolescent brain development a
fifteen year old will not be
eligible for review until she is
here she is thirty by this time
the brain is fully formed and
statistically the person poses
In fact in Michigan a bipartisan
package of bills introduced at
last week they provide for
parole review for juveniles
will my colleague from Russell
yield.
Madam president I would yield
thank you and thank you for the
moment I understand this but I
twenty years is a long time and
I understand these are horrible
crimes believe me I know this
first hand but it in your
remarks you you made it seem as
have to wait another five years
so there would be a twenty year
situation but anyway I
understand you know the spirit
of this amendment and and just
district attorney's association
this morning and those the
sponsor probably does many of
the chamber no they've been
opposed to this bill for number
comfortable with the twenty
years on thought that they would
pose or they would withdraw any
opposition to this bill if rules
that twenty years madam
president so I think this would
at twenty years that they would
ha what's wrong any opposition
to this I think that we could
really speed this bill up in the
road to compromise and sounds
like you have done the
compromise last year with the
members so I would encourage the
sponsor to think about that if
you want to hi good build up has
you off a lot of support from
can you get the dust on board
where we probably want to be as
good public policy and as a
compromise for those who are
and I would just point out Madam
chair of my colleague from the
northeast heights I'm sorry I am
still in the house with this
college stuff but anyway
extend themselves that was for
the dust that that five year
agreement and then the dust what
happened was individually they
can all agree
necessarily in an easy way but
but I would just point out that
the dust are hardly a unified
voice in this on this
legislation.
More significant thing senator
the word Mr ivory appreciate
that and I think that is just
thirteen dust around but the
message I got this morning I
specifically asked if the
position on the twenty years so
maybe they are still dust it off
supported maybe I did out of but
as an association has
specifically asked that question
is pretty monumental be honest
with you our president thank you
senator Morris for that
clarification.
Other debate on the amendment.
We are voting on Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
bill forty three.
Senators to your seat.
Senator Ventus voting no Senator
o'neill voting no Senator had a
meal photo no Senator Steinborn
now Senator McKenna voting no
Senator Sedillo Lopez voting no
Senator Hickey voting now
Senator Duhigg voting no Senator
Wirth voting no Senator Lopez
voting no Senator Stefanics
no Senator Shendo voting no
Senator moon Jooss voting no
the negative Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
bill forty three has failed to
pass the Senate thank you madam
president I I know now how to
one to Senate bill forty three
amendment sponsored by senator
Gregory A. Baca.
Senator Baca to move the
amendment.
amendment.
Thank you madam president I
present to the body Senate floor
amendment number two Senate
floor amendment number two
otherwise known as the dual
does is it introduces at the
onset of a juvenile case of palm
the finding of a of a man
ability which is essentially
judicata juvenile sentence if
the child is amenable a dual
adult sentence the adults
sentence basically all it does
that juvenile sentencing hearing
is is found at a hearing is
hearing is ordered for or the
findings will show the success
child murdered five individuals
a was sentenced to a juvenile
sentence.
on Raval that trial.
That settlement prison is not
the way to do business this
gives the judge broad discretion
in place in statute so without
I'll be open for debate.
Senator Sedillo Lopez no this
this bill there this and it
Is a bill that does not deal
with sentencing at all what it
does is it allows for a
prolonged parole hearing after
fifty years so it's it's
Seeing no debate on the
judiciary and their discretion
and the great faith we place in
them.
This ammendment sich simply
expands that gives them another
the second we're adding some
accountability to a child a
child that's been been deemed a
delinquent at that point.
And is serving time we're just
And I've heard from people from
CYFD and I've heard from people
who who work with incarcerated
youth the threats the things
We want to be successful we
don't want is them going through
the youth detention system.
Being non compliant the entire
time because they know Hey I'm
And with that.
I move Senate bill of the Senate
floor amendment number two and I
sent apartment number one.
In his.
I move Senate foreman they want
one to Senate bill forty three
at your seats if you wish to
vote no please raise your hands.
Senator o'neill votes no Senator
pope folks now Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino votes no Senator Campos
Senator Gonzales folks know
Senator Padilla folks know
Senator Duhigg votes no Senator
folks know centers to phonics
votes no Senator Rodriguez no
Center moon Jooss votes no
Senator Shendo folks know
Senate.
Center box.
Thank you madam president.
Yes madam president I yield
yield thank you madam president
and I was just checking to see I
thought I heard during the
debate of that last amendment
that.
I'm I would like to draw the
body's attention to page one
line twelve right in the title
with that's exactly what this
bill is about this prohibiting
the imposition of a sentence of
will point out though.
That on page two
line twenty one this is original
language in the bills not
changes as the court may
judicial branch is already given
the flexibility to do what a co
equal branch of government is
charged to do and that's to the
to do we trust the judiciary to
do their job or do we dictate to
the judiciary what to do.
And so unfortunately in this
bill we're gonna dictate to them
the the outcomes that we want
want to tell the judges how and
when to retain someone in prison
whenever they've proven time and
time again that they they have
their that their job.
Or don't we trust them.
For me personally I don't trust
them to do it.
They've had plenty of
flexibility over time and they
We take a sixty year sentence
down to fifteen.
And then we lacked the courage
on bail reform.
To really as a co equal branch
put out and say we're tired of
So if if my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle want to
just pick here and there when
they want to be tough on crime
or take something serious that's
that's their prerogative but as
Thank consistency the hypocrisy
has reached a level that
honestly I can't stand anymore
and it's extremely frustrating.
Sit through one hearing and we
heinous crimes we're not talking
about shoplifting and Alko.
We're talking about capital
murder here.
But then the day before we hear
this bill and Judiciary
as who their leaders and their
community are the people that
make the decisions that affect
their lives and the lives of
others.
So it's time you you either need
to be consistent or we need to
Center box.
Thank you madam president last
night madam president.
I was invited as we all were
although there were only a
Of slain victims.
Some of them slain by other
juveniles.
I wonder what they would say.
flexibility the judges should
have.
Whoops wait a minute we can't
ask them they're not here.
They're forgotten I had to sit
listen to testimony.
This past week from a mother.
Rightly and understandably so
alcohol and who committed many
crimes pleading that we keep the
sentences of light I understand
that I have children.
I would back my children.
Spare the rod spoil the child.
Is there any time for we
I don't think it does the thing
we never mention in here is the
deterrent effect of
incarceration.
What is that means if you're
Where we see that.
We're protecting election
workers with other when the when
this will never be prosecuted
further to bill that is not in
need.
That I have no doubt.
We'll go up and likely be signed
contrary to what we were
promised by the fourth floor we
The oil is not here.
The special interests have
invaded.
And they're winning.
And the cost of that.
Some of those people that
committed those crimes are
already walking around.
Walking around in society on
skate many of them have
Mexico mean.
Means loosening of sentences.
It doesn't mean second chances.
Senator Woods.
Madam president this this bill
does not.
Does not meet the smell test or
the sound bites that we heard
going into this session.
Go into the library.
The young man killed people in
I live very poor defenseless
people.
Senator plea bargaining that's
CENIC's.
To make it less tough on crime.
I think New Mexico.
Is begging.
The legislature.
To make a better.
Focus on getting the criminals
off the street.
Any says.
state of New Mexico.
That have a thirty percent
conviction rate.
No one is that then president.
Is not even trying to.
Plea bargain because they're
is going to lead COVID they're
so backed up with court cases.
We need to make life easier on
the vehicle.
Thank you madam president.
got a question I just wanted to
the first.
Then present that I was at the
rental has lied to and the
people for crying out the we
madam president is I've got
friends that have passed on both
sides in I've been trying to
keep up.
Currently I have sixty three
percent of those of emailed me
trying to be objective to both
sides but there are us last time
madam president for changes to
the law to protect the victims
and the families.
to go forward with this to see
the you know there's any way
that I could supported I wish
the amendments and.
President would have been
the state of New Mexico madam
president I do have one question
if the.
Senator would yield madam
president yes I yield ills.
the early release would be on
the families of the victims.
Madam president.
But we've also seen over the
past two sessions of people
who've suffered or lost loved
ones to youth violence are not
monolithic.
We've had supported victims
number of survivors of youth
violence and they stated
although our lives have been
forever altered by the violent
actions of people who are under
eighteen at the time we are firm
in our conviction the children
resources we work for much more
just future.
Madam presence Senator I
appreciate that but I would hope
that we would had some of those
they are not being heard by
their legislators and this crown
house in for me all stand in
opposition because I think that
Senator Brandt
Thank you madam president with
the sponsor yield.
First can you explain to me what
what would happen if.
Someone was a juvenile was
convicted of two separate
murders.
Can you tell me the difference
between the two I'm not an
attorney so I don't know.
A concurrent sentences when
someone is scheduled for example
might be piled on so there might
be a sentence of ten years and
then after that ten years it's
usually of.
You know and then to be served
consecutively means that the ten
So madam president Senator then
with the
Murder of Bill to get out after
fifteen years with this or would
they actually serve thirty if it
was consecutive.
crimes concurrently or
consecutively I interpret that
the that the hearing for release
will occur after fifteen years
otherwise this bill doesn't have
consecutive sentences.
That that if a fifteen year old
committed that murder they would
be up for parole at age thirty
not at age forty five.
sentence a child as a juvenile
serious youthful offenders are
automatically and mandatorily
sentenced as adults.
from fifteen to seventeen years
old and has been charged with
first degree murder which is
willful deliberate depraved mind
and felony murder.
Then maybe the wrong term
fifteen to seventeen year old.
Murders to different people two
different times.
I'm life is priceless you cannot
put a value on a life.
Madam presently Senator so are
we're focusing on whether this
individual has changed because
of brain development is
incomplete in adolescents
have is a passage of time and we
will know the answer because the
parole he hearing board of the
parole board will determine
after fifty years served whether
So we're not automatically
letting people go free at
fifteen years we're just giving
them the possibility to
demonstrate that they have been
Surprised gladly surprised.
When the governor came out and
said we're going to be tough on
crime.
And so I was really pleasantly
surprised when I heard the
governor say after hundred
seventeen people were murdered
in Albuquerque.
Apparently it takes more than a
hundred seventeen people being
murdered in Albuquerque.
Before we take seriously the
crime that's happening on our
We decided that that's okay.
Somehow.
Only spending fifteen years in
prison this plenty.
fenders receiving life without
parole.
After the hundred and seventeen
people are murdered.
We still take it so lightly.
of these people in other states
have been paroled how many of
these young men young women.
Have been paroled after fifteen
statistics are all that great.
But we always use.
That excuse.
possibility of parole I would
say that most of them are going
to get paroled after fifteen
years whether they've been
rehabilitated or not they're
going to go out back on our
streets.
With the person that murdered
their family member.
Not to mention.
But unlike the governor who
after finally a hundred
seventeen people being killed
started taking crime seriously.
This chamber still doesn't.
How many people have to die.
Members of this body.
Before we get serious.
About the crime that is
God for bid the someone that we
know.
Is one of the victims.
You take someone's life you
deserve.
Life without the possibility of
parole.
You deserve to spend the rest of
your days locked up.
Going soft on crime on our
streets.
We're running with the blood of
a hundred seventeen people in
our community.
That have been murdered.
Thank you madam president.
thank the sponsor of the bill
for bringing this important
legislation forward it's so
important because.
human rights treaty and history
a hundred ninety six countries
have ratified this treaty
equipment transplants important
not ratified this convention and
the convention of the rights of
the child states unequivocally
that childhood is separate from
adulthood and lasts until a
And.
I just thank you madam president
I just wanted to state why it's
so important to protect children
learn and grow and develop thank
you madam president.
Thank you next we'll hear from
senator share.
mentioned here when protecting
children is really what we want
to do all over the place so the
question is how what makes the
most sense how we can do that.
For some reason we don't really
wanna even prosecute bad guys
and if we do prosecute the bad
guys we don't want to we don't
want to incarcerate bad guys and
take good guys in turn in the
bad guys.
There's built around here all
the time so.
He sure has a has a farm with a
magazine is too big he's a
criminal.
And also have felonies attached
to them for doing nothing.
And here we have somebody that
killed somebody else.
In its sixteen year olds our
children in this bill.
Or the children or the adults.
If you were if you were strong
enough to carry the weapon of
your nation whether that was a
spear or rifle you're an adult.
But no we're gonna make voters
noted on my mind we're going to
call on children in one place
we're going to call in adults
and another.
They don't have enough sense to
to have a parental.
No I got to the parent has to
buy them cold medicine.
I see these things all the time.
It's boggles my mind how we can
get here.
I just don't understand it.
In in in our department of
health.
We say do you qualify for all of
the benefits.
Okay.
Just more inconsistencies in my
life one.
The one thing that I do knows
I think I understand what's
causing that.
We don't even address that
issue.
We've void that issue we seem to
go out of our way to avoid that
We have a problem we have a very
serious problem.
And we need to address it.
never the would do in my world
never have committed those
crimes.
In most of us.
We're old enough to remember
hanging in the back of the rifle
reckon the back of a truck.
We got shot in Farmington high
school then.
We have a growing crime rate but
we seem to want to make.
Make life more lenient for the
criminals.
Problems in that neighborhood.
Because the people living there
believe that nobody cares who
cares with breaking of the
The broken window theory has its
has its distractors of course as
But I believe.
If we show care for our
communities.
Whether it's the broken window
theory or not.
because we don't have sixteen
year old shooting each other.
Because we shown care but what
we show here is that we don't
care when people shoot each
other in Albuquerque or when
To go to and isotopes game but I
can't spend the night because I
want to have my car tomorrow.
And this is true would you like
there because someone will steal
my car.
So I wasn't the designated
driver I was the designated
entice the for.
Driver.
we have sixteen year old
shooting somebody else.
Would be even with the bat or
stabbing them.
The juvenile criminals.
what's really causing the
problems.
And I think what's causing the
problems is that we have gone
out of our way to break down our
families.
And I know as soon as I say that
all my gosh well who do you hate
now.
No it's out of love that I bring
problem is and if we have
families together this kind of
bills just that relevant.
No hear all the stories and I
And it's always it's always
bothered me.
That I deliver that message that
that that the single mother is
somehow to blame and that's not
true.
Then again with two or three
hundred guns on Farmington high
school campus when I graduated.
Almost everybody.
Almost everybody yep there were
losses of life fathers died in
Vietnam fathers died well filled
accidents fathers died on old
highway forty four which is a
death highway.
The family system the family
system might be grandma grandpa
might be answered on goals.
At least in one case the family
system was simply the teachers
at the school.
The family at least at least
together in some cases and that
kept the the fifteen and sixteen
year old from being too crazy
that is stop all of them of
course not.
Does it effort to try to fix the
broken window the broken window
of that family.
We're trying to fix the broken
child will get away fifteen
years and then say all wheel
golly do you feel better now are
you better now for students say
yes.
How do we help fix them.
This bill doesn't address
helping to fix the UNM fixable.
what it does is encourages more
of our broken children to break
more windows.
I sent out a way about it you'll
be fine.
No I don't mean this is an
insult.
To the sponsor of the bill or to
anybody in here or anywhere
else.
Twitter and Facebook are going
to blow up and call each other
will lease called me bad names.
By the way I don't care.
Which is why I continue to have.
It's important enough that in an
informal setting in the Senate
lounge over dinner.
We chat in to try to get some
ideas out here but we have now
a guy I would stand up here on
the on the floor no make my
point so making with passion.
But I'd much rather discuss this
stuff over dinner.
children and that is the basis
of what I think we all want to
do.
The question is does this bill
that is before us today to the
to the to the goal which I think
we want.
It's counterproductive.
Maybe we do need something like
this but this isn't the bill to
do it.
signature this office in just.
Which word for BES without
saying yes bovine scat.
And.
As we saw before party line vote
after party line vote after
party line vote except I know
I just don't think this piece of
paper does that.
For these pieces of paper.
that we have in the windows are
us the windows are our children.
And run around out there saying
doesn't show that we care about
the neighborhoods it doesn't
show that we care about each
other.
And that's our problem.
That's our problem.
But I do wish.
That we can have those
conversations.
You madam president.
It wasn't long ago that we had
but we can't have those informal
conversations.
But so rarely do they happen
specially now.
Where.
But the formal settings.
Of committees.
But we know that's out there no
worries us.
that we want the same things.
And I think we do.
And then we want to understand.
How do we get there in a manner
I can't support this because all
I see.
Is more broken windows in more
violence.
Thank you madam president
members and just a few comments
and on support of this bill no I
I speak a lot about the spelling
crime bills are not alike okay
can we just acknowledge that of
course there's inconsistency
because there are what they've
very widely I mean what's the
For starters okay second of all
the notion that that victims are
hurt that is not the case all
rights I mean I've got to sixty
we're also human but we're
policymakers why do we have a
children's code when we just
lock them all up you know shop
juveniles that's why we have
this different system so you
know that some of these bills is
this crime does have nothing to
do with this bill so of course
come down to any one case I mean
if we're going to get all
anecdotal we're going to
legislation by anecdote I mean I
can respond to with examples of
the leering you know juvenile
isn't gonna get paroled or H.
the parole board is there to
hear the victims and people
cannot can either dismiss that
because they don't get what they
task and they represent the
community you think they're
gonna let somebody out that's a
threat to society heck no I mean
they're not flawless I'm sure
but you know if we're going to
get down to anecdotes and like
Thank you senator we do have a
floor amendment the reader to
read.
Senate floor amendment number
bill forty three Senator Pirtle
to explain the amendment.
Thank you madam president in
we've heard in in testimony
sentences that they would
actually be eligible for parole
at that fifteen years even if
they murdered five ten twenty
people and what this would
simply do is instead of it
the parole hearing may occur and
so I think this is kind of
clears up with the consecutive
sentence language and and really
clarifies that we're gonna put
that discretion where it needs
In every other state that has
passed second chance legislation
from Oregon to Nevada to
Arkansas the subject is released
serve consecutive consecutively
this is what gives meaning to
the U. S. supreme court's
instruction that children be
given a meaningful opportunity
for release.
this it involved a boy who was
serving many consecutive
consecutive sentences up to
ninety one and a half years.
Parole from one sentence to the
into the next would not fix this
Further debate on the amendment
Senator Schmedes.
Thing then present with the
sponsor the amendment you'll
please.
someone let's let's take Clovis
for example so Madam presence
Senator you you're aware that
the that school shooter was
sentenced to two life sentences
familiar madam president as you
so I'll take your word on that
one thank you I'm madam
president pretty sure that was
the sentence laid down so let's
just use that as an example
this school shooter who has been
sentenced to two life sentences
plus forty years we're not just
going to give them a parole
hearing after fifteen years
they're actually going to have
Served out and and would not
have an effect on it or the just
the status quo that parole for
those two life sentences plus
board that the way it's written
now is if somebody in that
specific case regardless of what
the judge said regardless of
all the findings in court that
the parole hearing would happen
at fifteen years and regardless
of the sentence what could be
released at fifteen years this
hearing at fifteen.
Thank you madam president it
seems like your amendment
actually allows more judicial
discretion on the sentencing
that that's the intent here you
know we're we're trying to split
some of these hairs and and
respect the voices of those that
that have a lot of concern with
somebody doing one accident
resulting in multiple crimes but
you know what about those that
that murder somebody they get
out on their own recognizance
Thank you madam presence and I
Nothing in this amendment I I
think we'll supported because I
think it has
Then why would we kind of you
know what would be undermined
that while coming in with the
possibility of getting on the
fifteen years the other thing
I'd like to ask you about I'm
life sentences for a school
shooter.
They would otherwise not be
eligible for release.
You know them they have to have
And live through that horrific
experience again is that is that
correct.
And madam president senator I
think that was some of the
each individual crime and and
the perpetrators is that we were
going to just do a cookie cutter
blanket fifteen years and so if
there was a situation madam
victims families that would
would do that this just puts the
discretion of the parole board
to make the decision on
consecutive sentences instead of
I think this this amendment
makes sense because it does give
that discretion I think it's a
really validates and this bill
without the some and I think can
victims so I I will be
supporting the amendment thank
you madam president thanks in
thank you further debate on the
amendment.
Senator is we are asking on.
We are voting on Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
bill forty three.
Senator had a meal folks know
Senator o'neill votes no
Senator Steinborn votes no
McKenna folks know Senator
Sedillo Lopez votes no Senator
Hickey votes no Senator McKenna
Duhigg votes no Senator Hamblen
folks know Senator Hemphill
folks know senator Wirth folks
Senator Stewart votes now.
three has failed to pass the
Senate.
Senator Pirtle thank you madam
president members of the body.
Senator committees to move the
amendment three men present I
move foreman number one to
Senate bill forty three Senator
committee to explain them thank
Of a peace officer who is acting
in the lawful discharge of an
official duty when they're
murdered this is a cop killer a
yesterday and.
Not just yesterday but a variety
of.
Circumstances we talked about
Committee to give a one time
bonus to health care workers at
our universities trainees who
messaging thing this is to say
that the legislature supports
our health care workers and we
are going to message and say we
support you and we're gonna put
messaging are we sending to our
police officers.
What kind of messaging.
This bill I support actually a
When we are at at the end of the
day I know this bill allows for
the possibility of parole I
understand that.
And that they're not it just
the possibility of getting out
and when a local jurisdiction is
shaken when one other brothers
or sisters in uniform has been
murdered.
So what type of messaging are we
sending to our law enforcement
officers and I want to send a
strong message to them that that
we're not going to give them
those question marks when
they're jurisdictions are shaken
The bill already takes this into
account on page nine of the
factors to be considered by the
board number three the nature of
offense and whether an adult or
peer was involved in the offense
so what that means is the
individual circumstances would
need to be considered including
the officers involvement whether
have the felony murder rule
that's the reason we don't make
across the board distinctions
and we leave it to the the
balancing of these factors to
Seeing no debate Senator
Schmedes close thank you madam
president in closing maybe it
wasn't clear to the bill sponsor
about the intent of this
ammendment I'm not talking about
about no possibility if you
commit premeditated murder on a
cop there will be no possibility
that is what the amendment does
When they're grieving when their
family is grieving when their
jurisdiction is green when
they're departments greeting
they're gonna be thinking about
this possibility yes the judge
This would allow for more
closure for our peace officers.
So that that that's the
difference it does change the
bill I'm talking about no
and ask for showings.
Centers we are voting on Senate
floor amendment number one to
Senate bill forty three to your
seats.
Senator pope votes no Senator
o'neill votes no Senator Campos
both snow Senator Ortiz C. Pino.
Senator Pinto folks know Senator
Gonzales votes no Senator
Padilla.
Folks know Senator Hamblen votes
Senators souls folks know
senators to phonics votes no
Senator Lopez folks known.
Senate.
Senator members of the council
Well they may not have been at
their seats we were all.
Members of yeah we were all here
as I was looking around make
sure and they were.
No he was inside the chamber
during the vote.
If I would be able to Senator
Griggs.
All.
incorrect I thought we were
going back to the bill which I
raise my hand vote to talk on
the bill money my apologies it
And Sir creek side did not
mention your name just raising
her hand.
Then present so have a corrected
We're back on debate I have
Senator Ortiz the Pino next on
my list.
the and the issues raised in the
amendments this morning.
I've been trying to figure out
how I can see things so
differently.
How can I for example.
Be looking at things so
differently from someone is
clearly well intentioned and is
Russian faith and and believes.
As the.
The same Christian base for
example that emphasizes mercy
and forgiveness.
the fact that I've just given up
on punishment as being of any
use at all in deterring crime
I've been watching it for fifty
punishments were much less than
they are today we've added on
punishments for all sorts of
crimes we've added on years for
upon sentence to say as as I've
seen judges recently do three
life sentences.
A young person who is so
hopeless.
strike out is not thinking of
Jeez now it's going to be twenty
years instead of fifteen before
I qualify for they don't that's
never even crossing their money.
So how are we going to reduce
the level of violence I like
Senator shares comment about
broken windows but the broken
windows thing wasn't to pile on
He wasn't trying to lock people
up for longer and longer used
trying to make sure that little
crimes got caught and stopped.
And that I think slowly turns
these young lives around and
that is to do something about
the causes of these crimes.
The poverty the lack of good
education the drug addiction
Is making them less prepared for
when they get out.
And costing us at least fifty
thousand dollars a year for
every year they stay in prison.
started in social work with with
what you got for life you get
out after fifteen years as an
adult.
We've piled on sentences for
promise I prefer first you for
murder.
They they don't give them eighty
years in prison that's
still violent if just piling on
sentences did anything I could I
could have more sympathy for
some of the amendments that have
been proposed but they won't do
any good.
hearts earlier in life.
Before they get so hopeless so
angry just angry I mean I watch
them driving on the streets of
Albuquerque.
if you really if we really have
a department of corrections we
can turn them around and a lot
less than fifteen years and once
they're turned around what's the
point of keeping them behind
bars longer.
Making it tougher when you get
caught.
It's too late and so it's a it's
something that'll make us feel
think that giving the this bill
a chance is the way to go
because what it means is a probe
or concede are they turning
their life around and if they
are what's the point of keeping
will you know need to have I'm
when I was little my mom just
drove drilled into my head two
wrongs don't make a right.
I suspect many of you heard that
same lesson.
in the first place if he's
learned his lesson.
Let's move on let's get him back
into circulation.
And fifteen years is what adults
used to do for for first degree
murder.
Thank you madam president I was
The challenge we all face right
here with this particular deal
is it is first thank.
Madam it was that would just me
maybe about people don't think
who commit these crimes think
about what the consequences on
the not just young people
We've got.
We've got a genuinely a
individual from judge to judge
from.
jurisdiction to jurisdiction we
we don't do that well.
debates about how the parole
board should operate whether or
not we need them doing this or
that because where we where we
You know to me going way out
there there there Shannon's
because the crime they committed
at the time and that's one of
the things that we need for not
forget what we're talking about
of the discussion has really as
focused on overall crime and
what.
How younger younger sh people
are being treated.
That.
Is one of those things it's hard
to get your arms around.
When you look her in the eye and
you see the sadness that is
still there years and years
after.
who's incarcerated in state and
saying that that individual.
Has done all the time they need
to do.
And I a you know I think when we
talk about other things we talk
about how we distrust in some
ways the decisions of the parole
board.
we're just we're fooling
ourselves on a lot of this
stuff.
If we believe that some of these
individuals will be they're
going to they're going to get
waited correctly may get out and
their whole life will be changed
and they will be.
Good suggestions which is what
we're going to have to hold is
Either that or for all those
hands would go up every time
there was a potential amendment
that might make the bill more
palatable to all.
stuff that we found by working
together becomes a an issue that
we should all.
We can make that choice with
Madam president members of the
body that's not always right.
And the numbers here the numbers
I hope you are.
Because the state of New Mexico
is depending on you to be right.
winners and there's gonna be
some losers.
And mother I mentioned about
moments ago she loses in this
I don't think you can do that.
I don't think you will do that.
You madam president members of
don't believe you want to do it
better thank you madam president
and thank you members of the
body.
Thank you Senator Schmedes for a
second time.
I
Very much agree with senator
Ortiz Pena's comments and it is
very fascinating to me one of
the rewarding things.
policy position.
On something but you can agree
on so much.
It with a single bill.
the story my current pastor his
father was murdered.
When he was fourteen years old.
And when he shares this story.
For years and years and years.
He was shackled.
Hopeless.
Is a good word.
Hopeless and angry.
And so one of the principles
forgiveness and I think this
bill is trying to.
Reflect some elements of grace
forgiveness redemption.
And so the forgiveness I think
does not need to come.
From a legislative body can't
come for legislative body.
The context of a relationship so
the the the forgiveness cannot
come from policy the forgiveness
has to come from the victims
forgiveness it has to come from
those victims that that's the
true forgiveness in this
situation and that's up to the
victims right easy for me to
say.
Then present we've we've talked
about punishment and I agree
with senator GDP those comments
on punishment.
Here's the difference.
But here's the difference.
Punishment without love.
That that's what the system does
is not the state's jobs not to
love a person.
Or develop a relationship with
them.
State cannot punish and love
someone at least I don't believe
they can punishment plus love
equals discipline.
Some of the state can't do the
state cannot I believe
discipline a child that can we
can punish in yes punishment is
not going to do much.
A mother or father can punish a
child.
Without loving them.
Very harmful very harmful to
that children to that child.
advise the all the advice that I
dish out sometimes is never
punish your child if you're
angry.
Let that anger come down first
Madam president members of the
Senate what what what we talk
about justice.
Fairness.
Well we we have to have some
Shoplifter a drug dealer.
And and you were sitting in the
room of the judge laid down
that person be a good judge with
the colonel Justice is some be
delivering justice and fairness
so we have to have some sort of.
Semblance of justice and I just
We only talk about punishment
the absence of love it's it's
it's useless if we only talk
about you know more becoming
more lenient on crime.
And speaking of lenient I want
the public to know that this
bill matches the most lenient
policy in the nation when our
And I do give credit to the bill
sponsor.
For backing off of that to not
make this an out liar.
tracks state legislatures they
had Nevada and West Virginia.
At the fifteen years and and yes
there is some case law and other
Now madam president I I do have
some questions about the bill
and I'd like to ask if the bill
sponsor would yield.
You will Senator yes madam
amendment about first re murder
for peace officer that that was
taken from the capital felony
section and I I'd like to know I
didn't ask Miss in committee.
relevant as it pertains to your
bill for the serious youthful
offenders.
Madam president we don't have
the death penalty.
And then.
If we go back just a couple two
our capital felony
maybe I could be a little more
specific and sorry if I wasn't
specific enough if the youthful
hire for murder of a witness.
The sentencing protocol is
dash fifteen point three.
For a serious youthful offender
so I I just want to see how this
section thirty one dash eighteen
better understand that
I'm not this is not a trick
question or anything I'm I'm
just I'm just really trying to
understand.
Thank you madam chair I believe
on on page eight.
Subsection a.
thirty two dash to dash twenty
shall be entitled to a parole
hearing so it covers the it just
covers the criminal statutes.
That are that are covered by
this
By the statute.
Thank you relevant sentencing
provision to guide the judge so
so what I hear you saying is.
It is I'm still not
understanding let let me just
And my my question pertains to
either one of these serious
youth offender youthful offender
sentences in adult.
life imprisonment without
possibility of parole and I do
understand there's been a U. S.
Supreme Court ruling that's not
going to allow juveniles to be
sentence life without parole so
shall be sent to life
imprisonment so it it doesn't
mention the death penalty I just
I I just want to.
Make sure we've had this
discussion and if you're telling
what the bill does.
and so just to route to
reiterate then present Senator
are are you telling me that this
sentencing guideline for capital
distinction between.
The judge's sentencing which is
affected and I I appreciate the
correction which is affected in
What the sentence is not changed
all that have the two sentences
in place all that happens is
board will consider all of the
factors all of the legal factors
to be considered and make the
decision about whether there
should be a release of this
individual.
questioning but I I really do
want to understand this bill
because I do have a lot of
police officers as constituents
in in in my district and I want
to be able to.
Circumstances were a capital
felony has been found so the the
this juvenile they once again
sentenced to life imprisonment
without possibility of release
or parole so when a judge looks
shall not issue.
A life without parole for this
capital felony is is that how it
works.
and if that were the case then
they would applaud this section
the new material which is parole
for children sentences adults
that's the point of this change.
without possibility of parole I
mean what what how do they how
does how does it it reconciling
this not a critique of your bill
I just I'm trying to understand
sentencing in our criminal
justice system I'm just trying
to understand how is a judge
going to look at a a juvenile
that has committed a capital
felony when when our state
bill and it says shall not be or
you know Shelby Shelby Shelby
eligible have how does how do we
reconcile those two or do we
need to reconcile those.
a general.
At two so so you would apply the
statute that is specifically
referring to individuals that's
the principles of statutory
construction and that's how you
sentenced as an adult.
I would wear what I thought we
in may for sentencing as an
adult I mean they're they're
still they're still considered
Thank you thank you for walking
through it with me because it's
it's it's is you can tell it
madam president it's it's a
important issue for me when we
and it's my understanding that
even when a juveniles committing
the worst of the worst.
That they were still going to
open them up for the possibility
But sometimes you have to have
their consequences to your
actions.
And there can be forgiveness
there can be redemption and the
person can still be.
the setting of capital felonies.
Of the public understands we're
doing on this bill thank you Mr
then I.
thank you madam president I I
did Taylor was going to be brief
because I simply wanted to to
invite senator Ortiz Pino to
dinner because clearly.
just barely differently and
that's what we need to do but we
have to go Dutch because I'm not
buying him dinner on just going
to take you.
Thank you share further debate
Senator Diamond.
New Mexico's rising crime rates
was advertised to be a
legislative priority I quickly
learned that what some
On the life of a convicted cop
killer.
Over slain law enforcement
officer.
That vote and this vote will
Nicole Chavez.
J..
Was murdered.
COVID I never understand you and
I may never understand the grief
that you carry with you every
day.
This is a get out of jail card
The disrespect displayed by this
piece of legislation is
distasteful.
And it is offensive because it
day and the group you carry
every day.
Thank you madam president.
Roll call madam president.
not debatable and there's been a
request for a roll call.
For debate continuing debate our
motion it's.
So the clerk will call the roll
on a table in motion.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senator
savant is no Senator Diamond
Senator Gonzalez no Senator
Gonzales now Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen now Senator
Hemphill.
Soto.
Senator how to meal.
Senator huh me on no Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
senator Munoz.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator pope no Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez no senator
No Senator Sedillo Lopez no
Senator share Senator sure yes
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stewart no Senator
Tallman.
Senator Coleman now senator
Wirth Senator Wirth no Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Campos now.
This.
affirmative twenty three in the
negative the tabling motion has
failed Senate.
Back on debate of the bill I
don't have anyone else on my
It has I said I don't think that
having compassion for the
victims for closes having
compassion.
And I don't believe that it's
right to throw them away.
I think children especially have
inviting me to dinner or not but
the answer is yes if if he is
But.
Across the country this issue
has received bipartisan support.
Virginia Ohio in Wyoming the
same second chance bill had
Republican Sanchez.
And so I'm sorry that is not
bipartisan.
West Virginia in two thousand
fourteen.
In the years since the passage
of that law there has been no
known person released who
committed a new offense.
one point one four percent.
Over eight hundred thirty people
nationwide have now been
released based on this kind of
legislation they are starting
Well they're starting businesses
mentoring at risk Rick's rescues
and feeding hungry families lack
access to food.
Avid brain development talks
about hot technician and cold
cognition.
It simply hot competition is
cognition colored by emotion and
impulsivity.
Cold cognition is cognitive
This madam president move that.
Senate bill forty three.
Do now pass and I ask unanimous
We are voting on Senate bill
forty three there's been a
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
senator gray goes.
Senator Gallegos Now Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey just Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Senator Moores Senator Moores no
Senator one else.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville knows Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator probe.
Senator propias Senator
Senator Sanchez no senator
moody's Senators maintenance Now
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator severe Lopez yes Senator
sure.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Twenty three fifteen.
With.
Thank you madam president thank
you members of the body.
We're going to remain on third
reading and go to item number
nine with senator Neville.
For placing sent a more number
six on final passage has been
taking and it is now subject to
debate another substation.
Senator Neville to explain the
crime and justice institute will
be willing to pay for the costs
of the study this is a study to
try to come up with a better
system of our jails the counties
administer on the state I think
the it's a quite a very variety
and there's a lot of disparity
in the types of services that
we're able to provide for
inmates and the costs are very
for the for the jail and I
became the county commissioners
fighting with the city on who
paid what for the jail and I
found myself fighting with the
state for transportation costs
and it shouldn't be that way
co sponsor senator Ortiz a panel
for additional comments center
Casey panel thank you madam
president as senator Neville did
a great job of laying out with
that what it's all about I would
jail maintenance this is a way
of taking a look at ways in
which the jail and prison
systems might be able to
collaborative and be United as
some states have done thank you
but it is an opportunity to
perhaps expand a little bit on
the hearings that we've had in
the Judiciary Committee this
session on this issue and I rise
and support strong support of
think it's important that we
register that.
Court proceeding and the
consequences of that.
The consequences of the
McClendon K..
McLendon agreement McClinton
came about because there was
overcrowding at the jail when it
was the in in downtown
Albuquerque.
And when the manager was
criteria health care mental
mental health needs nurses
etcetera.
Despite the fact that the jail
in Albuquerque has now been
moved from downtown the downtown
in place to make clinic remote
says that if you shoplift in
Albuquerque.
And you keep it under five
hundred dollars and other crimes
like that you will be arrested.
fence we we need to be
recognizing that we're with the
tails wagging the dog here.
We're to keep our jail
populations low and the expenses
of jail population in
sponsor I think that was
important to we take a little
time to recognize that that
there are solutions to crime.
And they're good solutions to
crime that we know will work and
this is one of them looking at
Thank you Senator Ingle.
Thank you madam president and I
I hope that to.
When we study you know there are
over there we border Texas and
many of our particularly our
local prisoners are when we get
to credit or or put into and
this is a jail system in Texas.
bad care but there's a
difference in cost that we need
to realize and take a hard look
at because for some reason.
can do a better job running our
our local present for the
shorter sentences for people in
local jails because that's a
heck of a expense on our local
economy that hopefully there's
take a look at some of those
things thank you.
Thank you any other debate.
A singer and senator Neville to
close thank you madam president
there are a lot of reasons why
ten man jailed doesn't have near
the facilities to deal with
these issues as the three
thousand person bed jail might
so with that madam president I
move that sent memorial number
We are voting on Senate memorial
six tiers seat this if you wish
to vote no please raise your
hand.
school picture down from up
there and put on the floor well
iterations.
For.
By a vote of thirty four in the
Fuhrman of none of the negative
Sir Peter Wirth thank you madam
president Mrs that we go that
our visit an ounce agency
miscellaneous seeing no
objection or on that order of
business announcements
If there's no objection we're
taking Senate bill one fifty
nine off the president's table
and putting it on today's
calendar thank you madam
consent that the rules be
suspended at the journal show
all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session.
The Senate will come to order.
approval at the Judiciary
Committee.
There's no objection it is so
ordered.
This Peter Wirth I thank you
madam president unanimous
reading of legislation Senator
Ingle.
Thank you madam president madam
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rule be suspended the record
Senator Ingle to explain the
bill.
Madam president this bill
basically is a bill that to us
sponsored.
state source of tax for your
money that did the and this
retirement program cost the
citizens of the state absolutely
nothing.
forty percent and so madam
president Mr what this bill does
is it changes the for the word
eleven to fourteen and that this
goes into the formula for the
legislative retirement.
unanimous consent to excuse
Senators o'neill and Shendo
until they return to the
chamber.
Any other debate or other random
motions.
Senate bill fifty one fifty nine
do now pass us on Washington
isn't that the record show the
role is been called polos voted
in the affirmative except those
No more accurate maybe.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president Eunan's that we go
that our visit messages from the
house.
There's no objection the reader
will read messages from the
house.
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk channel so
the message from the house has
been received.
Judiciary Committee too who's
been referred Senate bill one oh
three as amended has had it
under consideration and report
same with recommendation that do
Senators servant this move
adoption committee report on
adoption of a favorable
committee report seeing no
objection the committee report
is adopted.
events referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Liz Stefanics chair
Senator Stefanics madam
president I move adoption the
rural and cultural affairs
committee to whom is been
referred house bill eight as
amended has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that do pass
adoption of committee report for
on adoption of the favorable
committee report seeing no
objection the committee report
is adopted.
Senator Wirth.
Senate memorial twenty seven
introduced by Senator Shendo
Senator Pinto and senators to DO
Lopez a memorial affirming New
Senator more L. twenty seven.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered.
Referred to rule seven cents to
financial institutions changing
the permitted percentage rates
for loans pursuant to the New
Mexico bank installment loan act
of nineteen fifty nine The New
making appropriation house bill
one thirty two.
House bill one thirty two have
been read twice by title is
referred.
House bill sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Chandler and act relating to
taxation extending the
technology ready miss gross
receipts tax credit repealing
Having been read twice by title.
Is referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee at cents to Senate
there's no objection on that
order business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you madam president so
Senator Campos has some comments
that he wants to make about food
Senator Campos thank you very
much madam president of course
is today today's New Mexico Food
and farm state and just a few
comments we always talk about
continue to if you will provide
the nutrition to each and every
in person to our elders into our
entire state so with that
there's quite a few people that
here with so many of you as we
all affirmed and we go forward
when we start talking about how
we gonna radic Kate some of the
issues that we do have regarding
deserve there's so many people
that are involved in this
particular initiative and today
we have some of the individuals
with us people like Senator
Stefanics who continues to
to how we can eliminate the
hunger that we have in our state
in there so many more including
all of you that we are here to
enjoy if you will of the fruits
members I go ahead I stand K.
anyone else wishes to make a
statement and then from there I
would like to at least recognize
three or four the champions when
it comes to our agricultural
this year was a rather unique
here the governor put together a
work group across state
and presented a package now I'm
not sure if I'm jumping the gun
but I want to recognize one of
my
And besides the group that is in
the governor's office there's
farm to table there's the young
Senator Campos and every other
person who's involved in this
not only that almost every
person in this Senate has signed
madam president.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much madam
president and thank you Senator
Campos and senators to phonics
state
madam president I just wanted to
recognize and of the south
valley of Albuquerque we have a
farmers left media growers
market the south valley
mainstreet was established in
twenty fifteen paying homage to
a grocery store madam president
Rio Grande located at that the
lotus where's that gateway park
with a vision to highlight the
culture traditions and history
of the south valley and the goal
of creating a space for
recognition again for life I
mean their growers market thank
you madam president thank you.
Senator Hamblen.
Thank you madam president and
residents are fed and that our
farmers are supported you knows
is a member of the task force I
do want to commend kindle Chavez
who was instrumental in
a couple of groups here the
agriculture to a network which
is building New Mexico small
farming economy through
sustainable and regenerative
young folks about sustainable
and traditional farming
techniques there's also Duane
chili Yazzie who's such an
honorable man he is a voice for
the Navajo people about the
food center and their foster
they work on fostering healthy
reliant fair and sustainable
food systems in our state and in
southern New Mexico they've got
these incredible purpose of
service models throughout the
us a look at the farm bill from
the possible north a region
these groups in all of the
others that have been part of
this task force are doing
we're showing is that food
insecurity is still going to be
something that's prevalent in
our rural communities many of us
represent rural communities and
also in urban areas but also our
dollars for the DFA budget
because every time we look at
food that is on our plates it's
because of our local farmers and
so thank you madam president.
Thank you.
grandstanding is is over now on
this issue.
you know I think it's quite
impressive that madam president
three actual farmers in the
chamber.
these things come up and and of
course I'm in support of
farming.
But yet.
As a body will stand up and say
look at us.
We love farming we love small
that the homepod Chrissy is
getting so thick I mean I almost
threw up listening all to all
that madam president.
Just sick of it.
Absolutely sick of it.
Enough is enough.
We can feed way more people if
we didn't pass legislation that
made it impossible to do so.
Thank you.
Of natural resource.
This.
Conservation.
Association that is doing a
part of of the different
programs that budget act culture
from the USDA.
Hello I actually found out about
this is my grandson is
participating in a speech
contest there.
Restoration not permit
desperation but restoration I
don't think desperation is word
is it but.
Thank you Mr president thank
you.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you very much madam
president and I just want to
thank Senator Campos sees been
I fill up my phone in my email
box and whatever called the
hunger free student all rights
and it was this body they got
together we had a lot of great
debate on it as the sponsor I
our children in the middle of
their school day we can take the
focus off of their stomachs and
place it on their studies and I
want to thank the farmers that
are in this body and if you're
listening I hope that you'll
realized.
The just because we're making
sure that every child has a
lunch in the middle there to
school they doesn't mean it's a
healthy lunch and so we just
need to make sure that we
continue that work and and food
and farm and farms are the ones
a a good solid lunch in another
school day thank you madam
president.
Thank you senator Senator Lantis
thank you madam president.
You know the comments one of my
colleagues and I'm gonna go
really prompted me to need to
come from Minnesota New Mexico
New Mexico State University is a
critical part of what we do the
research into water C.
production.
My upbringing with an issue and
government as a partner in
farming.
Representative areas in my
district government is essential
to the dairy industry the
Dona ana county Las was really
because of the foresight of
government going back to the
early nineteen hundreds when
they built hello from your
reservoir.
all the abundance that we do we
wouldn't have anything
resembling Los crucis we're
doing accounting without it.
So I'd like to offer a different
perspective which is a
partnership a true partnership
here today that farming is what
feeds us.
It's a critical part of our
economy it's part of our economy
that's not gonna leave depending
on the way to subsidies our
latest tax breaks.
Enlisted as partners farmers and
government rather than asking
government to get the hell out
of the way.
Thank you madam president.
is the time to tell us about
tomorrow we're coming in
tomorrow at eleven Senator souls
thank you madam chair Senate
education will be meeting same
time same place three eleven at
meeting tomorrow at nine AM in
room three twenty one.
Thank you US senator Munoz
office thank you madam chair
Senate finance will go in that
state and that three fifteen
through the minimum wage bill
and some language issues on
house bill two so we can start
wrapping up house bill two and
get it printed so thank you
Our room three twenty two we
have built some Senator Diamond
Senator Lopez Senator Tomlinson
remorse Senator Woods cinema
Thank you madam president thank
you members that's it for today
so unanimous consent the Senate
stand in recess until eleven
o'clock tomorrow morning.
If there's no objection we will
