Hi a girls and once we do those
are four bills will have Senate
consent calendar number one.
And I'll announce what's on
there and we'll pass that we get
legislation and ideal Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino for item number
forty five run third reading
Senators Regis reminder just to
This is a little complicated how
state government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill two
thirty four as twice amended.
Mr president this is a measure
that strengthens the
guardianship of reforms that we
undertook some years ago for the
last two years we've been
been working on it is come up
with this bill it authorizes the
office of guardianship under the
developmental disabilities
planning council to recruit and
annual review and other
monitoring.
Activities of its service
providers what we're trying to
do is strengthen the
accountability of this program
So basically what we've done is
given them some authority
knowing that if they're really
going to make this work they're
going to need some provided
support in terms of increased
strips away it's a very simple
and it's being prepared it
strips away the.
Mmhm the amendment that was put
on in our Senate.
that red in okay then we'll go
see can move explained
amendment.
The reader to read.
Okay Senate floor amendment
Senator disincentive to move an
assignment Mr president and I
move the of that and then floor
Senate floor amendment number
one to
Thank you senator the point of
this is that the state auditor's
office at the at the eleventh
hour showed up at at the first
Senate hearing on this bill in
the Indian.
that that means this bill would
be doomed so rather than than
than risk that I've I've just
opted to pull it off ask the
Thank you Mr president
Can you help us out just a
little bit Senator with what
Because of the time but as the
No what did it do in is that a
good idea to remove it.
Mr president this was put on
specifically at the request of
the state auditor since there's
accounting procedures to make
sure these accounting procedures
can be adopted in the near
future but we don't have any
Mr president and and senator
brand yes thank you Mr president
percent etcetera.
Senator Woods.
don't want to go back for
concurrence because it's so late
in the day.
But you truly feel that this is
not important enough to to take
Mr president just to be sure I
would like to ask unanimous
consent to have my expert
witnesses to be available so I
disabilities planning council
where the guardianship Authority
resides and the house sponsor
the bill Representative Marian
Matthews Matthews.
handled within M. O. U. rather
than than putting it into the
law so they feel comfortable
with taking it off.
Senator Woods thank you Mr
line of defense against abuse
neglect exploitation.
And.
You know there's some talk about
a audit report and the.
If you tell me it's good it's
good thank you Mr president
thank you senator Senator was
any further debate on the
amendment centers.
adopt Senate floor amendment
number one to the house local
government I forgive.
But is it a state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Senator there's a request to
adopt senator member number one.
By unanimous consent.
Say no objection the Senate has
information you want to share on
the big.
Mr president that's it the bill
basically is the next step in
these reforms of the
a comprehensive the package a
couple of years ago but but we
still been been been.
Hamstrung by the by the
inability to adequately
finance and monitoring
Thank you we do have debate
senator Senator.
Thank you Mr president of the
sponsor would yield that I would
like to point out that.
met little or no choice in the
matter.
Thank you Mr president Senator
so you know I I understand it's
but my brother was her guardian.
Because I was in Europe and my
other brother was an Asian so
the only one left was the one
that became the guardian.
We'll have to go to court and
say Hey here's the deal and so
because she lives with me most
of the time we would I took her
to court my brother showed up
Senator you better get on here
too because well I don't really
trust your brother he's a judge
to and so anyway so we did that
and we went through the stuff
good of moving that that the
judge actually checked into the
try to see what was going on and
now we know what we're supposed
to do and so we're ready to do
that.
But how do we make sure that.
That all of a sudden especially
the volunteers here volunteer of
So is the protection for for the
guardians as well as for the
Gardi ease.
Mr president and and and the
Senator in your city the
situation you described in your
there's no family that can come
to the judge and say we would
like to be the guardian when
somebody needs to have a
guardian appointed then this
office of guardianship is
is make them much more
accountable to have to be bill
have to be licensed elect to be
trained and we avoid some
thereby we hope will avoid some
of the problems that have
the depth of it until the.
Of Senator white's Bill.
So I do have a.
So we're we're gonna have this
so why why did we cut ourselves
out of at least having a member
on the board.
So Mister president and and
senator share
because it's a national model
and because the the courts have
jurisdiction over these cases
cases still resides with the
courts and that's why the
committee this advisory to this
program is named by the Supreme
Court.
Okay Mister president how might
who's who we expect to volunteer
for this and how do we expect to
run it.
Is present.
Mr president Senator share
miss McCoy says that
students in counseling and
social work and sociology and
psychology and they'll they'll
work in those jurisdictions and
professional volunteers to do
this work and and the home
visitors basically are the ones
that make the home visits and
and and just kind of check to
see if if what the guardians are
much for your help.
Thank.
Any further debate senators.
I see no further debate centered
is a printer to close on the
Committee substitute for House
Bill to thirty four as three
times amended do now pass and I
just for a roll call Senator is
your seats please we're voting.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
yes Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator great yes senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Hermio Senator had a
meal yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes senator
Neal.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Excuse me Senator Stewart DS
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman as senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Morris yes.
passed the Senate center digital
thank you very much Mr president
thank you members of the Senate
we're gonna go on to item number
nineteen and all yield to
With that house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
education house bill one twenty
eight as amended on final
passage has been taken is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
eight is the result of the house
memorial fifty seven task force
in the feedback that they got a
dealing with ethical behavior in
in insurance payouts associate
with claims of improper touching
and every receive approximately
nine point five claims per year
and this bill that addresses
were under this bill the
applicants for school employment
includes a process for what
happens after report is made it
investigating reports of ethical
misconduct and expands on the
training of individuals within
the schools and requires current
Committee and with that I'd be
open for questions.
Senators we're debating House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for house bill one twenty eight
is amended Senator Kernan.
this this is strictly a
different kind of a different
bucket or whatever with regard
to abuse and neglect correct.
with school personnel.
Well thank you Mr president I
know the the task force worked
very hard on this my only
concern is under the ethical
sure that that we're really
clear about whether teacher a
first grade teacher of second
grade teacher says to a child
you know you need to go get at
the back of the line things like
in the bill and it's more just a
disciplinary issues so are there
protections in there for that
particular type of thing Mr
presence under current and then
as I recall from the
an accusation would be quickly
dismissed by the principal who
gets the first
Report of its shall we say and
forward and I know this is
needed and and we do we need to
take care of our kiddos thank
you.
Any further debate senators.
do now pass and ask for a roll
call vote Senator is more
voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
the lawyer.
Senator serve on this Senator
Cervantes yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
senator do should be no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator pro.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator.
Okay Senator sure.
Senator socio Senator should
funding.
Senator depending yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
as Senator Stewart.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes.
By a vote of thirty seven the
affirmative Sir on the negative
house Judiciary Committee
item number twenty million to
Senator by the.
Thank you very much Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all options for placing House
floor substitute for House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
I see no objections center but
it explained the bill thank you
very much Mr president I believe
in amendment is being passed
around to go to that here in
just a moment but essentially Mr
Mexico the bill requires that
the a group trying to do the
testing has to notify the
department of transportation and
has to make sure that they have
a fault of the document the plan
which is the requirement today
and allows them to do this
testing in a platooning fashion
with drivers made available in
development committee substitute
for house bill two seventy is
amended amendment sponsored by
senator Michael Padilla center
for there to move explain the
to president we are burning
daylight here and night lights
and that what this does is the
amendment that we put on state
and Senate tax business and
transportation simply added six
additional months to prepare the
them approximately a year and
three months to get there your
informants Mr president to get
that all this together so that
the Department transportation
and the advocates and the
sponsors are very comfortable
with Senator yield Senator the
yield I will Mister president
thank you Mr president status
Senator I know we're trying to
make sure this the house doesn't
have to concur but what was the
reasoning
who was at this committee.
Center for them yes Mr president
I just described and explained
and I appreciate senator Morris
amendment to take it back to its
original date of the amendment
was added by Senate tax
business.
And the transportation committee
for this Senator Padilla thank
you Mr president I don't I don't
have that information advocates
were
I'm interested groups and
organizations or maybe even some
companies involved that all got
And of course the US president
of way to the actual due to the
bill for smaller questions of
thank you miss our is present
thank you senator any further
scares me pretty bad Mr
president Senator understudy up
for a.
maybe not so bad that the
technologies there.
But bad in the fact that we're
position here to to lose jobs in
New Mexico.
And so with that in mind you
state that you strike the
amendment nine understand that.
analysis it says the committee
sub for House Bills to seventy
removes the permitting.
Of automated vehicles and sets
president and senator why would
they make that change.
I thank you Mr president and the
just on the first item yes the
The industry will change it was
forward you when you transition
to this particular technology Mr
president there's going to be
retrofitting of roads there's
jobs is going to be retrofitting
of trucks there's jobs there's
fruition as a result of this
this transfer at some point so
that's just item on item number
one on item number two can you
please restate the second part
your question Mr president.
That.
I think I've got a Mr president
you jog my memory you got it.
Yes I do Mr president thank you
development now they're ready to
do the testing they've
identified New Mexico as a lot
of you know wide open roads at
one wide open spaces where they
Okay maybe I'm reading it wrong
Mr president sorry about that
Senator my I. my eyes must be
Senator Tallman Senator Brandt
the US present with the sponsor
yield.
Center for the ideal I will
happily to the newest homeowner
Thank you I I actually really
appreciate that offers present
summer so the the amendment that
you're striking is the tax
amendment which really just
leeway and then as we know we're
trying to get things done in the
last Lente hours of the session
Mr president so that was an
agreeable item to everybody
involved in this president
I mentioned a few moments ago
this now allows a fourteen
months rather than twenty months
and and all parties involved
Mister president have decided
that this is a good move and
this is for larger Thomas
vehicles but I actually look
forward to the day when I can
buy a car that can drive me to
Disney world so I can sleep all
the way there thank you thank
you Mr president I feel exactly
So I don't have a question
Sierra with Senator Mister chair
I have a question on the
amendment this question the bill
will put you on the bill Senator
number one by a unanimous
consent.
Has been requests for roll call.
Welcome to president the clerk
to call the roll.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator from
the last year.
Senator sure on this Senator
serve on this now Senator
Diamond.
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan.
McKenna yes senator Morris
senator Morris knows senator
Munoz.
Senator mo nos no senator
Neville.
Padilla Senator Padilla yes
Senator Penn Bill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Tallman yes senator
By a vote of twenty nine
affirmative I the negative the
Senate's adopted senator member
number one we're back on the
so this legislation came
together over about a two year
period is you know I I I have
the the fortune to to be the
chair the vice chair of the
committee on science technology
a couple years ago but Senator
Gonzalez I'm asking to say a few
words before we proceed Mr
president Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president and
members so you know again this
is that we have this done this
mobility study and just given
this you know very much the
state of the art of what's
the plant tuning of of big
vehicles such as our big trucks
but going back to
they had on the the tuning it
still requires drivers in all of
the just do requires a different
way of the vehicle momentum you
transportation alliance which of
New Mexico is part of that and
you're seeing more and more of
this and it is the future and
in a whole different state of
you know how this is working the
again of New Mexico is a very
this so with that you know I
will back again Mr president to
Senator Padilla.
Followed by Senator Steinborn
Senator Tallman.
Thank you Mr president and there
will be a sponsor.
Senator Padilla the hills Center
the original bills effective
July.
Twenty second and so now the
amendment changes the January
one two thousand twenty three is
that correct.
Thank you Mr president the
twenty twenty two its original
enactment date in the bill.
just goes to show I wasn't
paying attention.
how to operate it so I will be
able to operate this legally
until July twenty two.
Mr president you will be able to
do that because it's not a heavy
vehicle it's it's a vehicle
that's already quipped and and
Mr president I yield back thank
you Sierra Meredith further
debate Senator Steinborn.
Mr presence either just a few
questions and I'm just trying to
understand the bill this
presents Senators the state
department of transportation
support this legislation.
president and question why do
these vehicles need to yes on
New Mexico roads as I understand
that as opposed to testing
tracks or some other kind of.
have here Mr president lend
itself to this type of testing
when you're trying to test on
tracks you can't quite
economically bill tracks that
large that would be item number
one item number two the
typography of the State Mr
operation.
Senator Steinborn.
Okay thank you Mr president Mr
president I see that one of the
that name if you hold one moment
thank you.
Senator Senator would you like
to fund a fan and friend to.
Mr president I would like to
this.
is Gerry involved as with the
department transportation
unanimous consent to allow Jerry
to assist me to.
See no objections so fruit
center thank you Mr president so
things are possible.
Senator Steinborn Mr president
and is no reflection on
legislation at all it's
interesting I'm trying to
understand it.
without a push for these types
of bills and sounds like you
know I know that a fact the
Germany used to sit in a seat
established a baseline bill that
we're just adding on to and it
does seem like a logical
progression I just always
wonder.
Where we know where this thing's
coming from it is helpful to
know that our department of
transportation is behind it so
again.
Senator for bringing this and
I'll just keep listening to
debate thank you thanks Senator
Steinborn we do have further
Thank you Mr president and.
Senator.
If we're going to be allowing
for testing of these vehicles in
our state.
Are there other protections
built in around
would be are able to be made
whole.
Yes Mr president thank you and
to the good kind sponsor I'm
sorry the good kind Senator yes
so they have to submit to before
insurance that would include
what roads are going to be
utilizing all those things.
Thank you Mr president thank you
that that's already and and roll
through the department of
transportation for anybody that
would use our roads for this
purpose but let me ask my expert
just make sure.
Senator is accurate they do have
Okay thank you Mr president
thank center five million
dollars in liability insurance
or or what what what kind what
kind of insurance that that
Any further debate senators.
Senator Moores.
earlier and how Senator who was
just started to talk about some
of the questions I had on that
is.
And I think agency presents and
Senator Steinborn answer Duhigg
were just touch on some of
things I jotted down as is
covered just yes or no Mr
president of video Senator
Padilla thank you Mr president
yes you are correct and so this
presents an overview of what is
it like is it a weight limit
right now Mr president Senator.
Senator the.
Thank you Mr president with my
expert thank you.
the plan would have to consist
of of you know weight of the
vehicle
and and this is about you know
these are larger vehicles
there's there's a likelihood
participate if anything occurs
you know instantly and so all
those things are put in place
ahead of time.
Thank you Mr and so Senator
these are.
senator Tom has we're talking
about big like rig eighteen
Wheeler kind of vehicles correct
and that is correct Mr president
and so the visual I had my head
is that there would be someone
president I believe in terms
called platooning.
Thank you Mr president would it
just be limited to one actual
vehicle or is it like the
Thank you Mr president yes so it
would only be two vehicles that
are actually in the autonomous
state there would be a lead
vehicle in front of them of a
amount of data Mr president to
put all this together.
It was present thank you senator
so I'm I'm trying to visualize
as a this is like on I. forty
Mister president senator.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you Mr president this is
said primarily so you're going
down this platooning of two rigs
and that the pull off are they
allowed to pull off state and
Senator going on I ten and that
on side streets through
communities.
Thank you Mr president so the
plan that they would submit will
will let the department
transportation no law
enforcement center know exactly
where they're going to be but
they'll have to come from
somewhere so when I said
city to get on to the on to the
the the interstate and then if
they have to exit they would
have a plan depending on how
happens if of a car pulls
between these two vehicles you
said they're separated are they
would like just behind each
other I'm thinking of going down
Connection between the two
vehicles agency presents under.
Thank.
Thank you Mr president yes so
that's why the whole plan needs
to be put together in one of the
things is that the the
truth of be the.
I don't know what it's called
the lead believe vehicle and the
the trailing vehicle and the law
enforcement following them
individual they will be
yards for because of football so
that's a hundred yards was
president of football field
that's pretty lengthy distance
some long way for me to run Mr
vehicles thank you Mr president
know that when you referring
about a fast runner you meant
the actual president of the
state Senate not not this person
over here I know that the
distance from whatever vehicle
come between.
So the okay I think I got it on
the an agency present so source
to vehicles and we charge
whatever fee were charging for
them to go through New Mexico.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you Mr president.
so the fees are for any vehicle
participating in the test have
to pay the fees that they would
normally pay for waking distance
and impact on to the food for
tuning question before and I
that you know if we do have to
come out of Mr we were talking
about earlier the getting on the
freeway then they're activating
the technology.
the second driver okay thank you
Mr president so the answer last
question and so it has this been
and it gets back to what senator
do it was asking about liability
Yes Mr president the national
highway transportation safety
board is actually weighed in and
allow this to proceed in the
United States now okay source on
this president and since it's
is the census experimental will
they have higher liability than
say say fed ex truck or someone
like that hit someone all right
now because a serious damage
happen state fed ex or someone
hit you.
Thank you Mr president of.
Center for them thank you Mr
president yes so so the
acceptable policy across the
cases Senator Stewart trucks
have hit people and it's been
much greater than five million
dollars sometimes hundred
seventy five million and up from
there with that with this limit
instances experimental not
proven technology would these
companies so I think you Sir was
Google would they be as liable
if they had come out fees and
select that fed ex example I
matter is that they are
accepting a five million dollar
policy whatever that may wind up
being that's what they've
decided to do for this
particular project I can't speak
to anything beyond that.
get more in damages if if
something goes wrong or when
something goes wrong with this
production expert that this
isn't setting a liability cap is
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you Mr president so yeah
even though this is the
experimental technology there's
a lot of experimentation and
does that go on on our
are accepting department
transportation is a global wants
to allow these projects based on
acceptable levels of of coverage
and the level that they said is
liability is not going to be
more than five million I I hear
I I hear what you're saying
Senator and only put you on the
spot I think is the expert
witnesses and answer the
it's being it's the Dow capping
any potential liability of this
company since the falls under
this experimental category are
they covered under New Mexico's
president moment one moment
please.
give you is that they've they're
gonna accept the five million
dollar
of the policy for this type of
testing and any other a policy
that would require would be
blame the senator from no this
isn't as expertise maybe one of
our.
Trial attorneys could yield of
Senator savant this is a wake
service office would you.
has been under this experimental
project the Thomas vehicles from
eighteen wheelers opportunity to
the state there's a five million
dollar requirement for insurance
experimental program would to
the damages won a accident
happens and there's liability
would potentially are we capping
claims act's insensitive New
Mexico experiment program or any
other caps were put on liability
agency president centers our
office Senator about this Mr
president center now this is
go above five million the point
of some still be able to recoup
those they want their cap on
what they could recruit Mister
president senator.
The front center the requirement
is a five million dollar policy
that just means that you have to
point of still would potentially
get adjusted.
You know they have a five
million dollars cap it still
doesn't limit that correct.
This presents a that's correct
the policy requirements do not
I appreciate that is present
thank any further we do have for
the debate we have Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president with the
senator yield for another
actually has a preemption clause
and that.
For a preventing prohibiting any
local government from being able
to an activity ordinance
I thank you Mr president and
Senator Steinborn so the
legislation was developed
In the manner that it's been
Concern and generally opposed to
preemption preemption so.
Yeah and I also read the
the path so I I guess.
I don't know I guess I'm a I
just have a lot more questions
and that a the benefit of a
See no further debate center by
their clothes on the bill.
Thank you very much Mr president
thank you for the excellent
questions I thought they were
all very good we learned a lot
about but Thomas vehicles even
fully developed and also puts us
in a scenario where we're gonna
bring those new very diversified
jobs to our state in this is
very forward thinking and
progressive way of doing
twice amended do now pass and
ask for a roll call vote centers
we're voting to your seats
please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes Sierra the
lot in.
Senators around this centers
around is yes Senator Diamond
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
of.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle passes Senator
pope.
Senator propias Senator
Lopez yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator share.
Senator shared no Senator
Shendo.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Tallman yes senator dole then
yes senator Wirth.
Senator Baca no.
Senator gray goes.
Senator Gallegos now.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes.
Mr president.
Senator Lopez unanimous consent
I have over twenty in the
formative eleven AM negative
house for substitute for.
Committee for H. B. two seven
item that's going to be item
number twenty one and only able
to Senator gave us.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the Senate that the
substitution seeing no objection
Senator Gallegos to explain the
bill.
This is an appreciate the
opportunity of this bill.
require oversight from regional
housing authorities.
That is currently done.
Of through mortgage finance
authority but this is
Not stand for questions.
Senator example you do have an
expert witness.
Mr president I can have
unanimous consent I'd ask the.
Chris who would be my expert
witness I see no objections so
Apologize and take hearing into.
administration for disbursement
to MFA for training and
oversight image for this cut
want to the rural housing
authorities.
federal housing assistance
program would.
We stand for questions senators
we're debating house bill one
ninety six as amended.
Senator Steinborn.
Authority is something that
people in my neck of the woods
you now have a lot of history
with them
we Mr president center once upon
We put the NMFA we created the
NMFA and doesn't need them as an
oversight agency of Housing
Authority and.
authorities that we are tasking
to build affordable housing in
the state of New Mexico so
Mister president senator.
Is there a problem with having
MFA.
Mr president and center MFA had
no problem with the oversight
they're just trying to get it
under just federal oversight.
before and
So I respectfully I I would like
to keep legislative oversight so
I'm inclined to be opposed to
the bill I'm gonna keep listenin
but
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president and so
I'm I'm just thinking about the
projects in my community and
basically I think the and I may
my community thank do they go
through do they go through the
mortgage finance authority it
could you check with your expert
Mister president.
Senator Kernan would you would
you be open to yielding to
senator to subpoena yes yes Mr
president thank Senator Ortiz Y.
authority for the last two years
has been hearing that that HUD
is who funds these programs the
federal agency funds them the
mortgage finance authority has
about the scandal in Los crucis
you is she did she did.
Asked that we give the mortgage
finance authority some kind of
of of responsibility but they
and and providing oversight and
so mortgage finance authority
said great let's if if it's okay
with you we'd like to back off
and let you take it and handle
it for us.
hurt has authority over so when
I have an issue and get a call
from a constituent that is
housed in one of those projects
I just pick up the phone and
call the expert that the
I think that's what I hear you
saying is that correct Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino Mr president
Senator Kernan yes it and and
the interim committee had a
thorough discussion of it I
there really is no reason to
expect MFA which which doesn't
do the oversight of the federal
funding and in those the
thirties are funded by head and
they do the oversight so there's
regrettable when you did that I
think things are going pretty
well right now thank you.
Any further questions Senator
David.
like it looks like in one of the
the house committees there is an
addition that would.
Allow the the state auditor to
wondering why.
Why that language was taken out
that seems separate from just
just removing the oversight of
the and and the.
And NMFA.
Hi my expert witnesses they
adopt talk to the state
auditor's office and they're
okay with where the amended.
Center question.
so all thank you.
Thank you any further questions
Senators.
do now pass and ask for rural
call vote Senator seats for
voter house bill one eighty six
as amended.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez.
The Lopez yes Senator McKenna no
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
senator to subpoena all.
Very.
Senator Pirtle passes Senator
pope.
moody's Senator Schmidt is yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator souls know Senator
Senator dole many as senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator says the office.
Thirty one in the affirmative
eleven the negative house bill
Senator is we're gonna go on to
the Senate consent calendar
number one.
No school discrimination for
hair will yield to senator pope.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
say no objection Senator pope to
explain the bill you Mr
president house bill twenty nine
twice amended is the same here
bill is Senate bill eighty
president would Senator pope
yield Senator yield are you Mr
president thank you Mr present
quickly I just noticed that has
twice amended were the members
track in the bill that we I
what happened was the house bill
went through was twice amended
and those amendments were put on
a committee substitute force
Senate bill eighty on the Senate
side so what was approved and
Say no further debate center
pope to close.
Mr president I move that house
bill twenty nine twice amended
do now pass and ask for a roll
call vote.
Senator.
Senator bread yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
senator guy it goes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Just for the.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator by the.
Senator by the A. S. Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator songes.
Senator Sweetser yes senators
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Woods.
amended has passed the Senate
center pulled.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you to the chamber where to go
on to item number three that's
house bill sixty six as amended
taken for placing House Bill
sixty six as amended on final
passage in that it now be up to
the debate amendment or
substitution I see no objections
And secure transactions comport
conforming provisions of the
uniform commercial code a to to
the official texted so basically
all it does is it changes to
transaction and does other minor
Language cleanups uses a defined
term public finance transactions
amendment to a major change in
so that applies to all states
Anyone wishing debate.
I see none Senator Baca close.
Thank you Mr president move
house bill sixty six
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Browne.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Morris yes senator one
knows.
Senator o'neil yes senator due
to be no Senator do should be
known as senator by the.
Senator by the a yes Senator
Pinto.
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez yes senator
smitteez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senators
development.
Senator Senator Steinborn.
Well there you are.
Hurry hurry Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
By a vote of forty two in the
affirmative on the negative
house bill sixty six as amended
has passed the Senate Senator
Baca thank you Mr president
thank you members of body.
We're moving on to the next item
I know there's a lot of activity
please keep the volume to a
minimum Senator Shendo thank you
Mr president the hopes.
manage the center the Senate the
records show that.
All action for place in a house
bill two forty five with the
budget close.
Final passage has been taken and
then it is now subject to debate
Interestingly enough of has to
do with that one comma.
Of
the last year we passed the.
There was a a comma left off the
definition of grid modernization
is subsection sixty two dash
eight dash one three.
Of not having that comma.
that is doing
is to make sure that as we
modernize our our grid that the
substations are are part of that
so with that Mr president I I
a lot of people discount commas
and how important they are and
and a lot of people realize
common save lives Mr president.
You know if if you say something
like let's see grandma.
that's a matter of opinion right
there.
Any further debate.
See none Senator Shendo thank
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
around this Senator Cervantes
yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs.
Senator great yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Morris yes senator one
or.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
yes Senator Stewart a.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
Senator Sweetser yes Senators
committees.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator Cervantes yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Wirth you want to log.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator Baca.
committees senators meetings yes
forty.
I have a forty ten affirmative
on the negative house bill two
forty five with emergency clause
item that's going to be item
number five house bill one fifty
five workforce training.
Requirements and I'll you'll to
Senator Diamond thank you Mr
to debate amendment or
substitution no objections and
environment explained the bill
thank you Mr president this is a
pretty straightforward bill that
is been brought to us by
Representative Candie Sweetser
and makes permanent the reduced
residency requirement under the
drop training incentive program
J. to.
When the training is provided
close in the bill.
Thank you Mr president I asked
for that house bill one fifty I
do now pass and I ask for a roll
call vote Senator seats where
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey Senator Hickey yes
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes the McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator one
else.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto yes Senator printer yes
Senator Pirtle.
songes senator Sanchez yes
Senators Wendy's Senator
smitteez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator souls yes senator should
funding.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Munoz.
By a vote of forty one of the
affirmative zero the negative
item number six behavior health
practitioner practitioner
changes house bill one twenty
five IST twice amended all
you'll to center to save you
know thank you Mr president I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate the record show all
objection it feel explained the
bill Senator Mr president this
is a bill that changes the
number of years that it out of
state practitioner must have
been licensed elsewhere if they
and
it's it's it is a response to
the need for additional the met
behavioral health practitioners
in the state we were finding it
difficult to attract them and we
amendment sponsored by Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator anticipate to explain it
moving explain amendment Mr
president I move the adoption of
the of the floor amendment
number one to house bill one
Sanchez that it is it include
masters that we strike master's
or doctoral and insert in lieu
thereof substantially equivalent
and it won't be able to be
implemented so we're striking
and I checked with the Sanchez
she's fine with that and so I
would hope that the that we
could adopt this amendment by a
the amendment yield yes is it
has led to miss president US
senator to spin a little
disturbed tonight that we're
just writing the hard work of
it's was a I'm I'm really
worried that we take pride in
our committee work here in the
Senate that if we added an
amendment Mr president senator
that is being excluded when I
houses slowing down and that's
the problem is sufficient so you
walk us through the amendment
and why it was added on in the
first place agency presents
bill that doesn't include the
the essence of it that doesn't
change the essence of it and
when I asked her she said we'll
work on that during the
we can ask or not to debate this
and make sure things are right
now and I promise I'll work with
you on that
Senator Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the rules we suspended at
the record show that all actions
for placing House Bill thirty
one amended on final passage of
one amended updates section
twenty of the code of military
justice and basically updated to
Saying Center pope to close.
Thank you Mr president I move
that house bill thirty one
amended.
Do now pass and ask for a roll
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt
yes senator Byrd.
have on this Senator one does
yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator yes Senator Ingle
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores.
Senator o'neil yes senator to
should be now Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator Padilla.
Senator by the ATS Senator Pinto
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez Senators maybe is yes
senators of the all of this.
So there Lopez yes Senator share
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator souls yes Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Morris.
Senator Moores C. yes.
Thank you Mr president and the
rest the body thank you we're
gonna go back to item number six
and that's also one twenty five
as far as amended we're going to
Senator participate I'll go
ahead and put it on from the
beginning Senator the start all
amended on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution and and do we were
actually dealing with the
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill one hundred
twenty five has twice amended
amendments amendment sponsored
by Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
bill one twenty five.
And this is the this is an
amendment that we put on in ****
when we heard the bill and now
because of of the the
senator Morris did check with
the with people in the house and
and he's agreed that the that
the.
Anything that we're losing by
taking this ammendment off we
yes would be the two thank you
Mr president etcetera
So these doctoral degrees
master's degrees is this
the I. there looks like there's
actually talking about your
specifically it it's on page
twenty three.
Line nineteen.
And that is the marriage and
It's the.
It's actually a general a
president I just hope I can be a
little more flexible for a drug
and alcohol counselor
specifically so thank you thanks
Senators maintenance any further
debate on the amendment.
Say no further debate on the
just that we do it by unanimous
consent that is as a requested
up senator member number one.
By a unanimous consent.
CNN center participate in the
clothes on the bill.
Thank you Mr president I move
that it's that house bill one
twenty five is amended do now
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Senator Candelaria yes senators
have on this Senator Brandt is
yes Senator Diamond Senator
Diamond yes Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Ingle.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Senator need to be now Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino yes Senator
Stewart a.
Senator for the A. S. Senator
Senator pope Senator propias
Senator Rodriguez Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator songes
Senator Sweetser yes Senators
committees.
share Senator sure yes Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senator souls yes Senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
house bill one twenty five is
three times amended has passed
the Senate Senator Pirtle
explains vote and thank you Mr
president as we've all seen the
great Senator do in basketball
is March madness so everybody
pay close attention to Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
One basket in eight years of
planks for the Senate and I
running jump hook thing we've
never seen such thing I was on
the house floor at the time of
display for the house and we
all just stopped in amazement
that this guy.
much Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Joint
Memorial I unpack final passage
has been taken it is now subject
five requests at the L. E. S. C.
and the LESC to create a joint
subcommittee to study the
effects of changes that we have
made to our state public school
formula is at as a mechanism to
meet the significant educational
needs for our diverse student
population and I'll stand for
questions.
thank you Mr president I now
move that house joint memorial I
do now pass and I ask for a roll
call Senator seats where voting.
Senator Byrd passes Senator
Campos Senator Campos yes
senator Candelaria.
goes Senator Gallegos yes
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator good yes Senator Hamblen
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto test
center how to meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator one else.
Senator one yes yes senator
Neville.
senator for the Senator Stewart
AS Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
senators moody's US senators
manage yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator Sedillo Lopez VS
Senator share Senator sure yes
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Baca yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes.
One on to the next item on the
calendar that's going to be.
Actually gonna go on to the is
taxable as can be Senator
Shendo.
Mr president I believe it's
supposed to be house bill ninety
eight.
That's correct senator it's.
House bill ninety eight.
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous into the Senate the
records sold all action for
Is a yes high school ninety
eight as amended.
on final passage has been taken
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
Senator debate in house tax
revenue committee floors
agency bill that a cleans up the
tax code and makes a.
Of several minor but important
administrative changes these
changes will prevent tax
committee the tax smoke a policy
advisory committee and the tax
practitioner by the committee.
The bills of fiscal impacts or
mix of small negatives and small
president of stand for questions
Senator debating and wishing
debate.
Say no debate Senator Shendo.
pass and ask for you the roll
call vote Senator seeds.
Where voting the clerk to call
the roll.
It Senator Brandt yes senator
Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
senator guy it goes.
Senator Gallegos passes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator was a drug test Senator
hanem you.
McKenna yes senator McCain I as
senator Morris.
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores yes senator one
senator do you should be no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator by the.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla yes senator Pete
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo
yes Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator huh I'm here.
Senator had a meal yes.
Forty two in the affirmative
zero the negative house
just want to thank the the
Sanchez on the house side you
know Representative Martinez in
the Representative Harper having
lived in a lot of work in their
tax committee and now that we
have a tax committee on the
senator and welcome
Representative Harper to the
chamber.
Senator Wirth R. thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business messages
from the house on that order
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has concurred in the Senate
amendments to house Education
Committee substitute for House
joint resolution one as amended
Has been received.
sine die.
Just try Senator nice try.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that order business
announcements and most
miscellaneous when that order
business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
seventy eight manufacturing
services gross receipts and I
will present that for
Representative Harper who's
here.
item is item thirty two homemade
food act and I'll be sent
Senator Pirtle so unanimous
By that order business third
reading of legislation and I
yield to.
Senator Wirth.
Brokaw Mr president I don't
think we're supposed to be
allowed to let children be up
here during the session.
Senator Wirth thank.
Are the bill number it's it's
seventy to seventy eight house
bill two seventy eight item
number sixty four.
have no money but apparently
that's one that was must been
read in at some point and then
get on today's calendar support
so what we'll skip over that one
let's do the second one.
amended with the executive
emergency clause on final
passage has been taken and that
is no service debate member
substitution saying no
Amends the.
The election code to allow
Polling places and and tribal
If a polling place is to be
closed that the that the county
has to have permission or at
least consult with the tribe's
in case of an emergency this
pass a.
some of these polling places are
on the tribal reservation and
non tribal members also come to
those polling places so when the
when the community was closed
others outside so that people
can vote and so Mr president of.
I stand for questions.
two thirty one is four times
amended within budget because do
not pass and ask for a roll call
vote.
Senator centers where voting
house bill two thirty one is
four times amended with
emergency clause.
To your seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandt passes senator
Byrd.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
serve on this.
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Diamond.
I'm sorry.
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Ellen yes Senator Hemphill
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator had a meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator morning us yes Senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Stewart AS Senator Pinto
yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator pope.
songes Senator songes yes
Senators committees.
Senator Schmidt is no senators
so they are Lopez.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn Senator Steinborn as
Senator Stewart.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes.
By a vote of forty one in the
affirmative one of the negative.
By a vote of forty in the
formative one of the negative
house bill two thirty one is
four times amended with
emergency clause has passed the
thing miss president us and miss
into the Senate the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that all action has been
taken placing House.
H. W. C. committees of two for
H. B. one seven seven as amended
has been taken is now subject to
can sell under the cottage
industry act within the
environment department thank you
Mr president.
Centers we're debating.
there should be an amendment on
the desk.
Mistras the want to go to that
first here before we go to the
bill will go to the amendment
I at that Representative part
was doing this you know Mr looks
like I'm flying solo tonight
okay.
That we do have the amendment
Pirtle to move and explain them
and then.
Thank you Mr president amendment
on meat when it sold direct to
consumer and then brings in meat
inspections which was house bill
thirty three so that we can
consolidate those bills into one
bill so we have one bill called
Senator Steinborn just give a
Senator Candelaria Mister
president.
So we're gonna have we're ready
for debate will go to Senate
Hamblen followed by Senator
Senator Pirtle.
As you know we had conversations
about how important this is just
a couple of questions do you
have an idea about how much
money would be kept in our state
just from my own family and
personal experience there's a
lot of cattle that leave Chavis
county that go into Texas
because that's where we can get
them slaughtered were that's
you Mr president thank you
senator where would the has
there been a meat processing
plant before.
a desk the USDA to put a full
time employee at a plant and so
they don't see the economic
development or the economic
benefit to that but as a state
just allows us to have a state
employee doing it instead of a
federal employee they still have
to adhere to the federal
guidelines and all the rules and
rags on slaughterhouses but it
questions so with that how much
money with that position.
Costs the state.
And Mister president and and
senator I don't have that in
front of me but it will be a
Great thank you Mr president
thank you senator you we've
talked about apple butter and
we've talked about people making
shelf stable foods in their
great amendments that we work
together on between conservation
committee and tax with the
signage and having the verbiage
that the environment department
still will be able to
have passed this legislation
there has been one case it's
important to have that oversight
thank you Mr president Senator
Hamblen Mr president Senator
Pirtle yes we've talked about
it the and there's I don't see
that there's an emergency clause
on it.
And this presents an and there's
not an emergency clause so it
would be I believe it's ninety
days after signage which would
In our rural communities and can
also complement a lot of other
bills that are happening right
now in particular one I'm hoping
being heard in the in the house
right now the healthy food
financing act because these are
opportunity to do that this Mr
president central do you see
that there are opportunities for
programs to help people create
the shelf stable foods or at
state of the the county agents
that help with a lot of this
training education those types
of things but I really think and
thank you Mr president Senator
for reminding us of the of your
of the way and helping by
providing funds to start new
businesses thank you Mr
president etcetera have a
absolutely Mr president my final
comment to to the good Senators
development center there's a
west there also local chambers
of commerce and and they're also
other business serving
organizations that can help with
that so as you start hearing
reading it's difficult to hear
the debate we can just give the
volume to anymore for
informational purposes for the
body we have senator Wirth
followed by Senator Candelaria
Ingle and Senator Steinborn
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield and this present
ideal.
Mr president so I think it would
be helpful to understand I want
or not the leading any of that
portion of the bill and am I
correct in understanding that
Senator Pirtle and Mister
president senator I I didn't
write the amendment my intent
was just to add of the things
was added along with some other
things that we've seen in in a
few other states with regard to
milk and other of meat share
type coop language that was not
Kind of the original language in
the homemade food actor where
they where they truly additions
or were we redefining things in
them back to to the same there
there had to be some deletion of
some of the sections I think
just to make it simpler to to
key thing that thing I want to
make sure I understand that that
that the intent and purpose
behind the homemade food act is
not being because I understand
what you're trying to do you're
and what's there remains all
continue to look at this and
listen to the debate but that's
that's really the key key piece
for me thank you Mr president
and Mr president center there
they were both homemade food
Mr president thank you I I don't
have the the fortune and the
amendment would yield to a
question or two.
Mr president I yield.
Present can you disconnect point
to me the concern for the
average family can't consume
state an entire beef in a year
and so what you would do is is
important an animal share and
there's a lot of ranchers that
that create these where you buy
share the cost and then you get
that portion of the process beef
back.
Mr president is is that sort of
seeks to resolve I I don't have
experience I actually rather
support of the concept.
Sakshi rather interesting I love
to be able to to be able to you
get it explained that to me why
is the statutory section
necessary Mr president and
senator fertile and infertile so
Mister president center that's a
great question I appreciate that
a a process in Philip facility
that's not state USDA licensed
but it's still inspected to
ensure for safety for a for home
consumption but if two people
share that then you can't do it
and so this just ensures that if
you and I have a partnership in
turning that is section five.
And I believe this section deals
with base I think believe
there's two amendments are being
made to the gross receipts tax.
subsection may Mr president the
what the first strike through I
notice is the striking of on
process so now it appears that
the.
Gross receipts tax exemption for
my correct Mr president Senator
Mister Mister president senator
absolutely correct and the
budget has already taken account
this language it was in house
bill thirty three and it has
been taken to account in the
chain grocery store let's say
corn on the cob you don't pay
gross receipts tax but if a
local farmer grows corn on the
cob and sells only corn at a
receipts tax on food like they
have exempted at the grocery
store Mr present I guess I
identify us follow up question
though.
exempt and what is an example of
an agricultural product and I
guess an example be a processed
agricultural products because
essentially what we're doing
here is extending the gross
receipts tax exemption to
Mr president senator that that's
that's a great question
unfortunately that TRD they've
had a very liberal application
of what the word processed meant
so if you're selling beef and
you turn it into hamburger they
stakes it's it doesn't fall
under that if you make apple
butter as Senator Hamblen
mentioned from your own orchard
so you pick your apples and you
boil them and and make apple
not charging gross receipts tax
on food.
Mr president now the the the
next addition is we're adding
needs.
So.
president so callously the
cattle that be exempt from a
gross receipts tax our growth
governments gross receipts in my
What part of the chain the the
commerce change.
Are we targeting with this or
means.
Mr president is that is it any
Because mention a grocery store
that's already exempt from gross
receipts tax.
So what what what is the what is
the definition of the committee.
because of again the TRD their
interpretation of what a carcass
was we had to specify that we're
talking about the beef all the
way to retail.
Okay well I'm just gonna leave
it at that Mr president continue
doing some reading and
consulting with other members
and proceed with our beautiful
evening together thank you Mr
president think we're gonna pull
this one over for a minute and
let Senator Pirtle work with
this experts outside the door
there and just make sure
everyone is on the same page.
one that was read in earlier so
it's not yet on the calendar
it's the manufacturing services
gross receipts tax with the
Representative Harper.
we come back to one seventy
seven have that discussion
Center conned an audio we'll
still have the floor on that
bill and then we have the
several people who are on the
list that'll stay in that order
to seventy eight as amended on
final passage of an taken it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution seeing no
objection senator to explain the
provides a G. R. T. deduction
for manufacturing equipment what
this will do is put small
employers in New Mexico on par
Representative Harper is
continue to work on this is a
small step in the right
direction start is a much larger
bill but this was where it ended
I see no debate Senator Wirth to
close thank you Mr president I
move that house can't
transportation.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Candelaria now senators
have on this.
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Diamond.
yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator had a meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senate Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
Pinto yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes.
moody's.
Senator smitteez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senators
defending.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Munoz Senator my nose
yes.
Thirty.
House tax rate of.
Taxation revenue committee
substitute for house bill two
seventy eight as amended has
passed the Senate senator Wirth.
You Mr president members.
bill two eighty seven is twice
amend amended he now has the
amendment that he was waiting
for cell ideal Senator Shendo.
Senate the records show that all
action for placing House Bill
two eighty seven this twice
amended.
on final passage has been taken
House bill two eighty seven I do
have an amendment to this but I
would like to explain the bill
the bill directs the.
services the task for oil the
task force will present its
final report to the governor the
legislative education study
committee and the legislative
finance committee the
Legislative Council services
We call this process if here of
particular tribal communities
with the COVID a lot of for our
tribal members passed away many
the kids in our in our school
system so hopefully through this
gap analysis will be able to
provide the kind of services are
students will need to move
amendment the reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill two eighty
seven as amended amendment
distract all of the Senate
Education Committee amendments
and basically what that did it
what that was is that the it
added or extended the year.
number one Senator Brandt.
The US present with the sponsor
the yield Senator Shendo
Thank you Mr president to my
neighbor Senator.
I would would ask a couple
questions said Education
make it happen this year.
Mr president hi us as we sent to
four door Wonda Johnson.
Welcome to the chamber
Representative.
Senator Shendo.
identified in the ready to get
to work.
Thank you Mr president Center I
appreciate that this I'm a
little bit concerned about how
we keep removing the amendments
concerned it really disrespects
Committee process on the Senate
side thank you.
Etcetera etcetera.
Centers we are debating we have
Senator Padilla.
Thank you very much Mr president
I want to thank Representative
Johnson I think this is an
excellent move I think this is a
and lined up properly.
I'm.
Mr president the senator yes.
Thank you Mr president thank you
know meeting the deadlines not
Say no further debate on the
amendment Senator Shendo to
close on the amendment.
Mr president I just a I move
the.
Senator has been requested up
senator member number one to
unanimous consent.
Seeing no objection Senator
member number one has been that
it is house bill two eighty
Anyone wishing to make the bill.
CNN center Shendo to close on
the bill thank you Mr president
I moved it house bill two eighty
two eighty seven to three times
amended to your seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Candelaria yes senators
of on this.
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen Senator Hamblen
yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
how to meal Senator yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator o'neil yes senator to
should be no.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator Paul yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator songes yes senator
Senator.
Senator sure yes yes yes Senator
Senator Stefanics yes in
addition on board.
Senator Steinborn S. Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator one LCS.
Senator Pinto.
Know when to explain my vote
Senator Pinto no.
By a vote.
Thirty eight in the affirmative
one of the negative house bill
twenty seven is three times
amended has passed the Senate
provide for the votes are so
when we go to the vote if you
can please be at your seat so
that which is able to record
that vote appropriately.
Senator Morris he was residents
Thank you for the notification
center more senator Wirth I
think senator Morris borrow the
Senate Majority Leader senator
intent of the bill but when we
talk about expertise in social
work that expertise also really
needs to include the ECWA
Thank you Mr president so we're
going to do item number fifty
one that Senator Lopez house
bill two twenty two special
education bondsman Act.
all action for placing.
Okay
H. A. F. C..
House appropriations and finance
substitution see no objections
Senate office to explain the
bill thank you Mr president and
I think my brain is a little
slow tonight so my apologies and
getting that title correct Mr
proposing that we establish a
special education ombudsman
office and what this office will
do it will protect the
educational rights of students
education system to identify
investigate and help to resolve
students and families special
education concerns in for
students and families about
constituents who have had some
issues with regards to their
child who's a special education
Mr president members of the
working with the students and
families in the and our public
education system and I believe
this is a an opportunity that we
have with this measure Mr
resources so that they too can
have put our state access to a
quality an equitable education
would arise to the level of by
bringing that particular entity
up in consolidating many of the
areas that do affect our at
I'm really grateful to have this
opportunity to work with Senator
Lopez on this really important
and groundbreaking legislation
And I work with families who
have children.
With disabilities who receive
special education services are
Mrs and supports and I know how
to navigate that as some other
also.
And it's difficult to really
understand what your rights are
and how to advocate for your
it's difficult to understand all
of those challenges.
When you're a parent and you're
having to deal with medical
a special ed but office where
families can receive the
supports that they need to
navigate the complex system of
special education from early on
of finance committees substitute
for House Bill to twenty two.
See no debate Senator Lopez to
close thank you very much Mr
seats please all senators to
your seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator but.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes senators
Senator bill yes senator guy it
goes yes Senator Gallegos yes
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey Senator Hickey
don't leave.
had a meal Senator had a meal
yes Senator Kernan Senator
Kernan yes Senator Lopez Senator
Lopez yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to do now Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Padilla.
Senator by the Iglesias Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator smitteez.
Senator Stewart is yes senator
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator serenity
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn as Senator
Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes.
By a vote of thirty six in the
Fuhrman is here on the negative
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill two twenty two has passed
the Senate Senator Lopez Mr
one twenty nine that'll be
Senator Ortiz the Pino and
Representative Fajardo.
Senator anticipate a thank you
Mr president to.
taken and that it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution.
Say no objections center this
pandemic explained the bill.
The pharmaceutical companies
give doctors these coupons and
they then give the the patient a
coupon for the medicine that
they that they need to take this
patient's ability to to come up
with the the amount needed.
It's a controversial it's a
controversial practice some some
And so in this measure it's very
simple it was originally like a
sixteen page bill it's been
pared down by our.
to the extent allowed by federal
law when you're calculating
enrollees contribution.
For any deductible copay or out
of pocket maximum.
boiled down to this one.
Thank you senator Ortiz fan or
you just ask for an as consent
for your expert witness Mr
president I actually have two
L. O. Lucariello with the pharma
she's she's on the line with us
so those questions that we can
handle she'll she'll be
available seeing no objection it
one to house bill one twenty
nine is three times amended
amendment sponsored by Senator
Mark Moores.
Senator Moores to moving
explained that moment thank you
amendment as thank you Mr
president as a center to see
Pino talked about with coupons
with drug prices and and
everyone knows a drug prices are
way too high right now bonds are
reduction should be available to
everyone we believe the
amendment for broad budgeted
drug price relief to consumers
Memel ensure that any time maybe
president I stand ready for
questions Senator is we're
debating.
Sen foreman number one will go
to Senator Ortiz Y. Pino thank
The yield of the existing
problem you've identified the
problem but do we need to work
on it during the interim and
that rather than to try to to do
this ammendment now so we would
You Mr president I'm not sure
which one of you would have the
answer to this this is for
specialty type drugs are we
talking about routine drugs
as a commonly hazard new entries
into the market or they're
promoting their brand awareness
Mister president senator.
Mr president the Senator Moores
and how does the.
enter into this with this people
who is that's different than
what this is Mr president
center.
Senator Morris this presents
senator bill on that I don't
claim to be an expert on this
topic I do not believe there are
reduced prices that way I do
believe it's different but I
will defer to center to see Pino
about that Mister president
generic drugs and and to.
Many these have to be for
and you agree that your can to
use that particular generic that
there's some reaction that you
have.
Mr president Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino.
Bucks what's the how does that
kind of a difference happen and
drugs can you somebody tell me
that.
The some Mister president and
senator.
What the expert witness says is
that the.
That the.
That the price you're quoted as
Very good I just a I was just
curious about that I don't know
how that enters into this bill
Mr president Senator but it's a
it's it's a even my insurance
copay is higher than the coupon
wishing debate Senate floor
amendment number one.
St I'm sorry senator trainees.
Thank you
Thank you Mr president senator
my understanding is all this
says is that.
If you get coupons available
they're going to be good.
To everyone.
Thank you Mr president I think
it's important for the body
understand
You know.
If if the coupon for a drug is
only available for a very very
short on time I think that's.
available just make it available
don't try to pressure somebody
and say well if you don't get
here.
If you don't get in to see your
doctor if you don't get into you
year
and and you know within reason I
don't think we need to have some
that's going to be good for five
years because the drug
manufacturers are gonna really
to be asking for too much and I
would you know I I I like this
ammendment I think it's fair I
think it's good for patients and
can do about about
getting getting that bill heard
in getting on so.
I Senator I support your
enrollment.
questions about it Mr president
center Moores so we've been
talking about coupons but this
says offers a reduction in price
including any discounts so under
everyone who's is that correct
Senator Moores need of miss
president senator guess.
effectively lowers the price of
the drug overall for everyone
what is the chances Mr president
of of the manufacturers no
longer offering those discounts
doctors office asking for
specific drugs instead of
actually working through their
doctors so that's one something
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino is expert
has to say on that.
Senator anticipate a detailed.
Mr president to Senator we'd be
glad to.
went Mister president senator.
Is Caitlyn.
Lucariello and she works for
At does she have an opinion as
to whether this amendment would
reduce the likelihood of this
reducing manufactures giving
Mr president and and senator yes
the experts says that you're
absolutely right that that if we
were to adopt this amendment it
disappointed to hear that
because because I didn't want to
be right about that because I
think this is actually a good
consumer protection approach
and it's too bad that.
unfortunately I I I believe I
believe you.
When you say the that this would
likely get rid of I I I think
that's the effect that it would
Our.
The the at the up price on them
is is ridiculous and the we
should be and the fact that they
are offered at these discounts
these discounts to everyone
thank you Mr has on.
We have further debate senator
Candelaria.
president thank you wonder if
the bill's sponsor would you
Senator anticipate a deal.
Mr president of a good deal to
question why do drug
manufacturers offer these at all
the one I just charge a lower
price for the medicine for
everybody I have this sort of
opaque pricing structure.
Insurance companies pay as high
as prices possible for drugs or
as a direct to consumer can pay
less but ultimately the consumer
and the paying higher insurance
structure that's here's a lower
priced drugs Mr president
center.
Centered the subpoena.
Mister president senator
work on fixing it up.
They're committed to working
during the interim with the the
group that Representative
Fajardo was working with this
they get the benefit of these
coupons and it doesn't go into
the pockets of the pharmacy
benefit managers.
Mr president and and very well I
I I I appreciate ask question
No there's some significant
reform in.
Representative appreciate this
is how the system works we need
to address this kind of issue to
keep these benefits for folks
And and Mr president to Senator
Candelaria not only does the
woman from farm agree that
senator for hard to a
Representative artists are has
What senators any further debate
on centers are member number one
stronger words for my wife that
Senator going to confirmation
that the webcast is in fact up
and running.
Senators any further debate on
Senate floor amendment number
one.
Senator very bonus Center
foreman overall.
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Campos.
Senator to run does no Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator have.
Senator Hemphill passes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey passes Senator
Ingle.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan noted Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez no Senator
McKenna.
Senator my nose no senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto now Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator broke no Senator
smitteez Senators maybe is yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez now
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn as Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman now senator
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs no Senator
Hemphill.
Senator sure.
Senator share no.
Senator member number one has
failed.
To pass the Senate Senator
Moores thank you Mr Robertson
thank you members of the body
we're back on the bill Senators.
Senator is a penalty of Mr
president because I to so Mister
president senator we do ask your
expert witness how this bill
relates to the step therapy bill
instead of starting at the
lowest level.
Mr president Senator of both of
my experts agree that it really
doesn't have anything to do with
focused bill that's geared to
those coupons and make sure that
the person using the coupon gets
the benefit of it not the
maintenance materials in of a
famous present with the sponsor
you'll please.
Senator is the.
yes I yield.
Thank you senator.
Mr president Mr president
senator
that please Mr president of that
when I I I can answer with
without having to check with my
ex ruined is neither Medicare
nor Medicaid permit the use of
coupons.
president and senators committee
yes you're right thank you Mr
president members of the body as
the thing that's notable.
there's a reason why Medicare
drugs and its size the insurance
company to just pay for it month
over month year after year now
sometimes that's a good thing
sometimes I may be a good thing
talking about we're from out
people with.
Mainly just other you know other
types of insurance outside of
Medicare Medicaid
but you know I also want people
understand that this says number
one without a generic equivalent
so these are going to be your
your brand name new expensive
monopoly.
and so that the seven year
monopoly the go to market their
drugs as center Moores explained
and the of these coupons well I
got a got a fair shot in but
what's what's happening is.
And I it's it's above my head
but these drug manufacturers
have figured out a way to to
on to the authorize drug as
possible once again not
necessarily criticizing the.
of the bill here this is just
the reality of how it works.
that's that's not what we're
doing
So it's it's a concern of mine
Mr president.
That.
What we're doing is just
drugs can be certainly good but
I I think this bill as written
favors a very particular entity.
on that but I just have concerns
about that.
And once again Mr president if
this was just for cancer
patients I I'd vote yes if it
had been moderated a little bit
monopolized I just can't support
in its current form is to
president thank you.
We do have further debate.
the coupons not to the
manufacture the doctors of the
ones that can can decide to give
a coupon to somebody who says I
can't afford that medicine
doctor he can give you a coupon
coupons some states have
abolished it but if we've got
them here which we do we want to
make sure with this bill one
very simple thing that the
pocketed the money from the
coupon and the patients still
has to pay a copay.
We do have further debate
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes.
And I'll have my expert witness
is poised to answer Senator
thank you Mr president
Representative your expert
company it will help to draft
this.
Mr president and Senator
Steinborn is patient groups that
were the ones pushing for this
because they're the ones that
the benefit.
Mr president Senator I think the
amendment is very different than
the original bill it's totally
different Mr president Original
Bill to sixteen pages this cut
four Senator distinta Senator
Steinborn thank you Mr president
and senator right but the
original bill is kind of a.
And what I'm seeing a a PBM
transparency kind of the bill
drugs I kind of agree with what
Senator committees was saying
about that and that's why I'm
asking Mr president who who
helped to draft the amendment
Senator the the the bill that
was originally dropped was a
very complex bill that had
transparency issues it had lots
It probably got bogged down and
so when I got over here to the
Judiciary Committee the office
of the superintendent of
insurance offer to work during
the interim to work on the rest
of it and they just pared it
want to make sure that if you
use a coupon you get the
benefit.
It does not require you to use a
coupon but if you do.
prescription drug issues but I
am by no means an expert and Mr
at present can you get a little
gavel actions to reduce the
mentioned thank you.
consumer protection or consumer
offering.
The concerns on hearing Mr
president colleagues from health
experts not connected with
formula airy drugs from health
plans
lower cost drugs for them.
Manufacturers can in turn and
drive up the cost of these drugs
leader Paki smokes and get you
in on their product but you know
it you know again it's it's
cloaked is Hey we'll give you a
deal on this particular track
but in fact the effect on the
cloaked is a good consumer.
This legislation so I you know
those are the concerns I'm
hearing from from experts who
actually work in the space.
senator I I think this is I hate
to say it because I think but
this is a good kind of interim
thing to work on as far as how
to achieve this listen as you
a pharmacy for drag that maybe
within your formulas
but the.
But anyway I think that's the
safe ground it doesn't have
Mr president I move that the
house bill one twenty nine is
amended three times do now pass
and ask for a roll call vote
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt DS senator Byrd.
Senator Wirth DS Senator Campos
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey bosses Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan now Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez no Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores.
o'neill.
Senator o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator Ortiz
Y. Pino Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator Prochnow Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez knows
Senator share.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart no Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman no senator
Wirth.
Senator words you what did you
say yes.
Senator Gallegos known.
Senator Hickey.
No Senator Hickey no.
Senator Pinto.
By a vote of twenty four in the
thank you very much thank you
congratulations Representative
Fajardo.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so I think as the
and I would yield to Senator
Hickey on Senate concurrence
calendar number twelve Senate
bill three seventeen no
concur in house amendment to
Senate bill three seventeen.
Senator explained what those
amendments were.
some pretty simple fourth or
fifth grade math if I can
As you know Senate bill three
seventeen was passed earlier in
and behavioral health services
and therapy this bill was
amended in the Senate last night
Armstrong and she is on my phone
as an expert witness and also
has the superintendent of
questions that that is
the will of the president in the
Senate thank you Senator Hickey
saying of directions.
in and it actually complements
and I think you'll see that so
that the goal of three seventeen
which was to improve mental
those same names and it will
actually help lower the cost of
premiums and health care and.
gonna ask you to think back
about that Medicaid match that
we get in the state which is I
think the highest in the country
somewhere between one and three
another piece
There has been.
If any if you have been insured.
added on to so it's it's your
premium plus two point seven
five percent under the ACA this
is called the national provider
that came back on and you've
been paying it up until
September of twenty twenty and
their day there was a regulation
leveraging Medicaid money from
the federal government.
They're doing the same type of
tax to help put together a fund
and this is called the patient
Kind of break it all down what
the bill proposes to do is take
seventy five million over three
and a half years.
The federal match.
And basically.
and and then also there's just
ten percent so ninety percent of
When when you do when you do the
math on that that to that two
point seven five that you're
paying.
Is actually turns out on average
You've been paying.
So this takes its place but what
this bill does by expanding
access to insurance now I'm
large companies have cheaper per
member per month.
The the the more people that
that are in the pool.
Is an investment of seventy five
million to two hundred and get
four hundred and ten million
back out of that half of that
to the general fund and and that
covers the investment is two
hundred ten million it's like a
three to one match that covers a
seventy five and the rest goes
into the general fund so it's a
win is a win win win in multiple
following benefits is that and.
And these benefits.
I'm sorry these benefits
So small business who here to
for.
Has not had any subsidies.
it and that's one of the reasons
why only twenty three percent of
small businesses by insurance
but now there will be subsidies
And you're paying eleven hundred
dollars a month.
Money can go in to lower that
premium.
We'll get some benefit.
So I could go on and on and all
the creative things that we can
do essentially with fifty
thousand people coming out of
Medicaid.
will be looking for.
Insurance they can afford and
this will substantially help
them to be able to buy that
insurance so are just one of the
to ninety thousand we'll get
some sort of benefit out of it.
And providers are going to get a
significant benefit and how is
Medicaid which is the lowest
paying to commercial insurance
they're going to get paid more
and so New Mexico may actually
become a state that's attractive
this will make New Mexico a more
attractive state.
So.
The
Of okay and I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you senator had the we do
have debate where center share
followed by Centerville Center
to this says one any bill
concerning any subject matter
for which an appropriation here
in order to be levied would be
referred to the committee blah
We're talking about leveraging.
This is something that should
have been discussed in finance
committee instead of here almost
getting on the midnight again.
Centerman yes DO present center
yes.
So
Mr president no.
Mr chair.
So from my perspective we just
don't know what this thing
really does.
And would you be open to the
whole idea of moving this thing
president we have this bill and
finance and was explain to us
and in one way and then the good
senator they got his bill jumped
in the house came back and
a lot of light to something that
we didn't completely get to
we're told one thing and and it
actually does another it's a
premium costs it was dropped by
president trump and pick back up
taxes go to fund it's a whole
lot of money that's generated
two hundred and five million or
four hundred and some million
two hundred I will go to the
federal Medicaid correct me if
I'm wrong at any point because
anarchy no that's a basically it
Mr president and Mr Chairman it
people in Mr president center
and and so then when we do that
two hundred ten million to
Medicaid match to the four one
hundred four three four five or.
have a doctor on finance so we
can understand some of the
Medicaid stuff in Medicaid
expansion but center.
A two hundred million dollar
increase is pretty hard to small
going I think center share and
you are with me and and now I
understand how this process is
gonna work with you want to go
finance we can but we're gonna
come back with the same result
to point out just one more time
this is just one more little cut
on the small businesses who are
trying to.
To provide insurance for their
small business owners in New
Mexico.
I know this is all know this is
already in place but the reality
is today there's a one percent
insurance premium.
it's only a couple of blocks.
But how many more little cuts
can the little guy take Mister
president can only beat us up so
Yes Senator I think I got the
picture here and I think I'm
okay with everything except
you're gonna pay the general
fund back to the money that you
five million will earn back
A hundred and thirty five
million and that's the part that
concerns me is Mr president
center does the federal
We're putting money back in the
general fund that's almost a
shell game sounds like a little
concerned that the Feds may not
like that and come back and then
possible or accurate or is there
some way that the feds are going
to look the other way and let us
take forty million dollars away
from the.
we don't have to put up
anything.
Senator Hickey.
probably decades in the David
Bronco way with obamacare they
started with the full coverage
and ninety percent after some
time so they want the they want
comfortable with that you put up
seventy million and then you
take a hundred and thirty put it
back in your pocket that's the
part that concerns me if if I'm
misinterpreting that I'd like to
missing please Mr president and
senator.
Miss present.
the only issue is whether we
concur or don't come for.
A referral to a to a committee
is not a possibility if we
wanted to have further analysis
Etcetera hitting yes Mr
president ram was listening in
both ears and.
Missed a little bit of the
export.
tax you actually have to do this
small ten percent.
Of the private insurance in
order to be able to get this
and your private insurance but
this only be three point seven
five.
Mr president that's not exactly
where I'm going I'm trying to
find out were.
money four times over from the
Feds through for whatever was so
we're gonna get four hundred
million dollars from the feds
we're gonna put a hundred thirty
million in our pocket it just
it's like profiting on the
federal government and I'm
concerned that somewhere down
the way years maybe it's
perfectly legal but I'm a little
concerned that somewhere down
the road a couple three years
Thank you Mr president and
senator
One can always be concerned
about whether regulatory body
does sometimes in the future but
again this precedent has been
two hundred and ten million on
increasing access lowering
premiums for small businesses
and so forth and the other money
does come back to the state I
some factors that hundred and
thirty million dollars have some
strings does it go to other
health care type items or like
you said premium reductions are
this money gets matched it can't
come back and be used for more
match it for Medicaid from the
state other than what is
regulation is red.
Then there's there's no air mark
in their
other than just the general fund
and not to rematch again in
Medicaid.
and he put up forty backs and I
picked up the changes I had
fifteen Bucks in my pocket he
would real happy Mister
president that's the that's what
I'm thinking we're we're getting
into and that's what concerns me
answer I needed so I'll let it
go thank you Mr president.
Senator Burt.
Medicaid issue continue to force
I will tell you according to
what we've seen is I believe a
twenty seven in seventeen
eighteen and nineteen the number
of people and rolling on
And we we just about hit that
ceiling every year that we go
up.
Now we're going to increase it
and it'll be great we'll have
And now we're going to really
push.
The ability to pay Medicaid and
and for people to be on that
system.
And I know it's late and we want
to go home but I want everybody
on the floor to the here this
according to the analysis that
I've received this evening that
And that list is insurance in
New Mexico will cost more than
any other state in the union.
And that's the truth of what's
going to happen with this bill.
the state of New Mexico that
already have problems because
they've been unable to open
their doors for here and now
they're gonna be given another
think it's right and I think
it's wonderful that more people
get a chance to get on Medicaid
but it's on the backs of small
businesses that have been closed
for over here I don't think
president for the debate centers
committees.
Thank you Mr president with the
sentiment sent.
Senate majority floor leader
essentially hearing a house bill
that has never been heard by a
single cent committee.
And is now on the floor do you
okay with that.
committee in the analysis was
done that committee again given
where we are at this time in the
session I realize this isn't the
pulled back up because I wasn't
quite ready but again I do think
this is this is one that is
before us and based on the
Thank you for your thoughts Mr
president center I was gonna
vote against that Republican log
rolling and if we are ever in
the majority of the houses that
were in the majority I'm still
twenty twenty one
I'm I will just never do it so
we I guess we disagree but I
appreciate your thoughts very
much.
Mr president.
number one highest a premium tax
in the country.
This is a major major deal.
Mr presence and you had
mentioned that
That the intent of this bill is
to decrease insurance premiums
law of large numbers and
insurance the more people that
are in pools and ensure the
lower the cost of the premium.
Thank you Mr president center
let's just say twenty years have
greatly outpaced real wages
would you agree with me on the.
Senator.
The cost of health care
sixties at about twice general
inflation.
Thank you in so Mr president and
members of the body we're
clearly not getting it.
in nothing that anybody has done
seems to have actually worked
premiums are going up and people
the middle class especially are
being robbed every single month
what is being allowed in this
country.
Of what I really consider to be
theft of the middle class.
the maybe I don't know our our
tend to say well now we're
actually going to get it right
after getting it wrong for the
past forty years at least we're
answer I think that's our
fundamental difference I I
understand your your mathematics
and when you spread out risk I
They don't know what the prices
are and our and our our answer
or solution seems to be let's
just get more insurance more
insurance is going and more
dollar amount of their CEO
bonuses every year they're going
to fix it.
So who's going to fix it who can
fix it not anyone in this room
it well instead of robbing them
every month by their
ridiculously high health care
premiums we can actually put
those dollars in their wallets
and tell them what the prices
are and then they.
too expensive and it's eighty
Bucks next door I'm gonna go
there.
I'm gonna give that person my
money.
And the person that's charging
the prices are no one knows the
prices are Mr president.
So that's the only way we're
going to do it is if we actually
make it insurance again.
About this with a car Mr
president.
to get new tires to to you know
get a car wash no.
The every day and I'm not
talking about the extreme poor
These expenses if they know what
the prices are and are enabled
and empowered to drive them
down.
Connecticut and wherever else.
We don't we don't need that
extra cost is a burden is become
a massive burden in this country
and the solution seems to be
approach we're saying let's just
try more of it.
So Mister president and and
senator you obviously can tell
But also because this continues
to disenfranchise the middle
class.
By boxing them out.
going to go down I'll leave you
with this analogy.
Let's take just the any any kind
of come let's say McDonald's
drive thru.
And you have McDonald's drive
That is.
Going through this drive through
line.
Ask rhetorical question is
present Representative body do
you think people would maybe
spend a little bit more money.
dollar bill to everybody that go
that standing in line to go into
a target do you think people are
gonna spend more less or the
same amount of money that walk
into that target.
this anymore well I could just
increase the prices a little bit
ten percent.
Whatever that may be.
This does not decrease the price
Okay going along I I know what
the votes going to be on this
one Mr president.
scheme where we box everybody
out of the price of the pricing.
We've got to let people know
what the prices are instead of
spending their money.
And be allowed to just negotiate
those prices down themselves by
the millions and millions of
tiny financial decisions
every day in America that's how
Senator very much I know your
intentions are good.
Very much appreciate the thank
you Mr president.
You are for the debate we have
Senator Kernan.
The first thing I want to say is
that it's disappointing to me
that a good bill that was sent
to the house of representatives
for consideration from this
body.
from this body and didn't work
its way through the process and
that happens I understand that
it's this is not the first time
we're going to see this kind of
thing happened.
insurance carriers it appears
from the F. R. I. that I'm
reading it will increase in
health insurance premium tax
from one percent to three point.
been looked at by this body.
And the second thing I want to
do because I think everything's
been said we know this bill is
going pass is I'm really I need
concerned about it I was told by
various people this really
should have gone to finance.
And so I went to my colleagues
and I export expresses to them
And then all of a sudden that
concern goes way.
I feel very very let down and
I'm disappointed about that.
apologize to my colleagues.
trusted me when I came to them
for help.
And so I just use that political
Where further debate senator
Candelaria.
Thank you Mr president
When we have the bill sponsored
by Senator Shendo.
To establish the health
insurance exchange.
And I just wanted to share with
There were only five votes
against setting up the exchange.
And those votes were the
And then who else I lost it on
my phone and it's late this is
what you're going to get but Mr
president there the reason I
bring that up is at the time
when I voted against the
That would have regulatory
authority in place limits on
cost sharing and copayments and
premiums and deductibles.
Or whether or not we would
really leave that to the Feds
And so for me now I'm not
exactly thrilled.
Spots.
At the end of the day for me
few questions to tap into his
expertise Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator I'd be happy to
answer questions Mister
president senator thank you Mr
You're taxing my memory a little
bit they certainly didn't sell
hardly at all and I I think
function as as other sort of
consumer goods like like Gasser.
Our our groceries and I and I
pointed that out because I was
my recollection as well Mister
president senator Hickey that
large risk right to reject this
idea that they should purchase
insurance for short term risks.
and and they and they did not do
that.
but they are they don't you know
I only any reasonable person
expects to be hit with a gas
bill that costs a hundred and
fifty two hundred three hundred
insert obscene number here.
share Qatar wait for it Siskel
McSorley and Senator Woods thank
you Mr Shendo
but the I make appointments
personally the reason that we
continue to have to endeavor.
Answer this piecemeal approach
is because we remain.
Hopelessly wedded it seems.
or make it away for the states
to simply expand Medicaid to
everybody who could purchase a
lowincome plan but I think we
would see prices fall and I
think we would see it how the
it very clear I I don't think
that the reason we see high
prices and health insurance is
because.
because somehow we're
interfering with the private
Over dollars is present so I
stand in strong support of the
compliance.
I send a big shout out to well
idea we do have centers the
office next.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I'm
and I was upstairs and I didn't
have a copy of of this and I
came down to to look at it
because.
And so my question is.
Is this taking.
Toward that goal or not
I just need that clarified.
Mr president and if the sponsor
would yield I'm sorry of that
just give the.
I like the idea of reducing
premiums X. but I don't like is
who ends up getting the money I
think if you could explain to
me.
The tax and where it goes.
Thank you Mr president and
senator
the money half of the money that
comes in we'll go to
help lower the cost to the small
businesses that are buying
insurance in the ways that they
do with the share with the
that with larger numbers the
risk of decreases in order as
the cost.
Senator office.
Thank you Mr president does it
go to an insurance company
Senator had.
You Mr president and senator
individual or the business those
subsidies do go to purchase
health insurance but the cost of
the health insurance will be
lower due to my previous
comments.
Of health care model chair for
our model in the federal
government.
What would happen to this this
approach.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president and
the good senator from
Massachusetts Elizabeth Warren
that implementing it would take
ten years so this is could
considered an interim solution
the more acute disease and
exacerbations we're going to
prevent so this is a good
intermediate step I agree with
you there's a we're the only
country in the world that has an
Thank you Mr president I am I
apologize of the for asking
these questions it's just one
this bill came before **** it
was a completely different bill.
hearing and I really appreciate
this this approach.
I do consider it a stop gap Mr
president.
Because.
the goal and the intentions are
good
And so I'm probably gonna
supportive and I'm looking
forward to listening to more
data more debate thank you.
as for two questions Senator.
Yes I will yield Mister
president thank you Mr president
and just to summarize and I'm.
That has not changed at all yes
as it is the same the same great
bill that would be one of the
most profound things we could do
the session help New Mexicans
but the other thing that was
paying before isn't that right
Senator Senator that is correct
Mr president and Senator
Steinborn okay thank you and
that's basically the two pieces
the state of New Mexico and
super proud to support and
encourage everybody to do so as
well course thank you Mr
president thank senator thanks
Senator Steinborn si no further
recovering academic as are many
of you here we think we're
teaching sometimes but
otherwise I really appreciate
encourage not thinker I make a
motion to concur centers is been
a motion.
To concur with the house
amendment to Senate bill three
seventeen as amended.
no Senator Brandt no Senator
Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator guide
goes.
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator the
show through.
Senator Ivey Soto now Senator on
a meal.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes.
I'm sorry yes Senator McKenna
yes senator Morris.
Senator Moores no Senator manos.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator from the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez now Senators
committees.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn passes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Steinborn yes.
Thank you Mr president fellow
senators.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to go to that our
business messages from the house
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has concurred in the Senate
amendments to house bill seventy
five as amended by the house and
further amended by the Senate.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in gross copies of
Senate bill twenty seven with
emergency clause and Senate bill
three oh three.
The journal show the message
from the house of intercede and
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
substitute for House Bill ten as
amended by the Senate.
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for House
the house and further amended by
the Senate respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk of the
house the general show the
message from the house has been
received.
Wirth unless anyone has any
other announcements unanimous
consent of the Senate stand in
recess actually before I do that
I just want to give a huge shout
Senator Wirth and that certainly
stand in recess until eight
thirty tomorrow morning I see no
objections the Senate Senate
recess sergeant of arms if you
can please leave all the
information on the on the desks
