Have I present.
Okay great
so Senator Hermio we're going to
go in and start with your.
Bill here I don't know if we
want to move first on the let's
do the committee substitute I
need a motion to poor do not
pass on Senate bill four thirty
one piece.
Public peace health safety and
welfare and eighty.
I guess.
Adoption of the
Use.
Youth conservation corps
employment is the title of the
bill yes.
Okay do I have a motion by
committee.
Madam chair it will Senator
Griggs.
Also get secretary okay.
Second by Senator harm you know
I don't think we need to vote do
we will have discussion on the
We're good.
On the M..
Bill so Senator our meal you can
go ahead and explain renewable
thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee so
you see we come once before in
regards to the use conversation
court and I'm here again to talk
about that with Senate Bill
which this committee at the
substitute bill for thirty one
what it does it it it amends the
YCC Act to clarify the process
the YCC Commission uses to
employ young people and public
projects the bill specifies that
YCC will issue a request for
applications at least annually
adopt a competitive evaluation
process to select proposals for
funding and enter integrate into
agreements with the select
projects Sanchez now this bill
is important because this
process will increase the
programs accessibility to
smaller out legible entities
particularly and tribal and
rural areas that it will also
reduce the rejection rate of
proposals to the small errors
and YCC will gain the capacity
to serve more projects the
result is a greater number of
New Mexico youth will be
employed in improving their
communities while learning
valuable skills for their
careers with me today are a few
experts madam chairman
chairwoman I have Cheryl Baba
the E. M. and R. D. general
counsel Amanda Getchell the YCC
commissioner more kind and state
purchasing division director and
Senator Woods the YCC executive
director and with that Madam
chairwoman I'd like for xterra
would to say a few words.
Well good morning
Madam chair and members of the
committee it's good to see you
all again and thank you senator
Harding meal for that
introduction
that encapsulates the bill very
well at it will give the YCC
some stability and consistency
on how to structure our program
and we can use technology to
help.
People develop a more thoughtful
and successful project the YCC
programs we hire about six
hundred to eight hundred used a
year and seventy percent of each
of the each projects funding
goes to use core member wages
the remaining thirty percent can
be used for supplies and
training but ten percent of the
time must be used for training
so why C. seniors they learn
skills that can translate into
careers in our parks forestry
wildland firefighting timber
management acequia ditch
management construction and
outfitting and guiding it really
is a program that helps develop
use the New Mexico workforce and
it also because these are
working in their community
improving their community it
really gives them an
appreciation for their
surroundings and and we've even
gotten feedback occasionally
there was someone in Rio Arriba
county center our meal who said
well I I thought I'd never come
back here and now I want to stay
and work here in Espanola so
thank you and I I can stand for
questions.
Is the madam chair what what we
can go to the public comment if
you're still ready.
Thank you senator Hermio Rebecca
make the.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
There is no opposition indicated
to this bill.
In support.
I believe we have Greg Peters
with conservation voters of New
Mexico.
Okay go ahead you've got two
minutes.
Thank you and good morning madam
chair members of the committee
was great Peters of the public
lands and wildlife conservation
person Mexico your exported just
before thirty one.
YCC is been funding youth
centered projects in communities
and public lands across New
Mexico in every year since
nineteen ninety two hundreds of
youth engage in meaningful work
experiences that improve the
state's natural cultural
historical an agricultural
resources while developing an
active part stewardship and
civic responsibility for members
bill trails to prove wildfire
resiliency control Rosen it
stalled public art improved
senior and community centers
reserves cultural resources
uniformed naturally or public
parks the projects are visible
tangible and meaningful projects
and educational aspects are
environmentally sound and fill
an unmet need in these parts.
Just before thirty one will
reduce administrative burden of
the YCC by decreasing the amount
of time and resources are
currently required to prepare
eighteen process in our of P. to
the state purchasing division.
When Chris access to the as well
as licensees operating
efficiency for more money goes
into hiring and training to use
and improving New Mexico's
natural cultural and
recreational resources the
savings will be passed on the
YCC projects funding more youth
employment is common sense bills
win for all New Mexicans it does
not have a price tag it makes
our government more efficient
will help more used hired and
trained contributing to New
Mexico's economic recovery in
future workforce we recommend
passage of SB three point thirty
one madam chair members the
committee thank you for your
time.
Madam chair members of the
committee we also have received
a request to comment by Milan
Skyler executive director for
expanded pay you I.
But you've been able to join us
on the damn today and that
concludes public comment NFL.
Thank you thank you thank you
Rebecca Senator Hermio would you
do have any questions from the
committee sorry.
No you have a Senator Griggs.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator just real quickly what
is the real differences between
this bill and the bill we heard
all right.
Madam chairman Senator it was a
true freshman error that when I
did the first appeal I called
the hiring procurement and so we
do know that you can't procure
an employee but you can hire an
employee so this definitely just
spells out how we will at use
the act to clarify how the
process is to employee use with
YCC verses the other bill that's
that's the difference.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair and and I would I would
move do passed before Senator
Shendo has a chance to ask
anything.
Your woman.
Motion to do passed by Senator
Griggs and a second by Senator
McKenna Rebecca could you call
the roll.
X. yes.
Senator McKenna yeah.
Senator Sanchez yes Senator
Shendo hello.
Skating.
Yes.
Thank you Senator.
Yes.
And Pinto yes we have six yes is
reduced passed on committee
substitute for thirty one thank
you for tuning with.
Thank you thank you for the
committee substitute on Senate
bill four thirty when you
conservation corps the placement
and you go on Senator our meal
to next committee.
So our next business on the
agenda is house bill fifty two
once amended bilingual multi
cultural and Advisory Council
Representative Figueroa are you
on the Google.
Madam chair okay and do we have
your expert witnesses.
We do Mr Santa is here okay all
right and I'm.
Rebecca mate then are we okay to
go.
Yes okay.
OK Representative Figueroa go
ahead and explain renewable.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee house bill fifty two
as amended is bill that came out
of the interim legislative
education study.
Committee has and it establishes
in statute and adhoc committee
that has existed since the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act was passed in the
seventies what was passed the
council was not written into the
statute as an advisory council
was for the Indian Education Act
for the Islamic Education Act so
putting it in the statute
through house bill fifty two.
What is parity between all of
these acts of the and insurers
that the voice of the experts
across the state the linguistic
expertise and diversity across
the state contributes to inform
PED and make sure that they're
implementing the bilingual
multicultural Education Act.
I'm that is the goal of this.
Legislation before you today
there is no funding attached to
it because as I mentioned it's
been working in an ad hoc
fashion there have been times in
the last fifty years when at the
whim of an administration it has
been disbanded and those voices
were silenced so putting it in
statute we can ensure that these
voices remain.
Educating for the implementation
of the bilingual multicultural
Education Act advocating for
students multi lingual ism.
And.
Madam chair just a few in the
committee with permits the
expert witness to add a few
words.
Okay.
That that we thank you so much
so the I'd like to share just a
couple of things and piggyback
off of work to Representative
Figueroa shared and and that is
as an ad hoc council if for
these number of years there are
instances when the New Mexico
public education department so
perhaps because of issues or
situations of of discomfort may
is simply push the the council's
recommendations away however as
part of this this bill there's
an effort to make sure that
there's accountability.
If you're going it is stated
that letter stating.
Three to five that the sectarian
Department staff to provide
biannual reports to the council
regarding progress on your the
advisement of those are
wonderful T. is to ensure that
the advisement that are being
placed out there are are
actually being moved upon and
that the council be able to
question and and pushover need
be specific to to their
advisement
there are a number of by Mentzer
recently that are potentially
resulting currently in some
bills.
specifically House Bill to
nineteen deals with by literacy
is is a bill that has been not
promoted to through some of the
advisement that the current
council is made I bring that up
because there is it has issues
that focus not only on the
Spanish language but also on
indigenous languages and
recognizing the importance of.
But there's and that the need to
not look through the last over
the western lands when it comes
to academic achievement in
languages other than English and
so those are just a few examples
of what the the bill is doing
and what the what the intent of
the council has been and
continues to be as an advocate
for our our bilingual
populations here our state.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr stand alone thank
you Representative grow up do we
have public comment Nate and
Rebecca.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
We do have public comment.
We vacated now indication of
opposition to that bill.
And the in the report.
First we have guiliani who so we
honor you have two minutes.
The.
Was the committee many missions
in your I actually work with
children.
I'm here.
The coalition of sexual assault
programs and we're asking you to
stand with us and our sponsors
today in support Senate bill
fifty two thank you so much.
Next at mac we have Emily wilt
thou with New Mexico voices for
children.
Good morning madam chair members
of the.
Our and I'm representing the
Mexico voices for children part
of HB fifty.
We support.
Current council will be able to
advocate for bilingual teachers.
And will multicultural.
One of the most important aspect
of this bill that includes the
voices of parents of students
and bilingual programs and
Representative than it is from
our.
He's tribes and pueblos.
I'm gonna respectively and
features and tribal leaders in
teaching students for cultural
and linguistic heritage our
community after the committee
join us in supporting this bill
thank you.
Next we have Jeremy are you
included director you've been
learning acting head start
director with Santa Clara
pueblo.
What you madam chair members of
the committee a gentleman thank
you director to learning
speaking on behalf of coverage
every of center where public we
found stand in full support of
elevating I was able to culture
education advisory committee and
as amended we do believe that it
brings out tribal voices to the
table and we have been working
with this committee sent Nablus
are back in the seventies as was
represented by the speakers
again we sentence will support
madam chair.
That we have millet that
Candelaria with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Melissa Candelaria I'm an
attorney at the New Mexico
Center online poverty I'm also a
member of the legal team for the
Aussie plaintiffs in the Yazzie
Martinez case The New Mexico
Center live poverty is in full
support of this bill this
legislation is consistent with
the Ozzie Martinez really which
calls for the full
implementation of existing
statutes such as the bilingual
multicultural Education Act that
set standards for educating our
children in a way that increases
and reinforces our linguistic
and cultural assets and insurers
educational equity for English
language learners and Hispanic
and native American students the
Advisory Council codified by
this bill would help ensure that
education policies programs and
instruction are culturally and
linguistically responsive to the
needs of our diverse student
population as required by the B.
M. P. H. we think Representative
Figueroa for sponsoring this
important piece of legislation
strongly urge the committee to
pass this bill thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee at next we have
jasmine yep on behalf of the
tribal education alliance Aussie
analyst with native American
budget and policy and it in the
case.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
jasmine yet but I stated I am a
representative of the tribal
educational I. ants we stand in
full support of this legislation
the T. A. believes it is
important that the state fully
comply with the bilingual multi
a multi cultural Education Act
specifically because that access
the right standards and
reinforces the celebration of
cultural linguistic differences
in the classroom therefore
creating Advisory Council
council similar to how it's set
up with the Hispanic Education
Act and the Indian Education Act
this council would help ensure
that the BME eight is being
fully and correctly implemented
in New Mexico schools and
further strengthen culturally
and linguistically relevant
education in our state
these as stated before these
voices need to be included in an
official in and official way
bringing tribal voices to the
table is rolled to keeping
programs under the bilingual
multicultural Education Act
authentic and tribal norms and
culturally and linguistically
relevant education being at the
forefront for so for these
reasons we kindly ask that this
committee passes legislation and
we think the sponsor for
bringing it.
Madam chair members of the
committee at mac we have more
information with the league of
women voters of New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm here to make
sure in education chair for the
league of women voters of New
Mexico and of an educator of
long last thirty eight years and
we believe for the reasons
stated that this is very
important and for promoting
equitable education system in
New Mexico and one thing that
hasn't been said as far as I
know is that New Mexico is the
only state that only has an
advisory committee and that's
the Public Education Commission
and frankly it's been
marginalized only look at
charter schools and so on we
really do need something like
this bilingual multicultural
Education Advisory Council to be
in statute and to have broad
power to by three hours as
described in the bill we thank
the sponsors for bringing it
forward and we hope that we can
serve in some way to help the
some venture law thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee we also received a
request from lover read as
Balasore may call listen for the
majority but you've been to have
been unable to join us.
And that concludes public
comment NFL.
You thank you thank you Rebecca
Senator Hermio.
You madam chair woman and the
representative wrote nice to
meet you even if it's virtually
and welcome to the Senate in
general and cultural affairs
committee said nice to meet you
my question I think was touched
on by one of the supporters of
the bill not how this would help
with the Yazzie Martinez cases
and what we need to do in
regards in regards to multi
cultural education does this
touch on any of the findings in
my case.
Thank you madam chair and
senator yes yes it does because
on some of the findings in that
case and as this plaintiffs
group because it serves the
linguistic most will development
of these students so the the
call for linguistic and
culturally relevant materials is
inherent we're talking about
building language proficiency of
these groups and that is the
core.
Of the bilingual multicultural
Education Act this council is
called cabbage eight four there
is professional development.
Current teachers.
There is professional training
for teachers coming through and
when we talk about linguistic
development of students it's a
complex issue and it requires a
great deal of knowledge and the
bill is structured so that the
council includes the voices of
parents in the community so
linguistic experts education
experts the families themselves
are part of the voices that
advocate for how these programs
are structured and supported.
Perfect thank you and madam
chair woman just a comment so
I'm a former educator and so my
master's thesis was on the
literacy crisis of the Espanola
valley.
And when there was a test that
was conducted for students in
the second grade Fund Scrabble
word the students both native
and Hispanic founded the word
taco the correct word in the
national standardized test was
called.
The it was doing wrong even
though they did find a word that
was at they could relate to in
their culture and so because of
that and I remember my research
I stand in full support of this
because I do know that the bill
will also touch on curriculum
development which will include
at our culture and it's
something that we need to make
sure that we keep them there so
with that you'll have my support
and so madam chair with that I
yield the floor thank you.
Thank you anymore questions from
committee.
I do have a couple of comments
thank you Representative for the
world but being in the sport and
all that witnesses and everybody
involved with this Council and
what the multi cultural.
One of the things I really
stress to keep in mind are the
resources spent you know I see
all the what the council is
going to I'm cert
recommendations for curriculum
and instruction and professional
development.
The resources that are teachers
have in the classroom and I'm
going to the effect of all the
way down to the library to the
students especially when we
start to talk about broadband
and moving those things out of
some of our schools on the
reservations do not have.
A libraries kind of being
obsolete in the sense I mean
it's still place of you know
content knowledge.
But books
I didn't seem to you know do we
can download a lot of this and
some of our schools that have a
better.
Facility alone to speak about
the inequalities of education
are able to get the students are
able to go to there's library at
the school get a kindle and
download full book and take the
whole.
In some areas that is not
possible our children are still
not equal in that sense we when
we use that word
but when we talk about bilingual
multi cultural and linguistic is
you know seeing it spelling it
but it's also hearing it
so I really want to make sure
that those resources to that the
council can try to help advise
in that manner I know we do a
lot of but when you go leave
professional development it's
having those resources available
so you can actually implement
what you've learned and also
that the children can go out and
have access to it.
And in that sense to when we're
devising and it really touches
on what senator our meal was
talking about his assessment
when we decide on the assessment
we're going to get to our
students in the state of the
bilingual my multicultural
aspect has to be incorporated
our evaluated in which our
children are not being or kind
of you know in the negative
fashion that the I understand
that there are some you know
we're we're not a court order
eating.
Up people verses fry bread
William you would describe
something that was made in that
fashion so I hope they also you
know take that into
consideration and could their
input on those because when we
decide on an assessment for the
state and for students it really
needs to you know give us an
insight on the knowledge of our
our children and our students
thank you very much Senator
Representative do I have Senator
Shendo.
Thank you madam chair no I I
think this is a wonderful
Meant to those existing statues
that we already approved.
Of really don't have a question
but the.
I remember when I was in
elementary there was a question.
That stated something to the
fact is that what trophy is
awarded in hockey.
And I had that wrong.
In the Stanley Cup I have not
recovered from that answer to
this day so just to let you know
that a kid growing up on the
reservation.
Never do what is Danny Cup was
in the of I always remember that
question so anyway I just make
that comment and I and I think
the good things that are
relevant to our children to the
state of New Mexico and and
And how we teach our children
this much broader than I think
What we also believe that I
think you know my real education
beginning college.
As many of us when we begin to
shape the courses and explore
the things that we were never
really taught so just wanna make
that comment thank you and I.
So.
Thank you.
The past motion before us
Senator Griggs **** question of.
Greetings did you have a
question our emotions.
You know pay back for something
sometime judge all I all I can
say but I was I was actually
gonna COVID nineteen forty on on
Senator Shendo and let him
understand that you know growing
up down and Alamogordo you know
there wasn't much use for hockey
down there either so we we
didn't know anything about
hockey.
So I probably couldn't answer
that question right either.
But one thing I would ask the
the sponsor madam chair is do
you.
I guess the way things are set
up today.
Then seem to be sufficient to do
what needs to be done and and so
you need this this council are
we are we going to get into
duplication of effort or we get
a are we gonna have people
running over each other trying
to trying to do the right thing
does this mean is I guess what
I'm really really after you
obviously feel which needed well
what what's causing that that
real need to madam chair and
representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senators that's a great
question there is we've come to
a to a moment of understanding
impart impelled by the Yazzie
Martinez case or is put in front
of us so we have to recognize
something that I think a lot of
those new B. for the case the
doctor inequities in education
and about insufficient or
inadequate service to certain
groups of our students the
advantage of the bilingual
multicultural Education Act in
terms of avoiding duplication is
allowing this council to.
On page six scales and
linguistic expertise reaching
out to the communities and madam
chair your point is well made
reaching out to the communities
for the materials that are
already there I am in my thirty
first year teaching myself I am
a Spanish language teacher so
multilingualism it is important
to me and I truly understand
that classroom teachers when
they don't have access to
materials they make their own we
serve our students so there are
materials out there
that we need to pull together
into the framework make them
available and I think madam
chair to you point also I think
broadband is going to help
especially for oral languages
where we can just carry written
materials from one place to
another where we can have the
audio online and students
accessing it there it's not as
good as will still need their in
person teacher but we can convey
verbal languages languages are
only or all that way.
So madam chair and senator to
your point this is very focused
council on building up the
multilateralism of students and
the ability of our educating
professionals to properly assess
is this committee has pointed
out assessment matters and
assessment is culturally based
and even if it's linguistic
assessment those two are tied
tightly together and can't be
separated.
So that this council can advise
with regard to assessments with
regard to those materials with
regard to building the
framework.
It allows of the spanning
Education Advisory Council the
Indian Education Advisory
Council to focus on issues
outside of the linguistic ground
that also need attention.
and Mister Santa madam chair
Mister Santa may have something
to add their.
Madam chair Senator I'm just
really quickly I I I just want
to go well what Representative
Figueroa just shared and that is
that very specifically
when when I think of this panic
Education.
Advisory Council they they focus
specifically on one population
in same thing for the I. ACT the
Indian Education Advisory
Council focuses on our
indigenous communities the
bilingual to culture education
visor Council focus on on all
students and families and acts
as an advocacy lever for all
students and families that are
participating in bilingual
education programs really runs
the gamut and it looks
specifically through the lens of
language development as well as
academic achievement as well as
the cultural responsiveness
that's needed that many of you
have echoed in what you shared
up to this point and so that's
the that's the length of my my
comment thank you so much
Representative Figueroa and and
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
And mission of all.
You know sometimes and I you
know I hope that it's not really
going to be the truth in this
case but you know people get a
little a little bit criteria.
And when you put some L. chanted
that always work like you like
it like and I hope I hope this
does that I will I want to make
one quick pointed is related to
something that years ago my wife
works for the.
The Texas education tradition
she worked in an educational
service center.
And our service centers are
scattered throughout the state
we're specialist in in areas in
them.
Sure they can go out and you
know and and assessed teachers
in classrooms and you know in
areas that maybe can't afford to
have the the expertise teacher
that for show the show and maybe
some day you know if we're here
long enough for so those are
things we might want to want to
consider looking into for for
New Mexico so madam chair with
that I'll of second generation
those motion.
Senator Hermio you had your hand
up did you have something before
we go right through our our
emotions page about I'm sure if
you don't mind so Representative
I don't remember reading how are
members of the committee
selected to serve today a fight
or they appointed.
Madam chair and senator you can
find that on page two of the
bill.
It is appointed or designated
I members are appointed or
designated by
the Indian nations so there's a
member from the Navajo from the
Mescalero from the area from the
southern plains Willis from the
northern pueblos so there is
there I then there are eight
members who represent the
educational world jitter on June
twelfth grade teachers
principals superintendents
education minister there's
higher and spread across the
geographical area of the state
and then to parents are also
included.
So that is the fifteenth and the
the suggestions are created the
potential candidates people can
send in their names there
collected by the council's
current council ad hoc chairs
and PED and then PED a point.
Perfect thank you madam
chairwoman thank you
Representative and just one last
comment Senator Shendo if you
want to go see the Stanley Cup
you can pay for every single one
of us committee members to come
with you and you can see that
Stanley Cup in person and maybe
that will help to ease what you
went through as a student madam
chair no further questions that
will be next year's
appropriation.
Can we move forward with the
motion are Senator McKenna do
you have I I just
good sanitation I have another
question on the bill that I have
maybe it's not the real.
On the appointment of a
representative of chair
chairwoman no Representative you
mentioned eight members.
Representative the wide array of
teachers and and two parents had
been changed from nine to.
Okay.
I just want.
Madam chair Senator yes that was
an amendment okay all right good
thank you.
Senator McKenna did you have a
question before we.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you Representative
Figueroa where your passion as
as an educator.
I'm I I'm always
Concerned about valuing our
subject matter experts and I do
see.
That the.
Committee members are going to
be eligible for per diem and
mileage
reimbursement is that in lieu of
state an honorarium
how how does that how does PED
decide.
Whether.
Subject matter experts such as
them get an honorarium verses
this per diem and mileage
reimbursement again it gets to.
Yes to.
However I think it is to value.
experts time.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator and can I just say
awhile do I appreciate your
respect for the professionalism
of people who are called to do
this work as a teacher we don't
often get that so I thank you
for that and madam chair and
senator of per diem is pretty
much standard practice in New
Mexico government and this ad
hoc committee is is been going
has been receiving per diem and
mileage and that's really as far
as I know all that we do in New
Mexico I don't know of any
councillor Committee here
commission against anything
other than that we we as
legislators that's what we get
sh so I don't know if there is a
reason or rule in statute that
that sh when so that I just know
that that is standard practice.
Very good and madam chair and
Representative Figueroa thank
you in and I think it's more of
a COVID on my part.
We do want our state to honor
our subject matter experts are
educators.
And really take a look at how we
are compensating.
Compensating them because
You know if it's a.
The wealth of of time.
Expertise and I think it should
be.
It should be compensated so
thank you very much.
Thank you Senator McKenna
Representative Figueroa does
that conclude your presentation
of the bill.
Yes.
Includes our presentation I hope
this committee will support the
bill.
Okay so do not allow us to where
we were with the motion Senator
Schendel Senator Griggs louder
rock paper scissor.
Four so make the motion and the
senator Greg second second okay
so motion by Senator Shendo
seconded by Senator Griggs
Rebecca would you please call
the roll.
Thanks yes.
Senator McKenna.
Senator McKenna.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez yes.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator had a meal absolutely
yes Senator Pinto yes.
We have six yes is for do pass
on.
House bill fifty two as amended.
Thank you Senator Paypen growing
thank you all expert witnesses
for joining us today and you
have a do pass on house bill
fifty to one cemented bilingual
multicultural Advisory Council
thank you and we.
Thank you.
And we will move on to a
presentation by Lisa west the
Santa Fe recovery center for
corners detox center.
Before we move on Senator Griggs
has his handout Senator great.
Thank you madam chair and I just
wanted for Senator McKenna and
all of which I you know I get on
that.
Really exciting thank all Google
and honorarium.
Is a different type of payment
in per diem which is a daily
allowance to employees or
consultants to cover business
trips expansion honorarium
you're usually given to help
cover caution volunteers or
guest speakers and may be
considered taxable.
So.
That that seems to be the the
big difference about that show
you I just just happened do that
there it is right there too
exciting but I'm sure we we all
have now learned something show
so thank you very much.
Thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Griggs and
that will be on the assessment
at the conclusion of our last
committee meeting.
Please be so Wes would be pres
move forward with your
presentation.
Good morning.
Good morning madam chair and
representatives of the
committee.
And thank you for inviting us
today and we are very excited to
present our program to you and
answer any questions that you
may have
my name is Lisa I am the HR
operations supervisor with the
Santa Fe recovery center I'm
here with my colleagues Senator
so the umbrella our CEO and very
over our program director for
our new location in Gallup New
Mexico called the four corners
detox recovery center.
But before we get started
presentation I'd like to
introduce myself and give you a
brief summary about our company.
So J. eight R. B. so west
instead get routine and Jackie
on a machine Representative
acetate to pass the National I
am the right health plan work
for the tearing house plan I'm
originally from Crown Point New
Mexico and currently live here
in Santa Fe.
I am the granddaughter of the
late senator John Pinto.
And as he would only say do you
know me.
The passion that he had to help
people has been instilled upon
me to do the same and that's why
I am pleased to work here accent
the recovery center and to help
our native American Community
and our new and everyone in our
New Mexico community as well
with substance abuse disorder.
So our program
Is a substance abuse disorder
treatment center we have to
detox centers right now
And we have a thirty day and
ninety day residential program
that serves men only women women
with children and we also have
to outpatient programs Andrew
here in Santa Fe and the other
is an Espanola we also offer
recovery housing so in addition
to the ninety day
State clients that are wanting
to stay a little longer and if
there is room they can apply for
the recovery housing and we also
offer housing called the bridge
house and we have three houses
here in Santa Fe to work for men
and women for women with
children.
And the so we're currently
expanding our program and we're
really excited about our newest
program for the poor corners he
talks recovery center in Gallup.
And so if there's any questions
that you have any time during
your presentation please feel
free to ask me led to expand on
that for you so I'm gonna take
it over to still be at for a lot
of our CEO.
Thank you so much Lisa really
appreciate that introduction
good morning commissioner and
and members of the the
commission madam chair members
of the commission we are very
grateful for the opportunity to
present to you today on on the
Santa Fe recovery center and our
new program in Gallup the four
corners the tax recovery
program.
So I'm going to start by telling
you a little bit about the
recovery center and and really
appreciate what we sent has
already shared so I will take
you quickly through some of
these initial slides
so the Santa Fe recovery center
is a nonprofit we are car for
credit isn't out we do provide
substance use disorder treatment
services that
up until two months ago have
been based in Santa Fe County
and now are based in Santa Fe
and McKinley County our mission
is to work with individuals to
sustain lifelong recovery from
substance use disorders and
related mental illness by
providing culturally relevant
evidence based treatment and
education in partnership with
other community organizations.
So we really believe strongly
and the mission and values of
our organization and work very
hard to offer wholistic
treatment services in a really
thorough continuum of care that
takes individuals from detox all
the way through outpatient and
recovery housing with gender
specific residential programs
and also programs please madam
where women can bring young
children into treatment with
them when they come to
residential treatment and our
goal to work with community
partners is also extremely
critical to our ability to
provide comprehensive and and
high quality services and that's
an important value of our
organization.
Currently we serve over fourteen
hundred clients annually with
diverse socioeconomic and
cultural backgrounds that number
is going to go up significantly
for twenty twenty one now that
we have expanded to McKinley
County so we expect that we will
be serving between two thousand
and twenty five hundred clients
here in in twenty twenty one.
In Santa Fe the majority of
clients are Hispanic
approximately sixty percent in
the four corners area and the
majority of clients who come to
our services are native American
a hundred percent of the client
to come into our program fall
below the low to moderate income
limits on a hundred percent.
Eighty percent fall below the
very low income limit most of
the clients who come to us have
co occurring disorders including
medical and mental health
conditions in addition to a
primary substance use disorder.
Most clients who come to us have
poly substance use disorder with
alcohol or opiates being present
in almost all cases.
So as Lisa mentioned before we
do have a client care continuum
that includes detoxification
both social and medically
monitored then the short term
residential treatment women and
children's short term
residential treatment we have a
ninety day extended residential
treatment program in both of our
gender specific sites so gender
specific extended to residential
treatment for men and also for
women we also have recovery
housing bridge housing regular
and intensive outpatient and we
provide medication assisted
treatment in all of our programs
in all of our levels of care.
So the next two slides give a
little bit more in detail
regarding how many beds we have
our organization has grown
within the last few years for
detoxification we currently have
fifteen that's in Santa Fe but
will be expanding that to twenty
nine within the next two months
R. programming Gallup has forty
five minutes.
Our men's residential treatment
program has twenty four beds
here in Santa Fe are women and
children's residential in
extended program has thirty beds
and we can accept up to ten
children ages zero to three
years old.
Our extended residential
treatment program for men has
twenty eight budget.
We have eighteen recovery
housing then and three sober
living houses to for men and one
for women and women with
children and we can take a
capacity of up to twenty one
clients in our sober living
program.
We also have intensive
outpatient utilizing the matrix
model we provide nine hours a
week of groups and individual
therapy.
We also have regular outpatient
we have a satellite location in
Espanola and will be expanding
outpatient treatment to our
Gallup facility within the next
six months right now all of our
outpatient services are being
provided the end telehealth but
we are excited to be able to
move back into in person
outpatient services hopefully at
some point this year.
As I mentioned previously we
have medication assisted
treatments in all of our levels
of care in all of our programs.
So that continuum of care is
really critical to our mission
and the values of the recovery
center is critical to us that we
are able to successfully help
people with their treatment
process and the recovery process
and in order to do that and to
help them to be successful in
sustaining long term recovery we
have to find all of the levels
of care that they will need as
they go through the treatment
process.
In addition to twelve in
evidence based addiction
treatment services we also
provide an array of traditional
and nontraditional activities
to promote at healing for our
clients in a multitude of ways
and we've listed just some of
those traditional and
nontraditional practices that
we've incorporated into our
program.
Another important component that
we've added to our program in
recent years is case management
peer support and navigation it's
critical that we not just
provide quality treatment to
individuals when they're with us
but that we prepare them for
this charge and for
reintegration into the community
and in order to do that
effectively we have to have
strong case management and peer
support to help them navigate
and have a strong districts plan
when they leave our program.
One of the other things that
we've incorporated into our
program pretty extensively in
recent years is assisting
clients with food insecurity and
working with programs like the
life link and at the food depot
here in Santa Fe and others to
ensure that we are providing
food to our clients in all of
our programs and also at working
on gardening and horticultural
therapy to help clients to learn
about being able to grow their
own food and they we do have
gardens on most of our programs.
I wanted to talk just a minute
about how Covid nineteen has
impacted our programs and
services and how we have
the then flexible and and make
changes to meet the needs of our
clients and our communities
while remaining safe from COVID
so we were one of the very first
providers to implement safety
protocols in our facilities
including sanitation hand
washing daily temperature taking
for all staff and clients mask
wearing by all staff and clients
COVID testing of the staff and
clients and we reduced the
amount of traffic coming in and
out of our residential programs
when state home orders were
mandated our census did
initially dropped in March of
last year when COVID came to the
states but over time we were
able to employ the COVID safe
practices and get our programs
back up to capacity and we have
been able to secure up a real
protection program loans that
helped us to get through the
periods where we had significant
census drops in our programs.
We currently insure negative
comment testing of all clients
prior to admission we have
access to no ray of COVID
testing including Rapid testing
And so we are able to test our
clients prior to admission as I
mentioned earlier all of our
outpatient treatment services
are currently being provided via
telephone and telehealth all of
our residential services in
detox services are being
provided in person.
To date we're very proud of the
fact that all that I of our
hundred and thirty two employees
have been fully vaccinated.
So now I want to take just a few
moments and I and go into a
little bit more detail on the
four corners detox recovery
program how we are how and why
we started that program and then
give you some additional
information on what the next
steps are for that purpose so we
began discussions in the spring
of twenty twenty about opening a
detox program in McKinley county
due to the significant COVID
nineteen impact that community
and a lack of COVID negative
detox services so the the
program and CI
when comment was you know it was
negatively and very
significantly impacting the
community and see I began to
provide detox services to only
COVID positive patients so as a
result the hospitals were
overloaded with individuals who
needed COVID negative detox
services and there was nowhere
for those individuals to go and
NCI's capacity was diminished by
seventy five percent.
So we began planning for this
new program in July and August
of twenty twenty in partnership
with the state of New Mexicos
emergency operations center yes
yes six the behavioral health
services division McKinley
County and the city of Gallup it
required a great deal of
coordination and support from
several agencies in the
community we have to be zoning
changes and remodel buildings we
had the National Guard moving
things to it to make space and
we received some start up funds
from the behavioral health
services division as well as
support in the state county city
are Gallup Indian Medical Center
and other local providers so is
really in conjunction and in
partnership that we were able to
get this program up and running
and we opened the doors on
December twenty eighth of last
year.
The program provides social and
medically monitored
detoxification if you know
anything about the American
society of addiction medicine
levels of care we are providing
three point two with problem
management which is social detox
and three point seven withdrawal
management which is medically
monitored detox all clients
coming into our program are
voluntary admissions our program
is a hundred percent voluntary.
We do require COVID nineteen at
negative testing prior to
admission so we are providing
COVID negative the tax services
in the community our referrals
are predominantly coming from
the Gallup Indian Medical Center
St Joseph shelter in CI if they
have an overflow and we've
recently started to take walk
ins in the first two months of
the program has been open we
have seen ninety eight clients
twenty five of them have gone on
to additional treatment
residential or others.
An average length of stay for
this program has been four point
one seven eight which is
exciting from voluntary program
that people are staying in
treatment and they are choosing
to go on to additional levels of
treatment which is our goal.
So in terms of next steps for
this program and and what it
needs we are in the process of
working to pursue Arizona
Medicaid reimbursement a number
of individuals who've come into
treatment with us have not been
New Mexico residents and we are
working hard not to turn anyone
away so we are in need of at the
processes to be able to bill
Arizona Medicaid for Arizona
residents who come into our
program.
We are currently leasing the old
juvenile detention center in
Gallup for the purpose of
opening this program and we have
entered into a three year lease
with McKinley County for that
building eventually we will need
to have a permanent building and
given that building back to the
county so that they can pursue a
plan that they have for that
space so by twenty twenty four
we will need a permanent
building community for these
services we plan to expand
levels of care in this program
to include residential treatment
and outpatient within the next
six months.
And we plan and need to offer a
Sam three point seven that's the
American society of addiction
medicine levels of care which
correlates to medically
monitored residential treatment
and the reason that this is
becoming apparent to us that
this level of care is needed for
one reason it is an offered to
in the in in the state anywhere
at this point and and what it is
is it's residential treatment
for individuals who have
significant medical conditions
that are hampering their ability
to be entry.
And we have found in the clients
that we are serving in the four
corners program that there are
significant medical conditions
that individuals are struggling
with in addition to substance
use disorders and in order for
them to be successful in
residential treatment they need
to be in a location where they
can be safely cared for not just
from the substance use disorder
standpoint but also with respect
to them medical conditions.
So this is our plan in in
expanding to residential
treatment is to offer medically
monitored residential treatment
which is now a Medicaid
reimbursable service.
So I'm going to turn the
presentation over now to very
bored the program director for a
four corners program to share
just a little bit more about his
observations on this program as
it has started in the last two
months thank you so much.
Thank you so thank you to Sylvia
and these for introducing our
programs and
thank you all for your time
today and taking the time to
learn about our services and for
your continued work to bring
services to our under served
rural New Mexico communities
which we all know is so
important that right so you
mention I just wanted to share
some early observations that
I've seen in my and two months
on site in the early development
of our program so to start up
I'll start with the program
development and and how it's
coming along and where we're
headed as so you mentioned it's
a key organizational value to
serve to provide culturally
relevant services and so the way
that that shaping up with our
clinical staff right now we have
to independently licensed would
work independently licensed
clinicians who have worked in
the Gallup community for decades
and we also have to certified
peer support workers and there
are Cork medical staff who are
developing the program and we
also have two more clinicians
who are on boarding soon and
what that's looking like so far
in the first round of groups
that are being implemented
include psycho educational
groups on trauma and substance
use I live disruption and
recovery planning group we have
a holistic wellness recovery
group that looks it balance of
mind body spirit and emotional
state.
We also have one of our care
support workers will be running
a Navajo wellness model group
and another one of our peer
support workers will be running
a twelve step based recovery
group and we also have our
clients joining twelve step
meetings through soon that are
local to this community so that
they can hopefully get plugged
into the recovery community on
that later on in their treat.
And we also have great space
here for for recreational
activities and so all of that is
is developing and it's very
exciting.
and it's becoming clearly
becoming a beautiful tapestry of
culturally relevant services
that that represent the culture
in the region here in the four
corners region.
I'm just another update but I'll
share with you it's just
regarding the staff I and and
organizational culture here I
see that our staff is
tremendously passionate about
the work that they're doing and
they're very committed even in
that challenging early phases of
a start up and extremely
resilience to work through those
challenges and as I'm getting to
know the staff here on all
levels of this interdisciplinary
team I can tell you that
everybody has their own story
their own history that's tied
into what we've experienced in
our New Mexico communities and
that seems to be what motivates
everyone so that's been really
inspirational for me to come in
and program director and be able
to work with such a wonderful
staff another thing that I would
like to share with you is just
some relief some stories that
represent some early feedback
from the clients and sort of
anecdotal evidence that what
we're doing here is meaningful
and that it's working our
clients have expressed their
extremely grateful for our
services they're appreciative
that our services exist and
we've even gotten thank you
letters from the clients that
are just so happy to that four
corners recovery has come to
allocate community
and we hear a lot of times from
science this is never existed
here I've never even thought
about going into recovery I'm so
glad that this opportunity came
here other clients are very
engaged as Sylvia mentions of
the ninety eight research twenty
I have gone on to residential
treatment which is a very
promising signs that people want
people want to into recovery
they want to go on and of course
not everybody's first time
coming through.
For withdrawal management will
they go on for permanent
recovery long term recovery but
we're seeing a good number of
them are are ready for that
which is really encouraging and
just the clients are expressing
that are hopeful again they say
things like I've just never had
an opportunity to do this and
and they're really really
appreciative
one story I'll share with you as
we had a client who we just
transferred to residential
actually this week when he came
and he came in off the streets
you Mr expense variance in
homelessness yeah call you
substance use disorder including
ivy heroin and he was initially
just you know he's not feeling
well and coming across as
somewhat non compliant with the
staff and cussing at the staff
as they try to take his vitals
and stuff so I went in there
with a case manager and and RTMC
to talk to them and just said we
we understand you're you're
comfortable but we're here to
help you and we hope we can
create an environment of mutual
respect well within a day he did
a total one eighty next thing
you know he's helping the Mets
Tax around the the storm is
really motivated to go to
residential and he ended up
going to residential treatment
is just so amazing I came in
after the weekend and it's like
a totally different person I
just I wanted to share that
story with you because for me
that's the type of thing that
that helps you get up in the
morning to do this work
another key thing about our
program that serves in the first
couple of months is the
community support and
collaboration so you mentioned
that you know all the
collaboration and support it
when it's opening our programs
and I'm just really impressed
with the Gallup community to
wait it's come together with
different stakeholders in years
and community we need multiple
times a week I'm meetings with
providers with the hospitals
with the talks facilities and
other social support
organizations to talk about how
we're coordinating care and
collaborating and to me that's.
Really really a magical
Environment to do providing
services and so I'm really
thankful for the out Gallup
community for that so in closing
you know again personally I'm
just really grateful to be part
of this of Santa recovery center
and now four corners.
Recovery center it's it's been a
tremendous experience and I'm
I'm just so happy to be part of
this and and to work alongside
the Sensoria and the rest of our
amazing staff and our
organization I'm honored to be
welcome city Gallup community to
work in this community and to
fight for our rural communities
who are so underserved it's yeah
I'm just so glad to be here and
be doing this work and I'm
inspired by the vision and
mission.
Values of our organization and
our services that we shared with
you today and to be making a
difference in our community so
thank you so much for your time
and if you have any questions
for us and we're definitely open
for that.
Thank you thank you thank you
for your presentation committee
members do we have any
questions.
Senator Hermio.
Thank you so much for the work
that you're doing Lisa Sylvia
and very Madam chairwoman my
question is is do you by any
chance plan I'm taking the detox
to Rio Arriba county or
Espanola.
Thank you senator madam chair we
are.
Not at this moment looking at
expanding the tax beyond the
programs that we have but I will
say that the Santa Fe detox
program is doubling and signs
within the next couple of months
and that will allow us to bring
clients more clients into
treatment and traditionally we
have gotten a lot of clients who
travel from Rio Arriba and and
surrounding communities because
there are not many detox
services available in those
communities so are expansion of
a detox services in Santa Fe and
should help to serve that
community and you know with
forty five deaths in the Gallup
facility we have significantly
increased detox services
statewide with those two
expansions and and absolutely
bring clients in from other
communities to get to go into a
tree.
Madam chairwoman Sylvia thank
you for that now one thing I was
just going to put in your here
is there's a wink at the
Presbyterian Hospital in
Espanola that was supposed to be
used for cardiac and so it never
launched but that week I think
would be a perfect place for
medical detox if you ever think
about expanding into Rio Arriba
county maybe talking to the
county manager on how you can
come in to re reboot because as
you know addiction affects my
community and my County which is
really bad at us with and one
last thing madam chair woman is
just a comment I'm happy to see
that you're allowing women to
bring their children because
their path to recovery at
national studies show Madam
chairwoman that when women are
allowed to bring their children
they will stay in a program they
will succeed in a program by
having their children with them
so thank you for offering that
thank you for all that you do
and with that Madam chairwoman
no other questions.
Thank you senator.
Thank you thank you senator are
male I'm.
The building that you guys are
in currently is it sufficient to
I know we're talking about
budget and it's a juvenile
detention center but as far as
we purpose seeing the building
is it sufficient to meet the
needs of what you guys are
going.
Thank you madam chair we are
very excited about the building
I know that it is I I'd
sometimes people to think of the
juvenile detention center being
appropriate location for for
detox and treatment services but
the building really does have
what we need to be able to
provide high quality services
it's a large building being able
to open forty five beds for
detox services is really
phenomenal we have the ability
in that facility to administer
meds and have an on site
pharmacy because of of the
security and and the lay out in
the set up I'm we've worked very
hard to to make some
modifications to the building so
it does not feel like a jailer
detention center obviously the
cells.
Given that connotation but we
put really nice bedding and and
no one is locked in and we're
creating as as very mentioned
really nice recreational
facilities so we're actually
really pleased with the building
it is very challenging to find
buildings anywhere in the states
that support residential
services because you need both
the commercial and residential
buildings all in one and so.
I'm detention centers are are
buildings that have been
constructed to sleep people and
and that's one of the most
important components and they
meet all of the fire code center
up for that so the building is
is working well for us we know
that it's only temporary will
only be able to be there three
years and so we do want to begin
to look at what is necessary to
find a permanent home for this
program but for the time being
that the building is is
definitely meeting our.
Thank you and so the building in
Santa Fe eight was that built to
your needs are words that are
pre purpose building.
Madam chair we more than one
facility in Santa Fe we have a
facility on the CM ranger that
once built to our specifications
from the nineties that was built
by the recovering alcoholics
program that we took over from
as a residential treatment
building and that's obviously
ideal but very rare.
It's we have also received
capital outlay funds in the last
two sessions to put another
building on campus for women and
children and you have a capital
outlay request in this year so I
always like to put in a plug
anything you to support our
capital outlay requests to
expand services on our ceiling
campus I'm for women and
children the other facility in
Santa Fe that we are providing
services is on the Middletown
campus that used to be the
university of art and design I
and so that building was built
as a dormitory for college
students so we we are getting
quite creative in thinking about
the stability is that can be
repurposed so one of our
facilities in Santa Fe for women
and children was built specific
to our needs I and the other one
the ins out college dormitory
area.
yes and that's our secure.
The detox program will be moving
to Dallas state I'm in front of
the magistrate court here in
Santa Fe and that building has
been remodeled by the county and
half of the is going to be the
new crisis center that Santa Fe
county and and opening and the
other half will be the detox
building so again that's an
example of a building that's
that's been repurposed so once
we move back into that building
next month we will have three
different capsules in Santa Fe
only one of which was originally
constructed as a treatment
center.
Thank you I'm.
So
the the or laci the.
L. G. B. T. Q. I. A. when you're
talking about male and female.
R. is there an issue as far as
you know incorporating when
you're having to make these
decisions of where they're going
to be house it is that something
that is considered within your
program or is it just the bottom
line
And I know that you know it go
ahead and answer my question.
Here that is an excellent
question and one that out we
thought through very carefully
I'm absolutely at we are an
inclusive program and welcoming
of the L. G. B. T. Q. A. I. a
community and out what we have
done with respect to that is
asked individuals what what
campus since we do have gender
specific campuses they would be
most comfortable in and we
accommodate that so we
individuals who identify as
transgender can come into either
of our programs depending on
where they feel most comfortable
and some have decided to have
chosen to come into the program
of the gender that they identify
and sometimes they felt more
comfortable in our other program
so we evaluate that and
sometimes will make
accommodations such as giving
them their own grow up things of
that nature but to date we have
not had any problems are we
given choice and at respect in
in in an inclusive community and
and it's it's worked.
Thank you
So in that thanks to our.
Them.
The link to cancer alcohol and
cancer and even being proactive
you know it we don't want to
have to have the talk Senators
whatever are have to increase
the sites because that's on the
back end of it but on the front
and is there anything that you
guys doing proactively to to you
know in Tibet are giving advice
or adviser are into into the
communities you are in as far as
You know the stem of the
problem.
Thank you madam chair that is
such a wonderful question one of
the things that we've worked
particularly hard to do in
recent years is really build an
integrated program we recognize
that substance use disorder
comes along with significant
trauma and mental health
conditions as well as
significant medical conditions
and when we look at our local
hospitals and how many clients
are admitted into inpatient care
with gastrointestinal issues and
for going on ventilators and who
are dying in our communities and
our hospitals it often is
alcohol and and drug related and
so the only way to really begin
to address this is to provide
integrated care that addresses
simultaneously a person
substance use disorders medical
conditions and mental health
conditions and so it is really
critical for us that we have
begun to integrate care we have
a medical director for our
program we have psychiatrists
who work with us we have mental
health clinicians as well as
addiction clinicians and we are
partnering with the local
primary care and hospitals to
ensure that individuals are
receiving the care that they
need and absolutely we see we
see alcohol and other drugs as a
significant impact and risk
factor for diabetes and cancer
and many other health conditions
I increases domestic violence
suicide.
There is such an immense overlap
between addiction treatment and
and medical and and psychiatric
conditions that our communities
are facing so it's only by
providing integrated care and
working in conjunction and
collaboration with community
partners that we can begin to
address the needs of the whole
person and that is a really
important value of ours and so
we absolutely partner.
With the local hospitals cancer
centers at cetera to insure that
they are receiving addiction
treatment services but also that
their medical needs are being
addressed.
And the reason anyone Center
army was talking about women and
children that that cycle might
is are you able to address that
with the children as far as
educating them and you know or
is it just really just a patient
that some.
I'm focused on.
Thank you madam chair our
children's program started a
couple of years ago and because
of space limitations work
currently have having children
zero to three years old and in
with their mothers we hope to
expand the age of the children
that were able to start as I
mentioned there's a capital
outlay requests in now to expand
the building on our ceiling cap
this and if we can double the
size of our residential
treatment on that campus we can
begin to have multiple programs
that are appropriately separate
age groups for children so right
now because the children that
are coming into treatment with
their mothers are is here to
three years old there in the
very early stages of development
and so we have been partnering
with masking grants to provide
infant mental health and
assessments to those those at
those young babies that are
coming into our program and we
are also working with last
semester provide parenting
circle of security programs that
work with mother child I add on
to strengthen that relationship
to help your brain to improve
Erin Jang and we absolutely
believe that those are important
components in changing recycle
and interrupting the cycle that
these children and their you
know that these parents have
have gone through their parents
have gone through do we really
want to interrupt that cycle and
you created in your chair these
children and as we're able to
increase our program size and
age groups of the children who
will be doing more and more
interventions yup.
So would you say that there.
From your experience in the
field is there a gap then when
we talk about the women
the diction and then when the
children
Is there there is to is there no
service in New Mexico or very
little none as far as having.
Many in anything like this for
them.
Thank you madam chair absolutely
out we opened our programs for
women and children because there
were no residential programs and
state where moms can bring their
children when they came into
treatment there are some
transitional living programs
where children can come into
treatment those are limited as
well but really still there are
almost no services available in
the state where moms can bring
your children and the need is
significant and we recognize
that the limitation on age of
the children is problematic we
have made exceptions to make
children work for and I and even
have a six year old and are
under that program last year and
we're really trying to make sure
that we're meeting the needs of
the age group that we're
starting and not taking all I'm
older children into a small
space where we can meet all of
their needs but we have expanded
that and what's next sections
where programs because there was
literally nowhere else for these
women to step should be no other
way for these women to be able
to engage in treatment because
there was no one to care for
their children out so we are
really working hard to try to
expand the age group and
definitely hope that that more
programs in the state will open
this type of program because
there's almost no services
available where would be to
bring children street and the
thank you I don't want to sound
biased that just women have you
know that care for their
children back but there's also
you know the fathers out there
are mails that do you care for
children to that probably
instead of going the latter and
I think it's very different for
a domestic violence shelter in
that sense to provide a service
in that manner but so then my
much of the time especially in
the area I represent the
substance abuse and the the
violence do go hand in hand.
And it is not just a gender
specific in that sense
and one last question are maybe
it's more of I don't know if you
want to comment on it as far as
marijuana and cannabis you know
our neighbors up to the north
have legalized it and that New
Mexico is looking to take it up
as a
do you predict Sara what's your
prediction are what what could
you give us some foresight based
on some of what you've seen
around this happened.
Thank you madam chair.
A great question I I would say
that that my responsible will
probably be you know my my
opinion rather than than
anything substantive I'll tell
you I've been doing this work
for eighteen years and in
working with youth and adults
with substance use disorders
and it is more so an issue for
you there were I worked in
residential treatment programs
for adolescents for a number of
years and we would have
individuals come into treatment
where marijuana use was a factor
in fifteen years of working with
adults I've never seen someone
come through treatment just with
marijuana use disorder and no
other no other use disorders and
I have worked with a number of
physicians over the years who
really believe in that marijuana
can be utilized in medication
assisted treatment for anxiety
disorders pain PTSD and so I I
will say that as a CEO of an
addiction treatment provider I'm
not worried that the
legalization of marijuana oil
negatively impact addiction in
the adults community that we
work with there are some
concerns around you and at those
will probably exist whether it
whether it's legalized or not
and certainly we see a lot of
marijuana use in the client to
come to treatment but it is not
their primary substance it is
more concerning with alcohol and
And with opiates and cocaine
methamphetamine those are the
benzodiazepines you know those
are the substances that that
we're more concerned about so I
I am I'm not someone who is
supposed to to legalization
you know I I sometimes think
that legalization brings with it
the ability to regulate more out
which can be a budget but but I
will say that that with the
adults that we work with
marijuana in and of itself does
not seem to be the substance
that negatively affects their
lives the way that alcohol
cocaine benzodiazepines
methamphetamine opiates do.
Thank you thank you and I I
think that's a challenge because
we define adult as eighteen
years and about in which adult
is very different I don't know
if we could use a different term
as far as maturity in the at
that age is not something.
Defines that and I thank you so
much for you guys for joining us
and giving us some insight
there.
Don't know if Senator harm you.
I'm showing just two quick
comments one is why recovery in
Rio Arriba county is also doing
they just purchased a campus to
ensure that they can also offer
women or families who can come
in and I think their age limit
is twelve so I agree with you
that this is beneficial and my
last comment is Lisa your
grandfather was a great man and
I knew him and I know that he's
super proud to know that two of
his granddaughters are
advocating for communities and
so I have the pleasure to work
alongside chairwoman concern and
it's so nice to me to me Elise
that because I know that your
grandfather is proud that you're
carrying on his legacy as well
as chairwoman.
And that's all Madam chairwoman
thank you thank you anything
else from committee and thank
you Lisa for coming out in the
Senator Hermio been very
gracious he built a Alex right
so the interesting small world
for us out here and thank you
much so much and I look forward
to working with you guys a
little more and addressing our
issues here thank you senators
for joining us today for the
presentation and we will see you
on the floor soon and a couple
minutes go get something to
Munch on before you get onto the
floor thank you Lisa thank you
for joining us and we will see
committee member stay on for a
moment
Rebecca do we have any
housekeeping.
No housekeeping at this time no
house keeping at this time I do
believe we have
One more bill that was
Put into committee that is
correct and madam chair we will
have Senate bill for twenty five
Conservest Conservancy an
irrigation district salaries by
Senator Baca for next Tuesday.
And I guess we'll see what
happens we might not have the
agenda up well Friday at the
latest we'll see what happens
are today and tomorrow and I
don't know if Saturday if
anything will be put on there
so but we will be to stay and
I'm thinking that I don't know
how we feel about moving the
time back to ten.
Unless the floor
let's move that.
Ten o'clock okay.
Madam chair thanks.
Yes the okay I'm sure that be
surely be fine by me okay so
we'll meet ten o'clock on
Tuesday pending us far as I know
we just have the one bill and
we'll see what happens today and
tomorrow will determine what
happens next Thursday in our
committee and thank you for
joining us thank thank thank you
Rebecca thanks in part and you
guys have a great until we meet
again in committee we'll see
you.
Bye bye bye.
