Senator Byrd.
Senator Campos.
Senator from the lawyer.
Senator Gonzales present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill you're.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator McKenna
Senator Moores.
Senator my nose.
Senator Neville.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pro.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
You have a quorum Mister
president thank you rest of all
the members of please rise for
the indication to me that today
by a very on Senators Craig
Spanish to be led today by
Senator Michael Padilla.
And the salute to New Mexico
flag to be led today by Senator
Hamblen.
people to be subject.
Two rulers and authorities to be
obedient to be ready to do
whatever is good to slander no
one to be peaceable and
considerate.
And always to be gentle toward
everyone.
pleasures we lived in malice and
envy being hated and hating one
another but when the kindness
and love of god our savior
appeared.
Spirit whom he poured out on us
generously through Christ.
Our savior.
So that having been justified by
his grace we might become errors
in god may be careful to devote
themselves to doing what is
good.
These things are excellent and
profitable for everyone but
More of the by a person once and
then warned them a second time
after that have nothing to do
with the.
These last.
Seven weeks.
More we just pray that you get
us through this final stretch.
You know that our strength is
tapped.
For the give us wisdom because
without you there is no wisdom.
Father god we pray that you
On to the glory of you in Jesus
precious name we pray amen.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
Momentum lanthanide on of on
that a in those.
Once again reflective of the
announcements and miscellaneous
around that order business
announcements miscellaneous
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president and thank you Senator
Brandt
I just your the timing and the
message I could not have been
your your words are spot on and
and mean mean a lot we've come
through a journey for seven
weeks we've got a journey for
one week to go and extra deep
breaths and just remember to
I do want to say that it's
Center Lopez's birthday today so
it's a special day so when we
special day with her two kids
and again happy birthday Senator
Lopez ideal Senator Lopez
Senator Lopez I thank you very
older we sometimes don't like
really like to celebrate those
particular numbers that show up.
But we had a nice lunch the kids
sing me Happy Birthday we had
it is but thank you very much
everyone and just grateful that
I had another year around the
sun.
Mr president if I may since I
have the floor in NMAA consent
Candelaria the no objection so
ordered.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I yield to any other
members for announcements and
then we'll let everyone know
what we're going to do tonight.
the floor session instead of the
end but the time of the day is
about right to talk about.
I forgot what I'm gonna talk
about what's at the fence Mr
president.
and probably I tried to go
through it I just bounced off of
it.
But then I realized I was sleep
Because this late in the day
already I won't mention that
this is a political prop and I
wish it was gone.
Thank you senator share any
further announcements Senators.
Senator go ahead.
Senator.
Chavis they are me ho it in
honor of women's history month
our meal was born in Albuquerque
and became New Mexico's first
woman to serve in political
office.
What are me ho was appointed
equal rights for both local and
national government the New
Mexico Supreme Court ruled in
her favor and legislation
followed allowing women
statewide to take office nearly
a decade before the suffrage
movement would earn women
the seats in the New Mexico
state legislature with even more
to come in the future.
We should all women here in the
state chamber I'm sorry the
Senate chamber I would happy
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president members
of the body I just wanted to
give a shout out to a gentleman
lives in Los Montoya is
his name Steven one toy last
night my wife had a flat tire on
how we are in in New Mexico that
when we see somebody in need we
stop what we're doing in and we
help them so you know I just
I see no further announcements.
Senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr president so just
something we're going to do the
house bill's tonight and will
start at the top of the list and
just work our way down the house
bill's so starting with item
number nineteen
out of the center Stuart as I
have on the list of people have
that number twenty is house bill
forty three that'll be Senator
pope.
we're both Sanchez there I'll
talk to him about that twenty
three house bill twenty three
will be Center Hamlin.
Twenty four house bill one of
three will be centers the fan
X..
Gonzales will be those eight
bills and just wanted to give
everyone a heads up on that.
We also have a.
Large number of confirmations
but I don't see Senator Ivy Soto
business messages from the house
the reader to read.
Message from the house of
representatives.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house agriculture and
House Bill to ninety six with
the emergency clause and
requests the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk gentle so that the message
respectfully submitted Senator
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk the
general reflect that the message
from the house has been received
and Mister president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
Senate bill one forty as amended
by the Senate Senate bill two
hundred as amended by the Senate
Senate bill twenty seven with
the emergency clause Senate bill
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk of
the house the gentle so that the
message from the house has been
received Sir.
of business committee reports
the reader to read.
Mr president your rules
committee has had under
consideration Senate executive
message number thirteen dated
March ninth two thousand twenty
one in which the governor makes
the following appointment Dr
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this appointment
respectfully submitted Senator
Daniel A. Ivey Soto chairman.
He's not.
Read to be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
put on them with the single
motion and that the record show
that they were vote acted upon
Christopher the body as a
student member of the New Mexico
highlands university board of
regents for term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring
December thirty one two thousand
governor makes the following
reappointment.
Jerry Anthony army ho as a
member The New Mexico institute
of mining and technology board
of regents for term commencing
thousand twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
reappointment Veronica Espinosa
as a student member of the New
Mexico institute of mining and
technology board of regents for
Senate executive message number
eleven dated March fourth two
thousand twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
appointment David a look right
as a member of the New Mexico
institute of mining and
Senator executive message number
eleven dated March fourth two
thousand twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
appointment Neil the Betsy as a
student member of the New Mexico
Senator executive message number
fourteen dated March tenth two
thousand twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
recommends that the Senate
confirm this appointment.
Senate memorial thirteen do pass
and that's referred to the
health and public affairs
committee.
Senator Daniel A. Ivey Soto
chairman.
I moved it Mr president I move
the adoption of the committee
upon individually.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go to that order
business confirmations and ideal
Mr president I hereby submit the
credentials of Jerry Anthony I
to me whole who is been
reappointed as a region to the
New Mexico institute of mining
and technology board of regents
March fourth.
Twenty twenty one I move that
sent in by do hereby confirm the
appointment of cherry and the
new army Hotez region of New
Senator is.
I see no objection Senator many
us to explain the conferee thank
you Mr president.
New Mexico State University in
business administration his
juris doctor at UNM.
He was on the dean's list in
nineteen eighty four at the
university New Mexico had the
highest grade for ethics award
at the university Mexico.
in numerous capacities Attorney.
I think is public service and
his family is what really
matters to New Mexico.
He's.
His wife Lillian army health has
worked for the school.
The New Mexico institute of
mining in very mining technology
in very different ways so with
that will stand for questions
present thank you centerman US
closed on the confirmation.
Is to present ask man's consent
the records for the rules been
called and all those present
voted in the affirmative.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator brand.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator serve on this Senator
Cervantes yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator guide goes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores yes Senator my
nose.
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator for
the.
Senator Stewart I yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Sanchez senator Sanchez yes
Senators committee Senators
maybe is yes senators of the
Lopez.
Senator yes you're Lopez yes
Stefanics Senator Braniff yes
Senator Steinborn Senator
Steinborn is Senator Stewart
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Gallegos yes.
By a vote of forty in the
confirmation and expiring
December thirty first twenty
twenty six has been doing
confirmed by the New Mexico
state Senate.
Centerman us thank you Mr
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much Mr president Mr president I
hereby submit the credentials of
I yield to Senator Ingle to
present this country Senator
Ingle thank you Mr president
president pursuant to Senate
executive message number eleven
The board of regents of New
Mexico institute of mining and
technology.
Seeing no objection Senator
Ingle to explain the country.
is run the DFA.
He started he was a graduate of
New Mexico highlands.
And he has a doctorate from the
university of New Mexico he was
He's been the first executive
director New Mexico council of
university presidents from
nineteen ninety seven to twenty
probably as good as to the one
we used to know David Harris
David Abbey is an ideal person
to have on the board of regents
because he has this knowledge of
health of the money works in
In those things the the his
knowledge of state government
and how how the government works
in New Mexico in the money flows
will be very important.
So will now stand for questions
CNN center in go to close.
Thank you Mr president president
I ask unanimous consent that the
Senator seats we're voting on
the appointment.
As border region to New Mexico
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Ingle Senator Ingle yes Senator
Ivey Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal Senator on a
Senator Moores Senator Moores
yes senator Munoz.
Senator one is yes senator
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
broke.
Senator propias Senator
Yes Senator severe Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
senator so I'm going Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Stewart
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
The appointment of David and a
free as a member of the New
Mexico institute of mining
technology border agents for
term limits involve confirmation
and expiring December thirty
a confirmation vote and David
pre will serve the New Mexico.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much as president Mr president I
hereby submit their credentials
regents and I now yield to
senator Conrad Hempel Senator
sent conference.
Thank you Mr president pursuant
to Senate executive message
number eleven dated March fourth
twenty twenty one I move that
Say no objection certificate
they have failed to explain the
conference Mr president it's an
honor to
students in New Mexico she's
currently a PhD student in
mechanical engineering at New
Mexico tech and on target to
graduate and twenty twenty five
Colorado school of mines and
majored in chemical and
biochemical engineering she's
bilingual and was the translator
during the engineers without
scholarships throughout her
educational career I have no
doubt she'll continue to use
your skills talents experience
and intelligence to change the
Espinoza anyone wishing to
debate.
Saying David center going to him
for the close Mr president I ask
I Veronica's rentals a tier
states.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria Senator to run this
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs Senator
Griggs yes Senator Hamblen
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal Senator
Hermio yes Senator Kernan.
yes senator one knows.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Madam chair there Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Steinborn Senator Steinborn is
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator common yes senator
Wirth.
affirmative on the negative the
reappointment of running this
from us as a student member of
the New Mexico institute of
mining technology board of
regents for tournaments and upon
recognize Veronica Espinosa and
accomplishment.
of Mr Christopher so Senator
who's been appointed as a region
to the New Mexico State
University board of regents and
I now yields are number one
levels Senator Moores to present
confirm the appointment of
Christopher Steele Saito as a
region to the Mexico college of
a chemical and agricultural
arts.
college of agricultural
mechanical arts so I prefer the
latter.
Chris is a long standing New
Mexico grew up in the Los crucis
president of the national spent
a cultural center board and has
been on a number of boards and
commissions and state government
and the private sector so as
president I stand ready for
CNN center more ciclos thank you
Mr president I now move that New
Mexico state Senate confirmed
Christopher Saul Saito as a
region to New Mexico State
Other Senator Baca Senator Baca
yes Senator Brandt Senator
Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
Senator Hickey yes Senator Ingle
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores Senator Moores
yes senator wanting us senator
Munoz yes senator Neville.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
yes Senators readies Senator
Schmidt is yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator Sedillo Lopez
yes Senator sure Senator sure
Stefanics Senator Stefanics DS
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
negative the employment of
Christopher T. socio as a member
of the Mexico State University
border regions for term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring December thirty first
None of us residences that are
that much president I hear by
some of the credentials of Neil
Lee Betsy a student who's up
conferee senator Paul.
Mr president pursuant to Senate
executive message number eleven
dated March fourth twenty twenty
one I move that the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of newly Betsy as student regent
constituent of district twenty
three in the fourth year student
at New Mexico State University
pursuing a bachelor of science
and engineering physics with the
supplemental major in applied
mathematics and a minor in
aerospace engineering but his
background and story is much
five in the nineteen thirties
very few colleges serve the
higher education needs of young
native American students like as
grandfather and grandmother in
decades past most education
programs and training available
native Americans consists of the
He and his grandmother invested
in their children's future by
maintaining a large and healthy
herd of cattle sheep and goats
to pay for schooling at New
Mexico state his grandfather
would sail steers will.
New Mexico state is part of his
DNA throughout his childhood and
adolescence as a young adult.
even meeting his that's all
professors walking the corridors
of injuring calls.
those who much is given much is
expected we also believe the
spoon region position allows for
unique perspective that ensures
decisions made at the highest
level Representative reflect the
needs of students I'm honored to
Neal Leavitt C..
As a student region New Mexico
State University anyone wishing
to bait.
To call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca areas Senator
Brandt.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator should run because yes
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator guy
it goes.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey Senator Hickey yes
Senator Ingle.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator for
the year.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Senator songes yes senator
smitteez Senators maybe is yes
senator to the your Lopez yes
Your souls yes Senator Stefanics
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of thirty nine the
affirmative zero the negative.
twenty twenty two has been duly
confirmed by the Senate.
Senator.
Thank you Mr president we can
rise and give a.
Round of applause for New stern
region of New Mexico State
hereby submit the credentials of
Christopher Lee ready a student
who's been appointed regent at
the New Mexico highlands
university and I yield Senator
Campos to present this country
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Christopher or
leave IT as student regent to
New Mexico highlands university.
only about a for the on going
diligence that he shows he's
professionally persistent and
all the work that he does in all
his endeavors he's very
thoughtful and this morning or
he's working on three degrees at
the post secondary level and
hopes to have more completed by
the year twenty twenty three he
serves as the student body
individuals Mr president members
of the Senate who believes in
student success I could go
through all of his credentials
but what I want to do is just
leave you with one important
being that student but he is
also that servant with those
kind of credentials Mr president
members of the Senate I believe
that this young man as the years
go by we're gonna find that he's
all of us in general better is
he proceed so that Mr president
members of the Senate we stand
for further either affirmation
or if individuals wish to
the the reappointment of
Christopher the of the body.
See no debate Senator Campos
close.
Thank you very much Mr president
Senator seats we are voting.
The clerk to call the roll
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt is
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
yes Senator Gallegos.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator yes Senator Ingle
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
disciplinary as senator for the.
Senator for the ATS Senator
Pinto.
Sanchez Senator songes yes
Senators committees.
Senator submitted yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Senator Shendo as he gets rectus
this yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator soprano
X. Senator branded yes and
worth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods
Senator Woods yes.
Four in the affirmative zero on
twenty two has been doing
confirmed by the Senate Senator
Campos thank you Mr president
members of the Senate please
join me in congratulating
Christopher Lee IT as a rising
star in the member of the New
Mexico highlands university
Soto thank you very much Mr
president Mr president I hereby
submit the credentials of Dr
Frank Sanchez who's been
appointed to be a regent at the
New Mexico highlands university
thirteen dated March the ninth
twenty twenty one I move that
the Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Dr Frank Sanchez
as a region to New Mexico
about all of these individuals
as they have come forward to be
not only those public servants
but committed to education and
had parents yet grandparents and
and other relatives who continue
to encourage him to move forward
in life and so as a did he
continue to be very
Thirty three years as a dentist
ten years as a member of the New
Mexico highlands board of
regents.
Thirty two years as a member of
both he and his wife Joanne.
And they're a strong team in Las
Vegas and San Miguel County but
they continue to do is to go
ahead and share to have fund
in others.
So they not only give of their
personal wealth they give of
their time and talents and they
continue to motivate so many
work of this fine couple.
And as Frank always says I don't
do anything without conferring
with Joanne.
And I believe that's been this a
cornerstone a leader of Las
Vegas in New Mexico highlands
university when people want to
get things done.
They turned to Frank and Joanne
Sanchez.
Anyone with the right.
See no debate Senator Campos to
you know Dr Sanchez came to the
legislature and and worked in
Senate rules committee where I
was able to meet him and and
instant friendship formed
quickly and
she has a passion for Las Vegas
and continually works to improve
the the city of Las Vegas and
highlands university is the
heart of heart of Las Vegas and
so he's gonna do what's best for
highlands and for the students
See none Senator Campos close
thank you very much Mr president
and as a compliment to Senator
believe in Las Vegas and so that
with that Mr president members
of the Senate I ask for a roll
call so that we can confirm this
fine individual thank you
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt give senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes Sierra the
Duhigg Senator do here yes
Senator Gallegos Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gonzalez
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal.
Senator Moores yes senator one
else.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Hemphill.
Yes Representative are yes
Senator Pirtle Senator Pirtle
yes Senator pro.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
yes senators of the office yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn as senator
try to hang on to the money
maybe.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Senator Woods yes forty.
Four in the affirmative there on
the negative the appointment of
Dr Frank sciences as a member of
the New Mexico highlands
Senate please join me in
welcoming and thanking and
congratulating this humble
servant of higher education Dr
Frank Sanchez to the New Mexico
highlands university board of
set of nominees to these
positions there are more to come
this next week thank you very
much.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business committee
reports on that order of
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino
chairman Senator anticipate a Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate agree to
read Senate bill three fifty two
to pass and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill three sixty six
three sixty eight Senate bill
Senate bill three ninety three
do pass sentence referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill three ninety six do
bill three eighty eight do pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill twenty
seven do pass and it's referred
the Judiciary Committee.
House bill one twenty three to
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill to twenty four do
pass.
How state government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to
fifty as amended do pass.
anticipate a Mr president I move
the adoption of the community
committee report that says that
motion to that the committee
report.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous that we know
that our business announcements
and miscellaneous.
For that business senator Wirth.
suspended at the journal show
all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
no objection it is so ordered Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
do these committee reports and
then we'll go go to third
reading center portal you're up
first a unanimous consent we go
that our business committee
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Senator Joseph
Cervantes chairman Senator about
This several of them Senator
what really like to know how
many ten.
Miss Suazo present ask unanimous
have Senator sleeping anymore is
here to help us count but but I
I.
Yeah the yeah but but I hope you
reader to read.
House Bill two oh one do pass.
House bill forty one do pass
house bill one eighty five do
pass.
House bill ninety six as amended
do pass.
House bill one eighty three do
pass.
House bill fifty one as amended
do pass.
House bill two hundred do pass.
chairman Senator about this Mr
president I move adoption of
those Canadian reports I I've
kind of eleven am I right is
that right Levin Senator I
rules committee reports read but
yeah I I think we got eleven or
twelve and there.
some of their thirteen there was
twelve ever read it all together
and then the original one which
may thirteen for that's correct
senator over again I just wanna
you senators as a motion to
adopt the committee report.
Say no objection the credit for
has been adopted.
reading of legislation and yield
to Senator Pirtle on that order
business third reading of
legislation Senator Pirtle.
amendment or substitution no
objections center Pirtle
explained the bill.
The agency president several to
thirty four as amended simply
removes the onerous requirement
put on hold school kids to take
the GED to qualify for the
See no debate center protocols
on the bill Mr president move
Senate bill two thirty four as
amended ask for a roll call the
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Diamond AS Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal Senator how to meal
yes Senator Kernan.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator to to
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez senator Sanchez yes
Senators committees.
Senator share yes Senator
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics senator the planet's
yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senate Senator Pirtle thank you
Mr president colleagues.
Thank you senator moving on to
the next item on the calendar we
have Senator Gonzales.
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendments or substitute see no
objections.
Senator Gonzales explained the
Senate bill one thirty three as
amended proposes to create a new
aviation grant program with the
New Mexico department of
transportation under the rural
rural communities through a
grant program administered by
the New Mexico DOT.
Senate bill one thirty three as
amended relies on the
existing air service or a fifty
percent match if there's an
existing air service the maximum
grant would be either up to one
million two hundred and fifty
period the funding the program
of Senate bill one thirty three
as amended creates a rural air
enhancement fund and
appropriates in addition an
appropriated fund will not
revert to the general fund.
With that Mr president I stand
for questions.
would qualify for this
kind of insanity yield.
Mr president I yield to Senator
Pirtle
Mr president and a senator there
And Mister president and senator
how many of them potentially
will have
A service that would meet the
criteria to receive funds.
will meet the criteria.
Yes Mister president
Mr president and senator pearls
and then be able to receive
funds.
Senator Gonzales.
The mid agency presents under
fifteen airports are fifteen
carriers that's were I think the
confusion for me is coming in.
One time.
Our cabinet Santa from the New
Mexico DOT.
Say no objection.
expert witness so secretary
Santa
at that point you would be
evaluated and to see which ones
would qualify.
pros let me refer to my expert
witness.
information from my expert
witness of Secretary Santa he's
not quite sure but of the he you
know that.
He L. he does know that there
are a few within the state.
think that's the issue and I'm
looking at this Mr president is
being careful and and prudent
with the taxpayers dollars that
you know this doesn't really
language in a way that we know
where this money is going and so
I'd urge the body to proceed
with caution thank you Mr
president thank you senator we
do have further debate Senator
Baca.
Representative do yield Mister
president I yield to senator Bob
I.
Thank you Mr president you're
showing the county commission of
alleged county in support of
this effort
Mr president the Senator all
Baca I didn't hear the last part
of your state.
Senator Baca.
with a volunteer County it due
to does this bill affect them
are the qualified under the
let me have referred to my
expert witness.
That be great thank you Mr
president.
Mr president no Senator Baca.
According to my witness of both
Mr president center Baca I don't
have it with me at all you know
I'm sure that we could all work
with that.
Mr president does your expert
have that can you possibly Mr
Mr president in a center Baca I
will refer to my experts.
Thank you Mr president.
Santa Fe.
Clovis.
Hobbs.
Farmington Gallup.
Los crucis Solomon or full.
The lan.
And possibly grants and
Representative tone.
Senator Baca thank you Mr
president thank you sponsor for
going through the trouble of
president.
We do have further debate will
have Senator Woods followed by
Senator Kernan then Senator
Moores Senator Woods thank you
to Senator Woods.
right now Mrs talks about a.
is that still in the bill Mr
president Senator Gonzales.
Mr president Senator Woods and
that was taken out.
better results do you Mr
president high yield to senator
thank you very much so just
curious at so this this phone
small plane that flies in the
Carlsbad right now I don't know
how many seats but I believe
that they do have that type of
service so that's just what
we're talking about here correct
airline you have to guaranteed
certain ridership.
In order for them to make it
worth your while to come in and
so when that ridership falls
below a certain level that's
Mr president and senator no in
all of there's possibility to
that that you know again this is
being brought us so as a pilot
local match if they have no
service at the point and then if
they do have existing service of
the matching is fifty percent
but it is so at this time it is
so.
It is set up for nine passenger.
Okay well thank you very much
and I don't suppose you would
consider an amendment that would
include regional jets we need.
community we we do contract with
United they do fly into the into
Hobson.
Our ridership is been down
during the pandemic and so the
we're happy about that but I
don't think we would qualify for
this grant is that correct.
Mr president Senator Kernan I
really would not be able to
important to be able to have
airlines Committee your
community I know that's very
helpful and we're big state and
sometimes it's kind of hard to
Thank you Mr president of thank
you senator with the senator
yield.
red flags are being raised about
this bill and hopefully we can
clear that up because I
understand the there would
Senator Kernan was talking about
Narrowly written so that there
really are designed to help one
or two
communities sometimes it's
communities a powerful
legislators I think that some
were some of our concern is
service right to improper to
prop engine aircraft which would
exclude airport surface missile
we budget proportion and single
that we participate in amounts
of the potential requests are no
is not possible to me estimate
the value of the grants awarded
per year.
excluded from this list your
expert witness I guess give you
about ten to fifteen airports.
But it sounds like a lot of more
excluded so that's where our my
concern is that we're excluding
president let me refer to my
experts witness.
Senator Morris let me clarify
this for my windows so we're
talking about about airports or
airlines.
Mr president center great
Mr president no senator Morris
If they do have.
You know all.
Errol that is nine passengers or
less you know they would
qualify.
Mr spawn presidents and Senator
Woods to Gallup are qualified
for this.
Senator Gonzales.
They would have to apply in the
see if they met the criteria as
I met the criteria this would
apply if they would qualify.
as president Senator are we
going to get a report back in a
is going to disappear into the
black hole state government.
Senator Gonzales Mr president
and senator Morris I have no
problem with providing that and
I can request that you know from
a listing of every our community
airport that receive this or
community like at the get this
to make sure that she will
spread around the state and was
a specifically designed for one
The information from our
secretary said of all that so he
would be very much willing to
provide that.
Thank you Mr president of the
Mr president yes you Senator can
you please rise.
Mr president shut up presents
chairman Shonda would you please
a put a note down that the the
of just gone to one local
community.
Mr president the senator Morris
I will make note of that.
Thank you Mr president thank you
chair I do have an amendment
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill one thirty
three as amended miss amendment
sponsored by Senator Mark Moores
purpose clauses on this bill got
through without going through
the committee so I took in
taking this opportunity on the
floor to do that it's something
that we've asked bill drafters
not to do many times but they
potus Senator move that at the
beginning my apologies I move
amendment number.
Many members are on the same.
The four member of the floor
Senate floor amendment number
Mr president and the with the
Senator more so let me to stick
a second on the roof review this
with our expert witness.
this is president no Senator
Moores can you explain the.
Again so our expert witness can
perfunctory we do and Judiciary
we strike the purpose clauses
as senator or chairman of
judiciary says just quarters up
the the statute books that
Judiciary Senate finances deal
all you.
Mr president are chairman to us
about this is this sound normal
to you we need to do is an
Judiciary constantly.
Agency presents I look at the
bills but this bill did not go
to Judiciary of it had it would
have been struck with certainty
and and the there's really no
purpose in doing that in fact it
has some counterproductive
judge might look at that and say
well the legislature didn't give
the reason or or another reason
and and then interpret the bill
according to what reasons we
purpose so I rises for the
moment Mr present.
Thanks just about the senator
Morris thank you Mr president
and this is just for the
educational the body this is
something standard so if you are
answer from is expert witness
Senator Gonzales Mr president
and senator Morris though we
would consider this as a
friendly amendment.
that sent a four member number
one to Senate bill one thirty
three as a once amended already
the now approved unanimous
consent that is as in the
request for unanimous consent to
to Senate bill one thirty three
now has twice amended we're back
on the bill Senators.
Senator gonna have him.
Senator hello will this bill
impact our communities that rely
on essential air service
subsidies and my community we
thank you Mr president.
Senator Gonzales hello Mr
president and senator a I think
I need a little bit more
clarification on your question.
central air services subsidies
so that our flights are
subsidized and more affordable
for families thank you Mr
president.
Mr president and then Senator on
that he would have no impact.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator thank you senator.
On page six section seven.
Of the appropriation.
There us is nine million is
appropriated from the general
For the purpose of carrying out
provisions.
The rural air and henchman Act.
Print center have a.
Hagel of.
You know up.
Based on the the applications
and based on you know what is
being set up on that ten percent
and fifty percent.
to that amount you know that's
what he would be and I guess if
it's exhausted them you know
that with little.
Will would conclude that part.
there for a while and then.
Eventually the community itself
has to has to be part of the
fund this funding mechanism.
and so many times.
The planes have to be there they
have to be ready the pilots have
to be there they're generally
has to be two pilots in anytime
systems have come into effect
and
The amount of air services uses
really marginal and it just
doesn't it just has a really
hard time working and
Phyllis is a.
A sizeable amount of money and
the thing of it is is I'm just
not sure how long this can last
and.
Surprised at the amount of money
that should be appropriate for
the general fund and none of it
real revert it always it'll stay
there so.
And now we need to be careful I
think thank you.
Senator Gonzales close.
Thank you Mr president and just
very brief
four years ago with the state of
Wyoming what they have been
doing.
And so it has worked very well
for them.
And you know a different a
individuals to the area.
But in the.
Instead of the airlines being
empty as they go back return
things that can be worked on
just still depending on how
creative and how well.
You know of of an individual
community wants to work with
this but
consent that the Senate that the
record shows that the rule has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by roll call vote.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey just Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores no senator Munoz.
B. now Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator by the.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Sanchez Senator songes yes
Senators committees.
Senator sure is now Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator Senator Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Woods no.
president no members of thank
you.
Thank you senator moving on to
item number three that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
percent health and public
action for placing Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill one ninety on final
president this bill will make
changes to the developmental
disabilities planning council
membership an update the purpose
and duties of the council and it
renames the developmental
developmental disability
deprivations DD Act hasn't been
updated in decades and it's
based on old federal statute so
in two thousand the Congress
repealed the federal law that
has been the basis of the
current New Mexico Didi Act and
they enacted a new law that
the new federal statute requires
that people with developmental
disabilities and their families
participate in the design of
needed services and support so
children with disabilities and
their families and if the mother
who now has a twenty five year
old son who also has
developmental disabilities and
to the reader for him to read in
the amendment the ability to
move.
The reader to read Senate floor
amendment number one to Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
amendment thank you Mr president
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate to move on the amendment
number one for Senate Judiciary
language amendment as so that Mr
president this floor amendment
is just clean up language that
was requested by stakeholders
and it doesn't change the
president thank you senator
Senator debating Senate floor
amendment number one anyone
wishing to debate.
See no debate on the amendment
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill one ninety do now pass and
I ask for a roll call vote
Senator if you would want to
their demands and said that they
Senator there's been a motion to
request unanimous consent to dot
senator member number one.
Senator I have built we're back
on the bill in which the debate
on the bill.
I see no debate senator Senator
Thank you Mr I I certainly rose
a strong support of this just
have a question and the
sometimes the communities that
you know Representative people
disabilities there they they
disability could you just go
over with me is this
it is the majority of the people
on the council the way that this
you know it's been subbed in
amended now the the final
Senator Hemphill thank you Mr
president and thank you senator
for that question it's a really
important point and something
that New Mexico really needs to
with developmental disabilities
and their families and they they
deserve a voice and they need to
have that opportunity to be able
to advocate for the needs that
With the sponsor you Senator
Hemphill do you Mr president ten
I yield for a question.
The all council meetings will be
the.
Video Conference.
Senator Hemphill.
See no objections for witnesses
approve Senator.
So the reason that that is in
the the bill is just to ensure
accessibility
this will ensure accessibility
to these council meetings thank
you Mr president thank you
senator.
This presents Senator
That it be done by video
conference so I I get that some
people might prefer that.
I think some people around here
in person meeting.
So I'm wondering why it's
mandatory and not an option.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill so thank you Mr
Conference thank you Mr
president Representative.
madam president Sir can you show
meetings via video conference.
There's not an option in there.
The Senators conferring with her
as for witness I just want to
mount to the body that it is
So Mr president this is still
governed by federal law and this
is just in there stating that
they will also be held via video
president and senator the the
problem is this is law.
I so we're saying shell we're
not saying may.
the sorry Video Conference.
That's that's not an option.
You've written into our state
law.
option of doing that are we have
the option of not doing that.
You have prescribed that this is
the way it will be done.
meetings way back before that
was popular.
That's because our state law
allowed for that.
Didn't say you couldn't do it
but it also didn't say you had
Senator Hemphill thank you Mr
president thank you senator so
how families and people with
disabilities will get per diem
and so the the video conferences
a video conference and need that
accommodation have access to the
meeting.
Thank you Mr president thank you
your writer not you you write
it.
The let's council made an error
in here because your intention
is not that everyone has to do
this meeting via video
being able to do that already so
if you needed to write that into
the law to make sure that the
council was allowing people to
do that that's just needs to be
worded totally differently so
times myself put in a may
instead of shall or shall
instead of may and I always
appreciate when someone catches
up for me thank you thanks
Senate floor amendment number
two to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill one ninety as amended
for Senate health public affairs
committee substitute percent
bill one ninety as amended one
time.
Part of your explain chairman
underlying language on page ten
line twenty two and twenty three
does is that ties the hands of
the council that they shall not
be allowed to meet in person so
requiring it note this no
different Mr president in our
body we shall do video
conferencing for committees but
we may be in our office during
floor meeting so I think that's
president this is an and
friendly amendment.
Senator debating Senate foreman
number two.
This means you can just the
sponsor of the bill to yield if
you'd like okay if I could ask
the Sanchez Bill deal please.
Improve the field Mr president I
the debate I heard that the
intent is to just allow the
council to they can meet in
person or they can meet online.
Who knows maybe they could do a
Senator my son is in a
wheelchair and he wants to
participate on this council and
if that is struck then they
don't have to meet via video
individuals with disabilities
developmental disabilities
physical disabilities across the
state will always have that
accessibility.
historical buildings and things
but I mean even those are the.
You know I mean it's illegal for
them not to accommodate a person
with a disability I think are we
People with developmental
disabilities often cannot travel
independently or attend meetings
independently and so by not
all across New Mexico not only
that but it's expensive to
travel
we live in a very large state
and travel is requires time and
also in a catheter and requires
multiple bathroom breaks
throughout the a trip so by
keeping that.
Money in there those lines in
grandmother was categorize into
the wheelchair for the last
forty five years of her life and
I'm I'm well aware of the
transportation issues with
people may prefer electronic
means.
that's not a problem at all I I
don't see how that's a problem
at all the coming some of this
ability and allowing them to
With disabilities that feel like
they can access.
This council better in person.
So why don't we accommodate
Senator Steinborn right now is
in his office participating
through electronic means and
that's accommodating his
preference
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr president nothing
in this bill precludes the
Mr president the restaurant is
okay Mister presence area if
that's the case I will be
supporting the amendment I'm
going to
I would be supporting it as as
the matter so thank you Mr a
sense meetings we have further
debate on the floor member
number two we have center this
if you know thank you Mr
president and and.
solution I'm proposing that as
an alternative.
Of and if this meant amendment
attempt fails it was simply say
that all council meetings would
gonna go to Senate fertile first
Senator Pirtle and Mister
president senator we were also
working on when I do I do
want to urged the body to just
going to somehow not allow
participation to people who have
disabilities via video
conference than why are those
people on this council.
We should not put these councils
in a box allow them the
flexibility to do this what if
they wanted to go to one of the
members areas where they didn't
to dictate to this council how
they meet and where they meet
because that's their whole their
whole purpose is to serve those
with disabilities so if we would
all together and give them the
flexibility they need.
Senator we're still debating
Center foreman number two.
the clothes on the amendment and
thank you Mr president and you
know again.
Putting in a requirement the
shell hold all council meetings
via video conference.
councils do allow them the
flexibility.
And again if the council for for
disability.
Developmental disability where
number two to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
health and public from Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one ninety as amended and I
ask for a roll call.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator sure on this Senator
surrounded no Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond DS Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg no Senator guy it
goes Senator Gallegos yes
Hemphill no.
Senator Hemphill no Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Lopez now Senator
McKenna no Senator McKenna now
Senator Moores.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz the normal Senator
for the year.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pro.
Senator prognose senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez now
senator Sanchez Senator songes
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator souls
Senator souls no senator should
Senator domino senator Wirth
Senator Wirth now Senator Woods.
Senator Wirth words yes.
By a vote of sixteen in the
amendment here part of it before
we go into that we do have
Senator Pinto who would like to
explain her vote then we'll go
to the reader to read the next
floor amendment.
consistency of members to
consistency of how they are
meeting I noticed a lot of it
needed to be updated but when
we're doing some of this so if
dressings things like that but I
think a strong point with me
thank you Mr president thank you
Sir for.
Thank you Mr president members
of the body
president thank you senator we
do have another floor amendment.
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
two to Senate Judiciary
Jerry Ortiz Y. Pino center
participate in a moving explain
them and that.
Thank you Mr president and and I
I think the amendment may
capture the the intent of
flood so I would move Senate
floor amendment number two to
the Senate Joint Senate
Judiciary Committee subsidy for
senator for Senate health public
explain Mr president members at
I think the intent of Senator
Pirtle said the motion is
captured in this and Senator
Baca had looked at it similarly
Hold all council meetings.
So it's still say shell of of of
earlier but it would say hold
Senator is aware of any
incentive or member number two
Senator Hemphill yes that's a
friendly amendment Mister
president.
I move I move Senate floor
amendment number two to Senate
Judiciary Committee Senate
substitute for said health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
See no objections senator member
number two is been adopted to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate health of
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
Change a little language there
and now it's in statute
but my men that would have done
the same thing I guess you just
have a sponsorship issue thank
you Mr president.
amendments we're back on the
bill Senators.
Si no further debate center
credit him failed to close on
the bill.
committee substitutes twice
amended for Senate bill one
ninety do now pass and I ask for
a roll call vote.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt passes senator
Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gallegos yes senator Graham told
us yes Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivy
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores Senator more
snow.
Yes.
Senator Neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes senator from the.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes Senator songes yes
Senators ladies.
Senator suite is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods.
Yes Brent.
Senator Brandt yes.
center health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill one ninety as far as
amended has passed the Senate
center putting him he'll thank
you Mr president thank you
members of the US Senate we're
action for places Senate bill
three twenty five on final
passage has been taken that it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
SAINATO gestione Senator Shendo
First it just adds a couple more
few items traffic control and
safety devices to list of folks
public roadway infrastructure.
property you know like.
Of whether it's a.
Roads or or.
Any kind of of guard rails or
any accidents that happen right
Hasse's to either absorb the
loss or to litigate and and so
Mr president that's really to
the bill.
Thank you Mr president that was
the sponsor yield etcetera
etcetera deal have Mister
president I will yield to the
gentleman the Senate finance
I believe so because it is state
property and I believe since
it's if it's a state road yes
but if it's a Navajo Nation road
that goes through the crown
point probably not.
the guardrail would would they
be able to collect that
guardrail costs.
I believe so.
This presents center could you
check with your expert witness
to make sure we know so.
Mr press Mr president let me get
my expert witness on the phone
here it's DOT secretary of Mr
Santa agency present I'll
announce the score of the game I
think it's seventeen to nine
Present value phones of friend I
I guess that my next question
would be tell me what the
And.
This presents center.
pending the body know that name
of that game show sentiment just
you probably should know that
since you are the chair Senate
finance you deal with the
millions and billions of dollars
this presents center I I'm not a
Mr president because of the
weird of ray of pop culture
history that I know.
The answer to that is Senators
question is who wants to be a
millionaire.
know that Senator.
This presents the current score
of the game is twenty two to
twenty fifteen.
Mr president etcetera etcetera
Yes Mr president center and how
are they going to collect are
they gonna filing quarter they
can make an insurance claim what
happens if nobody sees I mean
Mr president if if if.
The department doesn't know who
who you know the the person
estimate the damage of.
Thank you Mr president and and
so on the bill it also says that
they can collect for the cities
counties and and and and
municipalities so they can also
Senator yes.
Mr presence in I mean we've done
a lot of waivers for people not
to stay there speeding tickets
to get time and a half for.
For a service and are they going
credit and and their insurance
training.
The Mr president the senator
They will negotiate any amount
times so it's not a total loss
but this does not go on the
credit report.
Thank you Mr president at one
last comment I I think they can
Kerr you're sure because in
section sixty seven dash seven
eleven it says a rest.
Rest in vehicle seizure.
That is in statute center.
Not in the bill.
yield I I just want to make sure
that that we're clarified I mean
it if there's a certain amount
of damage I'm sure they'll want
to see the vehicle I just want
Senator Shendo are you ready
want other questions.
etcetera etcetera yield.
A yes misprint a president yes I
will this presents and etcetera
I I was not able to hear this
department transportation with
their equipment and more traffic
control devices be collectible
also or would that be the loss
secretary saying that is that's
probably something that the
insurance their insurance would
take care of or or it could be
part of the contract.
center guy goes any further
debate senators.
Si no further debate.
Senator Shendo to close on the
bill Mr president I move that
three twenty five.
Irma transportation collection
of damages the clerk to call the
roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senators around this.
I'm sorry.
Senator Duhigg gas Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes senator
Hermio.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Monero's.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Paul.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo
yes Senator Shendo yes Senator
Steinborn test Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman as senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Geyer girls Senator Gallegos
yes.
calendar many yield to senator
Wirth Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so on Senator brand I
share something in common which
is backed challenges mine's good
Seeing no real objection it is
so ordered.
Thank you senator for that we're
going on the next item that's
item number five Senator
Stewart.
been taken subject to debate
amendment or substitution see no
objections Senator Stewart to
explain the bill thank you Mr
president so we often talk on
good list this bill deals with
one of those lists.
New Mexico has the highest
percentage of children in
poverty and the whole country.
level poverty seventy five
percent below the basic level of
poverty so this bill sets up a
family income index act.
We have an at risk index in our
formula that we has increased
over the years we have a whole
section in law that says just
a family income index it's a
pilot this for two years.
It looks at.
Their based on three things we
get this information from the
taxed Representative department
if they file taxes from the
Human Services Department if
of some of percentages of the
kids and extremely low and very
low income categories and thanks
to leverage ranks all think
this we essentially take just
those two lowest categories.
We determined ten percent of
the schools in each district
what we would like to spend the
money with also giving them a
fair amount of flexibility so
third of these funds are to be
used on a structured literacy
those things that schools and
districts may need like.
Help with family.
work with native Americans kids
So we are we are accountable
with this by requiring each
district to put in their
it's a direct help to each of
these schools.
It really covers a number of the
formula of that.
We will have at least a hundred
schools of representing eighty
percent of the districts around
after those four conversations
they had made all the changes
that I wanted and then I just
had to carry the bill for them
so I'm proud of this bill though
spreadsheet showing us the full
just use different measures we
can really identify the schools
that are high poverty some of
Senator debating Senate finance
committee says two percent of
those seventeen.
Senator Woods followed by
Senator Brandt Senator Woods.
We're talking about and dividing
up part of ten million dollars
right Mr president Mr president
that's correct.
Okay thank you.
We have further debate will have
need to the yield I brought up
some concerns and said Education
Committee.
and you actually listen to those
who took the only fixed the
the tax information and you've
taken that part of the bill and
so I I just want to thank you
for doing that thank you thank
you Senator Brandt further
debate Senator Pinto.
them.
That it isn't just the students
themselves but now we can
correlate the causes and also
with the supporters of our
there's links to economic
development within the areas
that also have links to domestic
violence to substance abuse and
I think this will strongly show
debate we have Senator thank us.
The sponsor you Senator Wirth
deal I just how he'll.
In in the analysis says
analysis assumes a ten million
dollars will be distributed.
Is that something that's already
pilot attending here I in fact I
think we even increased a little
bit more than that but it
started off as twenty I think
it's a little bit higher so but
it's for a two year pilot and I
For the ten million dollars I'm
just wondering if it is been
agreed upon.
Senator Mr present yes it's in
Mr president in center all the
Spanish to it that's true but I
was just wondering why Mr
president Senator the FIR would
budget and we'll go to this I
just was curious about that
because it did say use work
assume.
Mr president I understand and
Thank you for the agency
departments Mr president center
all yield I just want to make
sure that the.
Thank you senator because we do
have for the debate we have
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
president and I am to appreciate
the work that you're doing on
this bill I think that even
pilot and I know that many times
districts of when they get a
bucket of money like they're
they're going to get sometimes
it doesn't get to the screen
which really needed and I also
the New Mexico so I certainly
supported not appreciate your
working with PED to do this
thank you thanks Senator Kernan
any further debate senators.
issue and and education that's
why we have a finance committee
substitute so we lot of people
have made this bill better I'm
I'm really excited about it I
seventeen do now pass pass for
rural call vote senators two
seats please we're voting on
Senate finance committees of
supercenter bill seventeen.
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt
yes senator Byrd senator Byrd
yes Senator Campos Senator
Campos yes senator Candelaria.
Senator Gregers yes Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator mo nos.
waiting on you.
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator for
the Senator for the A. S.
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
senator Sanchez Senator songes
yes Senators committees.
Senator.
No it is a no.
Senator Schmidt is no.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator soprano yes
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Baca.
Senator Pirtle Senator Pirtle no
Senator sure.
Senator shared no.
By a vote of thirty five
affirmative six in the negative
Senate finance committees of
supercenter will seventeen has
passed the Senate Senator
Stewart thank you so much
members of the Senate.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
election for placing Senate bill
one ninety two on final passage
Senate bill one ninety two.
Hey is essential essentially
ensuring that the Brady giclee
an officer's knowing or
intentional failure to disclose.
Mr president members of the
Senate if an officer other
enforcement officer or other
government witness
untruthfulness for the purpose
of ensuring a criminal defendant
receives a fair trial.
Mr president members of the
necessary Brady giclee
information to the prosecutors
to allow for a fair trial.
And also Mr member Mr president
members of the Senate Senate
uniformity across New Mexico as
to what information the police
need to disclose and it reduces
the uncertainty as to the
required disclosure I'll stand
for questions.
Thank you Mr president if the
sponsor would yield Senate
office deals Mr president yes.
In in you're gonna find out Mr
Federal case law on this subject
generally known as the Brady
material if the sponsor would
the a super United States
Supreme Court.
Mr president the.
As the Brady material mean
anything to you.
Supreme Court did hold that in
Brady
that of and the giclee both of
these court decisions that
applies to evidence knowing
prosecutor and what it also held
is that the individual
prosecutor has a duty to learn
at any favorable evidence known
to the others acting on the
government's behalf.
sure there's uniformity across
our state.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president and.
I guess that's what's confusing
to me if it's in federal law.
state court is that Mr president
concerned and centers that the
way this works Mr president
Senator Woods no this is this
pertains in fact this measure
all prosecution for the cases
across the state of New Mexico
said this is here in our own
district courts Mister president
senator.
Thank you Mr president.
I'm gonna be like Senator Woods
a little bit ignorant on this
particular issue hello I go like
I said the other day I watch a
lot of Perry Mason and and the
case that the evidence is
supposed to be disclosed to the
defendant's attorney is that
correct Mr president it should
be disclosed yes.
senator what this does is it
explicitly states now in our if
if this does pass of course is
signed by the governor that it
Mister president senator this
would be uniformity across our
state.
So much president Senator on on
But all information.
and then it goes into a includes
acts of dishonesty conduct
with this being anything that's
in the officer's jacket their
personnel file that would have
to be disclosed to the defense
would add value to that case so
it is all the information that
would pertain to that
particularly if it's officer or
government official that would
be an in court.
and sometimes things really get
blown out of proportion in court
when it comes to something that
disclosed to the defense and the
if your bills to pass and become
law.
Mister president senator if the
district attorney of course they
are there to defend the officer
disposed to be brought forward
at the request of the district
attorney again Mr president
Senator this is already
something that has been
determined by the US Supreme
you know and if for me an
inability for all of our
district attorneys to be able to
utilize.
Mr president Senators that would
be something of course that's
its mission excuse me that is
mentioned in here of course
C. knowing and Miss Mister
president senator on page three.
I was gone I thought I had it I
got the wrong one on here.
if if there is a refusal Mr
president Senator of course
there is it be a suspension or
read the in the context of which
it's it's it's and so this is
under the actually the current
language allows for the
suspension and then you've added
Mr president Sir I think I
understand now.
Any further debate senators.
roll call center this to the
chamber please into your seats
where voting on Senate bill one
ninety two the clerk to call the
roll.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator number yes Senator come
that idea.
Senator serve on this Senator
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal Senator huh
I'm here yes Senator Kernan.
Okay.
Senator my nose senator Munoz
yes senator Neville.
Ortiz Y. Pino yes senator by
the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator printer yes Senator
Pirtle.
songes Senator songes now
senator smitteez Senator Schmidt
is now Senator so the a little
bit yes Senator so they are
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics Senator soprano yes
Senator Steinborn yes the
Inverness Senator Stewart.
Senator Woods now.
Senator marginal.
By a vote of twenty five the
affirmative point in the
negative Senate bill one ninety
number eight Senate bill three
seven nine that sentencing us
setting us thank you Mr
president us and skip the Senate
that the record show that all
action placing Senate bill three
president because of the area I
come from there's a lot of coal
miners uranium miners in our
area and as a local request and
across the state in in the good
with that I'll stand for
questions.
Senator debating Senate bill
three seventy nine New Mexico
miners license plates.
Anyone wishing to debate.
for bringing this bill forward
it's going to mean a lot to a
lot of people in my community
and I'm really grateful for the
work you put into that so thank
president I I would yield to the
I'd have to know if he has any
mining experience.
And and what he mind and and and
what location thank you senator
will have you know as an Irish
American my people were minors
right so like I don't know if I
actually have blood relatives
who are minors but but anyway I
left the Senator Ivey Soto is
not here but how many of these
bill license plates to have at
this point with this pin number
sixty two or.
Okay well I mean I have to say I
have a soft spot for the Silver
City and and the good people
that are working in those minds
just I'm just wondering with
Mr presence and the last thing
you would want me doing is
drawing any piece of art on any
plate and probably end up like a
stick person with the pick.
I was seriously I mean miners
work hard and and and I
understand that and I just I
just Grant County is just one of
my favorite places at this point
time thank you Mr president I
just want to add one more thing
that I do in fact have mining
blood my great grandfather one
where the vote was one of the
was also he worked at Kennecott
and I had several uncles who
also worked there so it would
mean a lot to them as well thank
you Mr president Senator could
the most important thing about
this is is you know portion of
that goes to the hospital for
minors they want to support
their own people they want to
support the hospital they know
whatever it is so with that Mr
president I I move that Senate
bill two three seventy nine do
now pass us as to the Senate the
Senate the record show that the
rules being called and all those
seats.
Mr roll call vote seems was
split.
The Colorado.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senators
to run this test Senator Diamond
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator how to meal Senator huh
I'm here yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator mon LCS Senator one LCS
senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator to
subpoena yes Senator Padilla
Senator Pirtle.
Senator okay.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman no senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Then
Senator been done are back.
Senate bill three seven nine has
passed the Senate Semenya's
thank you Mr president thank you
for recognizing the people that
have kept the lights on for
prior years to transition from
their own risk to their health
so thank you Mr president
members of body thank you
senator I go to yield senator
Wirth by then many able to
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond.
with fifteen of fifteen minutes
to play.
Thank you for that update
Senator Senator Wirth thank you
Mr president unanimous consent
we go that our visit nonsense
miscellaneous fund that order of
Business announces miscellaneous
start with the house built a
house built and that's what
we're gonna do for the rest of
the evening so unanimous consent
to go to that order of business
committee reports on that order
bill one sixteen has had it
under consideration reports same
with recommendation that a do
pass respectfully submitted
Senator Benny Shendo junior
chairman Senator Shendo this
read Senate bill three ninety
seven do pass as amended and
then just referred to the
finance committee.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill four
thirty eight do pass.
House taxation and revenue
House bill twenty one do pass
this referred to the health and
public affairs committee.
House bill sixty six as amended
do pass and it's referred to the
pass that's referred to the
finance committee.
House bill two forty as amended
do pass.
Representative senator Benny
Shendo junior chairman Senator.
I move adoption of the committee
report that is we have a motion
to adopt the creative arts.
See no objection the committee
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
third reading of legislation
ideal Senator Stewart who's up
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill to
forty four as amended on final
passage has been taken now
bill two forty four Nunes our
campaign reporting act our voter
action act our lobbyist
regulation Act and the financial
So before we created the state
ethics commission are secretary
of state was primarily
responsible for administering
violations of the statutes but
the secretary of state still had
enforcement powers so this bill.
Separates the administration
administration of filing forms
the state ethics commission
handles adjudication enforcement
of complaints.
The campaign legal center says
So helpful to forty four allows
for voluntary compliance when
someone files an ethics
complaint that violates the
state if they cannot achieve
voluntary compliance then I will
refer it back to the ethics
commission who adjudicate.
So helpful to forty four makes
increased authority to waive or
reduce fines for late filing.
H. B. two forty four create
several incentives for political
financial disclosure Act require
ethics commission members to
file financial statement within
thirty five days of their
appointment so Mister president
close on the bill Mr president I
move that house bill two forty
four as amended do now pass us
for roll call vote senators tier
seeds please we're voting on
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt give senator
Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Duhigg gas Senator guy it goes
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator controllers
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Hermio Senator huh I'm
here yes Senator Kernan Senator
Kernan yes Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator to to
be no.
Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senator souls Senator fenics
Senator for an active Senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes.
Who.
We get here.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Lopez Mr president
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Ivey Soto.
And Hemphill.
Say no objection.
members of the Senate Senator
gonna move on to item number
twenty on the calendar that's
house bill forty three as
amended and I yield to senator
Paul.
Mr president I ask unanimous
And.
I'm sorry has been taken as now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution see no objections
Center pope to explain the bill.
Advisory Council and a black
education liaison position to
advise the PD on policy and
programs related to education of
African American students and
improve black education teacher
preparation programs throughout.
Recruitment retention of African
American educators.
House bill forty three also
racially charged incidents are
racialized aggression.
House bill forty three Max in
New section of the school
personal lack to require all
school personnel to take an
responsive learning environment
for minority students.
Mr chair I would like to.
Also introduce my expert who
will be on the phone Dr Jamal
to the thanks for women so so
granted we ought we do have a
floor amendment will have the
reader read that amendment.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill forty three as
amended.
Mr president of this.
Amendment four center for one
for house bill forty three
amended basically clarifies and
information on the members and
also collaboration with the
office of African American
affairs.
That includes inserting and
replacing language for school
activities that are recommended
and prioritized by the council
within available funding.
And it also clarifies more
information on the statewide
racial and racial sensitivity
training by including an option
that training can also be
delivered in person as well as
online.
Thank you Mr president I move
that Senate floor amendment
number one be amended to house
bill forty three amended and I
ask for unanimous consent.
Senator member number one has
been accepted we're back on the
bill Senators anyone wishing to
debate on the bill.
do pass and I ask for a roll
call the Senate Mr seeds these
are voted on house bill forty
three is twice amended.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria Senator serve on
Diamond Senator Diamond is
Senator Duhigg Senator Duhigg
give senator guy goes.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator huh I'm here.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator my nose.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez VS Senator
share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman as senator Wirth
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods
amended has passed the Senate
centerfold.
Thank you Mr president thank the
body this is important bill for
members in our state thank you
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing House
Bill one fifty seven on final
passage has been taken and that
it it is now subject to debate
Mexico mining acts to establish
a mining act forfeiture fund
that would receive funds from
the forfeiture of financial
assurance a commitment of
in every committee and it's the
product of a lot of compromise
with all stakeholders including
Freeport mac Moran who stated
that they support this bill when
plant or close out plan for the
financial assurance had been
dedicated and if the duration of
the reclamation is to exceed
account and can be invested by
the state investment council
with advice of the
investment adviser hired by the
See no debate senator could
Hemphill the clothes on the bill
Mr president I move that house
bill one fifty seven do now pass
and I ask for a roll call vote
senators tier seeds please we're
Senator Senator Brandt yes
senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd.
Senator sure on this Senators
around is yes Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg give
Senator guy goes.
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Monero's.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Stewart on.
Senator Stewart AS Senator Pinto
yes Senator printer yes Senator
Pirtle.
senator smitteez Senators maybe
CS Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn yes Steinborn as
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Baca yes.
house bill one fifty seven has
passed the Senate center gonna
Hemphill thank you Mr president
thank you members of the Senate
we're on to the next item on the
calendar we have said house bill
amended has been taken is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
See no objections senator Wirth
to explain the bill thank you Mr
president so this bill
double damages when a private
property owner did a burn and
there was damage that resulted
from it what the bill does is
adopt a negligence standard and
landowners to conduct controlled
burns under very specific
circumstances and those are
spelled out in the bill also the
bill addresses range and forest
do is yield to my co sponsor
Senator Woods to talk
specifically about the Ag
portion of this and why this is
got the support the bipartisan
support that us analysts thank
us of the Ag community of.
Decided that they wanted to opt
out of this bill the reason I
actually got involved with this
bill was because there was a a
it would be a good idea to
To require little training on
these prescribed burns and and
what that trade off
done by the cooperative
extension service and you will
be able to get a certificate for
a this prescribed burn chair I
highway fires and is.
Some money Dr dragon a chain or
a Bering go out on a.
there's a lot of training done
by the
State Farm Marshall.
And it's all good stuff this
particular training will be done
like suicide by the corporate
I see no debate senator Wirth to
close on the bill thank you Mr
president and just just one more
environmental groups we got our
state forester I give her a huge
amount of credit for this and of
course the act community and so
the importance of using
prescribed burning and doing it
ask for a roll call the Senate
is to cease their vote in the
house bill fifty seven is twice
amended.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandis senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria Senators around this
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs.
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator my nose.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pendle.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator probe.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Stewart DS Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Pirtle no.
I have a lot of thirty seven the
One on to the next item that's
item number twenty three.
We have Senator Hamblen.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the rules be suspended and
that the record show that all
limited expandability thank you
Mr president HB twenty three
addresses the concern that the
introduction of out of state
schools unsupported by the
hospital medical community
addresses this concern in a
number of ways it pertains to
any new freestanding medical
school or out of state medical
school developing an additional
location within the state it
will help protect the delicate
training and residents the
resident evil systems in New
Mexico from out of state schools
it's very very important.
Hold to schools in New Mexico to
a standard insurers those
programs in residency programs
best suited for New Mexico
finally Mr president this bill
did receive unanimous vote on
the house floor.
Mr president I look forward to
planning to vote yes on this
bill but when she said it had a
unanimous vote on the house
floor.
I think we should kill it Ryan
this is you know.
Hamblen to close.
Mr president thank you HB twenty
three helps to build quality
third and fourth year training
programs and graduate medical
education residency programs
with the preference to rural New
bill twenty three as amended do
now pass and I ask for a roll
call vote Senator C. Fraser
voted a house bill twenty three
as amended.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Soto.
Senator how to meal Senator huh
I'm here yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan is Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator mail yes Senator need to
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator scientists.
Senator smitteez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
as Senator Stewart Senator sure
DS Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
I have a lot of thirty seven the
Fuhrman is in the negative house
bill twenty three is amended
Senator shared explains vote
thank you Mr president you know
for years it used to be the rule
that we didn't care what the
president I want to admonish you
for allowing this to happen.
Thank you thank you for that and
I actually didn't finish the the
vote is House Bill Clinton as
amended has passed the Senate
the next item on the calendar we
have house bill one oh three
that Senator Stefanics thank you
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
See no objection Senator
Stefanics explained the bill
thank you Mr president members
of the Senate house bill one oh
three as amended amends the
standards these utility
operators are essential public
health workers we have not
changed this of bill or this
so that everybody would be doing
it by computer.
at workforce development offices
I stand for questions Senator
debating house bill one of three
Mr president I move that the
house bill one of three is
amended do now pass and ask for
a roll call vote.
Senator CSCs raised more voting.
senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senator
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator how to meal Senator
Hermio yes Senator Kernan
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Neville yes senator.
O'neill.
Senator Neil yes Senator due to
be now.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senator souls yes Senator
Wirth.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Sweetser yes.
Thirty seven.
I to thirty seven the
affirmative one of the negative
house bill one of three as
amended center by the thank you
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all options for
placing House Bill twenty two as
amended
on final passage has been taken
successful a program to take our
educational assistance from that
role in the in the public school
to the classroom as a teacher
and help them through that
process with a scholarship it's
something about that who better
to fill these positions than
educational system to work in
the classroom all day long this
legislative this and we enacted
this Mr president as as the
experience with students in the
classroom so that they become
eligible for that as well the
bill also expands eligibility
again like I said to allow
school employees to qualify if
in the school day it also
establishes a
A a to do list president it
establishes a licensure program
for educational systems as well
See no debate center for there
to close on the bill thank you
very much Mr president I move
that the house bill twenty two
as amended do now pass and I ask
for a roll call vote and it is
to your seats please more
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Duhigg yes senator guy
ago Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator huh no meal Senator huh
I'm here yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Mars.
Senator Moores yes senator one
else.
Senator Neville.
Senator by the a yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
I have a thirty eight in the
affirmative here on the negative
house bill twenty two as amended
has passed the Senate center for
the thank you very much Mr
president thank you for that
Senator Padilla.
Gonna go on to the next item on
the counter but before I do want
to yield to senator Morris.
could give us an update on the
ID score.
Mr president sadly it's final
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record shows that all
action for placing Senate bill
no objection Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you Mr president Senator
real quickly you can put that on
again it's a house bill.
objection going explained the
bill.
Mr president house bill of fifty
two as amended establish a
bilingual multicultural
Education Advisory Council
two elevates the state current
ad hoc bilingual advisory
committee to a statutory level
similar to the the one status
specified in house bill fifty
two US amended are to advise the
public education department the
governor on matters related to
implementing.
licensure and student and family
service.
And with that a Mister president
I'll stand for questions.
Senator the main house for fifty
two is amended Senator Pirtle.
eleven PM Mr president members
of the body so if we could you
know take that into
consideration eleven PM it's
pretty late
which is grant is Smith
president day.
Mr president I move that house
bill fifty two as amended do now
pass and I ask unanimous
consent.
The the the third.
of roll call.
Senator is to receive favor vote
in the house of of its is
amended.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
senator again those.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Hermio.
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Morris yes senator one
else Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DSME Feldman.
Senator well then yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
house bill fifty two as amended
has passed the Senate Senator
Gonzales.
Thank you Mr president thank you
so you'll to Senator survive
this for item number seven
Senate bill two twenty as
amended.
Senator on this.
Thank you Mr president present
debate modification amendment
and passage the no objection.
Senator not this explained the
bill thank you Mr president
we were doing it during a
special session and the good
news is that as a result of that
legislation we now have I think
of cooperation and participation
by every law enforcement agency
but in our haste and of the
paced by which we passes bill we
did not think through some of
the issues and we we did not
we did not think through the
circumstances when body cameras
may not be appropriate so this
bill was started this session to
try and add a couple of
body camera doing so so this
adds that exception.
This bill also adds an exception
for circumstances when law
enforcement officers have to
the bill was as it was
introduced I know there are a
couple of amendments on the
floor I think they're going to
be friendly and and they are
part of a continued effort to
debated Senate bill two twenty
as amended and we do have a
floor amendment the reader to
read Senate floor amendment
number one to Senate bill two
twenty as amended amendment
what to sponsor this bill said
he is exactly what this
ammendment does there were some
other things that were added to
it those and as we thought about
Of the amendment we want to make
sure our happening correctly so
that we're not showing people
thank you senator we are
debating Senate foreman everyone
all you'll to Senator mantas.
Mr this is a friendly amendment
and I appreciate the assistance
amendment so Mister president I
now move Senate floor amendment
number one Senate bill two
twenty as amended and ask
unanimous consent that is as a
matter requested upset of our
member number one the unanimous
floor amendment.
By combining the other one.
We we don't have a foreman we're
back on the bill Senator Pirtle
anyway the exam state police
that maybe our grocery shopping
buying web beef Mr president.
By what again center of the
from a pretty small town in a
small ranching farm family farm
family I had no idea what led to
believe was until last three
four months of I really didn't
officers do or they shot but but
if you look at the original bill
and this this bill this year
does not amend the original act
to answer your question at the
meat market now.
Thank you Mr president and and
what about exemptions for state
of wrecking your vehicle trying
to Dodge a mouth lined with this
officer I'm sorry trying to
Dodge what again.
Outline Mr president if if you
know there's a footage of of
that happening.
Mr president and once again this
enforcement officer and members
of the public in connection with
the duties and responsibilities
of a law enforcement officer.
And thank you Mr but in all
seriousness you know I was one
forward these are some serious
issues that that we needed to
take on and ensure that we fix
this piece of legislation but
this is a perfect example of
moving too quickly in the
Morris the whispers I am on in
all seriousness Senator Pirtle
reference a situation of a
former colleague.
That was quite embarrassing
and
thirteen and so there did a
wellness check on the camera was
on and former colleague of ours
was in our you know wasn't very
use that are too embarrassed
some and I don't think that was
appropriate to and it's I think
you know I have political
differences with this gentleman
I just don't think that was
appropriate now is kind of the
sponsor would you'll you'll
appreciate that.
Senator Sanchez please thank you
this amount is the ideal.
Thank you Mr president centers
of Hernandez during the
these on and and at the time
Senator from this president we
do not know when I got
confirmation from state police
said that if we did passes that
security team would be exempted
from recording us
in question I have Mister
president senator would this now
number of things questions and
statements within your question
Sir is definitely some
statements are pop all drugs
about that Senator but it would
this require that the the
officer's wear this inside
responsibilities and that the
bill requires their interaction
with the public to be recorded
in of course if we think about
it.
Of that could be very critical
of footage in fact I've seen
try to attack the officers of
the court room try to attack
people corn that happened in Los
crucis there was a videotape of
the entire incident event and
that would be an appropriate
would these if
If you're in a hospital or
medical setting and with the
of a patient.
So Senator the answer to that
question would not be found in
this law or in this bill or even
an existing statute that would
be found in April and if you
what we call that the catch all
exception under April which says
that documents or other
materials are not subject to
disclosure one otherwise
precluded by law as we call the
you're very familiar with I now
would presumably protect the
disclosure against videotape
that would be taken in a
hospital or other web setting
enforcement officer so all right
my interpretation is a non
lawyers that it would not since
you're now dealing with a law
enforcement officer whose video
professional but he above
regulation will not apply to
that since it is actually health
care professional law so I did
not believe so if you walked in
to be a public record that's why
I rated course on on attorney
and again I just think there's a
lot of got you in this you know
with the senator Jennings
situation with the mountain
lion.
answer the door and the video
camera happens to be on.
I'm sure many of us would not
think that would be very
flattering I think that some of
the concerns I had about this
bill one as originally passed
a lot of messages from law
enforcement state police
officers Albuquerque public
public or the police officers
are have a lot of concerns about
this law.
And it was about the
respect for you Mr chairman I
just wish we had concluded more
and on the slaughter low more
transparent manner to include
things that are concerning to me
Senate floor amendment number
two to Senate bill two twenty as
twice amended amendment
sponsored by Senator Katie
Duhigg.
They hate to move that explained
number two Senate bill two
twenty is by amended
innovation center field going
explain what that amendment as.
Thank you Mr president this
amendment deals with the
the time.
And while the the majority of
requests that are made public
record requests are made for
these videos are are legitimate
public record requests.
and this is a gentleman in
Arizona who runs a YouTube
channel for profit or he just
plays these A. P. body cam
it is.
It is essentially an abuse of of
the public records process
but.
reasonable requests so what this
amendment would do.
Well it was to say it provides
specific information that would
individual the approximate date
and time approximate date
location or such other criteria
determined by law enforcement
that makes it easy for them to
do searches to respond to a
request like this they should be
able to to do that if they so
choose.
I'd referred to subsection D. it
should actually be subsection E.
so if I can amend my amendment
on the floor I'd like to do that
Senator is present if you know
Okay Mister president sorry I'm
not sure what clothes then spins
Senator just need to withdraw
that amendment.
We're back on the bill Senators.
Well on the bill we have senator
Byrd.
Thank you Mr person with the
sponsor yield Senator about this
So
are all the police departments
in all the sheriff's departments
in the state going to be
obligated to pay for this this
is an unfunded mandate is that
in other words at that time the
issue was whether there was an
unfunded mandate by passing the
bill to require bond for some by
these cameras that ship has
them to of of by and begin
utilizing body cameras that laws
already passed this bill simply
is intended to allow for some
law enforcement under cover
operations and also bomb squad
and and responses to those type
of emergency circumstances where
our shares Department for
example in Otero county that
there was a pretty good
expensive is involved in this
thing and as as we anticipate
this process growing and having
specially in the metros that
have you know huge huge cans and
and and a lot of people so I
just want bring of bodies
attention that the although this
intentions there's a lot of of
financial obligation goes to
every county in every city to
sponsor yield just about this
deal yes are you.
Thank you Mr president sponsor
with the with the amendment that
Senator sure.
which was requiring the the new
type of I guess
monitoring your new type of
camera which.
Required the automatic.
amendment in the Senate
Judiciary to specify a type of
technology which would
automatically trigger the
beginning of the running of
that technology we didn't want
them to have of the purchase all
those cameras needlessly or have
them have to go back and buy new
because I think that was the you
know that was a concern from you
know from a lot of people that I
heard from is it the the cost of
this particular equipment was
Thank you senator any further
debate.
Senator Diamond.
is I look in here it seems that
this this bill addresses policy
but is it is exempting any
agencies.
Senator on this Mr president
president we mentioned earlier
that we may have rushed into
this
legislation and I just want to
point out that the oldest law
enforcement agency in New Mexico
and actually that law
enforcement agency falls into
the same.
Requirements of his body cameras
it's an under funded agency you
theft and cattle disease are
required then to have these
cameras on in the event I guess
that we all wanted to Hipper
some film of of hundreds of
cattle that they inspect in the
to fall under this but thank
you.
Thank you senator we do have a
floor amendment the reader to
read.
Senate floor amendment number
amendment thank you Mr president
I move Senate floor amendment to
to Senate bill two twenty is
twice Monday.
See no objection the seven day
But overall what this amendment
does is that it ensures that the
public will be able to.
Make requests for the for body
Senator about this our concerns
me from the minutes to present
Senator.
We do have further debate on
forces approximate date and time
so I'm curious you know on that
spring forward evening at two AM
require a request her to put the
exact state for the exact time
or the exact location is part of
the request you are inviting
Is approximate within an hour
within thirty minutes within
fifteen minutes within sixty
seven minutes within forty eight
hours within ten years.
understanding of at just just as
public bodies to every time they
get a public records request
they interpret that language
using generally the plain
language understanding of those
that would be a determination
for judgment.
Senator Pirtle so Mister present
thanks for not answering the
question
you know I think the word
approximate is pretty pretty
proximate location Senator.
Mr president Senator Pirtle I
would say a good example of
approximate location would be
That the accident occurred.
Streets.
Near the location would be an
You might say Mr president in
the first two weeks of July.
But if we require requesters to
requests can be denied and that
would not be in keeping with the
policy of New Mexico in the
inspection of public records act
Mr president Senator you know
now for acting as a judge
and what they're going to
determine with the word
approximate I think we're gonna
But the law enforcement agency
to say well you were you were
three doors down.
Which is a great band but you
were three doors down.
Mr president members of the body
another it I mean I I applaud
the the attempt here but again
it's rushed
it's not written in a way that I
Mister president senator
a system where we don't have
frivolous paper requests it I
don't think it achieves that the
The approximate date and time
was a little bit more narrow.
I see it happen that you may
Gaffey and it was at sunset
section six such other criteria
determined by law enforcement
agency.
Well that's pretty vague I'm not
really sure what that means.
Mr president and senator can you
language that he wanted in this
ammendment unfortunately he's
not here.
To explain that but.
What that language Mr president
the flexibility to do searches
based on those codes if they so
if they they need if that was
something that would make.
point out that that we were just
saying about approximate is and
that that would permit denial of
of these requests.
What what I have certainly seen
as of these requests to get
denied for lack of specificity
because the exact information is
not used.
so that public bodies are not
invited to deny these requests
I'm reasonably based on a
technicality.
Is a difference of opinion.
And see you know I'm I hate to
a.
Really stand here and and
I think we had a birthday Center
when we enjoy this beautiful
music Mr president.
But that's the real issue here
is is by putting approximate
you're giving an out.
To these law enforcement
agencies to say you were not
within the proximity I'll give
Wake up to somebody trying to
kick the door in.
Situation happens.
Police are called.
Families freaking out kids are
person needy involved in the
incident.
So if somebody wanted to do that
the way it's written.
They couldn't say.
narrowed even know Mr president
members of the body if you have
that information how many be
Anne's tend to be Anne's.
Were there on that specific
But the way it's written Mr
president members of the body
it's really giving the law
enforcement agencies and out to
not provide information to deny
penal then Senator
Ingle Senator Moores thank you
Mr president I to expert in
health care not in the law so
but as the longest serving
we use in the committee and the
approximate or jumped out of the
page.
And is present with Senator Ivey
Soto yield.
Senator says is not an chamber
squishy Senator doing would you
yield or agency presence or do
have you all set in a detailed
Mr president gladly thank you Mr
criteria determined by a law
enforcement agency and I know
you touched on that Mr president
Senator.
But can't law enforcement
by by.
By defining what approximate
means Mr president then.
Senator Senator.
What really gives law
enforcement the ability to avoid
responding to a public records
request is not having any
Member of this body who actually
was a records custodian for a
public body R. but that statute
in a request and so reference
consortium are already doing
those interpretations every time
they get a request it's would
deny a legitimate public record
request due to lack of exact
language the exact dates times
amendments Center Duhigg so I I
keep you keep saying Senator
Ivey Soto you're the one who
submitted the so we don't want
this language into submitted it
think it means Mr president
means what any attorney or judge
thanks it means it's it's a very
squishy.
And this is the member number
six that you introduced
it says the law enforcement
agency can determine whatever
they want without any criteria
at all they can thank you to
squishy language in your chair
so try to do a deal with what is
working here Mister president
thank you Mr president thank you
and I think the amendment is a
good one actually of right I've
spoken with the the thing what's
in the the city clerk in in
created a cottage industry.
They the the and and I I can't
even call them reporters because
a lot of them have no
affiliation there just
find and and they they literally
don't know exactly what they're
looking for but because we they
can make all these requests they
keep the staff.
footage of of whatever you have
and then they then take that out
and need to sell it to a TV
station or more likely they just
sell it on the on the internet
new form of paparazzi that they
don't even have to go out and
take pictures I just wait for
the cops to take the pictures in
the US for their copy please of
whatever you happen to have a
it using this these six items at
least it gives the the the the
chance that what they're
actually looking for is
to rise and supported the
amendment and sometimes you want
squishy language and in this
case because she language is
important because it doesn't let
suggestion would be to insert
identifying criteria so that
that law enforcement of so that
they that they couldn't say well
helps them identify it has a
sponsor demanded said what she's
talking about is coding so that
the law so that the law
enforcement can search for
easily.
think that this ammendment is a
very good one and will be of
extremely extremely helpful to
address a specific problem that
the sponsor of the amendment his
Senator.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president I just want to relate
Pearl Harbor.
Two kids are kids in that
school.
And there are no video cameras
are of lapel cameras from the
if it helps I'm all in favor Mr
Chairman that got on the
internet in those kids and the
families of that school had to
see that and it got taken down
awful in favor of running a vote
for this because we can't have
this kind of thing we've got to
have some rigid standards for
the upper request to have some
credible credible activities
amendment Senator Pirtle on the
amendment for second time thank
you Mr president the unfortunate
thing is that this this wouldn't
prevent that from happening
because you would know the
approximate date and time
according to the testimony given
we all know it and that's the
intent of this ammendment thank
you Mr president.
Any further debate on the
amendment.
the bill has said as a friendly
amendment and I now move this
floor amendment to to Senate
bill two twenty as twice amended
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senator Diamond no Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos Now Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Moores now senator
Munoz.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator printer yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman as senator Wirth
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
By a vote of thirty in the
affirmative eight in the
negative Senator Memon number
two is been added to Senate bill
two twenty is now twice amended
members of the body centering on
thank you Mr president would
Senator want to shield Senator
announces the of yes all trying
yield because plastic barriers
between our two good friends.
the of the some of the folks in
our in our police departments in
the state and other departments
and what I was curious about how
long they were responsible for
this specifically you know of
noted in some of these things
that it's about three monsters
that is that what your
understanding as senator Senator
about this president nothing in
the bill that's before us this
you three months or ninety days
my expectation is are doing so
based on the tort claims act
which requires that one there's
gonna be a claim made against a
governmental entity that maybe
probably tell you there keeping
for ninety days.
Well that's what I was told I
had a because it seemed to me
when you talk when you think
about how many folks have the
scammers.
accumulating it because keeping
up for that and the date and
time and place in the officer
involved has got to be something
that's got to be beyond belief
so I was.
evidence there were specific
case that was noting on
something that the need to be
saved that they could be done
done away with thank you thanks
close by reminding members what
this bill is about and what it's
not about.
Appreciate the discussion about
the livestock for that's
interesting but this bill in its
of public number the public
I think be fascinated now with
livestock board video might
reveal but that's probably for a
different time and place in a
what this bill is really about
I'm sure the members that's not
with is about and if it had been
and if we had had this law
perhaps a couple years ago we
probably have some great video
that this bill was rushed.
Perhaps we can disagree about
that because of the reality is
that most of the country many
agencies in New Mexico we're
already doing this.
Almost everyone of them we're
already doing this including in
Los crucis and including the
City of Albuquerque the two
largest cities.
this was too expensive for them
to do and that was the argument
that was presented during the
debate was which is they
couldn't afford to do this me
too expensive.
I'd submit to you that that was
the capital outlay bill that
comes out in a few days I'm
gonna look to see how many law
enforcement agencies around the
state asked anyone of us to put
in capital outlay for cameras
money for those cameras in that
storage because.
If we don't see that the capital
outlay bill I hope will begin to
realize that that was a red
We all want sure last couple of
months what happened in
Washington DC.
On January the sixth we've seen
the videotape within the course.
Is being resolved as best
anything can be resolved by the
payment of twenty seven million
dollars by the city of
Minneapolis.
To the for a family.
In profound ways and I would
submit in good ways.
So we should be proud of the
fact that I sponsored and you
will help me pass a requirement
And one of them is when they're
disarming a bomb.
One of them is when they're
delivering the sad news of the
death to a family member.
And so with that agency
vote Senator is very voting on
Senate bill two twenty at three
times amended.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senators around this Senator
Cervantes yes Senator Diamond.
yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator o'neil yes senator to
subpoena.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sweetser yes Senators
committees.
Senator souls yes Senators the
product.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Woods yes.
this today and you know we
received two hand written
amendments here and this is what
we're told now at the end was a
well thought out bill and and do
offering red herrings or they're
somehow in different to doing
their job are dragging their
feet or trying to misguide us in
some way because they don't want
to do an honest job out on the
in this chamber thank you Mr
president.
Senator Cervantes to close thank
you Mr president was present
members that thank you senator
gonna go on to the last item of
the evening on the calendar that
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate Joint
Memorial two on final passage
has been taken and that is not
subject to debate amendment or
for nontaxable federal lands on
the full properly propped full
property tax includes the base
and I stand for questions.
Senator debating.
question and attended the
health.
Yes Mr president and senator
thank you Mr president center
and I apologize because I
haven't haven't looked at it
what what is the implication of
Mr president and senator well
this is requesting that the new
the payments from the federal
government B. based on because
a formula of some what like the
SCG and when that is not fully
funded in some cases but this
The state a bowl budgetary.
For the local governments.
Senator Steinborn.
Pinto to close.
Mr president that Senate Joint
Memorial cheated out task and
ask for a roll call vote
senators we're voting on Senate
Joint Memorial to.
The clerk to call the roll.
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Senator had a meal Senator
economy are yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be no.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pro.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator songes yes senator
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator sold yes senator should
panic.
Senator soprano yes Senator
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no.
Level thirty six in the
affirmative to the native
Senator memorial to has passed
of business committee reports
the reader to read.
Mr president your Senate tax
business and transportation
committee to whom has been
recommendation that it do pass
as amended that's referred to
the Senate finance committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Benny Shendo junior chairman
said the.
Seeing no objection the
committee for has been adopted.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
are our business and
introduction of legislation on
that order business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
introduced by representative
Alonzo Baldonado and Senators
Josh to a Sanchez and Gregory A.
Baca.
The joint resolution authorizing
the General Services Department
for the use of an East West
traffic relief corridor and
interchange with interstate
twenty five.
Posted resolution fourteen.
Western resolution fourteen
resources committee substitute
for house bill one seventy
seven.
And act relating to food
enacting the homemade food act
regulation pursuant to the food
service sanitation Act The New
Mexico Food act which chapter
fifty seven article seventeen
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
House agriculture water
resources committee substitute
and house taxation and revenue
committee substitute for House
Bill two ninety six an act
relating to capital expenditures
re authorizing a re
conditions for the reversion or
transfer of unexpended balances
of appropriations made by the
legislature in prior years
declaring an emergency house
Yes taxation revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety six having been read
twice by title referred to the
Senate finance committee that's
house taxation revenue Committee
that order business announces
Services latest Senator thank
you Mr president so just for
committees we will be in
tomorrow evening are coming out
committee chairs of please
announcer Committee tops Senator
Shendo.
Thank you Mr president your
Senate tax businesses
transportation committee will be
Senator the subpoena followed by
Senator about this.
Thank you Mr president DSN
health and public affairs
committee will meet after the
democratic caucus which probably
will be.
and a whole bunch of house bills
as well thank you.
Restaurant this thank you Mr
president likewise the Senate
judicial me tomorrow will be
subject to the completion time
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr president just
remember the the clocks will
change knighted two AM but do
about that smart V. C. R. and
that smart oven in my house that
are those are going to change
over medically as well to my on
mining for alarm radio and those
we really have to channel our
our inner programming and and go
back in time and try to figure
that out you know it's kind of
like doing a puzzle Mr president
Senator it might be painful but
operator has prepared a little
surprise for her this is
normally done in the morning but
now it'll be the last thing that
we do.
This evening.
The.
The.
The.
The.
seven o'clock tomorrow evening
Senator center recess till seven
PM tomorrow evening.
