So we have our that gender here
we have Senate bill thirty nine.
And for the purposes changes
should go and see a bill ninety
seven this this was and I.
Receive any objections to the
agenda.
So that.
It appears.
All yes the proper answer is yes
yes.
Are here really.
Should the.
I'm glad all right appreciate
that okay thank you I just want
to help me a lot
good thank you madam chair
members of the.
Committee
they have the Senate bill thirty
nine.
And to my left is a.
Representative Garcia to my
right is also of a
representative of the person you
just
the secretary of this evening or
GST.
So
of of what the Senate bill
thirty nine does does several
things is going to be a quick
summary of what the the US and
then I'll turn it over to
courtesy you.
Of.
The two are procurement co
definitions for native American
residents in this.
The American residence veteran
business in both the contractor
and then also on the resident
contractor the American business
and also the resident veteran
contractor those respective
areas it also have a permanent
three of.
Makes a resident of businesses
the impact of permanent
preferences for the business
which otherwise would and this
coming July of twenty twenty
good luck with our twenty.
And then it also removes a
language stating that only
businesses annual revenue of
three million or less may
qualify to receive better
persons which has been K. awful
it removes that language.
And then
Also removes the language that
would have prevented related
business sometime in preferences
full of.
More than ten years and then
finally
is increases a purposeful
resident business from five
percent to eight percent and
maintains the current preference
of ten percent for their own
businesses.
So
With that I'll turn it over to
John to see that in most thank
you senator madam chair members
the committee John Garcia.
Yes the secretary designate
This is the governor's bill and
the proposal is to expand the by
New Mexico initiative here in in
New Mexico and help in state
businesses especially native
American owned and veteran owned
New Mexico businesses so I think
the Senator really hit the
highlights on the technical
aspects of the big parts of the
bill it's a little bit
complicated as is the
procurement code here in New
Mexico
but the governor would like to
try to get this to improve the
opportunities for New Mexico
companies to benefit from this
big corporation we call state
government is one of our biggest
you know companies if you call
it that and we buy a lot of
things goods and services and we
want more of that to go to local
businesses.
All in the in the bill.
Center there's an affidavit of
for the for the native American
madam chair community this
strengthens the opportunity for
native American businesses to to
benefit from the from purchasing
New Mexico
there's a few things that does
it ask for affidavit by notary
public that will.
Qualify the the entity is
operating on lands the native
lands Indian lands owned in
whole or in part within land
within New Mexico at least fifty
one percent of of the company
the state owned by a native
Indian nation pueblo or other at
needed entity provided that at
least a majority of the net
income from the business and the
management and daily operations
are controlled by one or more
for members of the New Mexico
Indian nations.
But what this does for native
American businesses madam chair
members the committee is it does
two things it strengthens and
qualifies these entities it also
makes it so others that would
try to guys themselves as New
Mexico business or native
American business
they wouldn't be allowed because
we strengthens a little bit of
the of the of the guidelines to
qualify these companies
the best the sweet spot on this
madam chair would be a native
American owned veteran owned
business would benefit from
majority of the of of the
preference
I would I would ask madam chair
members the committee that we
must pass this bill or something
like it or the the whole
the the the.
The it will go away the
preference would will go away
because the last legislature in
the past had sunset on this bill
and so the sunset goes way June
thirtieth of this year also the
calf
is removed and we we need to
have the cap so that
more businesses benefit from not
just being a small business they
can be larger madam chair those
are my comments and the have the
stand for questions.
Thank you madam chair of thanks
for the opportunity to sit here
and speak to people about this.
You know I'm on in my head she's
record Vietnam veterans of
what's happening in our state
madam chair is.
Individuals are being left out
of ball opportunities to
purchase provide New Mexico what
this bill is all about you know
all there is to be the cause of
the state and then scarfing up
on all the good stuff all of the
contracts we do not have much of
an opportunity especially native
Americans are suffering from is
also backroom are not having the
same opportunities and what this
bill does it'll give every state
every residence in New Mexico an
opportunity to bid on contracts
are awarded to the state you
know how construction of
buildings whatever the state
what's all this will give them
all of their
grind is be it and with the
competitive this and they took
off that cap of three million
dollars Senator Ortiz said in
the to percent and off of it.
Cool that's a good thing so in
the company data for.
Resident.
Can build on the saying that
they have a very talented person
preference of.
Regular people have a need for
should reference on this and
which is real good and madam
chair we really need to look at
this we can make sure that
everybody in the state has the
same opportunity to succeed on
what we're doing here thank you
madam chair if I knew any
questions.
We work with them so amend
caretakers.
Thank you thank you Sanchez I
will go out to the audience.
Is there anyone in favor.
Introduce yourself and you're
doing a fine.
Thank you madam chair good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Khan or
Chico and I and the rest of this
for the public
and house and we support this
bill
And as opposed changes this is
cold okay I want to further out
madam chair and members
Committee we had a great right
out of the Senate Mexicans.
Satrapies.
Jennifer jar of honey.
Chair I I really believe the
changes that are being.
Our whole budget our New Mexico
contractors with specifically
native any of our products as
well I took a look at the recent
list of contracts that were
awarded by the state and many of
the individuals that were listed
were from.
I station a large majority of
recipients of state contractor
from out of state.
I believe that that given the
products and services that would
come with these contracts could
be offered by New Mexicos
contractors but separately
tribal and tribal veterans
contractors so for those reasons
Madam believes also changes the
state rhetorical New Mexico need
to happen there were some
A couple provisions in the
proposed bill that how will you
be to address specifically.
maybe in a property taxes.
Arms fall far
as you know managers Committee
tribal lands are held in trust
by the federal government are
exempt from property taxes
legislature's.
So for those reasons.
For.
As we.
Thank.
Anybody else.
Do you have anybody opposed in
the this.
Thank you.
Of course on.
At first we have Jennifer Weber.
Yes good morning can you hear
me.
Hello.
Yes
Yes.
Morning can you hear me.
Hello.
Warning can you hear me.
Where we are unable to hear you.
Yes.
Good morning can you hear me.
The.
If we could go on that will come
back to that.
Good morning can you hear me Max
we have.
At appropriations Rivera said.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Paul Quinn Rivera the
director of policy and
legislative affairs for the
Indian Affairs Department the
department stands in support of
SB thirty nine historically
native American owned businesses
have been under represented in
government contracts making it
difficult for native owned we.
Can you hear me.
Hello I have to call somebody in
order to to be able to some okay
well
Senator place for a bit until.
What the.
This is one of a catalyst for
the other Legislature night.
Bill and I heard you clearly
yeah I could hear the other
person on zoom to.
package as part of the town.
I think this Sir because job
creator needs to.
Is that the and.
Yeah that sounds about right.
We hear any line have.
Anyone on the state of if they
can hear each other between
those that are online can hear
each other but they can't yes
the Democrats are saying that
everyone is online can hear what
that we can't hear that in the
row is not sure sounds on a
tablet
in line.
On the webcast the queen.
Yeah.
that we couldn't hear you for a
while but we could see you now
we can hear you and we can hear
the other catalysts online that.
The native.
That one is.
Well shows yes.
Yeah.
It's a touching time now.
This is designed to give you.
The first thing is.
I'm on the webcast.
So that we can can't hear yes I
don't know that this left.
Is connected right if you on the
air right there everything
everything so it our state is
driving but it's not it's not
working.
On the basis that the life
station the remaining muted by
over some.
that maybe has to level.
You can hear that comment.
The stuff.
This is a yeah.
Most more.
Hello.
That can you hear me yes there
are on this.
This is on the side.
The vote just.
The controls right there.
It sounds more.
Follow for thank you.
You can hear on the yeah
everything that's on the screen
is being controlled to the
laptop the sounds good and is it
a laptop as well.
I think you need to add a
speaker to the laptop that's
just what's going on H. as
speakers to the laptop that's
their source.
The employee yes.
This is the.
One loan on loan to.
As extended.
Yes.
Has occurred.
Thank you that we just spoke
English well acted the.
Those.
At current weather could you try
speaking again of that's good
morning can you hear me.
With the health.
Yes good morning can you hear me
yes.
wonderful.
Thank you good morning chair
Pinto and members of the
committee my name is Jennifer
well that I am here representing
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce in support of Senate
bill forty nine which increases
the preference for New Mexico
resident businesses and
contractors as well as our
native American and veteran
businesses.
Because of our G. R. T. tax
permitting on business to
business services New Mexico
small businesses are at a
disadvantage when it comes to
contracting with the state the
chamber believes that Senate
bill thirty nine will help New
Mexico small businesses in more
competitive while providing
historically under utilized and
disadvantaged businesses an
opportunity to contract with the
state programs have worked well
very well in other states and we
believe that they'll continue to
work for New Mexico small
businesses we ask for your
support for Senate bill thirty
nine thank you.
And we.
I can you hear me yes yes okay
hi my name is Brooklyn river of
the director of policy and
legislative affairs for the
Indian Affairs Department the
department stands in support of
SB thirty nine historically
native American owned businesses
have been under represented in
New Mexico government contracts
this bill gives in state
preference when for native
American businesses when bidding
for government contracts
supporting local businesses
particularly tribally owned is
one of the numerous efforts the
governor is working on to
implement to keep New Mexico's
economy flirting I'd like to
thank the sponsors Senator
Shendo and GST for bringing this
bill forward thank you thank
Nico let's take the time to.
Thank you frankly.
And this we have to make that
point return that we also we
don't get the feedback.
They did I think without that
one off questions.
These are all their own the
volume just risen up if yes some
of all of the.
Okay we'll continue this in with
the office online yes our.
Three center.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is drew
setter registered lobbyists for
the public service let up okay
when gays and lesbians any I
rise in support of SB thirty
nine through all this important
program is vital for all New
Mexico businesses in particular
though this bill will correct an
oversight of the original law
regarding in state preferences
and finally allow tribal
corporations to better compete
for contracts in the state I
want to thank Senator Shendo
Representative Garcia and
secretary Garcia for their
support assistance on the
support matter which has been
several years in the making
thank you.
Next we have Chris meeting.
I
thank you madam chair the
committee for letting me speak
today I am a resident veteran
owned business I've been in
business since two thousand
fourteen.
Continue to grow my business
from a small business to medium
size business and removing the
the sunset date and the cap on
this I've only been able to use
this preference once with the
local government and now I'm not
able to use it again I've had
multiple this go in and when
you're talking about the bill
rate at thirty four dollars I'm
only asking for thirty three
dollars can force that health
forty cents for ten percent so.
The last just an example the
last bit that I went to seven
out of the companies that were
bidding five of them were not
from the local area or New
Mexico itself and all five of
those were on the awarded bid
for the state that I was not
over three dollars and forty
cents so I am in full support of
this I also part of the Rio
Rancho chamber veterans business
support coalition.
And everybody feels the same way
please pass this bill thank you
for your time.
That's necessary because Gerald.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Sarah fitzgerald I'm senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we stand in support of this bill
this morning and we thank the
sponsors for bringing the bill
keeping government dollars in
New Mexico and buying local
makes good economic sense for
the state it supports job
creation here as well as local
business growth the legislation
like this is leveling the
playing field for in state
businesses I'm here to support
this bill thank you.
Next we have our CRC Act.
Good morning
You madam chair and members of
the committee my name is arching
Garcia I have a small business
of a service disabled veteran
owned business.
I support Senate bill thirty
nine because I believe that the
provisions of by New Mexico find
those businesses that survived
the pandemic a competitive edge
in a highly competitive bidding
process I think it provides not
only revenue for the companies
that get the contracts but also
additional tax revenue for the
state of New Mexico so I urge
you to support this bill and
recommended to pass.
Next we have a license Baca.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Elijah box on the chief
executive officer for the Santa
Clara development corporation a
wholly owned corporation up
owned by the public Santa Clara
I'm also the chairman for Google
construction services which is
one of our sub entities of
Senator development iterations
we stand in support of Senate
bill thirty nine our
construction company Google
construction it is the.
The certified section eighty
homes owned company with over
twenty five million dollars in
bonding capacity and we've
recently in in the past couple
years have been one of those
companies that have not been
eligible or have been
disqualified for some of our
budget just because as he tried
a hundred percent tribally owned
native American business on
tribal land we are not
recognized as being in state for
in state preference of since
then we've let shifted to
beating on other projects our
our construction company.
Helps in rural areas in all of
our subcontractors are from New
Mexico and predominantly small
businesses that we support in in
helping whenever we go into
budget and because of that we
stand in full support of Senate
bill thirty nine and we think
the Sanchez and Senator Shendo
for supporting this thank you.
And last Jane interim.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is
Jane turned again with the New
Mexico utility contractors
association we are proud to work
with and alongside our resident
veterans and native American
businesses.
In America members agree that
the exits existing five percent
preference is an effective way
to honor support and encourage
veterans and native American
businesses in New Mexico however
we are concerns that an eight
percent preference when they did
will result in an unfair
advantage for other residents
businesses and just want to be
competitive given that at times
profit margins can be less than
eight percent.
Our goals are unpredictable in a
five percent differential should
suffice to give a benefit to the
recipients consider that a
contractor making a five percent
on a project is hopeful there
are no errors or delays to
attain that amount on a project
but there is no guarantee the
recipients of the differential
being about eight percent
instead of five percent isn't
sixty percent increasing their
advantage New Mexico supports
adding the resident native
American preference and the
other elements including getting
rid of the sunset clause but is
against the increased eight
percent preference thank you.
And that state programs.
Thank you of Senator Pinto
ceremonial appreciate this
opportunity or thank you and
express my support for Senate
bill thirty nine of a
procurement professional with
the New Mexico P. tech also one
of the directors of the New
Mexico veterans business
advocates nonprofit and a
veteran small business owner
myself thank you for this
opportunity thank you Senator
Shendo and senator Garcia.
Thank you make that Madam just
before we go on Dan is always
trying to get on of the this for
a.
Send an acquittal but just wants
to note that sent in a public is
in support of this bill as well.
Thank you thank you senator
should of we will go to any
questions from committee.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you madam chair
this.
Yes I understand a couple.
It looks like I I do we're what
we're doing is for residents
businesses and native American
resident resident businesses.
We're increasing the whatever
exactly calling from I.
And then if you.
Resident veteran vision for a
native American residents that
proved.
Thank you the team from.
we're was a show.
Representative kind of what
we're doing we're.
Removing those numbers a little
favor fifty percent is already
in place for veterans for for
the veterans the ten percent
already places that's not
changing we're just adding the
definition of native American
resident veteran.
To that of the agreement close.
Yes in the other one we are
decrease in that from five to
eight percent a three percent
increase right and I've been
that's correct and others didn't
read that exactly correct right
right there I.
What is your or is there I guess
We're we're we're going to be
more clear I guess Senator and
and.
Your native American resident
vision related American
residents
that provisions because it
looked like to me when we when
we initially to I a resident
versions or a resident that
provisions we actually include
everybody our issues to be more
clear when we when we add
maintenance Americans to that
were they be an excluded
because of they work
specifically defined in the in
the wall of Madam chair of
Senator Griggs I think the
example that Santa Clara
mention.
This clearly what is we're
trying to clear.
Right now you know procurement
if your business is on tribal
land is not recognized as the
New Mexico business for whatever
reason.
Okay.
Your.
And.
The what Senator gentle
described thank you for the
summer land the fund out of
don't have a New Mexico tax ID
number which is required
business New Mexico and this
will give them the opportunity
to have the seeing of all of.
Well folks involved.
Bill given opportunity to
compete it's coming out of the
state of New Mexico but it is
generous number.
The taxation revision number
state and develop off.
Your and Representative they
don't have that today just under
a year a resident or resident
veterans
Call licensure for.
Madam chair Senator the they do
have the opportunity what this
does is the the the definition
of a native American owned
business needed clarity the new
language I think it starts on
page eleven
is is where.
This strengthens the opportunity
to protect New Mexico tax
Representative department also
qualify he said Senator as
native American businesses
sovereign but also within the
geographic boundaries New Mexico
and so that's what that's what
the clarification is on eleven
twelve.
And and what they do is they go
to sign in at the sign affidavit
qualifying themselves
native owned in New Mexico and
other criteria included the
percentage of the business the
proceeds going to the back to
the company gets this native
owned and that's what that the
new language does in the past
wasn't clear and native American
owned businesses could
participate another big part of
this bill is is what it does for
veterans and the governor wanted
to make sure that.
That the the the veterans.
Would get the highest preference
in this bill so those are the
two big things on this
qualifying this language for
defining native American company
and also
increasing the percentage for
veteran owned if their native
American veteran known that's
the that's the best.
And budget chairman for Schecter
Division date eight
Representative Schecter that
have as we go stated we go
through this their staff that
that that clears and a little
bit for me because it it looks
lie we just see it offering if
you're a resident that
provisions with the were tribal
for your you know somebody from
Alamogordo.
you ought to be.
Right at the site that way but
if if we need to.
Clearly spell that out of all of
them you know I'm I'm surely
fine with that I just just look
like through if if there's
problems with hopefully this
will fix.
Going on for a little bit
correct I appreciate that two
officers on the one page letter.
Madam chair talk about online
online sixteen we talk about the
management and daily operation
of the business our control.
I
know that I really know what
part of control is
I think you know you can imagine
it but I mean do we need to talk
about the controlling interest
we need to talk about that stuff
instead of our control and I'm
not I'm not gonna argue that in
the first so I just want to
point it out and she madam chair
that's something that we need to
move forward if if that can be
may be better defined for each
to provide sufficient.
And madam chair Senator if you
look just three four lines down
it goes in the qualifying those
criteria also and then fifty one
percent ownership in the
management of the operations are
controlled so it is it is a
matter of the definition is is
there
qualifying what is ownership and
what is management.
And in Madam chair Jay I I hope
that correct Mr I just finished
have you have somebody in office
I think we should be tightened
the the Richter to get.
I sent through to many Judiciary
Committee hearing yes.
Get streaming Center o'neill
understand that as well there's
just we're Jeff and I have had
one other other thing.
For a.
Lost it at the moment okay.
Of.
When we when we go back in when
we strive.
Madam chair and thank you all
when we strive for three million
dollars.
What we're.
What were the three million
dollars I yes we're trying to do
he sure that the small guys were
able to get a
a better opportunity than the
big.
And when we strike the three
million whether it needs to be
three five ten or or something
else.
We've given everybody that show
the the biggest contractor.
In the state.
Now competes with the with the
smallest contractor in the state
we were tryin.
Brian in this to help previously
show up I.
Yeah I don't know how that will
play out madam chair and and and
you all if it looks to me that
are you getting rid of that
number
you open the door for everybody.
To do that and I.
I look at that and see if that's
something you really you really
want to do then it may not be it
may be something you could.
But if it looks like that's what
we were trying to do before wish
to help the these guys get
established and be able to
compete and now we've done is
we've just we tried that we let
everybody completed help.
sure I hope that I hold.
You know that.
We're still doing the right
thing by that but I'd I'd sure
look at look at that and I.
I have one one last comment
overall.
a motion you guys know I was a
as the mayor of Alamogordo
and borders procurement code.
As always talk about these type
of things are given local
proffers.
But afterwards local preference
she said that she had to match a
little bit.
I've always talked about that
and and in every instance where
we have a bed that's actually
higher than a little bit and
that be if we.
Any winds at that level.
So what that that means the
taxpayer of New Mexico is paying
more for this particular
vehicle.
And.
You know what I think if we look
at procurement because this this
happens in every procurement
bill we we see about this is we
need to look at some of that and
be sure that you can get the
award.
You can work you can work but
you just have to match the low
bid that was submitted instead
of being able to be on a on a
million dollar project that's a
hundred thousand dollars that
the taxpayer has to foot.
You know the business kitchen
and good good things about that
because it's a local business
their pay and local people and
they're going off.
But the taxpayer of New Mexico
pays more to allow.
Show I that's that's my comments
madam chair with I want to
support the bill for sure but I
want you guys to to look
especially at the at the three
million she is that that does
what she really wanted to do
thank you madam chair thank you
senator thanks senator Sanchez.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Senator dental tools
Senator Shendo I really bill
Garcia Representative Garcia
Mister Garcia
we had a really good comment
from of the.
The.
People here today with us about
on the lands will need lands is
can we clear that up a little
bit is that I was reading here
on page eleven slide six is that
for the that of.
So that you get the preference
and the problem before was not
of Senator Representative Garcia
said about the tax ID number and
also being able to have
something where they do have the
state for because I don't think
the tribal members own the land
is passed down right so to get
the tax ID number you have to
own the property or how will
that play out we have a
committee today so I think that
for us
From what I how are you reading
this is what there's two things
that could happen like if I was
in the.
The business owners a tribal
member and I'm operating out of
healthcare key.
I will go to the same process as
anybody else because my
operation use authorization I
will be paying taxes to the
county to anybody else I will be
operated basically as a.
As the mid American business
funded by the state or anybody
so so that's that's not the
issue the issue is the I was a
business owner and was operating
out of his Pueblo for in Santa
Clara.
Is operating couple construction
of Santa Clara.
Then.
The TRD office would be
something more because they
would not be paying taxes they
cannot show proof of it on taxes
being paid you know and so forth
so that's what's addressing this
so the first paragraph the
application for the American
resident business certificate or
resident contractors of get Jon
Gruden affidavit from the notary
public setting forth that the
business is operating on tribal
lands Justice reassurance that
yes you are not you know in city
and trying to get away from the
this but you are on the
reservation and that's to prove
after.
Thank you senator Senator
Sanchez Senator thank you madam
chair and you have well with
this bill I carried a
procurement bill last session I
still know what Aston
was a hundred twenty pages long
and it didn't go anywhere one
wanted to disservice I would
really Representative
emphasized no echo Senator
Griggs comment about make sure
that you flat the daughter to
carry on madam chair know if
those two of my committee.
This.
Sure.
Yeah I'm just concerned about.
Right mentioned that the
property tax issue I mean that
seems like the what can you have
your address as well thank you
have to have a be able to you
have to pay property tax in
order the division of.
Okay this is just this bill it
includes everybody in the state
that's why there certain
provisions that talk about of
taxes and so forth is showing
proof that whether you're a
native or non native or anybody
Hispanic you're a resident you
have to show that you have the
paying taxes for every operation
is okay but if you're on Indian
land since tribe's normally are
not taxed right then this
section will apply in that
instance were the the a native
corporation or maybe a native
person that is operating on
tribal lands we'll have an
affidavit saying that they are
for sure operate on the last
four.
Move to TRD that this is proof
that that they are.
Okay and then also a factor of
chair and senator what about
Senator explained that to three
million and that seems to be a
that that's that's the that's a
good point I think that's
something that will you know if
if if the bill does passes this
committee something that I
think.
We need to sit down and talk
about that's a good point
etcetera that you bring up
because.
This is not restricted to that
it opens it up to everybody.
And and I remember because I was
a history major in college if
this bill what why and did they
put a sunset on this thank you
the history of the statute what
was do you know madam madam
chair Senator I would never
question that was the number.
This is.
Yeah okay.
Thank you.
A couple of questions from
share.
Second time.
Of money right well the page
eleventh that runs all the
majority of the business and yet
online lines this is at least
fifty one percent.
This is.
I consisted.
The language of the.
The state already or
Using one of the other.
It
is here that the that that that
that language is coming from the
the the previous page was was
qualifying that are veteran
owned business with the two
fourteen the the fourteen to
fourteen the that qualifies them
as honorable discharge from the
military and I think when it
goes to the next page for
veteran owns a majority of the
business then it goes into that
page eleven W. we talked about
before so I think it's a final
and it's just coming down to
then qualify the language after
a line one.
On page eight thank you in the
Representative
The.
How.
So we talk about this
application process this is new
language.
We don't have this process
already in place so we really
don't know right now for the if
this if this actually the cheap
as far as language in the
affidavit
by the public what the are we
going to find that affidavit to
them and say get this notarized
you madam chair itself to the
budget excuse me then it's up to
the entity to get the affidavit
and into New Mexico tax rep
Department this new language
those two things that it it gets
more specifically identifies
what a native American owned
businesses and also
there are consequences for
anybody coming in and saying
they they they qualify under the
under these criteria and the and
so it it it cuts out those that
we try to be impostors and it
strengthens the fact of a of a
company that would be needed
maybe about.
Thank you.
Present one some of this process
to as far as
talking to some constituents.
Was actually establishing their
businesses COVID has been.
It's taken longer.
It's taking longer almost they
have no idea how much longer it
takes for them to get some of
the.
Back from the IRS to establish a
business.
But yet they're ready to operate
And that's a slight.
We know we're going to be able
to chief that during this time
for them to take advantage of
all the the money yes madam
chair I think that the this is
not new to taxed Representative
they do it in other
circumstances where they asked
for an affidavit of
it's it's it's it is a process
that the state tax revenues used
to I would think
it's hard to get a driver's
license for a car and COVID and
it's probably gonna be the same
challenge maybe here but the
notary would validate the what
they said was true they submit
that now they're under the
penalty of perjury or
violating the law and that's
what this is so.
Thank I think madam chair I
can't talk about I hope the
process goes smoothly.
Thank you for talking about the
driver's license.
That is part of it you have your
businesses small businesses that
are operating and.
Pending on how they're going to
do this type of reform are
charged in to have it drawn up
but how long it's gonna take.
The individual.
The coming out of their pocket
even to start the business this
is specially if it's that easy
though funding and when we
constituents in my area when
they go to try to get their
driver's license getting that
notary
to militarize that and getting
the information to get that
right is that when it was
implemented was a challenge
because they didn't know what
had to say they don't know
exactly you so you're going
through this and then you're
running back and forth
geographically
to to to get this done
so that if the process is easy
we make it make it sound like it
is but yet it hasn't been proven
are
Access this.
This is my comment on.
The chair will entertain a
motion.
Pathway
and
seconded by Senator.
Who
ability to call the roll.
Senator grace.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez.
It was open looks.
Six centers centers as possible
resident yes Representative okay
yes that.
Senator Shendo yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Pinto yes.
We have four yeses four do pass.
Thank you.
The committee thank you.
Yes Sir.
For.
The time off work out.
This
is.
Yes.
Thanks.
Many writers.
And madam chair.
The.
This.
Thank you.
Here no million years of the
committee.
Senate bill ninety seven.
Is the issue making
appropriation to the Indian
Affairs Department to update and
expand indigenous wisdom
curriculum project after the
approval cultural center this
project has already been an
existence and as we move
forward.
Doing.
American education issues.
The resources that are out there
we're not is plentiful and
choirs some funding to continue
with and expand it as we
integrate these.
Integrate the native Americans
culture into some of the.
That topped Act and.
That five hundred thousand
dollars appropriation.
There.
This push also requires some of.
It takes money to get these
resources up and running and I
think a lot of the teachers and
educators in that manner not
just teachers but anyone in the
education about could access
this.
Online.
To.
That I believe have to people
of.
In person and okay okay that
really fast so madam chair
Senators thank you so much for
the opportunity to be here today
and thank you madam chair for
caring this important piece of
legislation.
I'm Beverly will clear the vice
president of cultural and
community engagement so I hope
oversee the nonprofit portion of
the Indian council of cultural
center.
We are we have some
representatives including for
Martinez to Wisconsin with us
today wanted to make pre-filing
writers this curriculum came
about it was funded the creation
of it by Calum Graham that grant
has since expired and with that
with the with the mandate to
have culturally relevant
curriculum in the classroom plus
as you noted the Martinez case
really it's become imperative
that we be able to expand this
curriculum across the state and
that includes helping us with
recruitment efforts to recruit
more indigenous teachers in the
classroom as well as to do
professional development so this
is a one time asked this will
give us a ramp to be able one to
go ahead and expand the
curriculum and then to be able
to make this self sustaining so
we will not be coming back to
the legislature in asking for
funding this again it's just for
us to be able to update the
curriculum and if you look on
the funding request I will go
through this entire list of
exactly what the funding would
be used for and also to
establish a teacher recruitment
for program believe that's very
important to be able to have
the cultural relevance of the
curriculum as well as the
teacher in the sensitivity with
that and madam chair and
Senators drive one of our
Martinez is I want to one of the
main curriculum writers and she
did submit a written letter to
all of you but I think it's very
should say a few words if.
Right now it if you want to.
Right now thank you Dr.
Can we get you on.
Yes good morning on a board
chair Senator and show by chair
o'neill Senator Sanchez showed
gender and grace at the Senate
Indian rule of cultural affairs
committee thank you very much
for providing me with time to
share my expertise to professor.
And solar curriculum studies
former high school teacher at
history educator curriculum
writer and director of the
institute American Indian
education and this is regarding
the digest was incredulous.
every fall semester I teach
secondary social studies methods
courses required for
undergraduate and graduate
students seeking licensure to
teach middle and high school
start social studies in the
state of New Mexico early on I
introduce students to resources
methods and pedagogy to prepare
them to teach our youth across
the state of New Mexico.
Not only are they responsible
for thinking critically about
the idea of what counts as
knowledge and knowledge and
skills and social studies but
they must also become acquainted
with great focus on indigenous
peoples of New Mexico hello
Jordy of the students will be
teaching New Mexico history U.
S. history government economics
and geography in middle and high
school.
I am fully aware of the
limitations of expectant mothers
mainstream sources in addressing
the complexity of human
experiences and facilitating
strong historical consciousness.
Mexico state will relevant
curriculum has the potential to
content and skills to empower
students to think critically
about their present and future
goals as members of a diverse
global society.
Today I am here to speak to the
merits of the indigenous wisdom
curriculum regardless of the
situated nature of students
place in the world the power of
learning the steep core
curriculum provides a foundation
for developing a strong critical
consciousness I have the honor
of which to work with an
outstanding curriculum eighteen
that includes doctor Christine
seven section at the Martinez
agency as will be to mystery on
a follow up and miss Shannon
vero who provide culturally
sustaining and relevant a list
of these great educators across
the state.
As an educator with decades of
experience as a high school
history teacher professor at UNM
my goal is to introduce my
students to issues across its
three major objectives to engage
in intellectual activity with
the community of learners to
examine issues of race ethnicity
social class gender age and
language of glacier data now in
the past and to reflect on ways
that they can relate everything
their learning to their future.
Culturally sustaining a relevant
curriculum is good education for
everyone and for all students
more specifically this type of
curriculum is important for
engages to it and this is
recognised all levels and
diverse entities.
Point one culturally sustaining
a relevant curriculum
contributes to current thinking
for the teacher for the unique
status of indigenous peoples in
the United States and globally.
The council for the social
studies for these positions
state in two thousand eighteen
that affirms the rights of
indigenous peoples in this
affirmation they state that
indigenous peoples have the
right to dignity education and
to see and experience our
cultures traditions histories
ongoing sovereignty movements
offered to social studies
curriculum and classroom.
Point two in two thousand
nineteen the National Congress
of American Indians released a
report entitled becoming
physical landscape analysis of
state efforts provide data
education for all in the
executive summary the purpose of
the report is presented implies
that the basic arguments
presented by the Yazzie
plaintiffs in the Martinez
Yazzie versus state of New
Mexico K..
A state at the NCAA I states.
And our unfortunately in fiscal
two many most Americans likely
have attended or currently
attending school were
information about native
American just either completely
absent from the classroom are
relegated to brief mentions
negative information or
inaccurate stereotypes this
resulted in injury and damage to
narrative regarding of people's
tribal nations and their
citizens even though some
exceptional efforts are
happening around the country
like this the New Mexico right
right culturally responsive
track we specific and
contemporary content about
native Americans need to make
sure education systems much more
work needs to be done.
And the report that their report
was based on an extensive review
of literature in interviews and
starred thirty five states and
here's what they found from
their research number one that a
majority of the states surveyed
indicated the native American
education is included in their
content standards but far fewer
states require native American
education curriculum to try to
to be taught in public schools.
they also found that there used
to providing native American
education continent questions
include the lack of access to
curricula lack of adequate
funding and state support for
staff technical assistance
professional development and
evaluation.
that point number three of the
pedagogy of history which
includes New Mexico US world and
and global history is most
effective when historical
thinking skills of corroboration
historiography and you
actualization the changing
continuity judgment
argumentative writing identified
historical significance and
sourcing are embedded in
curriculum and instruction
collectively these skills work
best when they are vetted eighty
culturally sustaining and
relevant curriculum.
Wait for K. twelve educators are
part of the education are you.
Important civic a.
This is especially true since
the siege at this particular
curriculum where were planted at
the public health vocation when
elders and leaders said what is
going to be the contribution of
are you to their people in their
community.
My final point I like to make
here is that researchers in the
field of social work like Wexler
in two thousand nineteen change
that quote if young people can
make sense of their experiences
by locating themselves and their
situation with an historical
understanding and community
meeting they are better to
overcome hardship and sustain
psychological help.
The work once there was relevant
to be when I type it American
studies at what all high school
which is located at the CYFD
Spidey DC And made on level your
detention centers for make the
state of New Mexico I taught
native American studies to
native youth were incarcerated
at both of the sides but
attended high school on those
two campuses.
I found a better connection
among critical consciousness
knowledge and identity there's a
natural merger of the cognitive
and affective domains for
example if you or a course right
in a detention center can get an
appreciation for the knowledge
about activism decolonization
sovereignty rights as they
relate directly to indigenous
peoples.
Through this whole process of
reflection because a critical
readers of the world they can
rethink their roles as members
of society upon release for
their release to the public they
can ask questions and
interrogate things that we
assumptions that we take for
granted about the representative
representation of indigenous
peoples they can think
critically about cultural
sovereignty within the context
of their own native nations and
engage improvements to
revitalizing Sir data languages
and more importantly they can
get engaged our guide the next
general nation of used about the
value of forty two critically
beat the world.
So in summary we must email the
fact that in the ruling by judge
important that Mr Huber Martinez
Yazzie persisted Mexico K. the
pedagogical value culturally
relevant sustaining and response
curriculum with PED providing
indigenous you and all you for
that matter with the uniform and
sufficient education for college
and career readiness.
And I did email this are
testimony to Senator Shendo and
Senator because I have your
email addresses and if you want
you can forward it to the other
members of the committee I thank
you very much for your time for
listening to my presentation.
What I say I did share this
letter with you so that you can
show the other sectors as well.
Okay well thank you thank you
doctor thank you doctor for
working with those kids I have a
high school I used to work at
the same kids here's his job.
It's up to the audience we go
any comments on.
Conroy.
Chairman of the committee my
name is Khan marching out.
And I this will pose Act money
Thomas and we strongly about
support of this bill
Well.
Of culturally and linguistically
relevant material.
Available for tribal education
departments for try to control
schools but when public
education.
I can take my own experience
that I don't recall taxable on
tribal history culture in my
entire year supporting school K.
twelve of
as a matter of fact just all
single native American teacher
of them all my years of folks I
respond were
was drivers Estonians and
capture workers up.
That side of this gentleman I
believe this bill along with the
appropriations will go a long
way towards expanding the
availability of materials and
curriculum to I can tribal
education departments with
educators who really want to
expand the knowledge of both
native and non native for those
reasons was chairman the staff
was thank.
Anyone else in support of this
bill.
Anyone opposed.
Is the zoom do we have anybody
on zoom yes we do at first we
have Joseph's opportunity.
My constituents.
Sorry.
Senator.
A good morning this Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Joe Sabatini I am a
retired librarian and have
volunteered at the Indian pueblo
cultural center in their library
and as a docent for the last
thirteen years.
That was present during the
period when the Kellogg
foundation's
assisted in the
Hundred years except that that
the scholars who have created
the indigenous with custom
curriculum
created and expanded upon in
this remarkable
indigenous wisdom curriculum
that is publicly available on
the Indian pueblo cultural
center website the.
there are twenty seven units on
hell's on social studies on
math.
Science.
Language arts.
With the this wide array of
pueblo related topics but
presented in a very.
Thorough
the format that is is is is
geared to a teacher in a
classroom actually presenting a
unit that.
Will enhance the learning of the
children regardless of whether
they are pueblos or.
Anybody else.
And so Matt.
Thank you in these days when we
have this
Over reacted
critical race theory and the
hysterical reaction to critical
race theory this is a balanced
respectful.
Professionally done piece of
work and to in the largest.
To add new new units to it too
and then
present it to more and more
teachers who will actually
presented in communities where.
Pueblo peoples and other peoples
will will benefit from it I
think this is remarkably if this
unit in there about geometry and
help with tropical canyons
Pueblo potato is a perfect
example of hi Thackery and tears
and with the mathematical
exercise this this is this is
not
These these are real subjects
create teaching real critical
state thinking.
That will benefit.
The communities that uses that
to help understand each other
and.
Delighted to the Senator Pinto
has brought this bill at.
Thank you so it's great to to
expand what the reason the
resource and the production of
that is and.
Distribution to the education
community thank you thank you
just a next reentry center.
Morning members of the committee
my name Mr setter I am a
registered lobbyist for the
public of this letter okay
Wingate sent whippings any I
rise in support of SB ninety
seven as a curriculum is a key
in educating students about
tribal culture and its
importance in New Mexico I want
to thank the sponsor for bring
this forward and I want to thank
As for Martinez and and
Madam chair for for dancing this
curriculum and provided a
valuable resource to schools and
students throughout the state.
Thank you very.
Next year it might have been
sitting.
I.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Mike
if it's any I'm a current
currently policy fellow with oil
futures at in New Mexico and I'm
also a former teacher at native
American communicating or as we
call Naka and I live in
Albuquerque and part of the
Navajo Nation when I saw this
bill and you must support as a
former history teacher in my
tenure at not good use this
invaluable indigenous wisdom
curriculum resource offered by
the Indian public culture center
I was incredibly excited to use
the New Mexico current day
United States units the IPCC
curriculums are so rich in
knowledge about tribes and
pueblos in the southwest region
and are grounded in core values
that inspire and challenge the
minds of students they really in
Richard traditional school
subjects through unique
pedagogies that drive students
social and cultural capital
Indian tribal culture centers
curriculum develops necessary
critical thinking and civic
engagement that benefits our
communities and that's a
strength based approach that I
really appreciated and the
central and essential to the
curriculum and imperative to in
public education everyday this
curriculum helps recover and
nurture indigenous communities
we think the sponsor and I think
the sponsor for bringing this
bill and ask you to support and
favorite SP ninety seven thank
you next we have Karen rip off.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen would lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and I can't say it
better than the people before me
but for all the fees and stated
we stand in very strong support
and want to thank the sponsor
for bringing this forward.
Thank you and next we have ready
at okay.
Our Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for giving.
Was beaten and some part of
Senate bill ninety seven my name
is would have pocketed and
research and policy analyst and
state travel policy fellow at
New Mexico voices for children.
Voices for children stand in
support of this bill because
indigenous western curriculum
projects is an important and
much needed resource.
It's the pharmacy in our
Canadian and US.
You for improvement Pueblo and
other indigenous students.
Additionally all students
benefit from this curriculum by
developing respect and
appreciation for public culture
and history and public people's
continuous contributions to our
state.
Thank you to the indigenous
scholars who have developed this
curriculum thank you senator
temple for sponsoring this bill.
And thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee for
your time.
Thank you and lastly at Michael
the Cerro.
Committee members on I like to
express my support of this bill
you know I have children and
public schools that would
benefit from this on the line
from the public sentiment and I
do work at the temple culture
center I am the director of
guest entrepreneur experiences
and also have had my time
working with them students are
we can Bernalillo high school
and the benefit I think that
comes from this is enter
interacting and engaging Pueblo
use the conversations that will
stem from this interactions that
will get the value that will
they will add to the classroom
amongst other students that you
know might not be Pueblo
they will have a lot to teach
our teachers as well and up in
that disco handed handed really
enrich their classroom and rich
the community and this create a
sense of you know along
involving just sharing that
cultural component I'm one
hundred percent behind this.
Thank you thank you for that
thank you for your comments.
Chair Mister chairman of this
okay to the committee would go
Senator Griggs thank you thank
you madam chair.
This project.
A couple of the mission to me I
guess I would I would would look
at the the bill we're trying to.
Date and expand the indigenous
wisdom curriculum project at
the.
Well first of.
And then when we when we come
over here we we show the budget
and I just down from the we're
K..
I talked about the director of
education
tribal and community health for
greater.
Right here folks
Mr chair and and the manager or
the already there are we hiring
new people in the in the center
to.
to do this and but I when I see
it in her stuff that always gets
me about things.
Is that we're trying to to have
a program that gets out and
helps.
people teachers teach provided
curriculum helpful helpful the.
Forty percent.
Have the money be in.
Allocated is going to these.
Top four budget at.
It does look like that stuff
that's actually going to get out
really help people it's going to
the management of the of the
center and I don't with these
new people for
the people that are there we're
just helping pay their salaries
are I don't I don't health
show this chairman and madam
chair young just to talk about
that a little bit she would
which you're what you think they
should do with here.
Mr chair Senator Griggs members
of the committee.
The New Mexico local to Senator
Ingle of all the traits that are
here listed it's kind of the
central location of doing that
making sure that the curriculum
that is put out is something
that's approved by all of their
that total would support of
certain aspects of the cultural.
Pueblos their own culture Dr Lee
put out publicly.
There are some things within our
tribes nations and pueblos that
are very sacred to us which
we're not just gonna open the
door and let's see that it's
done in a certain way and out of
respect in that manner for their
culture I think this is a small
price to pay to bring all these
keys in agreement so that as far
as if we did it from the state
of New Mexico we would still
have to do that same process of
going out there doing the
outreach managing.
To each tribe and contact each
of these to make sure.
There's a collaboration that
this happened.
And in some sense a lot of what
just happened was the other way
around in which would then stuff
is mandated are this is what we
want from you instead of it
coming from the other aspect of
this is them creating it
creating an accordion open the
door so it's a little bit.
I I would think it would be
smoother going this process than
having it put them on to us and.
To our so madam chair Mister
chairman Senator it is a good
point that you raised so far
this has been this work is been
done through volunteers like Dr
Martinez and so this would allow
us to expand that these are new
positions but I'm also very
sensitive to what you're talking
about these are recurring cost
on a nonrecurring outlay which
is why we made the point that we
would need to be we will become
self sustaining so that these
will be a permanent part of the
expansion of the curriculum so I
do understand what you're saying
but currently for us to do the
outreach that madam chair is
talking about for us to do to
recruitment efforts to try to
get more indigenous teachers in
the classroom we will we do need
these positions to be expanded
but again the cultural centers
very much aware that we would
need to make this.
And sort this when we can.
And the Mr chair.
There I I.
You know I I applaud what we're
gonna do because I I thank you
for following thinking New
Mexico New Mexico issue is not
talk very with
for everybody
but I you know I think it's
it's.
It's important that we we we
teach it correctly we teach you
from a perspective that
we've got.
This happened here in this
happened.
And this guy has a view for the
same issue.
And I think that's as important
and you hear that
I just as I was looking at it I
guess I'm trying to really
figure out are we are we really
are we really expanding the.
The indigenous wisdom curriculum
project for we just helping fund
the that should be in pueblo
cultural.
And if these guys are yeah we're
trying to page people are
volunteers
measured and higher hiring
director for the center
then I I just think I think
there's in this don't exactly
match.
And
Chair and Mr chair that we
Here we look at that as a saying
goes forward to be able to to
address some of that in finance
if if in the future its product
of if we want if we really want
to
In addition I'm not sure that
the project was such all the
center to do the
indigenous wisdom curriculum
project so
thank you Richard thank you
chair I mean it it helps me
understand stuff I don't I don't
know show.
Thank you for that.
Senator Shendo thank you the.
Share some of the questions of
the committee.
right.
The.
For the the budget policy
Senator but because of the
complex you know the it
increases so way off.
It and my question was where are
these for existing positions or
people or even create it thank
you and to the question that
these are going to be created.
Thank
and so.
And to do all of this of this on
the front page.
For professional development
teacher called teachers across
the state how do we know that a
lot of.
Thank you for.
The work.
The.
And the.
Other nations.
The I support what we gonna do
this in order.
This is one funding is yes in
these individuals to expand the.
I guess.
This is the.
Request from self supporting but
it's kind of trouble that that.
Because you know.
Almost no but the.
The former secretary of higher
ed former president of of other
colleges almost you know.
Twenty years of my life in
higher education and the
November Dr very wealthy and
others in.
Last December the folks that are
doing the work.
if you that's great I guess the
funded and will be trying to do
probably needs a little work to
do for us to understand exactly
what what what we can do
I.
But there's no people.
As well for the for the.
For this code out there.
Is this interested to say.
Interesting to hear of the
settlement Mr chair of what the
subsystem the portion of the
words that come.
We
service.
In the committee.
When talk about.
People doing the work as a
teacher it's we're mandating
this to kind of meet Mr Martinez
part of a lawsuit.
The implementation within as a
teacher it is it would be a lot
easier to stop resource that for
the.
But we know that there's the
resources to implement the act
are not.
There's not apply throughout K.
they talk about all these
different content areas and they
were a lot the.
Develop too little bit for each
one to start implementation
that's it when you get that's
what we hear from teachers
there's not enough time in the
day to do office to do that to
do get these resources gathered
been it kind it would cut down
on if you already know that some
of the system that manner and as
a teacher you teaching your
content area but when you're
ready to cooperate something
culturally from wherever you are
working.
That access would allow you to
to incorporate into what you're
doing and it's not there.
Then you're.
Date and we're trying to meet
the criteria for this lawsuit
if.
It's going to take longer to.
But they're already the only
have the ball rolling this is
just a one time and then we'll
The other aspect about the
budget familiar with I don't
know if that really are.
To Martinez would be able to.
Beverly so madam chair Mister
chair so this indigenous was a
program is not the only thing
that the cultural center Dallas
so you know we we have our other
programs we had Kellogg invested
in us to get this curriculum
going but with our we want to be
as transparent as possible about
the budget so that you didn't
know that it does include staff.
What under the proposed hello
grant we did not charge for
professional development we we
under the terms of the requests
we don't have that funding
anymore the way to become self
supporting and I was recently we
had a contractor the public
education department for sixty
five thousand dollars to do
teacher professional development
and so we want to be able to
scale back where it includes
your point about how we're going
to become more self sustaining
our through those types of
contracts and those activities
and to do that to do the work of
course we do need the person to
be dedicated to that and the
other thing I really wanted to
show to is that teacher mentor
program as well as the summer
academy that we will be doing
those are kinds of the
activities that we need staff to
do right now the education
department at the culture center
is a staff of one so this would
actually help us to dedicate
resources to this curriculum and
to the expansion of that to
include professional development
of that and again we can look at
the budget again I am from my
cabinet secretary days a very
familiar that when you have a
one time requests for recurring
dollars that there has to be a
plan in place for the
continuation appropriations and
not that is exactly what we plan
to do thank you.
Before we go to a motion I just
just really interdependence
Kellogg grant because that's
great that they granting money
but sounds like it was all
volunteer how much if you don't
mind me asking what was the
grant how much was the grant so
madam chair Mister chair and
doctor Martinez you might
correct me but the original
requests for two hundred fifty
thousand and it was for
honorarium is for us to bring
regular then and then we also
have their travel because those
curriculum writers actually came
to the in the public cultural
center to be able to work
together on the interface of
that and so the it kind of was
the starting point and now I
need to be updated but we want
to do the expansion including
the creation of a high school
textbook and that would help us
underwrite the expenses and
travel expenses as well as
honorarium is for those of
riders and and there's also been
discussion and we've been asked
to also look at a pre K.
curriculum so that we can
actually start with culturally
relevant education as early as
pre K. thank you
how the hell out of the was it a
multi year grant from the
Kellogg foundation or what was
it a one one time two hundred
fifty thousand dollars a so
madam chair Mister chair it was
a one time grant that and and
they express that at the time
for us to get this particular up
and going and and just if the
face of that and I believe that
grant actually was given to the
center in two thousand and
eighteen two thousand seventeen.
Finally
it and you can see these parts
that grant in your current
proposed budget the honorary
so so so I'm just echo.
My colleague senator Sanders
comment like.
No that's that's great you're
gonna go self sustaining but
good luck I mean that's a lot to
to line up and it's very
consider and just wonder why
didn't come in for multi year
why why why did you come in for
recurring on this so madam chair
Mister chair that was a
consideration for us to do that
but we we just believe that
there are other funding sources
as well as sustaining and again
just being sensitive to that
aspect is actually would give us
a couple of years good years to
be able to get that set up and
going so that you know it could
be a consideration but okay
Senator Shendo this is kind of I
guess part of the question of of
Mr chair is is I know we
refer to the Yazzie Martinez and
there
Representative Lente that's
creating kind of a framework for
funding is any of this invented
in that as well Mr chair
Mr chair I have not seen that
work in the Lee during the
interim the legislative
education study committee there
was did it come before the
committee but we did not
actually something
it was more just a verbal
overview of what it is.
Thank you thank you and I have I
understand this is right this is
very exciting.
To work flow so.
Is there a motion by.
By Senator Sanchez.
the clerk so call the roll
Senator Griggs yes.
Senator Sanchez yes Senator
Shendo yes Senator only yes
Senator Pinto yes we have to
pass the.
Madam chair.
That we are okay okay thank you.
Our.
