This is a story about an eight
year old girl.
Adam is a fictional character.
That's based on too many cases
that are all too real we have to
Anna was a child that was known
to the child welfare system for
whole life as was her mother.
returned to live with her mother
where she was kicked to death at
the age of eight years old.
That is not yet created the
systems to keep all our children
safe our children face adversity
abuse neglect.
be just another story that gets
ignored our role in telling this
story is to create a society
you this morning but I
understand you're in for a real
treat as governor Lujan Grisham
and it lieutenant governor how
we what I list.
and Senator souls for putting an
age a day together.
Dona Ana County resilience
addresses been busy in the last
two years since we saw each
We've especially tried to bring
awareness that Dona Ana
resilience leaders exists in our
county we have a media campaign
points that we receive from my
survey a couple of years ago.
We also have very noteworthy
projects that I'd like to
data is a informational sheet
educating the community about
how to pick a provider and what
questions to ask our housing
To include being selected as a
Blue Ribbon committee for the
city of Los crucis as we
negotiate our next year bond
cycle and having housing as a
priority.
working on many issues that are
facing our community one being
workforce shortages the other
Point of entry with folks so
that they don't lag in in the
system somewhat of a follow up
system and then lastly as many
communities has been facing with
identifying specific
neighborhoods in need of
infusion of services and will be
partnering with the city of Los
crucis and non profits to
summit with our service sector
leaders bringing Eric Barton who
is an adaptive leadership group
your communities so good luck
god bless take care.
Resiliency is consists of
representatives from over fifty
adverse childhood experiences
are really looking at child
maltreatment from a preventive
point of view as communities we
want to make sure that we're not
addressing childhood
maltreatment and neglect only
to connect so many partners in
the community with Anna age a
book that really talks about the
CYFD system I'm taking care of
our youth in our community and
Resilience.
Is to reduce the bear to
accessing services.
adversity I believe we all have
a role to play resilience cedars
provides that seat at the table
that so crucial to ensuring our
children and families flourish.
This is pick up better on the.
problem in an issue partly it's
not picking up on the main one
so we'll move over to these
mikes and use these.
for an institute they started
bringing stakeholders together
from the ten vital services and
you can see they've made a lot
of progress and they're getting
ready to go even bigger and just
well one hundred percent Otero.
Good morning everyone my name is
Gail I am the co founder of one
hundred percent sure we've been
going for almost two years now
is has organized this and you're
going to hear more about that
from some of the people
participating warning my name is
Nadia and I'm here at the the
hundred percent of terror
on this is called the annual
Pitt county point in time count
and more is going to tell us
more about the pecan.
More reading.
census that tries to help people
who are experiencing
homelessness on a certain day of
the year this this year from
January thirty first we're gonna
want to do is a knowledge that
there are homeless people people
experiencing homelessness in
Orange County in our community
we want to try to get some data
kits and the House and socks and
everybody will get a gift card
ten dollar gift card to meet up
you know just one of the daily
unit housing here in a terror
county so we've got a group of
people a committee that works on
their
price housing without
transportation possibly a very
somebody doesn't know the.
Public transportation shuttle
transportation if they don't
have a part to get to a doctor's
appointment so my committee
they need to know how to get
around this appears to be able
to accomplish what at age eight
guns I just want to say that a
hundred percent New Mexico has
provided the framework for our
organization we are House star
office we pay rent to NMSU
so that if anybody coming into
our office was.
I'd say.
The school secretary here the
barriers here are the goals that
what the people say we're
barriers for them and somebody
said they you know not been able
to provide those resources that
they needed the year before that
Reports share quite a bit of
information and have really
informed a lot of the work that
we've done thus far.
Since the very beginning.
part of a hundred percent Otero
is networking and.
That somebody has to do with one
sample of the cooperation and
coordination that is happening
only as a result of a hundred
percent of terrible.
event we had I think one person
from Otero county who just so
happened to be in the audience
here and look at where they are
now in just two short years
during a pandemic it's just
book club and thinking about
getting started in this
initiative and now you'll get to
see all of the progress they've
made in two short years.
We are one hundred percent San
Miguel and we're coming to you
live our legislators today from
our power our we were meeting
county of San Miguel and it is
just such a joy to be able to
work together even in this
hardest of times and when we say
together and we say we that
appreciate your support so with
that being said from your one
hundred percent San Miguel
action team it's all about
media.
Next one of our first counties
so before we even had an
institute we had Dona Ana County
and Sapporo County who really
made this happen contacting
Imagine in New Mexico where
And we're communities in the
residents in those communities
have access to medical and
behavioral health care and we're
counties.
I'm doctor Sharon sessions the
director about reaching a
physics professor at New Mexico
tech.
Today I'm representing one
this is such an important
resource to provide the
foundation of this or in the
framework for helping our
communities coordinate efforts
so that we can convert this
All right so those were our
County videos next up we have a
video from David Greenberg with
the national educators
association and one of our key
Good morning it is an honor to
join you virtually at the third
I now work with the New Mexico
state affiliate of the national
education association the
largest education association
the largest labor union in the
many years and I believe that
the ten thriving and surviving
strategies advanced by the N. H.
eight institute are foundational
to our society and our
democracy.
Many of my students we're going
home from school worrying about
where they were going to sleep
that night or where their next
meal was coming from.
to be successful in education
system that is too often one
size fits all and top down.
There's an expression that those
The start is with the students
the family the educators and
community members in those
schools.
Community schools is a strategy
The community school strategy
transform schools into hubs that
promote active family and
community engagement support
services like schoolbased health
Moreover community schools
support extended learning.
Students as we know spend eighty
percent of their waking hours
outside of school in their
continuous learning outside of
school and the community.
Unlike certain proposals related
to extended learning however
Community schools have shown
proven results.
They're considered an evidence
based strategy under the federal
criteria.
And studies have shown
consistent.
a seven dollar return on every
one dollar invested in community
schools according to a study
done right here in New Mexico.
But that's just a drop in the
bucket.
With the governor and the
legislature's leadership.
We hope that every school in our
great state.
hand at age eight institute have
a great day we'll see at the
session.
Thank you.
Thank you to David Greenberg and
where we kind of give an
overview of the initiative talk
about what we're doing and
really get people engaged and
I'm thrilled to say that earlier
this year we had a state
Bernalillo county for years and
she actually was able to take
that and run with it and hosted
several book clubs and I'm
thrilled to say that we have
someone here in person from
Thank you.
Thank you so much I just want to
thank us senator souls for all
the support of community schools
And initiative is being led to
court team is being led by
Representative Dixon as well as
representatives are occurring in
a number of other legislators
who are very committed to
in the community school world
and then New Mexico coalition
for community schools.
Community schools is a core
component of the N. H. state
initiative and the one hundred
We began this initiative through
joint powers through the joint
powers in two thousand seven and
now have fifty four community
schools in our network we have
partnered with one hundred
focused very much on working
with those community schools to
amplify the voices of their
school communities on the
services that they expect and
what the experience with those
services.
we can to thrive in the best way
possible.
We're really at the very
beginning of our survey
implementation so we are we do
anticipate with the size and
number of people of Bernalillo
But we are extremely excited and
where this may take us our
community school work is the
perfect platform to start to
really deliver the changes that
move this forward in our county
thank you.
Thank you so much I'm thrilled
to say she's helping us now in
Santa Fe County so I am really
excited to introduce you to
Jennifer Monson this Santa Fe
County treasurer.
Good morning everyone
Bernalillo.
Press.
Good morning everyone so nice to
be here about gender with me
are at a hundred percent and I
shared my personal story with
you we do have a very long time
but to say that and a date has
hundred percent community talk
often with dom and having done
the survey working group
accounting we plan on continuing
the same in Santa Fe County it
is exciting.
So I think with the partnerships
we have with the schools right
the very very useful and how we
go forward so thank you for
having us I apologize a little
out of breath but with three
grand babies this morning and
one very active four year old
Thank you Jennifer and thank you
this next County as one of my
favorite stories about how they
got engaged with the an aged
Institute Valencia County had
from some Valencia County
stakeholders who said okay we've
done the book club the health
council in we're ready to do it
come meet with us we're starting
Good morning everybody I am data
collected from the Cortina
Valencia County under the
auspices of the community well
really exciting to us so that's
where we're starting that's our
framework and super excited
about the power of the hundred
percent initiative structure it
county now have ten times more
people working with them on
these innovations every month
and we have a few people that go
sector because they keep
appearing so one of the things
that were really drilling down
on is what access needs so we
hear a lot from the other
like five versions of access no
hit on the quickly.
The first piece which you've
heard a lot about is building
awareness of the resources that
is absolutely first and then to
drill down to are you even
more maybe getting back not sure
sometimes so it's really
important to understand from a
community person's perspective
what it's like to have access
community that's a lot of not
access if you don't feel safe
showing up in the space so we
address that access issue as
well and finally can a person
to pay for.
Is there a free or low cost
option and how is that supported
community so eventually we need
to get the political will to
current come unity projects
include our survey just like
Bernalillo county we are working
to get a mural project up and
education to our policymakers
about what the this is what it
looks like and what we need.
This goes beyond strategic
we do deep research and access
resources and gaps analysis and
we also have to schools that are
trying to be community schools
it's very exciting and.
All right our next speaker is
from another county was a cool
story I guess I shouldn't say my
favorite stories because they're
all wonderful Taos County we
initially started working with
order to really provide access
to one hundred percent of the
members of the public community
they were going to need to
engage the county and they did
Good morning everyone Rosselli
let the Donald and the great
granddaughter of Rev he'll
Martinez from Senator New Mexico
it is respectful to recognize
the unique can and during
relationship that exists between
indigenous peoples and their
traditional territories we
acknowledge that we are on the
recognize honor reconcile and
partner with the red willow
people whose land and water we
benefit greatly.
In this valley today.
extend services into towns
county in August of twenty
twenty with the time we put club
we had over forty participants
formed in twenty twenty one the
core team established a road map
utilizing the system's coherence
framework framework for change.
We're developing our housing are
sorry I'm seeing action team are
action teens many of them are
very tied up right now with the
this initiative because of that
coordinated cohesive effort we
have a very dedicated core team
that's been meeting weekly and
is continuing to work on all of
commissioned by Lynette houses
from Taos Pueblo
and we are also
evaluating our surveys and
seeing what more did what other
community initiatives makes our
work easier because of the
alignment in the leverage that
we can nexus for creating the
And I guess I would just like to
close with
My grandmother's name resolution
Thank you so much for being here
with us today.
Next up is a person who I think
it actually really move the one
federally she is with the state
association of health councils
and thank you for being with us
today Schardin.
Thank you so much Catherine Anne
yes executive director of the
counsel's and for the alliance
our mission is an alliance of
forty two health councils
throughout the state which
includes nine tribal councils
and thirty three County health
providing a strong voice for
community and public health and
you can see that we are in great
alignment with hundred percent
communities I cannot see
use and the passion to build
healthier communities and
standing together advocating
together working on all of these
ten vital services together
desirable for probably as long
as any of us can remember and
yet we have been working working
working in multiple agencies and
we're going to be stuck and so I
see great hope for moving our
health forward in our state
because we have to like minded
read the books that Katherine
and have great I've watched what
has happened in our health.
they serve are stronger because
of it.
Yes thank you.
And so this is very ouch really
working on the same thing let's
work together and I couldn't ask
for better partners.
I'm really excited that equity
access issues that Diana
mentioned our our deep concern
just because of this service
exists we know that does not
mean it's accessible by any
to recognize public health day
at the roundhouse which will
actually be.
There are also I'm very very
our outreach for email listed on
our website and also on the New
Mexico Public Health Association
website is raised racism is a
often related to racism is way
very few of us whatever saying
we're racist we know that we
want to value on people and make
it accessible services to all
beginning because of you know
who we have been as a country
and it's time to move that there
you're out of the way to really
have a public health are
showcased on slides of different
agencies that are statewide
organizations that support
building healthier communities
secretary will be speaking to us
after Caramon W. secretary will
be speaking to us as well as
several other state leaders in
But and and of course comes to
the station at the end the press
conference we have some of the
organizations that need and
building equity in our state.
be able to and the systems and
structures that can change to
support racism in our state and
then at two o'clock we have she
great that runs included align
technology it however I think
it's even more important for not
organizations to understand why
is that so important what it
who owns the land and where we
are in land ownership and usage
and how this proper respect in
that context many of us want to
recognize and respect.
landownership by native peoples
and in our communities so again
I just think you don't
so the we all together all of
the members a hundred percent
community all of the health
councils can stand together to
advocate for the policies we
Thank you Sir and.
All right so you just heard from
counties all over the state and
you can see each one hundred
percent New Mexico initiative is
access to vital services is the
single most important thing we
can do as a state to address all
of the problems we're trying to
much better outcomes for all New
Mexicans and I truly believe as
you just saw the passion is
there the belief in our
communities is there the belief
author Dominick hello.
Thank you thank you it's great
to be here thank you for joining
us from the World Wide Web and
the one hundred percent New
Mexico initiative.
We've done a whole lot through
our amazing community partners
and through the work and the
passion that our community
members have to help their own
communities and stop the cycle
survival and thriving Services
in ways that I haven't heard
before in the state and I think
it's just going to continue to
grow research tells us that
It is we did more research we
realised all our children are at
I think are you are really ready
to share their voice and join
movements and and help their
families and their roots I think
never been disappointed by you
when we invite them to the table
they always show up and they're
always you know they come up
If we want our families to
survive and thrive we as a
nation as a state.
As a city need to commit to
but create healthy communities
healthy workplaces and
ultimately help the local
economy.
and that's a normal we are
asking the federal government
and all our state governments
are county governments in our
city governments to commit to
we're going to be around for a
So our work is profound and we
invite you to join us and it's
going to be a very exciting
future for New Mexico.
have a few comments and I think
you've all heard the phrase
I've got good news and bad news
and I would like to share bad
this is been tough in many many
ways for all of us
none of us could have imagined
global pandemic would would shut
and disruptions in in the way
that we relate to one another as
community members so this is
something we all know everyone
started our work we were working
in child welfare and that is
when we we heard the story
that turned into the story of
Anna and
disorders leading to untreated
mental health challenges so it's
a long lesson this Catherine
said.
Almost every bad thing we can
Adverse childhood experiences to
various forms of abuse and
neglect in the home.
We have parents who are
struggling care giving
news before I get on to the good
news.
And
There's a phrase that you hear a
lot if you work in the public
easy to say and they're very
easy to write.
But these five words are a big
problem.
And the five words that you need
to be.
We refer families to services.
We've got to be really careful
to use that phrase because we
know that it services.
work do the services actually
exist.
And that's what we have to ask
every time every time we hear
that phrase.
We have to do the due diligence
can you get to the services
vital services so think about it
this way.
Think of a mother Marie she
works full time at a hotel.
behavioral health care can she
get the medical care.
When she goes online if he's
lucky enough to have access to
the internet if he's lucky
enough.
our services for surviving.
And for thriving and as you've
seen in the video.
That mom is going to need access
to five services for surviving.
We all need services for
surviving.
But with our initiative we want
to do more than survive you want
to thrive and that means
youth mentorship programs and
job training.
So when you hear this phrase
when you read this we refer
families to services.
Can our moms and dads really
access these services and what
we've discovered is that in some
counties thirty to fifty percent
us to the good news we have in
New Mexico the one hundred
percent New Mexico initiative
and as you've heard we have ten
counties are already doing the
our state leaders and so we have
an opportunity here to do
wonderful work and the great
look for a plan and if you ask
the question who's got the plan
amid all of this where's the
plan forward what's the vision
you know.
every New Mexicans it lays out
exactly what every county can
do.
We have a book to inspire
everyone.
And so we would like to thank
One hundred percent can thrive
thank you I don't have this back
to the Senator.
entity Institute came about and
also where we're going from here
and then also give you an action
plan how you can help make this
partner Senator Gonzales who
currently is the mayor pro tem
in Los crucis but she's on the
city council there.
And believing this book.
And she'll tell the story it's
like dammit I thought I had in
that time and she leave it
strategically somewhere else and
I'd pick it up and tried to read
the back about it and and she
she still as few minutes away
and so I'd like well I don't
have anything to do so I sat
down and started reading the
start of this book and read a
few pages and by the time she
was reading ten minutes later I
City I was reading the book and
reading more and I'd stop and
say let me read this to you
which is like I know dear I
already read it yeah with and I
kept reading and on the way back
owe my gosh this is amazing this
is what we ought to be doing in
New Mexico.
First was the second time I
learned about aces adverse
could I do at the time I was
teaching Advanced Placement
psychology at at the time it was
not the high schools but changed
the name to order mountain high
school.
And.
chapter when you're gonna have a
break so it was kind of a one
off day.
And I decided to give the ten
question ACE's survey to my A.
I also had a short video and I
had the.
We made sure because talking
about early childhood and trauma
and things can be tough I talked
So I did all of the students the
survey and had them anonymously
right their number.
On a card no names I just how
one point five aces.
Out of ten for people New Mexico
the average we know is a bit
higher what was asked last that
being successful in school.
So as I collected the cards it
was tallying up the results I
showed a short video and in the
video talked about the initial
that children or the people who
have two or more races have.
Your outcomes in the future.
The video made some comments
your life expectancy.
Drops by twenty years.
The motional.
I was telling of the numbers and
realize that of the twenty eight
students in the class there were
five or six of them.
That more than six.
It wasn't
the as a teller discussion about
how it affects these this was
about them.
The discussions that.
So clearly that hit me pretty
hard.
Following the stories I don't my
gosh you got to write that down.
So I read the story the story
ran in the Santa Fe New Mexican
the last piece of paper the
Senator one of our not doing so.
So we started talking about how
do we fix this.
I'm resources Senator.
dollars the first year.
Well legislation hard nobody
heard about it before.
So yeah there was some
interesting story and there's
do it as a Senate out on when I
got over here but if you're not
already on the finance with hard
to get something added but then
this magic thing called junior
What we end up with one point
one million dollars I think the
first has some recurring some
nonrecurring.
That started in northern New
Mexico is now is housed at New
Mexico State University but to
provide the framework for
counties to start doing the real
work.
just real rude not no Rio Arriba
County and don't Ana County
initially.
You see that would spread to ten
counties with more asking
questions about it.
have done the initial work to
actually do the work of doing
this right now it's mostly
volunteers and all of those
counties that already have
regular jobs.
legislators from around the
country are interested in doing
a presentation about what are
you doing down there in New
Mexico how are you doing this.
The council of state governments
in also doing this.
So what we're doing in New
Mexico is happening across the
country.
As a with New Mexico as a model.
I think about the news like how
many more children should be
allowed to go hungry.
Five percent but presents not
many right.
Five percent is thousands across
the state of New Mexico.
One percent.
children go homeless.
Children.
Some people think all my kids
are doing well.
adults in the country in the
state.
It's important for me as a
legislator in the state.
To really work towards services
They all that with.
Every day we do.
So we ask.
You the people you influence
need to call your legislators
that ten million to advance this
you thank a hundred percent not
ninety nine percent a hundred
percent of children should have
all of the services they need.
The.
We fail the state.
Poverty is expensive.
Every one of us when we don't
check with resources.
We have.
Large percentage of all people
live in poverty because we allow
it to happen.
Services to ensure that all.
Hundred percent all.
Our children have access to what
And so wonderful for all of the
people that are doing great
things around the state of New
Mexico it all of those counties
every county is different.
for almost anybody out in
Lancaster County.
Bernalillo county.
Most people in the state of New
Mexico has its own specific
problems and issues that it's
A. J. it's.
Someone knows the state.
We were problems.
past we've always allowed.
to tell their stories.
We have the room for another
forty minutes there is a
microphone up at the top if
anyone feels compelled.
initiative what they think we
ought to be doing or what
they're.
Their purpose is how they're
going to ensure that all
children in the state of New
and introduce yourself and do
whatever.
Whatever you think is important
so thank you.
Hello can you hear me.
Good morning Ag.
I just want to share the I. I'm
an attorney here in New Mexico I
advise one of the larger
counties and I think that this
is right on the mark I think
that.
go to one of the biggest
obstacles that that that we're
gonna be facing is is people who
try to use things like the anti
donation clause to say we can't
just do it this is important
nothing we should do it and
you've articulated all the
reasons and for me this isn't a
theoretical problem this is
something that I saw my family
members my mom came from a
single parent household and did
everything she could to change
the tide so that was so that her
kids me my brother my sister
this type of support and the
government has to step it up
this idea that we can't do more
that we shouldn't do more is
just.
Do we have to do away with it so
I want to thank you all for
and sent a fire department we're
kind of starting to and that
same thread develop some ideas
to kind of helping
some of the children we
well so I kind of just want to
throw out thank you know it's
it's incredible watching people
take this initiative we see all
the time and so it's nice to
kind of start to feel like we
as well but I'd love to kind of.
To this discussion and train at
least in the mentorship with the
ten things I think the fire
department your nurses could
Good morning my name is Chris
Lemmon I'm visiting here I flew
I really appreciate this I grab
the Texas panhandle
And I love coming to New Mexico
and I'm staying at the
wonderful.
get one of the books not
withstanding that I'm not from
New Mexico and I hope that you
will bless the with at least one
day of citizenship here I can
get a book.
New Mexico no other state you're
probably doing this but you all
are on the front line I really
appreciate it this is just a joy
we're get ready go see Georgia
o'keeffe museum and but I really
officers are to for this issue I
really appreciate it very much
so thank you.
a graduate from Las Cruces high
school
and I was also a graduate of New
Mexico State University.
is now working for the
just provided session.
I suffered a lot of trauma and I
made it a mission in my life
that I would not want my
year in high school I decided to
Go to work and through that
mentorship I got pushed to go to
to to New Mexico state which I
never thought would have been
and my.
am I have an associate's
bachelors and a masters in
professional counseling I only
got my masters to help my
children be better I don't even
right now but
I I work with at risk youth and
I'm trying to make a difference
in their life and I would love
but thank you for all the work
and thank you for listening.
Los Alamos high school and
Senator I had a similar
experience to yours I teach
childhood development at Los
Alamos high school and started
first time I gave it we had the
same experience in class like
all of the students who all of a
sudden realize what their aces
scores were and it was shocking
film resilience with Dr Nadine
Burke from California and one of
the things that I.
Talk to the counselors into our
are getting that school early so
that we are hopefully.
Giving kids a childhood they
don't have to recover from what
even Los Alamos we have such a
great school system we have kids
who suffered and have a high
number of aces and so I really
appreciate the work that you're
system in Los Alamos to to make
sure that this work gets through
all over the state the thank
you.
You should use this.
The.
Yes.
And I'm from the Espanola valley
in Rio Arriba county and working
with and age eight Institute and
hundred percent New Mexico.
life so a lot of the work that
we're doing is really.
really really just instrumental.
my niece passed away actually a
year ago
Her name was Leena Rodriguez US
Paso in accident
Very tragic accident just the
right outside of walking.
And after the session or I'm
gonna go out to of the cross of
the martyrs we're gonna reader
you you'll need into a balloon
to prevent some of those
accidents because those are
totally preventable.
and you know growing up born and
raised in the Espanola valley
vibrancy a lot of our people are
struggling and a lot our our
down trodden a lot are are
desperate and so the work that
we're doing it you know we're
actually
coalitions all working together
so that way we can prevent this
these type of tragedies for use
and not only that but just give
glimmer of hope in their life
we're we're working on
environmental strategies across
the community were working on
direct services so these are all
things that we have to do but we
really come up to the to the
flea and they're they're betting
for us the people so I just want
to thank you all I want to thank
you
just for being so you know
I just want to say thank you and
just to continue the fight
continue the good work and the
we're gonna keep on doing it on
on the grassroots level you know
well you know we can't just
depend on our elected officials
in their department.
And and together we can do it
together we can do it but we
of taking that that lead we're
we're leading the charge and
we're just doing what we have
the power to do and little by
little you know the momentum is
growing and we're gonna see if
we can keep on just doing
Thank you dominate the close up
the work continues.
We have an action plan we have a
dealing with the problems after
they occur.
We have record budgets in the
state of New Mexico ten million
dollars is a fraction of a
percent of the state budget.
the support.
Make sure that a hundred percent
of our children have access to a
healthy future.
We can do that.
over on this side and be happy
to sign and chat with people up
there.
If people would like to follow I
tweet and I tweet fairly
NMSU.
That you and then we did that a
date institute that and so that
and hopefully will start hearing
this around the country because.
The child abuse not dealing with
it afterwards preventing child
able to pack this whole room
with people as this continues to
expand and do the good work to
make sure that all of our
children are safe thank you.
