Follow up to the question that
we have the last meeting about
the to my ex there the some
discussion of the first of our
meetings about whether their
lives are not and.
That the minds are as light
there's a way where you can add
press down and hold on the line
and it will mute.
Was that everything everything
online is the start that the
meetings of the gavel and
said none of the conversation of
the audible to anybody and is a.
Hired rights as to laminated
start.
Talk to you we have total.
But we are.
Thank you the.
Thank you for joining us today.
Of the four session is starting
at eleven thirty.
We go into our agenda here so it
presentation from the New Mexico
the.
Our secretary cabinet secretary
Lynn Trujillo.
And of our Assistant Secretary
nineteen sixty a consul
Stephanie sellers are trying.
But.
We will.
Representative first and then we
will go into the field from
Senate Bill what what what what
Senator arguments and one forty
nine fifty two PM.
Thank you.
Good morning.
C. Nadine.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
Good morning.
Thank you for joining us today.
Do you would you like me to get
started madam chair yes go ahead
and begin because we do have a
floor session starting at eight
thirty today.
You know will be in the good
morning madam chair members of
the committee and gas that are
in the committee room
then Trujillo cabinet secretary
for the Indian Affairs
Department I want to thank you
madam chair members of the
committee for this opportunity
at two percent the department's
budget
but before I begin madam chair
if I could have W. paideia and
propane Rivera introduce
themselves for the committee.
Yes.
Thank you good morning madam
chair good morning committee
members my name is Nadine
Padilla and I service that
deputy secretary at the Indian
Affairs Department thank you for
having us with you today.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is called
queen of air and the director of
policy and government relations
for the Indian Affairs
Department thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee it's my understanding
that you wanted to have a
presentation on on the
department fiscal twenty three
budget request we did find to
that committee members at our
appointees indication as well as
a one pager and I'll I'll
briefly walk through that
presentation
as you can see the executive
recommendation for our
department includes it
substantial increase to the
Department at sixty three
percent increase which equates
to one million eight hundred
thirty dollar increase to our FY
twenty two operating budget
where the increases liar within
that time two hundred category
which covers salaries and
benefits that's really important
for us to retain the high
quality staff that we have as
well as supporting expansion
request to support new F. to use
for the department we also do
you have an increase for
contractual services
Portion of our budget which
really helps us as a small
department we do a lot but we
often times needs to engage
contractors with expertise to
help us move large initiatives
for I and then we also do you
have an increase in the four
hundred category which is
primarily aircraft component
which would include that tobacco
since state cessation settlement
funds it's a transfer that comes
over eight typically typically
that every year but also as a
back line item are related to
our suicide prevention efforts
which I'll talk a little bit
more about in the presentation
so as you can see there's quite
a difference between with the
LFC was recommend recommending
and the executive recommendation
we were able to at back on the
house side to our budget on some
of those.
In some of those categories but
really just want to highlight
that the executive
recommendation really provides
the funding necessary to support
our department it's.
Madam chair members of the
committee just you look at your
slide number for it lays out our
priorities and really our first
securing more staff
that we are requesting the
requests and the executive
recommendation supported addy
eight new FTEs this to the
Department which would increase
the capacity on both the office
of the secretary side as well as
administrative services division
since twenty nineteen the work
of the department has increased
yet there hasn't been any
corresponding increases in our
department staffing and our
operating budget and as many of
you know the department is
involved in more nearly every
issue across state government
for our our office of the
secretary currently I work spans
ten brought policy areas and
this is growing this work we
either establish or my family my
dad you are task force you need
for administer on in addition I
just want to let that committee
members know that our department
service on thirty boards
commissions and task forces this
is in addition to the work that
we currently take on at the
department I'm and as secretary
to give you an example I serve
on line active task forces and
commissions and then I rely on
the assistance of staff to serve
on those boards or commissions
that I can't survive
and since twenty nineteen the
department has been named to
serve or designate
representatives for eight point
commissions and task forces I
just wanted to give the
committee a picture of.
How our work continues to grow
but yet not the staff and the
budget
with respect to the
administrative services division
side of our department we see an
increase and capital outlay
investments in our tribal
communities thanks to many of
you and our governor at the
department we currently have one
FTE and that person is that
staffing capital outlay
administrator and Mr Lawrence
John.
For folio which is over two
hundred and two million dollars
capital outlay and yes and
oversees four hundred and fifty
active projects in your slide
presentation just like I it's
that dark colored side we just
wanted to illustrate the points
you about the comparison of this
significant increases in capital
investments in our tribal
communities versus the staffing
and this year we anticipate yet
another year of much needed
investments in our tribal
communities
which will add to our
department's existing portfolio
and increase our workload so
madam chair members the
committee we really need the
budget and the staff to ensure
the Department continues to
effectively and efficiently
administered our programs and
services and account for these
public dollars as I mentioned
before earlier highlighting the
increases hi to that subject we
also have to have the resources
to continue not only to recruit
but to retain we have highly
qualified staff and we need to
make sure that they continue to
stay with our department that we
built those ladders growth
internally and that we should
ensure that we have on
sustainable division's to be
able to handle the work and
transitions the positions that
we've been advocating for fit
into the structure of our
department.
And they're really vital to help
us move forward initiatives in
our critical work I'm.
In our department was known as
an agency with a revolving door
and when I started yeah in
twenty nineteen we had a vacancy
rate of forty percent our
vacancy rate is twelve percent
now with only two positions.
And you know the executive
recommendation really honors
this commitment to our sovereign
nations enter into the citizens
of New Mexico I'm excited six
highlights our second priority
which is on ensuring that there
is funding for suicide
prevention efforts in our tribal
communities we've requested that
total amount of eight hundred
and thirty one thousand nine
hundred that is it increase you
have on a hundred eight hundred
fifty thousand dollars in our
base budget but we want to add
to that these funds are
important because we will use
them to higher on dedicated FTE
to carry forward this work we
know that
suicide unfortunately
significantly affects our native
communities and native people
that was two prior to the
pandemic and we know that the
pandemic has only exacerbated
it pre existing health
disparities for our people and
really has led to a spike and
risk factors for mental and
behavioral health issues so we
are looking to address this
we've heard from many tribal
leadership and constituents
about the need for more funding
and more work to be done and as
I mentioned in my previous
testimony in front of on the
Senate finance committee and
how's Committee I can't
emphasize enough the importance
of supporting this work my
family was has been personally
impacted by this last year and
you know we just really need to
do more in terms of addressing
this as the addressing this
crisis
I did also include in your power
point presentation just.
To give you an idea of our
staffing as I mentioned we have
two vacant positions but we're
working very hard to fill those
and weird the leadership at the
department is committed to
keeping our retention rate high
it's at the highest levels in
the department's history and I'm
really proud of that we really
create a work space that is
really a family where we care
for each other and I'm deeply
committed in the work that we're
doing
not only at does our department
and minister capital outlay
intense but we just continue to
address a wide range of issues
impacting our Indian people here
and we make significant progress
and all that we're doing
you know we need to expand the
department in order to meet the
needs of our tribal communities
in our Indian people and it's
really clear madam chair members
of the committee that the work
of our department increase being
and our role and statewide
matters continue to grow
I am we are extremely thankful
that every legislative session
legislators on introduce bills
that are inclusive of our
department
just to give you an example
during the twenty twenty one
legislative session the
department analyzed sixty four
bills and out of those bills
fifteen pieces of legislation
directly named our department to
carry out a specific task we
need the budget to ensure that
our department Kerry out not
only the intent of the
legislation that names us but
also our existing statutory
duties and mandate so madam
chair members the committee in
closing I I want to thank you so
much for your continued support
of the.
Art meant and the service that
we are engaged in I'm proud of
what the team has built it
really is a legacy that honors
the importance of the department
we are one of two cabinet level
departments in the nation and
really exemplifies the state's
commitment to our sovereign
nations and are Indian citizens
of New Mexico and with that
madam chair and members of the
committee I want to thank you
for your time and your attention
and I'll stand for any questions
thank you.
Station thank you Secretary we
have any questions for the
committee.
The one of the maybe Mr the
local claim also to.
The chance to get any input that
secretary.
Thank you madam chair I I would
ask at W. Padilla and Mister
chair if they have anything to
add.
I thank you madam chair and
committee members I'm I am I'll
just add a little bit to what
secretary presented on our
department and our team has
really.
done significant outreach in
tribal communities which I think
it's really important we've
taken a rail on the ground
approach as much as we could
during the pandemic but I think
that is really important because
it we have engaged our tribal
communities our tribal
nonprofits and people that are
interested in the work in the
initiatives of our department
and just to talk a little bit
about some of the current work
that we're doing of the Indian
Affairs Department is involved
in the fifty year water plan.
And we have established a tribal
water working group which is
really critical in ensuring that
our tribal communities make a
significant contribution towards
a fifty year water plant and
that we I'm sure that the
state's water plan includes
tribal voices and perspectives
I'm so through that troubling
gauge mint and outreach we host
our our month tribal water
workgroup meetings but it's been
a really successful endeavor so
far in getting our partners and
tribal water experts to the
table and that's just one
example of the type of outreach
and engagement that we're doing
on many of the initiatives of
the department so I just wanted
to raise that one small portion
and I'll turn it back to you as
secretary or quickly.
Thank you thank you.
Justice secretary Padilla up.
Probably.
thank you madam secretary and
members of the committee
I'll just say it's been a real
pleasure to work for the Indian
Affairs Department and work on
tribal issues under this
administration I think both the
governor and the secretary have
done a really great job of
rebuilding trust between tribes
in the state and there's been a
lot of really great work that
we've been able to do because of
bills trust and I think you
know.
We as the state moves forward
under under this administration
tribes are definitely considered
and and brought along with all
of the the movie forward so
I thank you secretary and
members of and madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you thank you for the
questions from committee
members.
Madam secretary I do have a
couple of questions.
With the consultation with the
five nations and pueblo have
we've got in the in the feedback
as far as economic impact on so.
Indigenous nations.
Thank you madam chair for that
question we have initially
reached out to our nations
tribes and pueblos especially
with all the
the action that's coming down
from the federal side in terms
of funding and what is recovery
looks like an accomplice for our
tribes here we do have someone
on staff nanti FICCI who is
working with Christopher her
wrong on our just decide to do
that outreach to get a handle on
how we can better serve our
nations tribes and pueblos as
federal funds are coming into
the state
and so we are we've initiated
that I've asked for a work plan
and they've developed we are
always seeking and looking for
guidance
but that has just has started
madam chair.
Thank you madam secretary and
has have you established a
working relationship with the
Mr Travis I believe Mr Martin
Travis was appointed by the
governor.
Yes I'm madam chair thank you
for that question we have
lifetime talked several times
with former mayor Marty Chavis
as well as former secretary
Bianca or tease where time is
now that director of the
infrastructure these coal court
there all also Mike Hammond who
is working on water issues and
water infrastructure and then
matched met who is working
advising on a broad band just so
madam chair members of the
committee we the department
hosted a briefing prior to the
legislative session for our
tribal leadership and part of
that presentation focused on
some key pieces of legislation
to make tribal leaders aware of
and one portion of the agenda
was devoted to that
infrastructure conversation and
we had all those individuals
with the exception of this Ortiz
worth time because she wasn't
named at that time to present to
tribal leaders and so we are
working hand in hand with them.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary.
I think one of the things I'd
like to have clarifying to is we
do have a tribal liaison within
the New Mexico to the.
The public education department.
And it just it too but we don't
have anybody in ITV.
As far as what we talk about the
Yazzie Martinez case.
madam chair members of the
committee I guess I'm can you
help me understand your question
I I I'm not quite sure
or maybe W. secretary
appropriate and I'm.
I don't quite understand the
question if that the
collaboration that you know we
do.
And so when we say Indian
Affairs Department and talk
about the Martinez Yazzie case
is within the public education
department we expect that to be
taken care of within that part
of it is that perception.
I thank you madam chair for that
clarification yes we have a very
good working relationship with
our partners at PD I talk
regularly with secretary side
houses the also we are in touch
with Assistant Secretary less
honest who is doing a fantastic
job at PED and we work hand in
hand together I in relation to
address the needs of tribal
communities related to education
so we do work with that we do
work with some of their other
team members there I think Heidi
macdonald who is at the
department but we we regulate
regularly engage with them at
PED.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary.
The committee has any other
questions thank you for the work
you do your whole department you
know you got your hands full
with everything we've talked
about some of the issues within
the state of New Mexico and.
I think one of the things this
is for the comment as we try to
tackle crime in Albuquerque.
To highlight that.
Thank collaboration that
happened with the City of
Albuquerque with them in line W.
I don't know if you would like
to touch a little bit on that.
Just to enlighten the committee.
S. thank you madam chair I think
you know one of the things that
we have done that I'm proud
about is and I I really when it
comes to that and my W. our
efforts and task force really
want to commend our general
counsel Stephanie Salazar in
addition to her duties as our
general counsel she really has
led the work on behalf of the
department and through her
efforts in working with other
stakeholders were able to build
these partnerships out that
didn't exist
That didn't exist before and a
perfect example as that and will
you that we entered into with
the second judicial district
DA's office really credit
Stephanie and helping move that
forward but that shows that
continue partnership that we're
building at all levels as W. PGM
mentioned you know our work that
we to directly engage for tribal
communities so you know
establish that connection with
tribal law enforcement but we do
need a lot local law enforcement
and I think it's going to take
all of us to do that and that's
a prime example of what we're
able to do so thank you madam
chair for us need to expand upon
that I think we have more
opportunities for us moving
forward and just want to thank
yous Senator for your
sponsorship of both Senate bill
thirteen and Senate bill twelve
which are vital to force all
these efforts under examples of
how we can work across different
agencies so that we can bring
justice and healing I think it's
an example that we can deploy
and many other issue areas that
are affecting our native
communities here in New Mexico.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary.
In that I don't know if you have
anything in closing.
Assistant Secretary and.
But thank you for joining us
here today.
Madam chair members of the
committee again I just in
closing I want to thank you for
your continued support and as
house bill two is on its way are
over at the Senate I would ask
for your support and advocacy
with your members of the Senate
finance committee well we were
able to add some money on the
house side we are still there is
still a gap between what we need
to and supported the executive
and so we could use your support
with our Senate finance
committee to add back was vital
resources to support the good
work of the department thank
you.
Chair members of the committee.
You thank you for the secretary
thank you stating that hoping
for joining us today and we will
offer you the Senator our meals
and it.
Emergency billing of the death
tainter.
And.
The expected.
And madam chair
I this morning okay Madam
chairman members of the
committee any time of the
morning thank you so much for
taking the time to listen to
Senate bill one for one I'm
gonna give you some background
happened really but led to the
creation of this.
In December you can remember
there was a strong wind storm.
Winter weather came into Mexico
mostly in rural areas where
people rely on propane to keep.
The storm came through
temperatures were below
freezing.
The issue is the people who who
have propane to heat their homes
rent there takes the expensive
to participate when you run the
ten.
You can only go to your propane
company we've got that take two
pills left take us about little
competitor.
The propane company in this case
could come out because the
issues they were having on the
back end to half a tank filled.
Some of our techs are up five
percentages are just the one or
maybe two nights to beautiful
the majority of the people
affected were elderly or for
people who live album of the
property.
We couldn't get the propane so
what we did is we then teamed
with the county of re refi
multiple state agencies in the
governor's office to declare a
state of emergency state of
emergency happens we then looked
at outside propane companies to
come in and fill these tanks now
this bill is a bill that is
definitely centered around
safety and help because we can't
afford to be in this particular
case and I think about that
storm of trolling through
respect.
More and I will concerned about
facility Mexico or rural areas.
Once again finding the same
severity one perfect now with
the today is a victory just the
deputy superintendent of work in
licensing and also have a
director of the construction
industry division which means
claims based service expert
witness to the public through
the questions on this bill.
The part to let you know that
one of them.
Is a violation of the statute
and I'm just the nineteen
seventy eight section seventy
dash fifty that fund.
To allow containers to be filled
and other than the folder or
folders authorization now with
this bill would do that would
allow the state county
municipalities are tribal
government to determine whether
deceased where the LPF provider
is able or ability to provide
customers with that fuel the
declaration of emergency allows
the bureau to obtain health PDF
providers customer lists and
offer a service of LP gas tank
but other of the staff providers
this means any other competing.
The company can come in and
fill.
This is the work environment
this last time we had companies
for public if you wanted to come
in as the bill and other areas
that would help with that this
customers are also protected
from the gas providers
compensated that gas tanks with
fuel left in them without first
compensated customer for the
unused all people ask provided
during this definition.
If you have any questions to
take.
Okay we'll go out to the
audience those in support
thank you for the.
Anybody in opposition.
The.
yes one as spam.
thank you madam chair good
morning my name is Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico propane association and
on behalf of the association we
really want to thank Senator
harmony for bringing this bill
forward for Mister ray is
working with us and for clay
Bailey who has years of
experience and is really
great regulator to work with and
very knowledgeable this is an
important issue and we stand in
strong support of the bill
unfortunately
the business person that did
this to to the community of
trauma is not a member of our
association
to many of our members credits
Ferrellgas suburban Rio Grande
they stepped up to the plate and
they took the did the right
thing and they took care of
business for the people in China
and but they did acquire a
liability but at the end of the
day they did what was right and
so this bill I think is a is a
is a great bill we stand in
strong support and we urge your
your support for this bill thank
you madam chair.
Since from the committee.
I think a couple
addition the yes madam chair and
thank you center for free the
bill fortunate what happened and
so that the reliability issues
how does that play out madam
chair.
If anything happens in all of
your the of the person that
comes in and something happens
with thank you for but you're
the to all the other buildings.
Person fill it out so hi public
liability.
Chair madam chairman the record
of one of my.
Mr chair Senator members
committee.
Oil to gas for small and.
New Mexico so we pass these
folks coming in the they stepped
up to the plate once the
delivered put fuel into the tank
they're gonna be liable to the
fuel cell and that's one of the
challenges we're asking somebody
to take on to help the students
situation that they're not
getting customer we brought
these folks in from out of town
right because the county to
people heather could keep up we
brought then they did it to help
constituents monitor technology
bility this could affect you
know if they had over half are
so very proud of the industry
for step up with the liability
is all of this you would use up
somebody else's film.
Madam chair so.
Of.
See is growth the.
The fire for Mrs so if this bill
passes madam chair of that
liability still exists.
It's not taking care of this
bill part of the members with
their that is that the end to.
You madam chair Senator members
the committee that is correct we
know the first would be able to
address liability just because
once it starts with the German
issued insurance.
Our.
Senator Gerald on that point it
seems like budget state of
emergency was declared.
And then the individual a
company that was not the company
that still your dad on the
container native children in
the past that company comes in
as our direct response to the
state of emergency you would
expect that if that container
who are you know any number of
things happen there that the
state should incur or would
incur.
Liability because a declaration
of the state of emergency
I don't know that but so that
would be kind of the question
for you all is well we're trying
to do the right thing.
I firmly believe we are that is
there.
Because of that do we have a do
we have an liability at the
state then takes all.
Because of a and improper
connection that had existed or a
faulty tank that existed and
the company in an attempt to
fill the tank created the you
know on the issue or the other
company cars some sort of leak
in why that you know because of
the issue
has as it all played out you
know because I I know we have a
lot of good lawyers in the in
the Senate I'm gonna guess we
got some good lawyers running
around up there they just would
love to change their teeth and
something like that so are madam
chair center.
What do you guys think I mean if
you had any discussion at all
about slide state partition.
If I the official result of the
state of Virginia and maybe the
state of emergency shelf are you
know remove liability from state
but just like to to know what
you guys think.
Madam chairman of the first and
to my experts.
You
madam chairman Senator committee
I hate it I discussed this with
helping comes we were requests.
Is my experience in the industry
for years yes that want to put
that product in there you're
gonna be responsible the company
the supplier will be responsible
live.
When we asked him to come in and
I'm very appreciative they don't
that come in and we discussed it
and it was has to and we're
trying to take care the
constituents and their industry
of one thing we do do is if we
have an outcast like they ran
completely out were required to
monthly test make sure at least
there's no leaks many times when
they'll be gas company gets
involved with the liability
issues in may not to be the
biggest cost right but if there
is a wood fire from would still
be insurance coverage for
everybody and it's part of it
but.
Might and I have to we may be
its legal guidance on this but I
still believe it will go back to
school.
Okay and madam chair Senator the
all I.
I think it would be wise to you
know Academy ahead of that
should something ever ever curse
you guys remember
probably ten or twelve years ago
we had that that date.
Gas supply issue that affected a
lot of the state I think we had
people from all.
Come in to to a shift with shut
offs and terminal.
Of natural gas show it money
coming we may have oppressions
that we have right back there
that
yeah we can look into to that
chair and.
Senator German
that might help our should be
ready in the event of something
happening again and and
hopefully it won't
I would I would imagine a lot of
those consumers of their I've
got to believe they probably
changed their care you
Shenzhou more which in Colorado
about an opportunity changes
other thanks to the way he he
traded but hello madam chair
should refuse madam chairman
what's unfortunate Senator is
there's just too many companies
in that area so here the issue
that we're running into one of
the major issues of not finding
drivers who want to drive these
trucks imported fuel they're
having a hard time and try to
deploy these into the industry
and to is the overload on the
number of people that they're
providing service to is too much
for just two companies right now
one of them being completely out
which is the one that was just
north of China that becomes a
major issue in north of the
Mexico about another major issue
is the affordability of the tank
they can't afford to purchase
that take the tank was there's
this problem wanted to be there
but unfortunately a number of
senior citizens and those
families that are below the
poverty level need to take up
the issue but but the point is
right now they're having a hard
time but by the drivers to
deliver the propane.
Thank you madam chair thank show
thank you John.
Thank you thank you senator
grace any other questions for
committee members.
So.
There's the blue tape that you
go to the store and you just and
by instead of taking it to get
it filled with stuff those
tapes.
Cannot be filled by L. P. the
field.
Madam chairman of survivor
standing that those would be
rebuilding to take those back
into the ticket that they will
come to a fill up a new property
without small take and then you
do get an LP gas a refilled the
state on I'd be I don't think
there's it if you took the tank
out and you were transporting in
my area what you're talking
about it's already issue.
They sell it takes at home depot
I think they're hundred gallon
tanks.
But then it becomes an issue of
physical ability to talk about
senior citizens and to the
discretion of our how the
tickets being transport because
they have to be transported up
right they can't be transported
in a vehicle that is a a close
to be basically a pickup truck
in that sense in the in my
correct
I would just like to.
So.
As a committee the the picture
your discuss and talk about art
design and I just but the
pressure to one moment on the
whole thing to talk about we run
the rule for for.
Three hundred members of local
construction and stuff like that
but for these health screenings
you actual plants are up two
hundred fifty gallons to five
hundred and that's what we're
doing a lot more in these rural
areas because you can't pay for
us not people go so they said
the water tanks which the
company general leases to.
Thank thank you.
They just want to clarify
especially with them about how.
The internet is are very limited
in that sense and those that the
transport of my area most time
is for committee that they just
have one still put to let to do
cooking set of having to build
fire every time to have the milk
produced.
Versus having a heating system
running off to take to put
stated L. depending on who who's
doing that in helping household
that these alternatives are very
committed to safety issues along
with that even in the transport
even in doing the connection.
So having a licensed person.
Do this
that has a training and stuff I
think we talk about liability is
very critical in that sense then
supporting this.
Have you approached our do we
know if the Beijing a long term
services division has anything
in place as far as to set up our
senior citizens madam chairman
that's one of the agencies that
really September twenty would be
from this issue happening is
they can not only to provide
food for the seniors of the
literally went door to door
knocking on doors of New Mexico
state police to ensure that
those who do more running on
propane to keep them warm or
those that we need to take
action so they're definitely
they stepped in during the
emergency and they've agreed
that anytime they needed to help
us that would be something madam
chair members of the committee
another key provision of this
bill is allowing us to know the
customer list of a cent provider
who is not willing to provide
service to to their customers as
was in the specific situation
and the reason that is so
important is for what we just
discussed the aging and long
term Services Department the New
Mexico state police community
leaders you know so Senator
meals Representative at also
bored what knocking individually
two doors trying to find out who
was that was low on their
propane gas levels trying to
make sure that we have any sense
of who might need help so that
we can step in and either pop
provided space heaters whatever
was that we could find in the
media while we look for a long
term situation but it was very
difficult to know exactly who
those individuals were because
we did not have a customer list
and so this legislation helps
give us that extra tool to
figure out who those people are
so the words I direct services.
In this provision that and it
would not hinder it's hard to do
privacy of the customer verses
change the company to do that
outreach to say what we're
unable to serve you at this time
call this person do you know if
any of that was initiated by the
company madam chairman in some
cases of water as where they
were defer to the second company
but the second company haven't
overlooked that they could come
in the news in some instances
they took their their fee to
join the new company but
membership and so this is a true
that we definitely those
individuals sure the ticket I
just want one more comment of
mine but this is a true
collaboration of New Mexico.
We have a land grants for Taos
County bringing what into the
community if they have what this
does to ensure they would stay
warm we have members community
tried to rally together and how
they can bring people in the
world oxygen the governor set up
along with the county a warming
station where people could come
and stay warm any time of the
day or night and with the oxygen
if they needed a place to stay
that would keep the more so
thankful from every level from
the governor down to Land Grant
communities of what they did to
help Senate district I thank you
and thank you senator and with
the other things and I'm sure it
is the efficiency.
Do you know if we do have
alternatives for our seniors and
those that were effective to
either upgrade the efficiency of
their I mean I know we have
stuff in place to upgrade homes
to this I weather is ation of
that but as far as the systems
that are available in your area
do we have any way to do some
outreach are.
I would say that we're going to
buy the whole state but that
there's so there so they get
place the madam chairman if you
look at the community of the
least of his work to take
personal drive to go solar
they're able to service so many
communities of the pandemic work
on solar sure absolutely he
homes versus propane and I hope
we see that ripple throughout
rural New Mexico is leading on
solar and that that will power
and help to keep homes thank you
senator anymore questions for.
Which is a functional for the
past transaction from traditions
of the past.
The second.
Senator Williams.
Could you please call the roll
Senator very yes.
Sanchez yes.
You should know yes.
Senator o'neill yes Senator
Pinto yes we have four for a to
pass.
After you pass on your bill for
this bill.
What forty one thank you madam
chair and senator Griggs all
look at lessons learned on
behalf of the natural gas
service the.
I feel.
terms of the committee thank you
very much and.
One
more generation is.
In.
The.
Good
morning senator.
Thank you for joining us today
for those online and public we
are Senate bill one forty one
rural libraries and dealt with
the maybe if.
Thank you madam chairman and
committee members.
This is a bill that is.
Simply C. additional.
Rely very.
And it gives us a chance to
bring everybody up to date on
the status of the fund.
Yes my expert witness.
Show my more.
Came up with the idea of the
first place working.
That the department figures
fifty million dollars reaches
fifty million dollars
anticipation is in each of the
fifty rural libraries in the
state would be able to count on
about forty or forty two
thousand dollars a year
following to them for their for
the maintenance the staffing the
program and the physical
structure even of those fifty
rural libraries and they and the
significance of our rural
library and community.
Is is incredible these largely
our communities without.
They're not incorporated
communities they don't have
local government and the role
library functions as a little of
everything it's where culturally
the state places where economic
development activity occurs is
our after school programming and
we can programs for children and
families.
Thank please it's where the
community as opposed to what's
going on.
And so I would like to it's all
right madam chairman has Mr line
mark talk about what is the
world leader in balance fund is
intended to do and then I'll be
glad to fill in which is where
we stand now with how much is
and and and lower and.
The thank you senator Ortiz
people did are you the only
expert witness we don't have
anybody that needs to come
online.
I don't know if the state
librarian Mr Xilai Committee as
joint is do is he would be our
other with okay let's hear some
of the other I don't know okay
madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
letting me be here today so
there are fifty one village in
Plano libraries that eligible
for the down that right now
tribal libraries as six six of
these libraries are operating
under ten thousand dollars a
year there's staffed by
volunteers they required to be
open at least twenty five hours
a week libraries for example and
and time to go back I see Taos
and Rio Arriba County hi
Carrizozo
most of the fibers with love to
hire a staff person to keep
their library open
Another sixteen of these
libraries are operating under
fifty thousand dollars a year
thirty thousand in Magdalena
totally owned this is really low
have a cue about forty thousand
so this is very they're really
under funded these libraries
The maybe other Senator needs
that they have the staff members
of the fibers are severely
underpaid for example one
library in Butchofsky county the
library director says manages to
five hundred and eighty thousand
dollar capital project see the
sights of doing the collections
running children's program
managing volunteers she gets
paid twelve dollars and fifty
cents an hour to spend ten years
the library down in south
central New Mexico the director
works full time for thousand
dollars a month
library up in far north eastern
New Mexico the library's States
thirteen fifteen hours she told
me that she made more being a
waitress most of the children's
librarians in these libraries
and assistance are getting
minimum wage so this is a
situation that really needs to
be rectified the staff.
The the need for staff is really
strong in the libraries landed
these libraries the director is
the only person there
the the library and in college
T. Pueblo for example told me
that she her biggest problem is
that most staff is hired and
requests to the the grant isn't
reoccurring the state needs to
select staff members go when the
grant runs out so the
reoccurring funds of the
Of the exam it would be a huge
benefit for most of these
libraries
infrastructure needs the
librarian and Tate and Toby
they're dollars dollars falling
off the library in in the in the
way of a they have inadequate
heat their roof leaks in in
meanwhile they distributed a
hundred and fifty three comment
tests today community into K.
recently they're the only
internet for seventy five miles
the only free internet access
and they're like right in the
center fifteen dollars an hour
as well in Tularosa of the one
to hire staff to do field trips
in the summer for the kids the
library there told me that the
parents don't even have five
dollars to get their kids to to
White Sea answer the space
museum and by being able to hire
staff they would rectify that
situation
So
I did a I mentioned so if we get
this twenty million dollars ten
ten million are in the house
bill two right now and with
Senator Ortiz sees Pinos that a
request for another ten million
that would give each library
somewhere about twenty two
thousand dollars a year it would
just be a really rate changes
for them they could hire full
time staff member on that but it
would make a huge difference to
each of these libraries so madam
chair members of the committee
thank you so much for listening
to me today and you have the the
state of the flexibility.
The one.
Thank you Mr.
If.
is Mr gonna be like that to
state.
good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am standing
by to answer questions if you
have any questions I am You Like
unable.
Use the report we've got the
a question just for questions.
Can you additional tests some
test for us.
Mr testing can hear me.
So.
Testing.
I.
Okay good yes.
Good morning testing testing all
right thank you.
All right.
So you'll just for questions
okay Senator Ortiz Pena.
Madam chairman three years ago
we came before the legislature
just for the million this
committee approved that.
Finance committee over it was
one million
one million so that the fund was
created
and it actually was added then
the the following year we we as
for ten million and we go to
four million so it's up to three
million press statuses as three
million to fund.
And in this race you know in the
by the time Senator Griggs
because it'll then of we will.
Actually it started.
So we're we're jobs and actually
the LFC is asking in in house
bill two those ten million.
So this is the ten million on
top of that we're just we're
trying to get up to if we get
the ten million is in house bill
two will be at one quarter of
our target will be thirteen
million and you know we keep
as much as we enjoyed coming
back before this
is.
The loan will last basis so
that's through this bill another
ten million that we get as of
the twenty three
it is it was in the finance
committee sees fit to add that
in and then you know maybe next
year we can just push it right
over the top is that the three
some of them actually would go
to the state library and help
provide technical assistance to
communities and want to start
new lives that's one of the
other key provisions of this
spine and with that was special
thank you and we'll go to those
that are here in the in support.
Anybody here that's in
opposition.
They send anybody else going yes
adverse reactions that
seventeen.
Good good morning madam chair
members of the committee I'm Joe
Sabatini I am the co chair of
the legislation committee of the
New Mexico library association
and I can say this
rural library endowment fund is
transformative you have.
Communities that I.
Described as a the train don't
stop here anymore I've been to
care as those those library I've
been to
coronas library to Magdalen this
library and that those are.
Community hubs.
Probably the only public access
to internet in those communities
and that makes a huge difference
like to the the artisans on.
so those main street to who are
selling able to the to connect
to the internet and and and sell
their goods.
This is about the survival rural
communities and it in.
Most cases they are
tiny municipalities or
Food just that are not
incorporated and
eighties steady dependable flow
of of revenue.
Enables these heroes heroes to
provide this service to their
communities and and it it makes
a.
Huge difference in those areas
so getting getting the fund up
to twenty.
Twenty million dollars
Twenty twenty twenty thousand
dollars a year for both money
and addition to the the grants
in the fall and the fund raising
that all these communities to
enables.
An effective levels of service
rate starts to enable that
level.
I thank you for your attention I
ask your support.
Panel on the roof.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Pamela my hoodie we serve
the pueblos is letter will care
Wingate centrally P. Santa Clara
and so the.
I also echo Mr seventeen these
words of wisdom and
you know historical value that
he has and also in support of
this
it is very
truthful about communities and
they're like we're seeing the
hub centers in this pandemic
world our children have really
been engaging through a lot of
either homework or whatever even
a fun activities to engage
themselves so I truly support
all that you can give and we
appreciate the committees
A favor for I do pass thank you
so much you folks have a great
day.
As.
Thank you.
Do we have questions for the
committee and that Senators.
Thank you madam chair and the
and senator
Who the ministers the fall this
is the state librarian and so
you know some of the stuff that
that you mention their salaries
and and all of.
Very early the value wait
whether or not a particular line
were particularly community J.
gesture I to them that the
expansion that community with
these funds that were Madam
chairman and and Senator Griggs
all of the Mr line market
respond to that the idea
originally was that there would
be no such separate valuation
the library could count on that
money coming in and then that
would be the local library the
decide how to spend their share
and all that let him explain how
that could work madam chair
members.
Thank you for the question yes
each library that is eligible as
long as they submits their state
library annual report that acts
as the application for the the
disbursement of the funds and
the library and their board are
allowed to choose what their
greatest needs that would be a
salary
hello Act TLF the need I. T.
that there are thirteen or
fourteen five oh one see three
libraries included in the
in the group and because of the
anti donation clause those
libraries will not be able to
use the funds for capital
improvement but all the other
libraries continues to do that
and the state librarian Mr king
they could probably answer that
question more specifically I
don't know if he has anything to
at.
Madam chair I do not have
anything else that thank you.
Thank you
Senator Madam chairman and
senator you know just because as
you said that low wage in front
of me and you've always been
a good friend in the Senate
yeah justice thank goodness for
oil and gas.
Look like very very.
So madam chair person thank you
very much and that.
Thank you I think you might just
passions built for.
Thank you senator Greg Senator
Shendo.
Thank you madam chair of.
The question is I know you have
a three point two he said it
down sure component.
And so for these.
Funds or whatever receipts are
being issued it now or you wait
to get to a certain special.
Four and the the funds are
distributed by my question and
so forth discussed direction.
Madam chair members of the.
Committee so
right now I I I understand from
state library in maybe that
there is it may act the governor
is the distribution of the funds
is going through legal staff and
so they anticipate that next
year will be the first
disbursement it was and so this
year there is a disbursement
there was eighty seven thousand
dollars that was due to be
dispersed from the I next year I
believe there's about a hundred
and fifty thousand dollars to be
dispersed so the state library
rolled over this year's
disbursement next year and the
first disbursement will happen
then and it'll be somewhere
around.
Between three and four thousand
dollars probably.
Madam chair so so that this be
equally distributed to the fifty
one libraries and then they will
local decide on spending at
exactly and then I was five
percent will go to the state
library and
And then there is it and then
determine percentage that will
go towards grants to help
my villages established
libraries where there is.
Thank you.
Senator sure what but thank you
thank you senator Senator now
thank you thank you thanks for
bringing this for you know.
More from that this.
All of us rural libraries I will
point out the state poet
laureate program is run through
the live.
Okay so that's the right thanks
and gas our.
I'm so twenty when you get up to
twenty three million hopefully
what would be the spin off
annually twenty three no.
Madam chairman and senator
you'll take a lot of the pages
of of the investment is done
that we would anticipate
something in the neighborhood of
about.
Dollars a piece about twenty to
twenty.
Okay and then again I'm sure
it's all just the ideas just to
just distribute all that usually
without any kind of a valuation
of assume that house library
probably has more programming
and say that care is as a one
but it doesn't matter it would
just be all the same amount.
Senator and then my favorite
libraries story that the show
this year previous hearings is
is a by the folks that that is
the it is a one room library and
old house and has the only
telephone in town so at night
when they closed the door.
They have a Jeff outside to
bring the phone outside and play
outside Jack so that anybody in
town needs to make a phone call
after hours to come and use that
phone that's one of the services
they provide some of the
services very community
community wildly different you
know in the in the library the
one witness shall help get
started years ago that we this
index and we spend time at as an
incredible array of program and
they have the the the start of
secondhand store that sells know
just books only and other things
and that helps finance it so
they have I think the staff for
two full time.
Does one full time one full time
a couple of part time librarians
but they do programming that's
unbelievable every weekend they
have makers shops for his
computer access for the villages
lost their business because they
they sell online the market.
Thank you thank you thank you
senator any other questions for
the committee.
Senator and thank you for
bringing the support.
Because we talked about
communities and the rule yes.
The internet is free but I don't
think all the libraries probably
have internet the my correct.
Madam chair members of the
committee I believe of the
libraries to have internet the
quality of service varies a lot
from village to village and
Senator is that based on the
structure of the library or is
it the provider source of
service.
Madam chair members of the
committee I believe it has more
to do with the provider
at the end of
Leveraging that you like you may
could probably speak to that I
know there's some programs that
are bringing fiber to some of
the smaller communities you know
the library called to do till
last week I think it was called
to complain about but one one of
the leading recent they have
fiber to their door but they
don't have the money to get it
into the library
so there's a big variation.
And Senator is one of the things
within the communities to is the
postal service maybe leave that
I don't know if this could be.
They could try to help us with
back to as far as having the a
place.
To do that kind of business but
I think that's what it is.
These two is that internet
service to get into our state
agencies to social security
office unemployment to have
access to the password it
happens in the communities that
library as far as a safe place
and the reliability of of being
connected and being able to do
the business instead of having
to commute all the way to to our
offices and stuff and I think
that's been a big
Very sparse meeting some of
those Services stepped up
continually have to be a cap for
them to receive funding to for
the Twitter daily living hi to
site for Shiite Year if bill and
hopefully that'll put some idea
and there someone out there will
here I need to.
The chair will have any other
questions for committee chairman
today.
Yes thank you for to that space
Senator Shendo second by Senator
o'neal thank you would you
please call the roll Senator
grace yes senator Sanchez yes
Senator Shendo.
Senator o'neill yes Senator
Pinto yes thank you very much.
Thank you very.
I
think we will engage and.
There's a.
