Stay on the Senate calendar that
we're working on this morning
we'll go back to number item
number five one Senator share
down so next up is the Senator
Burt for item number six.
Thank you senator Wirth Mr
president M. S. consent we go
about our business third reading
of legislation I yield to
So confused I ask unanimous
consent right now that the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
Seeing no objection senator Byrd
to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president the this
is this builders three primary
things.
Secondly as time goes on the ISO
rating will diminish so
insurers rates should be more
departments all over the state
from metro in Albuquerque and
Santa Fe down to small
communities to be able to
purchase additional equipment
within their especially the
volunteer fire department folks
and so with that.
Mr president I do have on the
line with me as an expert
Questions or requirements thank
you senator Byrd Senator Burt
See no objections expert witness
itself proved.
See no debate Senator but as in
the bill thank you Mr president
I move now that
Senate bill two fifty six as
amended do now pass and I ask
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
chevron to.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator Moores.
Senate.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator for the year.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator songes Senator Sweetser
yes senator smitteez.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
Senator sold yes Senators
defending yes.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes.
Senators around this yes Senator
savant is yes.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
McKenna Senator Tallman and
amended has passed the Senate
senator senator Byrd thank you
Mr president and members of the
Senate thank you moving on to
the next we have Senate bill one
eighty six as amended Senator
one eighty six as amended on
final passage has been taken is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution.
I see no objections Senator
Campos explained the bill thank
tax act the weight distance tax
act and the motor transportation
act at the port of entries from
the department of public safety
to the department of
that's what this does Mr
present.
Senator is we're debating Senate
bill one eight six as amended.
Anyone wishing to debate.
amended do now pass and I ask
for a roll call.
Seven eight please more voting.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
serve on this yes Senator to run
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ivey Soto Senator Ivey
Soto yes Senator how to meal.
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator by the.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
probe.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Steinborn.
Wirth yes Senator Woods Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Brandt.
eighty six as amended has passed
the Senate Senator Campos thank
you Mr president members of the
Senate thank you Senators
undercounter gonna go on to item
number eight that Senate bill
Senate Bill Senate finance
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
ninety on final passage has now
been taken and is set now
everything we found out that
that the firefighters in their
regular scheduled hours of duty
we're not pay that portion is
so as we we fix this problem
more we found that as Paris's is
thirty four million dollar fix
and so what the firefighters
have decided to do is pick that
committee substitute for Senate
bill ninety.
Anyone wishing the debate.
Senator by the.
one point five percent on my way
up to Santa Fe this morning what
percentage of the cost of does
that pick up.
Mr president center I think I'm
an expert witness in and I.
I'll make sure that it was
represented to me that it was
all the cost and I and I but I
was surprised to hear that but
one point five percent is going
to cover the entire cost of the
Thank you Mr president.
Any further debate senators.
Saying no further debate
centerman also closed on the
all those present voted by a
post I.
Roll call vote and.
Senator is we're doing a roll
call vote tier seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Wirth DS Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria Senator Candelaria
yes senators of on this Senator
What
what.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Senator Hickey just Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto Senator Ivey
Soto yes Senator how to meal.
Senator Moores yes senator one
knows.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
probe.
yes senator smitteez.
Senator severe Lopez Senator
shares.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez are you
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics are you
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator probe.
Senator propias.
Thirty five.
Thirty five in the affirmative
bill two thirty six item number
nine Senator Kernan thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all action for
explain the bill thank you very
much Mr president and so this
bill basically is asking that
New Mexico Carlsbad New Mexico
called the Carlsbad
instructional center and then
over time in the nineteen
sixties they decided to align
themselves with New Mexico State
University.
forty member task force's been
working over of a number of
months since the fall of last
year to develop a plan to become
an independent college again one
thing you have to understand
would simply be changing from a
branch college to an independent
college they have done a great
deal of work the task force and
senators we're debating Senate
bill two thirty six we have
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president will the
with the senator please feel for
a an important bill as several
important to the senator and
it's important to her
constituents it's important to
New Mexico State University the
proposal before us is to take
new plan and so that's an
interesting idea but I think
there's some important things to
consider Mr president Senator
one of the things that struck me
supplying to.
The community colleges for
sharing those resources support
services federal you remember
what the dollar amount was that
million dollars a year for
branding and in return for that
in addition to that of sitting
in of an account reserve account
made requests to determine that.
So even though they do provide
some services frankly the money
that has been sent in New Mexico
State University main.
that I do have two experts are
prepared if I need them but I
can tell you that of what New
Mexico state Carlsbad has
sent Senator the answer to the
question and start ask
rhetorical questions because
that's what we do here on this
floor sometimes NMSC supplies
about five million dollars a
dollars that that college is
going to have to have to
to independently find
number two Matt Matt Mr
perceptions are for doing this I
will tell the colleagues I think
it's also important note New
Mexico State University is doing
a study right now looking at the
And and I will finally to say
and I won't belabor on because
there's other bills.
They did a mill levy in the
community of Carlsbad to raise
they were donating and voting on
something that was for New
Mexico state and now that we're
kind of switching that up on on
to that feel fair to you
community is one hundred percent
behind this effort that mill
levy was to help support New
Mexico State University Carlsbad
but that money obviously has
gone to the main campus sitting
Turning to the chancellor into
ministration now in the Los
crucis that have said to me
that's their money they can have
it whenever they want the
problem is when they have asked
down that road if you would like
I prefer not to because there's
some question about the
association that was just to do
that study and so I would like
may not of heard this bill yet.
NMSU has the the funding raised
for this college have been set
crucis kind of home base for
NMSU but NMSU servicing entire
state I think a Carlsbad taken a
lot of initiative there's no
time
then I would personally like to
see more valuation done so that
we make the right decision for
the students and so I
respectfully stand opposed to
Thank you Mr president present
with the sponsor yield please
Senator Kernan yield Mister
president I would need to ask
permission to have my two
experts enter the same.
worried about my questions are
going to be pretty civil I'll be
happy to have Johnny he is
certainly an expert for Carla I
don't I don't want members when
I stand up to ask questions
you know Senator if you would
yield you know has the NM issue
border regions taken a position
on this issue Senator Mister
president and senator I don't
think they have taken an
we the city of Carlsbad in the
community was not involved in
selecting who would do that
study it's basically something
that the regents have directed
the chancellor in the
have taken an official position
on that.
Mr president Senator do you know
has the chancellor the head of
an issue taken a position on
losing the Carlsbad branch Mr
president and senator when he
first talked with me back in the
Not stand in the way of that
occurring now how he feels today
I think is maybe different I
cannot speak for him but at that
Senator and so the NMAA shoe
below the chancellor we have the
today I think we have the
problems with the president but
another con in the problems do
you know is the number two the
Senator not to my knowledge but
I I could check with my experts
if I need to do that.
Thank you Sir your your answers
you can check with the experts
and a two branch college in
Carlsbad with the main campus in
Los crucis and I've never heard
from the regions I've never seen
a resolution memorial from the
regions I've never heard from
trust you all the way of their
position is essentially no
position.
And I'm gonna tell you
throughout this whole session it
and when we get in the committee
that well this agency takes no
position.
And this is hard for me because
I really do rely upon those with
expertise in their fields I
vote the NMAA you gives up its
Carlsbad branch.
and all that that might need to
the university and I have
absolutely no idea that the
And I hope you can understand.
Just mind numbingly.
Waxed I am.
To find myself in this situation
be making this decision
there may be very good reasons
that NMSU retains Carlsbad as a
branch certainly there have got
to be good things about having
community college in our state
is that advisable with all that
means new administration right
new entirely new structure new
organization in Carlsbad many
this importance to NMSU into our
entire higher education system
and have absolutely no idea what
the university's position is on
this Senator can ask you this
what is the secretary of higher
communication.
With the secretary she has
received the one hundred and
twenty page plan for moving to
independent status I can't speak
I'm not shocked by the answer.
Shop is of the secretary of have
had a position that she would
This is avoiding leadership.
This is avoiding making hard
decisions.
There's no way to run a state
Thank you Mr president and I
have you know I can appreciate
have some of the comments from
Senator sure vantage.
in the very early fall or late
summer.
I have a of this passion of this
past year.
when.
When there is going to be a
whether or not they would prefer
to be independent other than
remain.
Under New Mexico state.
well I mean Carlsbad is
certainly in my district and I
support them because this is
what they believe they need to
do and I think the community of
you know they made that child
David George and I believe it's
the right one for them.
staged a main campus and as
Senator Kernan mentioned the the
comments were that we will do
what we can to help you.
they should that but the.
The campus should Carlsbad went
went forward.
And the.
Seems like there would have been
numerous opportunities for the
border regions to have an
opportunity to review that.
Mr president and and sponsor the
first time that I heard that
there was any opposition from
Show mismas president and and
members of the body I just I
want to relate those things to
you because
I don't want anybody to to
believe that that Carlsbad is
Mexico state to take a different
position.
because it appeared to me they
were always supportive of
Carlsbad.
controversy because it appeared
to me from the very get go that
it was one that they were going
to work together on to
Gallegos followed by Senator
avail then Senator DC Pino
Senator Gallegos thank you Mr
president I don't need to
sponsor the yield I just wanted
to make public comment to the
positive piece now what Senator
what this if the department has
not come out against it and had
not voiced I took that as a
college thank you Mr president.
Thank you senator Senator bill
thank you Mr president real
San Juan college decided to go
independent from New Mexico
state about whole thirty years
ago or something like that a
long time ago.
It was the best move that could
this case if Carlsbad is ready
to take on a community college
it's a great symbiotic
relationship the college becomes
your own it becomes part of the
environment and so I would
encourage it's part of the
community is ready for it then
it's a good thing thank you Mr
president thank you senator
avail further debate with
I do notice in the analysis that
we received that during the
committee Senator Griggs
mentioned that the chancellor of
New Mexico state did oppose it
in the committee and that the
they didn't do it but they
didn't feel strongly enough
about it to make a big stink
about it to us so I I I I like
with senator Neville said that
this has the potential to become
vote for the bill in light of of
of my trust in Senator Kernan.
Thank you senator Senator
Tallman.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Drafting bills together with the
the representative two of.
Look at the.
huge system only has three the
system is.
The governing system is of.
Much to a fragmented and it's a.
which got six times three times
more population we do don't have
anywhere near the number of of
he colleges and universities
that we do the system is really
hate to hate to vote against the
Senator Kernan we such
Well meaning person.
but I think this needs a.
debate Senators Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr president and
fellow senators
I often of side my mother is
And of certainly provide some
motivation also I think the
pride of her life with the
founding of the local community
college in Rockford Illinois and
and thank you for bringing at
Senator Kernan thank you.
Any further debate Senators we
have Senator Diamond.
concerning to me never the less
could you describe the current
structure of Carlsbad.
Branch campus is there a is
there an on campus president
could you describe the
leadership of that thank you
to continue with the local
president and instead they
brought the executive director
of to the main campus and that
that is the face of that
particular branch and that
really is what kind of trigger
this is the taking away of that
that person who represents the
if it would be more beneficial
to be independent which by the
way does not add another branch
or college it just simply
changes from a branch to an
actually do a better job with
their students and that's the as
reported by the LFC and Billy
gets volume one page one twelve
so you're exactly right there is
long have you guys been without
a president and could you also
tell me is there any tend to
fill the position or has it been
announced at that position will
not be filled so Mister
become a position at the main
campus that would represent each
of the branches and that
executive director would be the
person that would represent the
that they could go ahead and
hire someone to be hi I guess
sort of of president but then
that would have to pay that
salary so I just think it's time
independent once again they were
independent to begin with that
would like to move to that
status once again.
And Mister president senator I
think the only one I can can
tell you about the same one and
I believe senator Neville
mentioned that.
to do this without receiving the
results of that study.
So Mister president senator of
the study I think it's under way
I'm not sure it's been the
at the main campus I think there
there has been communication
regarding that study the reason
we need to do this now is
because just a study continues
before I have in front of me a
hundred and twenty page plan
that the task force has put
together addressing all the
issues from accreditation.
that is you know it's a thirty
day session so it would be two
years before this could be
addressed again and I believe
New Mexico State University
Carlsbad is ready to move to
independence now.
almost we compared to this to a
divorce but maybe a divorce that
needs to happen and so I am
choosing sides I'll stick with
New Mexico state but I cannot
argue that Carlsbad deserves to
supporting it as heartbreaking
as that may be thank you.
Any further debate centers.
Senator Kernan close thank you
Mr president and instead to a
Senate bill two thirty six do
now pass Christ unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
We're voting on Senate bill two
thirty six.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
No.
senator Byrd DS Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes Senators
around this.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes I'd like to explain
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Morris yes senator one
knows.
Senator.
Senator disciplinary test
Senator for the year yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator songes Senator Sweetser
yes.
Senator smitteez.
Senator tweeted yes senators to
the office.
Any rogue yes yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman no senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
In the affirmative to in the
forward I and aware of the
circumstances of Carlsbad
community college New Mexico
State University and I also
recognize the importance of
would hope that what we are able
to do as a especially those of
us in southern New Mexico be
able to have conversations with
the administration New Mexico
As well as New Mexico State
University so thank you very
much Senator Kernan for bringing
this forward and thank you Mr
chair.
of our universities and
community colleges however I
never heard and then just say
the same thing has Centers about
this in center and with I never
heard anything from an issue
Senator thank you very much and
I just want to thank the body
for listening to the debate in
for listening to Carlsbad and I
appreciate very much all of your
Senator Lopez can Harris.
Thank you I didn't realize my
bill is up I I would prefer to
Then go down to the floor.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president that's
fine so we'll just move on to
eleven on the calendar Senator
Lopez.
placing Senate bill one nine six
as amended on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution see no objections
consideration Mr president is
forming a task force
to review the children's code.
Mr chairman as we know
and the list I know was long Mr
chairman with regards to the
children's code a lot of the
oversight with regards to
children youth and families
department and other areas for
be
overseen by the New Mexico
Supreme Court children's court
improvement commission and that
Mr Chairman there was an
amendment made
and that is requested to again
saying that we can't say shell
to the courts but asking them of
course at the we are requesting
them to do so
Mr chairman
for questions thank you senator
Senator debating Senate bill one
ninety six as amended we do have
debate will have center by the
F. followed by Senator o'neal.
Thank you Mr president just a
years ago Mr president that we
really needed to do this so
thank you Senator Lopez for
bringing this
This forward it is much much
needed this is there's been so
is this a cut comprehensive
complete reviewers are just
sections of it Mr president and
and to the kind lady from
Bernalillo county Mister
chairman Senator this is a two
a two year review process.
I appreciate that Mr president
and I just hope that that is
this what happens that folks
like you and I Mr president and
trying to work on the stuff
myself since I've got survive
here I also hope that we take
the the time to include people
from all over the state and all
if you will look at the the list
is not limited to but there are
different factors different
areas different sectors that
need to I think have a seat at
very happy to hear that and when
you say different areas do mean
different areas of the state or
different areas of law for all
of the above Mister chairman
Senator I would think you'd be
so thorough that do we looking
be made Mister president senator
thank you very much Mr president
and and Senator Lopez this is an
excellent concept and idea I
really look forward to this work
I think it's going to produce
applaud her for taking the
initiative along with
Representative had at a.
To to do this you know ten years
ago we totally revamped the
house and I was remember I
remember voting for that and and
working with the the
administration at that time and
there's just been so many
one advocate that we all are
really most of us would would go
to two asked to help us
interpret the children's code is
retired he's no longer actively
up here and it was high time
for sponsoring this this bill
thank you thank you senator nail
is there any further debate.
Say no further debate center let
us close on the bill thank you
Senators tier seats please.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria Senator Candelaria
yes senators have on this
Senators around is yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator great yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal Senator had
a meal yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
senator Munoz yes Senator one
is yes senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes senator should
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman
yes Senator Tallman yes.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president members of the Senate
thank you revert back to item
number ten that Senate bill
three oh three centers the
office.
three
On final passage of that has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution no objections
elected by F. T. and another
member that would be appointed
by the governor the governor's
appointee
Well I'm sorry not the governor
education department and or the
designation and the designated
would have to have financial
experience as well as be a
resident of the state of New
Mexico.
throughout the day we have
centered on the Lara.
Thank you Mr president I I don't
need the sponsor to yield a
educators is essential on the R.
B..
However of this bill is enacted
the majority of members of the
E. R. B. retirement board which
let's recall has a fiduciary
duty to the fund.
means making some difficult
calls.
we had analysis Mr president
John of our retirement boards a
few years ago and one of the
to receive the benefit and so
while I certainly can appreciate
the intent behind the bill we
know loud and clear what will
happen if we for their pack
these boards we will continue to
have further debate senator
Munoz.
Thank you Mr president whether
sponsor you.
Senate president.
For benefits or not being able
to make changes we're gonna
struggle
this board and the R. B. funds
haven't funded it correctly with
para.
And so when we start changing
these border adding members to
the board it becomes a big
problem currently right now and
someone gets all its members on
and the other members don't have
any comment.
So I strongly oppose this bill
gonna end up the same way parent
is in struggle right now so
thank you Mr president thank you
centerman us we do have further
debate we have Senator Ingle.
Yes.
Of rules for public affairs on
the other but anyway Mr
president.
Chairman is been something that
had a next birch on retirements
public retirement age.
And the as I remember now we
were talking about changing the
public schools.
able to to absorb that.
And he said well you know he
said in the day and age we're in
now in the nineties making
fourteen on all these retirement
programs.
Because Ashish where markets are
going to be in the United States
and don't worry about it well
models took his word on that and
benefits and we have the best
retirement programs in the
United States bar none.
But they are on thinner ice than
they need to be.
people on board that can really
make hard decisions because
there's going to be hard
decisions to be made on these
and we cannot.
Thank you Mr president and and
I'll just share what we heard
and in health and public affairs
about this.
Currently if you look at the
make up.
There are only three.
association of educational
retirees an elected
representative of any a New
Mexico.
An elected representative of the
E. R. B. the secretary of PED
the state treasurer and two
appointed by the governor.
This would from forty three it
the program that it is
representative we had one more
member who would be from
The American federation of
teachers.
And they they might be but there
is no guarantee that they would
be so would still be a majority
all the people that are paying
into it and A. F. T. members are
not currently being
Representative because any a
covers a lot of teachers but not
the ones who belong to a fifty.
committee that it's currently
seven and that line is the more
common number but the majority
would still be none E. R. B.
Thank you Mr president will
Senator please yield for a
question.
Senator love this deal yes.
Mr president center and Senator
board include Representative and
NEA.
Yes it does and does that
include the university
professors.
and so but does it but it right
now it does not include the
educational assistance right
represented by A. F. T. Senator
mind that Mr president I
apologize.
here is that we've got different
people with it who are vested in
this fund representative on the
board but we have a group of
people who are not this this
any board let's be honest but
but it is an equity issue
including the educational
assistance so thank you Mr
presentation Senator Steinborn
we have Senator Kernan followed
a little bit of information.
When we heard this bill and and
I believe it was Senate
education and basically what I
learned that combined NEA and
AFT basically represent about
association and I think there
many many teachers that are
represented by that organization
they are fairly non political
they don't get involved in
politics I just care about the
southeast New Mexico and
probably other parts of New
Mexico I think it's basically
Albuquerque so you know it's up
to the body what you want to do
but I think it's really
percentage of teachers in the
state of New Mexico.
We do have further debate we
have Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president would
the
If T. member have any background
in finances.
No Mr president that is for the
other member.
president that are added to the
board and that when the other
one would have to have that
background this one would be
elected by the by the A. F. T.
who are of not represented right
now within that board in
addition it with this would
improve communication which I
they're asked to do things it is
really important for them to
feel that they have
representation and that there is
two way communication that goes
between the members and the
Mr president wanna make them a
nonvoting member so you can
still have that communication is
communications was really
worried about.
these when these cuts were
proposed
the E. R. B. is doing just fine
and I think the other thing I
because most most teachers were
women so this is another reason
that we need to have
representation of teachers on
the board so that they feel.
Mr president
Senator is the in the EA
Representative a.
Teacher or educational person.
New Mexico association of
educational retirees are they
education educators.
They are retired educators
You know to a board that
actually makes the right
decisions when this new person
has no knowledge no background
this type is nine and diverse
reputation representation helps
with improve financial outcomes
are many studies that show this
many studies that prove this.
Can you give me one.
boards but also on boards
dealing with corporate
governance and the issues are
the same the the more diversity
you have on the board the more
level of members with the fund.
Mr president Senator
decisions based on return of
investment or would they be
pushing to make social justice
decisions for the board.
is to manage the assets of the
fund.
This presents center so one of
the concerns is and we sing this
across the country is boards
being taken over and then
of of making of getting too many
people in this fund.
That do not have the for this
year background.
You said that the other member
have a background in finance so
this board would go from four
three with for experts to three
non experts.
Two five.
resident of New Mexico an
employee of H. E. D. and
presents the relevant financial
and experience relevant to the
decisions political decisions
can affect the performance of
funds and the point of this fund
is to maximize the benefits for
the country and this is the
secretary of higher ed or their
designees if the secretary of
higher ed decides to do it they
don't have to have any of those
me it concerns me that we're
adding more people to a board.
I agree with senator Candelaria.
On his position on you know that
fund ought to be really
concerned about this change is I
don't think it's going to make
things better I think it's going
to make things worse we do see
that this fund is underfunded
properly it will run out of
money we don't need people going
on the on the board.
That don't have the background
to make the right decisions for
the board.
Just one.
And we have to find someone else
to run this fund so I think that
This is probably not the a good
meals for a second time Senator
Wirth thank you Mr president I
appreciate the the debate I've
been listening carefully and it
it just feels to me like the
F. T. member but there's already
an NEA member.
And so the balance though to the
AFT members Senator Ortiz Pino
pointed out is we're putting in
either the higher and secretary
financial or produce sherry
aspect of a pension or
investment fund management.
So I'm gonna support the bill I
do think representation matters
and because of the balance here
I do think it makes sense and it
doesn't hurt the current make up
of this board so I planned to
Caller to this if A. F. T. in
addition to representing
teachers representative about
ten thousand classified staff
which are bus drivers cafeteria
those workers as well and the
representation on the board and
I'm quite certain Mr president
that and Senator that they will
they will doesn't it amongst
with sentiment us thank you Mr
president of the sponsor you
Senator Lopez detailed yes Mr
president I yield this presents
center I just when you were
debating with the good senator
from Albuquerque over there for
present and so the influence of
the Legislature whoever was an
influence that decision on the
board made that change of the
If they hit a big market change
that fund will thank and it will
change completely and so when we
talk about structures of a board
and and how we structure those
but nobody listened and so we're
adding members and this member
has to have a financial
background.
And that may help a little bit.
investment good people I don't
know how much knowledge and
financial background but look
where we're at today.
The first change that we've ever
If we really want to continue
down the same road.
And more members.
Get it more diluted not make a
decision like para.
I mean this is not the right
on pensions and investment but
the next chairman will hear this
for his term on the pension
funds to.
We could put every member on
Tara Anne are being combined
on.
The retirement funds are not
like that the retirement funds
need to have strong financial
people they'll make strong
something change it correctly.
At the right people and get the
retirement funds and in the
that'll make the tough decisions
that will bring it to the
legislature and say well you
make this force because we don't
want to do it.
Every time the legislature's
should be doing that's
investments they should be
looking at adding more members
doesn't fix the problem it only
adds to the problem thank you.
Hold on real quick Senator Lopez
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino did you
want to go for a second time for
a second time Mr president that
trying to follow with Senator
mom among us was saying.
said public present but I think
you meant private prisons Mr
president that was based on pure
politics the reality is those
Perception that this is a the
wild eyed political decision no
they they looked at it and said
these guys are losing money
thank you Mr president for close
I have to say that it was not
the E. R. B. that made the
decision not to invest in
private prisons it was the P. E.
R. eight and I don't think it's
in fact the E. R. B. with a lot
of collaboration went through a
process of believe is about.
all the pensions just because a
P. R. eight is in trouble
doesn't mean that the E. R. B.
should be punished and the the
teachers in fact today
Representative classified
employees in Carlsbad.
and Carl and these these
employees rely very heavily on
communicate with them but will
communicate with all others in
the class whether they're
members of the of the you are
not because that's what unions
do they represent the entire
move into a size a board that is
a best practices we should move
into boards that are diverse and
well representative of the of
I move that Senate bill three oh
three.
So that the role has been called
and all those president no I'm
sorry that we vote on this bill
by voice vote.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria Senator Candelaria no
Senator serve on this.
Senator Cervantes yes Senator
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs no Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Ivey Soto now Senator
how to meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
No like to explain that the
senator Morris Senator Moores no
Senator manos.
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no senator Paul.
Senator Schmidt is now Senator
severe Lopez.
yes Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Yes.
president I just checked with
Jane Goodwin the former director
it was the E. R. B. that voted
to divest secondly it's any are
representative Carlsbad not a of
T..
investments so as we move along
just make sure we know where
we're at.
Senator Lopez Mr president I
wrong information and I think
the the Senator of thank you and
thanks to all members of the
body.
Thank you senator we are going
to item number twelve on the
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
one ninety three as amended as
twice amended on final passage
has been taken and that is now
bill one ninety three with
Senator Diamond.
I'm Senate bill one ninety three
will provide rural equity on but
are often under served or un
served in many areas during the
pandemic these disparities have
really been highlighted.
It.
Our study and it will be
For correcting long standing and
equities of resource allocation
so with that I would like to
turn it over to Senator crystal
rural and remote districts like
so many of us Representative I
I've said this many times before
but my district like so many
others the political divide is
divide you know two thirds of
New Mexico's population live in
cities of over a hundred
recent pandemic the recent
pandemic highlighted disparities
in resources including broadband
relief funding distribution
educational resources and
resources to bring a voice rural
New Mexico it's house of the DFA
of the local government division
which which has the resources to
same spirit by supporting the
spell thank you.
Thank you thank you senator
Senator as we're debating Senate
bill one ninety three.
As twice amended.
Thank you Mr president of would
either sponsor with does this my
colleague from Silver City yield
actually a bill.
Mr president Senator you're
correct it is a bill and it we
are ready to take action.
the ninety five thousand
dollars.
Is that how is that going to be
spent for a for a full time
employee or or how how does that
work by the second Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond deals.
In an are both of you so one
employee is enough to to meet
the needs of this entire state.
Mr Chairman one is one more than
eventually grow into an office
of its own but we're gonna start
with one position to see
where we need to go from there
thank you senator thank you Mr
president both of you thank you
for sponsoring this you know we
talk so much about the rural
an urban Democrat so so thank
you so much for bringing this
bill forward thank you for your
bipartisan thank thanks thank
you senator we do have further
little bit the notion that
Albuquerque is urban two nights
ago I was driving home and a
coyote came in the middle of the
road and snatched a baby rabbit
as it was crossing and ran on to
of the city can you to see a
coyote tracking down and taking
stand in support of Senate bill
one ninety three ninety on but
the mental work with local
federal and state governments
and nonprofit groups to provide
we face in rural and frontier
New Mexico and I stand in
support of this bill thank you
Mr president thank you senator
any further debate senators.
ask for a roll call vote Senator
voting on Senate bill one ninety
three as twice amended.
Tier states.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
grados Senator Gallegos yes
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes senator
Hermio.
Senator Hermio yes Senator
Kernan.
Morris Senator Moores yes
Senator manos senator Munoz yes
senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator propias Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman yes Senator Tallman yes
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
on the negative Senate bill one
ninety three as twice amended
has passed the Senate Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president I expect
You may now call your ex for
with us and let them know that
your bill passed if you'd like.
all rise and give a round of
applause.
diversity commission Senate bill
one forty eight as amended
Senator Stewart thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent that the Senate the
Thank you Mr president this is a
Education Commission of focusing
on having long term solutions to
the problems that we have in New
study of the L. A. S. C. of the
no time to lose report that came
out of NCSL studying high
performing countries to try to
We have a four states that set
up a commission like this as a
result of a lawsuit they were
very successful have three
think it it tends to bring
stakeholders together.
It's a five year commission they
report to the legislature every
stand for questions Senator is
we're debating Senate bill one
forty eight as amended anyone
wishing to debate.
Sorry Mr president Senator I
voted for this bill in.
Education but I'm I'm seeing
that Senate finance amended this
bill can you please go over the
robust subcommittees that worked
because we have in the make up
of the committee will you just
a number of other things.
In addition this says that the
vice chair of the commission
will be chosen from one of for
also tell the legislature every
year well what kind of financial
support the commission thinks we
need to do remember this is
Mr president Senator did you
bring this ammendment.
Mister president senator.
You know everybody wants to get
change it drastically and I said
no to that I really wanted to
President Senator I wish I could
agree because I really liked
what we were doing in LFC with a
note time to lose I thought the
unfortunately the way the winds
go.
Of the L. E. S. C. it did not
keep that direction I thought we
were really getting to some good
changes for the state New Mexico
have heard the bill for
medically for me.
it really.
In my opinion the amendment.
recommendations of the
commission basically given the
authority of the legislature to
the commission when it comes to
how to fund public schools it's
giving a blank check to this
recommendation back to the body
and all the sudden the judges
saying that you've got to follow
that those recommendations you
don't have a choice.
And I will tell you folks we
And go back to when we did it
and what's happening with this
current pandemic as a perfect
example.
That we just continue to give
away the affording.
you dress up amendment and and
explain to me how that's not
going to set us up for our
authorities legislature being
stripped away by the courts.
commission to talk about funding
in their annual report.
I mean I I didn't I didn't want
these amendments because I
didn't really think they are in
Martinez review the findings the
findings of fact and look at the
plans that have come up so far
and to make recommendations to
damages at all I think the
commission without us even
saying this would have been
saying we need to put more
funding here for this issue.
job in New Mexico.
How could what we learned in no
time to lose help us move New
Mexico forward.
You know we're we missing why
commission to suggest a funding
issue so I I disagree that this
changes the tenor or the
direction of it.
Ruling said because yes there
was a financial component to it.
But the biggest component and
the biggest.
Thank you the judge said was.
adequate not necessarily at the
dollars that we are attaching to
it was inadequate but the way we
were using them in fact they
called the help head very
And so I I.
I wish this bill would stay the
same I would send put these
amendments on it
I cannot support the bill in its
want to echo those concerns I
feel like this is a going
further down the road in a
dangerous us blending of powers
instead of separation of powers
issue.
And this is well established in
appropriators if you don't like
the job they're doing then you
need to vote for a different
appropriate intellects different
centers representatives you to
that we have and so instead of
suing we we need to select
different people if if if we
feel like we're not doing act
job on funding something and so
I just want to to echo that
because I was really frustrated
appropriate the funds that's
what the people elect us to do
and so this this road we're
going down on I believe is
disenfranchise in the everyday
that elected us our constituents
were not accountable to these
other interests and and all in
all these these lawsuits they're
they're trying to tell us how we
should do our jobs
disenfranchisement of of the
ordinary New Mexican the way I
see it thank you Mr president.
Thank you center street is a yes
Senator Gallegos next.
Justin listen couple of last
questions it brought to mind is
on your commission.
Are they can be recommendations
legislature a path forward to
improve education.
Thank you for that Mr president
in center being fiftieth in in
And pro tempore on the tracking
and monitoring.
For the commission who's gonna
be doing and how are they can be
addressing it back to us.
some business groups and some
advocacy groups that are willing
to contribute if we need more
funding for experts or of
Scares me that that if if we're
taking.
Growth we not gone down and and
how it can affect your for
public schools but with that all
Thank you Mr president I
appreciate the debate with that
I move that Senate bill one
forty eight as amended do now
Senator Baca now Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Campos.
syringes yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond passes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey yeah
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Senator how to me are yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan now Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Monero's yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator probe.
Senator propias Senator
severe Lopez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stewart is Senator tall
man.
Senator dole money as senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond no.
By a vote of twenty seven in the
Says we're gonna move on we got
the item number fourteen on the
calendar.
That Senate tax business
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill four
forty Senator Shendo thank you
transportation committee
substitute for four forty.
On final passage has been taken
that there is no subject to
debate amendment or substitution
in the men's are are statewide
economic development finance act
to broaden the financing tools
that the NMFA is able to
implement in the event that
authorization of this state
small business credit initiative
of twenty ten.
It was a program the that
provide provided grants to
states to incentivize.
In back in two thousand ten for
the New Mexico received eleven
million under this program.
Which which the NMFA had to
This was effective in delivering
the funds.
Loan participations do not
provide the same leverages other
of state small business credit
a capital access program which
will provide matching funds to
banks to create insurance pools
with Indian role banks to
encourage them to make small
economy loans to small
businesses.
requirement that the economic
development department
determined that the business
service and economic development
purpose and is suitable for
financing Mr president staff
senator yield Senator Mr
president I yes.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president center I have a all
the respect in the world for the
New Mexico finance authority and
committee.
R. and I will continue to on the
floor unfortunately
Just because I think it's a it
Actually authorize the finance
authority to give money to banks
for losses a lone loss program.
program this pool.
Right Mr president and that was
something that came out in the
committee was the director said
well this would be for federal
loss reserve.
Program and I point that out Mr
president colleagues because
that's something we really want
to put in statute for.
Basically subsidize losses.
I know that something that we
talk a lot about on the floor.
Was that currently in law.
We require.
We require that the finance
provision Mister president
senator.
Mr president the I have an
expert witness.
That the.
We can introduce rex for with us
please thanks for witnesses are
McKenna Russell.
With the New Mexico finest
Authority the number of
direction Senator July the
at the bill on page eight.
Current law.
allows the finance authority to
make loans.
From the authority and we're
striking the requirement in law
again this is without free
condition this is a new.
president Senator.
President of the funds does not
Mister Mister president Senator.
This is just regarding general
To subsidize losses but but that
are just separately they are
thirty to issue loans were
removing their requirement that
to also get rid of that
requirement in the law that they
don't have to repay it the
problem I have with this act Mr
presents and I appreciate the
forego requirement that there's
a dedicated revenue stream to
pay back the federal program
based loans for that limited
on all loans there's a dedicated
funding stream to pay back.
There's a few other little
lesser issues I have with the
bill but again I just think it
needs more work I'm not opposed
letter of the law not just
someone's intent I think the
letter of this goes way beyond
it and.
I think it takes it beyond the
present among us.
Thank you Mr president the
sponsor yelp etcetera etcetera
everything the good senator from
Los crucis talking about would
have to be done in rural and so
when NMFA does that in rural
than that fixes the problem but
he's referring to long lost pull
guaranteeing the loan there's
money percent aside for that and
so when they guarantee those
funds that's where the money
goes siliceous clarify that but
these are federal funds are not
general fund it's economic
development money for the state
of New Mexico the structures
that's where we'll see the rules
of how they pay back the loan
and that's where the structure
comes in.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator Munoz we do have further
debate with Senator Brandt.
senator John I'm trying to.
Compile what I've heard from the
last two speakers and trying to
figure out this bill because I
have not seen it
and.
relates to federal funds where
is that in the bill.
In the middle of.
here nine years is the the bill
is the law rules or not.
And the rules are made based on
the laws that we pass or leased
so.
If we're changing the law.
And we're not specifying that
however we assure the NMFA.
How are they gonna you how we're
gonna be sure they'll take that
authority and expand it to state
funds.
as part of the rulemaking.
Thank you Mr president Center
and and maybe it's in a
The law that we're not seeing in
front of us Mr president my
understanding is that it's in
NMFA rules.
Mr president it's it's not a law
it's it's in the rules.
Okay thank you Mr president that
gives me some reservation
because again the rules are
Letting them write the rules and
they were making a lot of match
the rules that's really not the
way it's supposed to work so how
As a legislative body.
Of we'll review those and make
those stipulations.
So is present with that then go
We do have further debate with
senator Ortiz if you know.
yield to couple questions
etcetera etcetera agency
presentation will and the doing
some speed reading here trying
to figure out what would.
The fiscal impact report talks
about the.
We have the things that have
been done through this law in
the past and it does sound like
it's always using these.
program besides those assess BCI
federal funds.
Mr president I understand it
it's it's the federal funds is
created to give us another as
certain parts of the of the act.
Doesn't mention federal funds it
they're probably mentioned in
the earlier sections of the act
is that the case does your
Thank you Mr president it
doesn't mention of federal funds
but it happened in the rules.
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president I'm just
looking at the bill here I I
don't think I've seen this
I thank you Mr president so on
page eight twelve and fourteen
line eleven twenty two and seven
respectively the languages
assistance or wire or we moving
away from making loans to such a
general term Mr president as
providing financing assistance.
Mr president the.
providing the match for the
The capital access pool which
increase the insurance pool.
define what that is or give me
an example there of.
But it isn't alone Mr president
because you're striking make
loans so you can make loans
anymore and and and instead
you're saying provide financing
The the definition of financing
many of.
The definition of financial
very narrow term make loans to
provide financing assistance
sources of revenue to repay the
loan from the authority and then
I read somewhere else.
And if you'll bear with me a
moment.
no actually it's just making
loans again provide financing
assistance I guess what troubles
me Mr Prez's that that that more
that expansion of terms there to
that is well but providing
financial assistance is just I
think you may be overly broad
maybe it maybe I would encourage
you to to define the term in
Issue project revenue bonds
enter to Los loan participation
agreements provide loan
guarantees I think we all
understand what this is make
inserted instead they're very
general term that I just I
really don't understand it it
almost sounds like you could do
really open ended things with
Thank you Senator Baca we do
have further debate for a second
time we have center this if you
know.
The act the state why could
Economic Development Act all
this bill does is it adds in the
consideration equitable value in
return.
These federal funds will be
effectively used to cover losses
of a bank.
In the event of a loan default
that's something that I feel
real comfortable adding to what
will remain if we defeat this
bill.
The sound program for economic
development in the state we
still get all the good stuff we
hear real good explanation for
why we would want to protect
banks.
From defaults by loans they
made.
Then.
I see nothing that the public is
gaining from this bill but I
would I would love to hear the
of twenty ten which was created
by the of to to stimulate you
know the economy after the.
You know the to two thousand
eight nine.
Other states if you read the
fiscal analysis.
It's it's stated that the state
would have benefit from the
ability to offer one or more
trying to be proactive is let's
create what other states also
did and be ready at this federal
funding does come then hopefully
you know we can implement you
Our second time with senator.
Yes thank you Mr president
sponsor you finish out of the
field yes Mr president so to
answer some of the questions
happens of federal funds flow to
us and we have a small business
X. Y. Z. that comes in and says
I can make the twenty percent
well NMFA steps in and says
okay will agree and NMFA comes
in and says okay will deposit
this amount of money in the fund
to guarantee those loans in case
guaranteeing against the
borrower that the loan will be
paid and that's the way it
works.
Any further debate senators.
president I'm I'm just wondering
in the vein that you're talking
about.
Because it is.
The.
Representative is that correct
I'm sorry lack of funds is left
over after they foreclosed on
the business.
answer is yes to Senator to the
good center from Albuquerque.
And is our Mr president are.
R. O. makes treated as equal
Mr president at.
It's hard for me to see how this
is this is supporting and
protecting the businesses of the
Pino that that this is helping
the banks and and this present
not even just our local
community banks or credit unions
by national banks like Wells
Thank you senator here any
further debate senators.
Si no further debate Senator
Do now pass and ask for a roll
call vote senators to the
chamber please.
We're voting.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes senators to run
this.
Senator Cervantes no Senator
Diamond.
Senator Gallegos passes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Senator Hickey passes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator how to me on.
Senator Kernan now Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez my apologies yes
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator pope no Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Sedillo Lopez no Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stewart now Senator till
then.
Senator Stewart voted yes all
sorry.
Senator Woods no Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos now Senator
Hemphill.
Senator by the year yes.
Senator Lopez Mister president
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Ivy Soto except for
By a vote of six in the
Thank you Mr president thank you
members of the Senate thank you
we'll go on to the next item
that's item number fifteen on
the calendar that Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill three seventy
rural beach offended record show
that all action for placing
sentiment Senate Judiciary
Committee chef to present bill
three seventy five as a minute
Senate bill three seventy five
years is attempting to do and
it's a bill let's uh.
Interested in by the state state
We're someplace things that
happened in
Some of our state H. and the for
some of our our police officers
First members of the Senate what
this bill is trying to do is to
give.
And amend provisions of the New
New Mexico under no law
enforcement training at to
This bill also removes the
oversight of.
Of officer certification
misconduct early from the law
enforcement academy board and
This bill amends the alley A. B.
to include the director of the
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy and all directors of
satellite law enforcement
academies there seven governor
appointees.
Mr president the.
And to build it the the
implementation we have postponed
for a little while so we can
make sure we're following this
right and correctly and do it
right.
Our pollution fortunate person
and even are people that are are
dealing in any way with the
public.
It's new and better training on
how to handle situations that
hopefully do it always do it
right.
And I think this kind of
training that Hey if we do have
some things I think this will
help the state's responsibility
if what we've tried to do.
bill three seventy five as
amended.
Then on page Santa Fe.
Senator yes this is the
maintenance on Bill Semenya's.
from two hundred fifty thousand
to four hundred thousand if
that's in place training for for
officers and it pays for itself
through the the through the
frontier.
this and and a lot of things
happen but now we put all the
tools for the officers to get
the best training they can be
updated to have an independent
body look at officers and if
anything happens for them to
the board and and it's gonna
change of behavior within police
agencies because we're giving
them the training to change
their behavior we're not just
with them when you give officers
a training that they need and
times have changed and and then
we can see change.
Munoz further debate Senate
office.
Thank you very much Mr president
and
I rise in support of this bill
Ingle did mentioned there have
been you know with the George
Floyd killing murder that
happened last summer some issues
were brought to the forefront
say a a good way for us to move
forward you know the law
enforcement academy board has
been in front of Senate rules
for many years over and over and
force I mean all of these issues
has to have been part of our
conversation in Senate rules
when we the law enforcement
academy board members came in
front of the committee.
legislature needs to look at as
we talk about how we reform the
system itself
again this is a great
opportunity and I I am grateful
the the other a portion of where
the law enforcement officers are
Thank you brought in for an
infection of some sort that has
happened.
other portions of it Mr
presidents not just qualified
immunity.
There are other things about
looking at accountability as to
how the public our taxpayer
a killing and excessive use of
force by one of our law
enforcement agencies an officer
how do we make sure that that is
taking care of it how does the
other bills going through the
legislature this year that I
think also are some of the other
pieces that can make the system
as I called whole as we talk
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator our centers
I am trying to figure what
exactly we're doing in this I I
to the state academies of apply
to both the Albuquerque academy
in state government.
Senator I think it is going to
apply to basically all our
training for our law enforcement
people.
what was the purpose for putting
attorneys on there so just to
have the discussions go longer.
Thank you Mr president thank you
senator so some of the.
training what are what are some
of the major changes being made
to the training program.
crisis management intervention
dealing with individuals for
experimental experiencing mental
health issues.
Methods of de escalation peer to
officers firefighters and anyone
in telecommunications with the
police department.
Mr president etcetera so this
the training time at the
academy.
The.
That decision hasn't been made
yet that'll be made as we go
along here and that's why the
state enactment actually is a
year out so we can figure out
or not they need to bring in
officers who are in the field
and do retraining because a lot
of officers if they've been in
the field don't have this added
Thank you Mr president and
senator and and I really
appreciate
answering these questions I you
know law enforcement is.
years in the Air Force and then
get out and become a police
officer and my injury kept me
from being able to do that.
So I have a lot of concerns as
we make changes I do know that
be and how they're going to be
done and I know we don't want to
specify everything in law.
and I used to be one of those
lawmakers up here that I want to
specify anything in law that's
anything like the bills that we
pass.
And so that's that's one of the
reasons I.
Look at all these so closely it
sounded like in your
start doing that really really
soon Mr reader so we we know
what's in the bills.
But Ezzell like there's gonna be
some oversight.
Senator the the oversight as as
I read this bill and and
studied it basically.
chairman of the board the
national peace officer or
sheriff.
The tribal law peace officer.
An attorney in private practice
who practices as a plaintiff's
attorney.
entities and civil rights claims
an attorney who is deployed by
the public defender's
Department.
board will also look at then the
what's going to be trained are
these two separate boards I
guess I'm getting a little bit
confused.
And I suspect this will be the
on the academy board training
and how to judge some of these
things and who's going to.
How the hell this will will be
implemented but I suspect that
senator I I.
Thank you madam sparkles
continue listening if anyone
else's is going to speak on this
board.
Anyway all continue listen thank
you Mr president thank you
center thank you senator.
you Mr president for members of
the Senate I
I really appreciated obey here I
think this is an area where
we're going to start on this
something that's going to serve
seventy five amended do now pass
and ask for a roll call vote of
the New Mexico state Senate
centers where voting.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes senators
goes Senator Gallegos yes
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator how to meal.
Yes and I have been unable to
open up my video.
Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator manos.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator for the a yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
senator senator Sanchez yes
Senators committees Senators
maybe CS Senator Sedillo Lopez
Stefanics yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Woods yes Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes.
was frozen he's on Senator
handheld computer he would like
to vote Mister chair Mister
president Senator economy on.
Yes Senator Hermio yes.
Senate bill three seventy five
as amended has passed the Senate
Senator Brandt explains of thank
you Mr president this is
actually the first time I've
ever stood up to explain my vote
because I don't think most
but I I know Senator Ingle that
we need to make changes
ceremonial so we need to make
changes I hope that these
changes are the right ones we
need to continue to pay
attention
it's a lot of work that needs to
be done but we do need to make
changes in this area so I would
have voted for it to hopefully
that it will work hoping that
members of body and that my
expert witness center Ingle.
Moving on what item number
sixteen on account of that
Senate bill one of three as
twice amended.
has been taken now subject to.
Debate amendment for
substitution I see no objections
Senator Stewart to explain the.
native bees honey bees and other
populate earth's pollinators
have declined across the country
across the world and that has
accelerated in recent decades.
our food supply it's estimated
that one out of three bites of
food you need to think the
pollinator for.
navigation alter brain function
metabolism rate and reduce long
term survival rates.
The use of pesticides mainly
And twenty eighteen the European
Union banned neonicotinoids as
did you pay later February
This bill.
We'll try to restrict our use of
neonicotinoids by banning the
Institute labeling requirements
and educational material so
consumers know what they are
fine.
So Mister president.
this bill does not restrict in
any way the seven hundred
eighteen thousand acres New
Mexico grows of alfalfa.
Peanuts onions potatoes grapes
lettuce the special and some
species of buried some plants.
Most of these crops and these
these commercial products.
In twenty thirteen EPA required
pollinator protection language
and signage on labels of
it's come to my attention that
the New Mexico department of
that crew worked with me for
eight months on this bill.
Have a reviewed the replacement
Senate bill one of three just
twice a month Senator we first
need to have the right to read
the amendment then we can move
forward with that the reader to
read.
Senator Senate floor amendment
Mr president so this is.
Probably the least up pakcik of
any of the pesticides it's
called to the scene in the
press.
be there for many many years a
report by Cornell regarded the
use of the taken arts routinely
but they separated out a C. to
wanted to put it in as an
acceptable use and that's what
this ammendment us thank you
senator debating Senate floor
amendment number one to.
survive this on the amendment
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president will
sponsor the amendment you Mr
detailed yes.
Mr president I don't I don't
know those names this this came
to me the New Mexico department
of bag
so I can't tell you the names of
any springs.
And Mister president centers my
understanding that that the
European Union lifted the ban on
neonicotinoids.
Legislation sunset it and and
the main reason was is that
there was not one study or one
conclusion that showed that by
so I'm just curious why we're
gonna carve one out when all the
studies that I've seen from
actual laws being passed did
that neonicotinoids had zero
ones what what this is active
ingredient is actually in Mister
president senator.
is present that is not what my
studies state the states from
Canada Canada has also banned
see the Medford from the other
ones as a reduced risk.
So it's frequently uses some of
the vegetables that are not
Health Canada and European food
safety authority have a
determined that there are plenty
of alternative products and that
get to the bill there's there's
plenty of misleading information
there that that I want to touch
base on I am curious who holds
the patent for a C. to Madrid.
want to carve one out and not
the other a lot of times it's
your large corporations that
push for a lot of this stuff so
I think that's important
information that if we're gonna
make these decisions really need
are they trying to carve out
pesticides are in competition
with with their patented
chemicals are we getting into a
need to know these things and
and they come with with an
amendment like this without this
information you know it really
doesn't do the delivered a body
a service so thank you Mr
Si no further debate on the
amendment sinister to close on
the amendment thank you Mr
president I I think this is a
good options that came about
after lots of conversations with
and ask for a roll call Senator
is two seats please.
Where vote in the Senate floor
member number one the clerk to
call the roll.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria senators to
run this.
Senator syringes yes Senator
Diamond.
Gallegos Senator Gallegos yes
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen yes Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Stewart Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle passes Senator
Ivey Soto.
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Morris.
Senator o'neil yes Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator to to be no yes senator
for the.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator Sanchez yes Senators
Wheaties.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold
of Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Stefanics
yes Senator Steinborn.
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes.
Senator Lopez.
Mr president I animus six
The for the.
Level thirty four in the
affirmative three in the
negative senator member number
these thank you Mr president so
just two things on this I look
at the EPA fact sheet for this
compound and says it is only
this up to the point of that I
think these decisions is highly
scientific decisions.
I generally favor not pulling
this the we imagine is only
moderately toxic to bees no I
don't really know what that
means for the for the bill and
then secondly we have a farmer
resistance to those much like
antibiotic resistance that we
see if you use the same one over
and over and over again you can
get resistance to it and so I I
have a a continued fear of what
the same one over and over and
over and over again.
Instead of rotating them so I
have a concern about that I I
not just camis non organic
chemist not a not a farmer I
he says meetings we are back on
the bill.
We have Senator Woods followed
by Senator Pirtle Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr president if the.
Online well thank you I've got a
mock up here.
Senator I'm sorry it it says B.
commercial application
applicator is also a private
applicators.
Now.
What kind of confusion about
that.
Is that we're in the definition
uses of supervises the use of
the pesticide that is classified
for restricted use for the
purpose of producing and
agriculture commodity in
If applied without compensation
other than trading a personal
services between producers of.
The culture commodities.
commercial applicator and
private applicator.
So Mister president senator all
of these types of changes that
months they wanted to upgrade
and put more detail into the
pesticide control act so these
came from them.
trained by them you have to be
licensed by them they have fees
they paid paid to the Department
the pesticide control act that
department of ag asked for.
Mr president Senator understand
what you're saying you care
We need to correct the law in
the bill.
Thank you for one of these
attorneys around here would look
at that.
Gator with respect to some uses.
Well really don't know what uses
we're talking about here.
than provided by section so and
so so.
I have a little hick up with
that.
But I know that that's not what
You're talking about that class
of pesticide.
And it the the receptors of.
and and essentially you gave me
a list.
Of the plants.
That the.
You talk about pumpkins melons.
Apple's.
Squash.
In some problems.
In this video we are and Dixon
and back up in that country.
Senator Stewart the old.
Mr president I I didn't really
hear the question he's asking
this chemical on the apple tree.
What what in the world would
they do that.
It's it's legal.
Madam protiv.
Senator this present I just
don't really understand what you
have them grow better I don't
quite understand what your
question is.
Mr president and and madam pro
protium if you ever had a apple
Yeah I guess that's a question
no one asked Mr.
Had a Natalie I'm and I want to
ask.
Senators I know it's late in the
What I'm asking Mr president.
If the chemical is chemically is
restaurant by the EPA to spray
Mr Thomas present I assume they
weren't listening they would put
it on.
Then Mr president why.
Are you banning that product
from them.
water they're now on our water
our Fischer eating insects that
live on top of the water our
fish are being point and from
then they could tonight's we
neonicotinoids are in our water
they're in our fish Minnesota.
In their this last year a study
bill is trying to mitigate the
effects of this poison on our
environment and our food supply.
see the list covering some of
her nineteen thousand acres of
the major crops in New Mexico
they already use seeds that are
treated with neonicotinoids they
their labels talking about
pollinators EPA requires the
department of act to regulate
them.
The department of ag regulates
The states here that there are.
Fifty five hundred acres in New
Mexico that would be.
Senator was that a this is a
statement.
fifty five hundred acres
affected by this.
If I had an apple orchard.
That's pretty hard to sell.
Is that apple is not is near
perfect.
When you go into a grocery
store.
The two pairs.
Through thanks.
That farmers trying to sell
something.
The state there's a lot of fruit
that comes from out of state
into our state.
So I guess the good question
in it Mr president.
Senator I'm is present no of
course we're not gonna do that
the main thing this bill does is
nurseries are labeling a
pollinator plants if they are
going to try to help the
pollinators grow if they're
labeled slide rules from the
EPA.
Talking about neonicotinoids and
what they do to pollinators so
is a much less toxic only got to
have a life of one to eight days
in the environment compared to
several years from the others so
we certainly want to eat healthy
Senator Woods so Mister
president our our so you're
saying that apple's are
poisonous if if the blooms are
on it but I think most of our
apple farmers traded don't use
the neonicotinoids we have a lot
of farmers and organic that
termite management indoor fly
parasite control specifically
exempts that so it's still be
using neonicotinoids there.
disruption with the pest
management industry so I think
this is a common sense thing
that we're trying to do to try
to educate the public about the
education and more training
that's the.
Last part of the bill so I think
this is a good common sense bill
is not sky is falling it's that
are toxic out of our
environments offer loans out of
our food that's the purpose of
this.
Should all food be grown
organic.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Woods
I I do not have the right on
Okay thank you Mr president.
I'd I'd love to have that
discussion with anybody in the
house that that wants to discuss
If there's any takers.
Thank you Mr president the
Sanchez deal for a few questions
Mr Dale yes.
Thank you Mr president how many
farms are located within your
your district.
farms are are located in my
district but you know there has
to be over a hundred.
And you know I think this goes
back to the bill that we
discussed earlier and I wish we
who have no idea.
Mr president.
What it takes to put that gallon
of milk on the shelf.
A loss.
And here we go.
Wanting to make it even harder
to produce that gallon of milk
But yet here we go wanting to
make it even more difficult.
What does it take to get that
steak.
On your plate.
single day for every single
person in this room.
So I hope every single one of
you takes a look a long minute.
You think I'm gonna put
something on my corn.
It's going to kill my kids.
I'm gonna put some of my corn is
going to kill my cows.
We're innovative we have to
because guess what.
We buy everything retail and we
sell everything wholesale.
That's the reality of being a
Find out of the market's going
to crash.
That's what we're dealing with
here.
I'm sure there's ten bills
dealing with children and
starvation this session.
There's bills dealing with how
do we get more fruits and
vegetables into our school
And it got got me to thinking
because you know having children
and and going through having
tonsillitis and things I learned
a lot about antibiotics.
It just allows your body to beat
it where Marxist so in those in
non discriminatory kills
everything.
Even the good bacteria.
The past only because guess what
farmers figured out over years
and years and years there's a
pretty badass bugs out there.
I guess we'll get answers Mr
president's the lady bugs all
bugs.
The lady bug is the biggest war
That would kill this war here.
That's out there saving my crop
doing the good work I'm not
going to Mr president members of
Neonicotinoids allow me to do
that.
They give me the ability to be
smart and protect the good bugs
So this this myth Mr president
that that these neonicotinoids
are destroying the bees.
Is that it's a myth.
When we ban these Mister
president.
And and and senator what
pesticides is is is my farm
gonna be left to use can you
answer that.
talking about alfalfa this bill
has nothing to do with that if
you're talking about porn this
bill has nothing to do with that
or chili this bill has nothing
that this will do so I I hear
what you're saying and I'm
certainly not a farmer but I I
had an acre farm when I was in
my twenties it was an organic
probably not this year.
So this is not designed to harm
farmers in anyway and it will
that you plant and it has to be
labeled by the EPA and you have
to use it well so you don't have
to spray it's already in your
pesticide in state water land.
Animals.
Center for Mister president
Senator thanks for dodging the
question
you know when we apply it to the
in a need to spray the aphids
right need to spray the mites
it's not there so again we're
gonna be left with two options
or dental floss States.
kill the ladybugs killer
warriors.
That are out there fighting for
the farmers.
So the question was what's going
to be left out you know when it
when I read through the bill I
In this legislation that it says
there will absolutely be no ban
on the use of these
insecticides these necessary
insecticides in commercial
On page fourteen in the bill
amendment was put on.
To specifically say.
subsection nearly naked toward
class pesticide shall not be
designated as at risk as
restricted use pesticides
So this is what what's all this
spring releasing depositing
application by a licensed
all south of we corn sorghum
cotton pecans dried beans chilli
peanuts onions potatoes grapes
lettuce to session lows some
intended for rhetoric
eradication control mitigation
of lice or bed bugs and then it
continues to go on but that
are designated as not pollinated
by pollinators.
And Mister president senator how
how do I.
All an eight mile fell for seed
without pollinators.
department of ag designation
saying that these are not the
flowering plants that are the
most impacted by neonicotinoids
apples squash peaches a perhaps
payers those are the plants that
permanent access should be
mitigated from neonicotinoid use
Thirty days from now the
department of ag isn't going to
change their mind.
And I'm not going to be able to
use it on alfalfa because an off
office of the most beautiful
flowers.
as not part of this a
neonicotinoid restrictions.
Mr president in center where I'm
not seeing specifically.
For the purposes of this
subsection mandatory class
pesticide shall not be
designated as restricted use
pesticides unless they are
major props to have
neonicotinoid in the seats they
must be labeled.
They must be reached they must
be put on fire by a licensed
And it doesn't say what you are
saying so I I guess I'll digress
and and and move on.
You know it's been talked we've
let me tell you how that works
Mister president senator.
You sign up with about.
A hundred acres two hundred
acres of organic farm.
They come out.
And when it's time to take it to
market Mister president senator.
Just go to whatever field you
want to.
Ship them out.
But you know my family farm for
for many years on the
Wildlife refuge just outside of
Roswell.
organically Mister president
senator.
And when we did organic you go a
whole year that alfalfa wouldn't
get more than two inches tall
two inches tall.
Basically suck all the nectar
out of into the plant couldn't
survive could make in a year.
And Mister president senator
when we go down the slippery
slope and we have legislation
People will start.
People will go hungry.
The average American farmer
Mister president senator fees a
hundred and forty six people I
Everybody wants to do.
Some days I wake up wonder why
the hell do I even do this.
sense of joy Mister president
senator that I get out of doing
it.
It's something it's something to
be proud of.
Nutrients.
Food to people in affordable
price.
I did that.
I did something that matters.
But yet here we are.
Trying to attack.
The very people.
people who can't afford to live
paycheck to paycheck.
The during COVID had to make the
decision do I feed my family.
Do I pay my mortgage do I pay
for my car.
they hire consultants that went
to school have college degrees.
That no.
For the culture they know bugs I
piece of legislation that
doesn't protect farmers the way
that is portrayed.
Off of faulty science.
And we're actually gonna force
Growing up as a kid.
Going out and helping my dad
spray the fields.
We had a lot of jobs ahead
school in crossbones on him.
Really dangerous stuff.
And yet we've come a long way we
have things that we can use that
aren't as dangerous.
To control bugs.
And replace those safe chemicals
off of faulty science off of per
trade lies.
Really Mr president I wonder.
How we continue to come in here
day in and day out.
All of these things.
It's one thing to say it Mr
president it's one thing to get
Picture liver.
Do those types of things do you
trust the doctor that's what he
does Dr went to school for that.
But for some reason with this
type of legislation and I'm
sorry if if I'm I'm being a
little long.
But this is my livelihood Mr
president members of this body.
To feed your family.
Pirtle.
Former.
Is this going to be the bill.
That says you know what.
Then to pass my farm to my two
sons and my daughter.
Six generation in New Mexico
president members of this body
absolutely not.
You can look throughout history
and see the imperfections have
we learned from it.
Absolutely.
In this type of legislation.
Cuts farmers off at the knees.
But with our actions we cannot
wait.
Mr president members of the
body.
To destroy your livelihood.
Listen to the people who
actually went to school for
this.
Look to the European Union look
at France easing their
neonicotinoid restrictions
But absolute crop failure.
Is that what we're prepared for
Mr president members of this
body.
To take something that's
effective.
don't save the bees.
The bees that were per train
that we're trying to save.
Never been happier that I voted
against it memorial than right
now.
things that are causing this but
the first thing we want always
blame is pesticides farming
they're the problem.
Well you know what.
And I just ask you Mr president
members of this body how did
that make you feel.
Did you feel secure.
I didn't take anything for
granted because guess what I
have plenty of food stocked up
all the time.
But the look in people's faces
And it's these policies Mister
president senator this Sunday
you go in the grocery store.
There will be any apples.
There will be any meat.
You can listen to the farmers
you didn't listen to the experts
that live this every single day
of their life.
Every single member in this body
will look back and say.
We messed up.
It's our fault the grocery
You know Mr president.
I have a a decently good sized
farm.
I ask you do you think I would
actually spray something in my
field.
Next to my house I was going to
poison my own water.
To put that out there.
To make those accusations.
And yes I do take it to heart.
informational services for the
body with Senator DC panel
followed by Senator Diamond then
Senator Griggs center does if
you know.
F. I. R. on this bill.
It's pretty clear that the
department of agriculture.
Thanks this is a good way to to
control.
notes that this bill supports
the department's continued
efforts related to pollinator
protection outreach.
And because of the inclusion of
neonicotinoid pesticides on
commercial agricultural crops.
So I don't think if we pass this
bill will be in danger of
starving because the department
Senators who's sponsoring the
said the primary emphasis of
this bill.
Zoom.
longer be registered for
residential use.
These are things like.
Protection of structures from
termites control of garden a
So I mean I think.
There's a great deal about rates
is been expressed but it I think
it's misdirected thank you Mr
president thank you senator
there ever been an incident of
harm by these pesticides.
Present there is incentives from
all over the neonicotinoid
hive numerous studies
demonstrate that neonicotinoids
pose a threat to be population
in particular scientists
recognize that other factors
these insecticides have negative
impacts and that restricting
their use would benefit
pollinators levels of
neonicotinoid insecticides
the amendment has nothing to do
with agriculture nothing at all
no agriculture crop in this
state will be restricted more
Thank you madam senator and and
Mr president earlier referenced
examples of harm that's been
done but the examples that you
referenced were actually in
eastern states and in fact
twenty nineteen and twenty
twenty we lost forty seven
percent of our behalf is forty
seven percent.
In Europe there was only about
Thank you madam president I feel
like maybe this is a a solution
in search of a problem because I
can assure you that New Mexico
farmers have a lot of problems
state of New Mexico which these
pesticides of included our New
Mexico waters I'm actually
Mister president senator yes
I'll have to pull it up it was a
European Court of justice on
Thursday found that France did
not violate the rules when it
banned chemicals considered
pesticide bans because the sugar
beet has caused such a drastic
curve in production so actually
bans are being lifted and
Europe.
harmful to farmers it doesn't
really affect farmers now that
we've added one of the the one
of the stand naked provides back
there is no harm to farmers
they have a lot on the table
here I mean even as consumers I
think we should be more
concerned about this I want to
point out that these Nico need
Nico nicotine nights are
to create outlaws of our farmers
because they're going to need to
use them to produce the same
yield our number two we just
stop growing we just stop
growing because the cost of
not New Mexico Texas.
And Colorado.
And our neighbors and you know
budget in my district the
southern New Mexico border
farming shipped from all over to
our and in fact if I supported a
bill like this I feel like I
might even have to recuse myself
of the vote because there's a
this will completely put them
out of business and so one
couldn't Senator Pirtle disease
passionate cries these cries are
being held heard from all over
New Mexico this is real.
opposition to this because their
livelihoods are at stake.
This is an assault on
agriculture and tax Colorado New
Mexico and Texas will do just
I'm asking you guys to oppose
this bill there's not enough
information.
We have farmers and ranchers
that you are misinformed so the
impact that agricultural hasn't
New Mexico and that this bill
has on our agricultural
producers in New Mexico thank
you Mr president.
I believe is that we've that
we've got dueling studies we
have studies that the.
Sanchez relying on that show
significant risks to bees and we
get we get off and around and
going on will you know different
things but part of the part of
the bill is targeting
The issue some with pollinators
right now is orange lack of
access to food sources at the
share.
And and wanting to protect.
These are the.
And.
growing these products that you
and I eat and I I believe they
were listed in committee as
others of they they were that's
not the the whole list.
Senator Mr president also also
peaches apricots and pears but
Representative senator that you
know I've gotten calls and
letters from people from damning
they're farming will be
impacted.
And when we were in committee
and I think one of the things
that we discussed because it
would just.
either it was either you or
someone who's supporting you in
on I don't believe it was you
Senator
but the the statement was that
they would just be collateral
damage.
Mr president senator do you know
how many acres are in
Albuquerque.
Senator no I don't but certainly
the rest of the crops combined
I'm fairly certain.
Agency presentation there's
apparently.
One hundred twenty thousand nine
Product in Albuquerque be it the
growing melons in their gardens
or they're treating their
treaties or they're doing
something.
There's every bit as much
farmland that these people rely
on for their very existence.
And
Mister president senator I just
We're not even sure first of
all.
That this staff purge bees.
I do believe Mr president
Senator that have staff somehow
we find that it does kill bees I
think there's far more chance.
that we're trying to be sure
that we eliminate use of this
pesticide from so Mister
president in the and senator I I
appreciate you standing here and
president I'd ask the body to to
vote no on this bill.
Moving on we have Senator
mantas.
Thank you Mr president members
of Senate let me first of all
environment and I think the
motivations of the sponsor are
very genuine and good.
I rise to express my
disappointment to really.
have a position from the
department of higher education.
And there was a suggestion
earlier by one of my colleagues
here that the New Mexico
department of agriculture
supports this bill and and my
issue and no position at all.
In one statement they say this
is and I said the sponsor
nodding your head and this is
disappointing because because
other senators I respect that
expertise I respect the
expertise of so many of you in
this chamber that you bring to
this wonderful body into our
process.
What is disappointing that we
have a New Mexico department of
consistent with our goal of
protecting bees in our state but
at the same time the department
says we're okay with the bill
also because it allows for
agriculture but guess what's not
defined in the bill.
Both even around Judiciary
Committee long enough know that
when you exempt commercial
our farm tractors right through
it.
Because this bill exempts
commercial agriculture.
And we're certainly going to
claim the work commercial
competitors our competitors are
California Arizona Texas they do
not ban this pesticide.
And if you look at the bill to
pay for loopholes you'll note
And so this bill really achieves
very little if anything.
If the ban is on EPA banned
pesticides there are no EPA
I'm named for my grandfather ho
said up with act my grandfather
began without a high school
education selling watermelons
from the back of a truck you all
And my parents were very
insistent belonged to my
grandparents of giving us all of
the important tools and skills
of being a former my brother and
harvesting tomatoes and
watermelons and all the other
vegetables that we used to grow
one are important.
But I'll tell you in Dona ana
laws all great laws all well
intentioned but what they've
done is they have eliminated
vegetable crops in New Mexico.
The graph of what we grow pecans
I can go down the long list of
the crops we grow and there's
one thing they all have in
common.
Don't require labor.
because that's a popular topic
during this session and it gives
a whole different meaning to
being buzzed.
the crop remember one important
thing about marijuana.
Very heavily labor intensive.
And if you want to know what
Any success on I'll tell you
it's all now gone to Mexico.
Including our chili I've been
honest with you all about that
have a very large Julie
And if you ever want to really
understand farming in New Mexico
come to the Senate that just a.
Or Columbus port of entry.
from Mexico into the United
States.
Hundreds every day.
That's the reality of farming
today.
What we're really accomplishing
with this bill or all that we're
trying to do here when it comes
down to what we say is
diversifying new Mexico's
economy.
government are state agencies
and our experts to really direct
us with the right policy at the
right information.
And when our New Mexico
We do have a floor amendment the
reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate bill one hundred
number one to Senate Bill.
One of three is three times
amended.
Thank you senator provide
explained the amendment.
Thank you Mr president and this
serve on this was speaking to
and strikes may online for
inserts shall.
And this will actually alleviate
some of the concerns that I have
that will ensure that that
these past of pesticides
available for application and if
you read down
in subsection one it says not
pollinated by insects so we will
Thomas present this is a
friendly amendment.
And I think that Senate floor
amendment number two and Senator
Move Senate floor amendment
number two to Senate bill one of
three is that I submitted.
Unanimous consent.
three now is four times amended.
We do have another floor
amendment.
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
imminent Mr president of Senate
floor amendment number three to
Senate bill one zero three
amended four times.
Roberts that
Are not pollinated and simply
removes the word visited which
is
a term that I think any good
crops not pollinated by
pollinators and really cleans up
the language to ensure that we
are doing what with the
intention of the legislation is
to do.
Thanks Senator we are debating
this section has already been
amended.
it was the department of ag that
put language in here.
So.
Senator debating Senate foreman
number number three.
Anyone wishing to debate.
bill's been amended and the part
that the senator is trying to
amend has already been amended
so this language no longer
exists in the bill.
Center for.
which amendments in conservation
committee was that.
Mr president I'm not sure what
what number was I don't have
PO now reads not pollinated by
insects means agricultural crops
not dependent on insect
pollination.
And Mr president I don't see the
problem and Terry and to amend
my amendment to include striking
Senate conservation committee
amendment number one.
Senator Pirtle that you want to
Senator go ahead and remove this
amendment.
Mr president withdraw money and.
calculated to achieve with the
Sanchez said it is about mostly
the use of pesticides or this
over the winter we lost all of
the bees.
That that here this the state of
New Mexico lost about forty two
And this this bill has the as a
sponsor has suggested is not
going to affect.
there are many of many bees and
it's and I I hope the other
thing I wanted to say is the EPA
while I agree it is not been his
Known as managed pollinator
protection plans and this bill
is a step in that direction of
moving our state along with
sixteen other states that have
either enacted legislation
industry of farming is really
going to be affected so I'm I
really honor the sponsor for
reading this bill and I'm proud
to vote for it.
Brandt Senator committee.
Thank you Mr president.
with the bill sponsor you'll
please.
Senator detailed yes.
first of all I am I'm glad that
we struck the Tax business
amendment because I want to
point out to the body there is
existing language.
you actually go to the the on
reasonable affects the
environment definition of
reasonable ads adverse effects
Now the definition is a little
bit better now.
It was circular and so we struck
that amendment it it's so the
definition of.
concerns about the bill but I
just wanted to point that out
for the body that we are making
changes.
to that part of the legislation.
portion of this bill has been
discussed it really and you know
you mention is not going to.
Affect agriculture but.
On this present pretty sure they
already have to have one maybe
this puts more of regulation on
it but they they have to be they
have to be registered they have
in center I'm here in page
eleven twelve and it's time out
it's on lawful.
To use these pesticides and but
this Rita to be licensed or
certified to use the restricted
use pesticide.
And so
because this is new language
Senator.
Mr president I'm there's other
sections of the bill that deal
with licensure also I'm looking
Mr president I don't know that
level but I've I think that's
probably true.
Okay you look at page twenty
section ten is about continuing
education
I think there's further
licensing issues on page.
special permits there were
things in the pesticide control
act that the department of that
wanted to work with us to
change.
license requirement the that is
my understanding is that your
understanding.
So Mister president The New
Mexico are.
Our administered also by the EPA
language addressing usage to
protect pollinators so EPA does
require pollinator protection
language and signage on labels
percent labeling those products
which is another the concern I
had then was is left out I don't
want to get back because I want
to stay in a license issue but
that that's where the alfalfa
I mean this the this is an
entirely new Lysons it is my
understanding that your your
time of federal regulation on
talking about the state of New
Mexico department of ag there I
Let's just use this one another
on a license to have a you know
just see them improve on their
crops I mean do they not it is
that is that true.
So Mister president I'm fairly
regulate the the application of
neonicotinoids and other
pesticides and insecticides they
regulate everything having to do
with agriculture.
license required to administer
those yeah you you can't and
that's the great thing about the
about these New Mexico least my
understanding not a farmer but
you know you can't just sprayed
you know the my understanding is
is there you know there are are
two types of pesticide
talked about the residential
stuff and that's I'm not age
that's not a big concern of of
money in the bill and so yes we
we have these two types of
To use the restricted pesticide
and the person including license
holders are certificate holders
Asian does not have a permit
this is it's my clear
and and yes I agree with you
it's regulated but there's a
difference between just
regulating something requiring a
license for it and I just wanted
Mr present like like many people
when I say it doesn't affect
them they don't believe me.
to do with growing Chile.
Thank you Mr president and and
response and I understand
there's a disagreement between
you and between these these
other folks but I'm a GM trying
issues to be worked out.
but that is still an ongoing
concern of mine now I will say
that and I I was gonna bring
this up I don't think we to talk
department may allow these
things one through seven.
Which are kind of exceptions the
that you carefully put in there
and I'm glad that now it'll say
it'll say they shall so I think
that's a very good amendment and
I I think it was the intent as
bills crafted but I I feel
better about that part.
creating a new license here yes
I understand currently regulated
but I think it's gonna be a new
licensure process that the
department back is gonna have to
one of my weird things everybody
has kind of weird stuff about
them I guess one of my you know
weird things with my kids I feel
like I'm always a little more
kinds of things I don't know why
I'm like this is the way in.
And
So I I I do have a concern you
know I don't want my kids you
not harmful to people in general
I mean yes you could drink you
know two gallons of these things
and I'm sure get quite sick but
vertebrates like humans dogs
cats
you know those those sorts of
are gonna be used and I haven't
seen any data to suggest and I I
might actually vote in favor of
this bill if I was convinced
But I'm not convinced I haven't
seen any evidence of the a lot
of research and.
and by the way the data the
forty some percent data that
that is in that is not been
lost forty seven percent of the
entire B. population New Mexico
that's not true the this not
from commercial these not from
wild bees is from Mexico the
hobby level these
the United States is all the
land we're clearing for for bio
fuel for corn for ethanol
actually very scary map that's
on the computer right now about
shows that the bees of
investment in those areas
specially for the Midwest
because of what we've done.
with with all the essential
stuff.
huge white spot right here.
Thankfully New Mexico's kind of
blue kind of the western part of
of land is being cleared the
bees been going away so big big
big problem.
But the science to me is very
clear on that at least but but
for me it's not for me is not
know putting in this other one
the
oscillometric.
But I really really have a
concern about the older
pesticides that may be used more
now and are actually more toxic
amendment.
Three three.
Senate floor amendment number
amendment I move Senate floor
amendment number three to Senate
bill one oh three is amended
four times.
Thank you set the Senators I
just want to make sure do each
of you have the amendment on
pretty much the exact same
amendment that you had earlier
it just simply strikes the
conservation committee amendment
number one where it says
dependent on pollination not
what we think it means and that
means agricultural crop crops
not pollinated by pollinators
thank you Mr president we're
debating Senate floor amendment
This is this is friendly also.
Debating.
Si no further debate center part
Unanimous consent that is
request for unanimous consent to
the Senate floor amendment
number three.
I
amended we're back on the bill
Senator Candelaria.
Chairman after the after the the
I see no objections so ordered.
Mr president.
Senator Pirtle.
we hurry we can probably get him
on the midnight train to Roswell
not to Georgia the probably
Russell thank you thank you
Mr president
Just a few questions and I'll be
quick I
Just want to share a you know I
respect folks in agriculture and
Are neonicotinoids.
indiscriminate so I guess the
question is.
From my research.
Is it true that neonicotinoids
can remain in the plants remain
in the soil and remain in the
water and still kill these bugs.
lasts for one to eight days but
many the other in the in the
kitchen arts can last for many
years and Minnesota where they
just did the study of deers they
along the top of the rivers so
they're they're everywhere.
Thank you Mr president
So.
In case we keep killing the
bees.
Senator Stewart.
So Mister president that's.
fifteen hundred species of
native bees that are not honey
bees in this in this state
we have six of our bumble bees
we have trouble with the health
of our plants
And then you can certainly all
the studies I've seen I've been
studying this for a long time
know I've seen all the different
bees are in my yard there you
know my lavender plants and you
see this.
and so I just want to confirm
again.
did today than there's basically
no agriculture in New Mexico
that would be restricted from
using that for what they're
Si no further debate.
Senator Stewart to close excuse
was I was wondering if if our
friend from former friend from
Chavis county can answer quick
question for me Senator Pirtle
The necks are a indiscriminate
and and kill everything but Mr
president and the Senator Pirtle
indiscriminate may kill
everything then how could the
lady bugs actually live like you
were talking about could you
describe why that is.
rose.
And so the beauty of
neonicotinoids is that it only
kills the pesticides that seek
to destroy the plant.
will not kill the insects that
you want to keep alive.
So on the first cutting Mr
president members of the body.
There's an exorbitant amount of
a fit.
piece of equipment is completely
covered in lady bugs I have
pictures if you want to see the
most beautiful thing in the
world.
In fact some ladybugs might find
it interesting Arnold read
And if you pass this we're gonna
replace neonicotinoids with
pesticides that kill everything
I I want to I want to first echo
my the frustration earlier Mr
president from
my the good counselor from Dona
Ana and the the debate the act
believe this bill is about which
side of the fence the stand on
of their organization that's
expensive in the state we should
expect nothing less than them
stepping forward and taking a
we've heard from retired
educators a retired social
workers we've heard from retired
military we've heard from
attorneys.
Differences and why bills like
this don't work can only be
articulated by the farmers.
And I've had dozens of calls
and why they're not harmful.
Because they have the
professionalism and the
experience Mr president that we
as professionals in other fields
could never understand.
state this past summer I tried
to grow tomatoes and actually
had some success Mr president.
But if I had to sell those
tomatoes to feed my family I'd
And how to best grow our crops
to keep us all safe and keep
prices of food down.
These types of laws increase
Attorneys for anybody else while
in a matter like this.
Mr president I'm gonna go ahead
and believe the farmer thank
I want to thank the Senate for
the debate
I certainly feel personally
attacked by people saying I'm
one would believe me so I hope
you can look at what this bill
is trying to do it's trying to
restrict mitigate the harmful
effects that we're seeing
them so I I think the bill is
better now and with that I move
the Senate bill one of three.
Five times amended do now pass
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg gas Senator guy
it goes.
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Kernan noted Senator
Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes senator
Senator o'neill no Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Stewart here.
Senator Padilla passes Senator
Pinto.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes senator Sanchez no
Senators committees.
Senator Shendo passes Senator
sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Steinborn yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
And again.
Senator for the year.
Senator Padilla yes.
Be going towards.
Mr president.
the affirmative twenty in the
negative Senate bill one three.
Five times amended has failed to
pass the Senate.
Senator.
Thank you members of the Senate.
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the duly
enrolled in gross copy of Senate
bill two as amended with the
emergency clause has been read
The journal so the message from
the house has been received.
And Mister president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed house
House Bill to sixty eight as
amended by the house without
emergency clause.
How state government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to
And how state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill two oh nine in requests the
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business
committee reports on that order
of business committee reports
the reader to read Mr president
your Judiciary Committee to whom
for Senate bill twelve do pass
respectfully submitted Senator
Joseph Cervantes chairman and
just about this Mr president I
ask unanimous consent the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
Senate bill eighty do not pass
but that Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty do pass.
Senate bill eighty two as
amended do passed as amended.
And Senate bill three sixty I do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Senator Joseph
Cervantes chairman that is about
this move adoption may report
visit aspen some miscellaneous
that order businesses
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you Mr president behalf of
chairs to fan acts I ask
unanimous consent that we
Mr president with the leader
yield.
Thomas present I would just
present could you remind us what
conditions for landowner taking
or killing animals on private
land revising provisions for
taking or wasting up came
amending provisions regarding
the big game deprivation damaged
report thank you Mr president
thank you.
At another Mr president
unanimous consent.
What.
about our business committee
reports around that order
business committee reports the
reader to read Mr president your
conservation committee to whom
has been referred Senate tax
the finance committee
respectfully submitted Senator
Elizabeth Stefanics chair
Senator Wirth move adoption
committee report that is as a
and that order of Business
senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president so will be in tomorrow
at eleven o'clock so for
committee chairs now's the time
Santo Brandt Senate bill four
thirty and I need to ask
unanimous consent to change the
labeling of the bill from his
name to mine.
The reserve for the third year
say no objection.
Sorter thank you senator.
Senator at this present that's
actually what I was going to do
five o'clock in indicated we go
back into the committee after
the floor session so we'll see
about fifteen minutes after
we're done with the floor
tonight Mr.
Thank you senator Senator
Candelaria.
Thank you Mr president sure
right into everyone's time we've
all put in and certainly earned
to welcome a proud new New
Mexican garland Brooks Tillery
was born at twelve twenty six
today at a whopping ten pounds
Senator Munoz.
Thank you Mr president Senate
finance we're going tomorrow
nine thirty we need an aft and
FTE for official be counter for
you thank you senator Senator.
Thank you Mr president said the
Indian cultural affairs will be
meeting at ten million tomorrow
we have sent a bill for twenty
Thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent to make an announcement
see no objections thank you Mr
president you know I would of I
who's in Chattanooga Tennessee
it's already tomorrow show her
birthday's already come and gone
but Millie regret was born
Birthday thank you Mr president
members of the body thank you
senator grace congratulations
and Happy Birthday.
Any further announcements
Senators.
resisted eleven AM tomorrow
morning.
