Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president I wanted
to thank the staff for all their
hard work we really been
pressing him in the last twenty
four hours I believe at least I
of the as work so hard to this.
president for those of you who
missed my announcement the other
day if you need a little relief
please go look at my door in
room three twenty eight that my
intense go look at the animals.
Thanks Senator any further
announcements Senators.
Centerman us thank you Mr
numbers for the next week so
anybody that wants those and
ready to leave the capital and
retire those will be available
to Senate finance so we are on
after right after the fifteen
minutes after the end of the
Senate floor we are going to be
right here on the Senate floor
since everybody's here and
everything's up and operational
we will have to go to the
committee room fifteen minutes
after the floor session on the
Senate floor thank you seven yes
to see people in the gallery so
thanks for coming we we did the
starting a pandemic so we don't
see anyone but I like to call
out Representative Roger Montoya
from Rio Arriba county who's up
for our community and those who
are in need of thanks for
joining us Madam.
Thank you Mr president thank you
thank you Senator Hemphill.
And welcome to those in the
two thousand one but that just
to a
to say to everybody it has a
significance to me because in
twelve twelve twelve I was
remarkable that I have those
those few days ahead of of
Senator but the S. and remorse
Senator Brandt
nine years ago today so thank
you Mr president thank you
Senator Griggs we do have
further announcements will have
Senator Moores followed by
Senator Hickey Senator Moores
thank you Mr president first off
seniority Senator Pirtle are
painted.
Our Senator critics times change
out of it I just want to thank
center our meal just actually
brought up a good point I just
nurses the medical staff around
the state that doctors have done
so much for us last twenty
months I'm just glad to see them
here know why they're here but I
definitely want to thank them
In our two doctors on the floor
thank you thank you thank you
better than Senator Moores
incredible what the medical
profession has been through and
maintain through and are still
scare everybody if I did but
anyway thank you for being here
and thank you for everything
you've done and thank you
senator Morris and I just want
to say that on behalf of the
Thank you Mr president just a a
quick announcement that we will
not have to make an amendment on
house bill two to bail Senator
Ingle stalled out of the pound
so thank you Mr chairman thank
you Senator Woods any further
announcements.
Seeing no further announcements.
twelve o'clock noon tomorrow
morning hearing no objection to
senator Senate recess till
twelve PM tomorrow afternoon.
