Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator for the year.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
You have a quorum Mister
president thank you senators
would like to welcome each one
of you back with us that you
stand
for our own very Senator very on
by Senator how to meal and the
solution Mexico flag to be led
by Senator Hamblen.
Thank you very much Mr
president.
have as teaching moments.
To guide our families and
communities.
May we fill our lives with
excitement.
They go way beyond our comfort
zones.
When we rise to the occasion.
Experiences and discoveries.
For which we become amazed
grateful and we continue to grow
upon.
May we walked together.
And work together.
before.
It's our legacy and
responsibility.
afternoon to you and all the
members I ask unanimous consent
that we start off by that order
business messages from the
governor.
vested in me by an article four
section six of the New Mexico
constitution calling the fifty
fifth legislature of the state
of New Mexico into special
session at twelve o'clock PM
for the New Mexico state Senate
and the United States house of
representatives respectfully
yours Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor.
Senator Wirth.
president and I think we have a
proclamation also needs to get
rid ready and so unanimous
consent the proclamation the
governor calling a second
special session of the fifty
fifth legislature the red before
proclamation whereas.
The right to vote is the essence
of our country's democracy and
the fundamental principles of
equal representation for
faith effort to construct
districts in both houses of the
legislature as near nearly of
eagle products population as is
practicable.
Where as the federal twenty
twenty census data regarding New
Mexico's population is now
available whereas the state of
New Mexico received
Were as a R. P. A. funds must be
spent for specific purposes
pursuant to federal law such as
responding to the ongoing
And whereas it is necessary for
the New Mexico state legislature
to convene at the state capitol
building to read a portion its
membership as required by the US
as the pandemic progresses now
therefore I we shall Lujan
Grisham governor of the state in
New Mexico by virtue of the
authority vested in me by
article four section six of the
o'clock PM on Monday December
sixth twenty twenty one at the
state capitol building in Santa
Fe in accordance with article
four section six the special
session is called for the
United States house of
representatives and New Mexico
house of representatives and New
Mexico Senate to reapportioned
district for the New Mexico
Public Education Commission
Legislature second special
session twenty twenty one.
Done at the executive office the
six day of December twenty
twenty one witness my hand and
the Great Seal of the state of
New Mexico Michelle Lujan
consent that the members of the
Senate elected to serve in the
first session of the fifty fifth
Legislature constitute the
Senate for the second special
session.
Legislature be designated the
officers of the second special
session.
If there's no objection it is so
ordered.
Jackson to the motion.
Saying that it is so ordered.
Mr president Senator Wirth I ask
unanimous consent that we go to
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
see no objection or on that
order business and that's just
miscellaneous Senator Wirth.
realize why we're here and what
we have to do and I very much
appreciate that tomorrow I think
Senator Brandt we'd like to have
you do the indication we will
stepping in one announcement
tonight at five fifteen there is
a lighting of the State
Christmas tree at the southwest
corner of the capitol grounds
band again that's at five
fifteen southwest corner of the
capitol grounds.
What I'd like to do is you'll to
other members and then come back
floor so everyone has a sense of
where we're going so I would
give the other members for
announcements miscellaneous
thank you senator Senator Wirth
o'neill to Senator Lopez Senator
Lopez and we can ask for consent
Thank you cannot direction is so
ordered senators on that order
of business announcements and
miscellaneous anyone wishing to
make an announcement.
After a long dry spell Mr
president the Los Lunas high
school Tigers took the state
championship I did play on a
team for three years we were not
very good then but obviously
they're much better now thank
S. Senator Gallegos yeah we can
just correct the the address the
speaker was in your previous
life.
year Eunice high schools and I
straight championships tomorrow.
And also Lovington New Mexico
has a temperature of all schools
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president so just for the
members you heard in the script
that we adopted the rules that
we had in place in the last
under the emergency bot given
the changes that have happened
in terms of protocols we do need
to change those rules and so
today also Center Ivy Soto will
announce the rules committee is
going to meet following the
floor on the floor of the Senate
specificity
tomorrow morning and we will be
working on the rule change this
afternoon tomorrow morning that
should be heard in committee and
Senate just for the members of
the public we are going to do
the congressional we're gonna
start the congressional maps
here in the state Senate and
then of course the the state
understanding that the bill
addressing spending of the arpa
funding I will start in the
house as well so basically the
so with that.
again today we won't be back on
the floor I think we'll just do
the citizen redistricting
commission this afternoon with
that Mr president I ask
Senate several go to Senator
Ingle that order business are
going back to senator Wirth the
agency present we are gonna go
back to announcement as soon as
I'll go ahead and go with that
with the introduction of
legislation that will go back to
announcements the reader to
read.
Senate resolution one introduced
Senate resolution one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printer referred to the
rules committee Senate
resolution one Mr president.
Rural things.
Senator so the title reads a
resolution amending the Senate
rules regarding calls of the
Senator Wirth Mr president deal
to the sponsor of the rule
change center Ivey Soto.
Senator.
independent of the other one and
and certainly that is a
conversation we can have in the
rules committee wells being
considered.
Alright alright thank you Mr
president thank you Bob thank
you senator thank you Senator
Centers Soto then Senator
Candelaria Senator Ivey Soto
thank you Mr president thank you
colleagues welcome to the.
December redistricting special
I just want to rot walk through
a few things on how we're gonna
be proceeding both so that the
the members know as well as the
The Senate rules committee will
be meeting here on the floor to
receive a report from the
citizens redistricting committee
ease
members of the rules committee
will simply set at their regular
seat here on the floor
and that way if other members
who want to be here we don't
then for some members of the C.
R. C. to make
to give an informational report
and to be able to answer
questions from members of the
that went into the C. R. C.
process we will not be taking
public input to to that report
today the public input that the
comments were that the public
made on various aspects of these
maps.
Tomorrow morning at so that'll
be at one o'clock today here on
the floor tomorrow morning at
twenty one the rules sh back and
Judiciary room however that is
one of the rooms that is being
used for mapping purposes during
the session so we will be
meeting and three twenty two
and I have eight.
The folks know.
That.
Of the COVID part of it is an
essential aspect that we need to
folks are comfortable when we
bring that back to the floor
tomorrow after the rules
committee meeting takes place.
and those maps when they get
referred to the rules committee.
Is that we will schedule a
hearing for an explanation of
and and we will.
Likely not have a lot of on the
initial presentation of
public input.
and sing and and to the point
that at some point then a
Senate.
State Senate district map a
congressional district map we'll
and and we will prioritize the
COVID of Senators.
who are not on the rules
committee if you'd like to give
comment will prioritize your
comment but then open up to the
procedure them when the maps
come over the the Public
Education Commission map and the
state house district the map
up for public comment and a vote
in the rules committee is in the
same process if anybody has any
questions of agency president
anybody has any questions about
the procedure I'm happy to
R. over the next week week or so
that we're gonna be here is that
we have an opportunity for
people to give input we have an
opportunity for people to be
able to
Thanks etcetera etcetera.
I'm not happy.
I have to conform.
Support.
and to everyone hear the Mexico
state Senate I rise with a
rather important announcement
I think that.
the best in the worst in our
government.
I think that.
Any adult who's paying attention
of good will.
Has come to realize as I have.
That this partisan structure we
have in this country.
I don't think anyone can look at
the events of January six twenty
twenty one.
Mr president I stand on this
floor.
This on.
A father whose name I do not
know.
By all measures I should not be
among you but I am here because
of the simple promises of our
constitution of our loss.
laws force and meaning for
people.
Who don't have power and don't
have privilege.
But they demand those equal
rights in front of the law.
How many times on this floor our
ideas dead on arrival simply
because they're introduced by
Republican.
If if the Republicans are the
majority actually the reverse.
You're not progressive enough.
You haven't signed on the dotted
line where you gave up your
Our country isn't made strong
and relevant by political
parties.
But by the principles that
should make all of you my fellow
citizens.
The Democratic Party has been
asleep at the wheel field for
decades on issues that we where
matter most to communities of
color and the poor.
decisions we make should be
based on partisan.
Ambitions.
And it broke my heart to see
already.
That the Senate maps.
advantage for some members of
the Democratic Party.
You wouldn't strip
representation from people that
I represent many of whom are
president I'm John playing this
game and I announced today that
I've submitted to the secretary
of state of re registration
changing my registration I am
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president just
Senator Ivey Soto did you
announce tomorrow morning what
time the rules committee was
going in.
I didn't on nine thirty AM okay
that we stand in recess until
tomorrow morning at eleven
thirty.
See no objection to senator
Senator resistant eleven thirty
tomorrow morning.
