Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator McKenna your.
Senator Moores.
Senator manos.
Senator Neville.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
You have a quorum madam
president.
Thank you please stand for the
invocation to be given this
please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be let
this morning by Senator Neville.
The place in Hispanics to be let
this morning by Senator
Rodriguez.
Good afternoon everyone.
We
Through a strict.
Beloved father mother guide.
We ask your presence with us
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
Mexico it is this simple.
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
Seeing no objection were on that
order business announcements
miscellaneous Senator Wirth
thank you madam president thank
so a couple of announcements up
front of Wednesday February
second is the deadline for
introducing bills.
you're having any trouble
finding you're report Kerry
fresca is.
On the secretary of state's
office will be in the Senate
be discussed today Senator souls
and Senator Ivey Soto teacher of
the year awards and then one
event tonight the Comcast cable
Senator Lopez thank you madam
president senator Wirth majority
floor leader unanimous consent
to to allow cameras on the floor
only.
Soto until he returns to the
chamber.
Seeing no objection we will
excuse center Ivey Soto other
announcements Senator Ortiz he
political science major he's a
junior from Santa Fe.
He's a graduate of St Michael's
high school.
He actually did part of it is a
University Purdue University
Indianapolis I U. P. U. I. and
and of course because of COVID
he basically spent the first
is this year he hopes to be an
attorney.
His name is Adrian directive
Maya.
And he it it turns out to he he
Appropriations Adrian is a step
son if the members would join me
in welcoming him to the Senate
today.
intern for the week is a senior
at UNM she is Andrea on cool and
she has no relationship to no
relation to the doctor because
college students and it provides
them with scholarships and
mentorship and she has been
she's very she's majoring in
political science at U. N. M.
what's happening there so please
join me in welcoming her she
will be around for the whole
week.
grandbabies this year so we're
excited about that so I just
wanted to thank the New Mexico
college of agriculture
mechanical arts for providing
this these diapers are for them
so anyone wants given these
thank you madam president the
the face masks and whatever you
want to call a phase that's up
to you the face masks are
provided by New Mexico State
Mexico and what's good in
research what's good as
university for New Mexico state
is good for the entire state
please where you're ready
facemask with pride or give them
thank you New Mexico State
University very stylish face
masks we're them with pride or
give them to somebody else who
will thank you.
all national board certified
teachers and the contributions
to the learning and growth of
New Mexico students and as a
former teacher I want to thank
and congratulate all of those
teachers who have been penned
Thank you madam president I rise
to introduce my all student
intern who's here with us today
this Alexis peers who is a
never running for the Senate.
Please help me join me in
welcoming Alexis.
president just wanted to rise
and the knowledge The New Mexico
exchange carrier group is here
in Santa Fe this week doing a
lot of the work that they do
they are our local telephone
broadband to their communities
in a big way and they're always
here to give us their thoughts
and and how they feel about
things so when you see them
around the building thank them
for the work that they do
our staffers from Senate
finances is roaming around here
with your junior capital stuff
make sure that it's all correct
if you had some issues with it
is roaming around if you need
you he'll come to you if not
we've called your office already
this morning intention email so
let's wrap up the junior bill
for anybody that doesn't know
issue these one one hundred four
thank you madam president thank
you Senator Lopez.
I thank you madam president
unanimous consent to excuse
Senators o'neill and serve on
madam president of I like to
thanks to choose a special guest
from a universe in New Mexico
this panel go oil whose director
of our American is to services
at the university and also
She is also a UNM alumni.
Twice over working on her third
I believe.
Let's welcome her of these two
together thank you.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you members of the Senate I just
want to wish my wife a happy
anniversary today and think food
bank for in touring with me most
Any other announcements Senator
Diamond thank you madam
president today is for each day
and so members from across the
state have delivered gifts to
leadership organization also
Senator Stefanics is running
some great bills that would
allow some funding
availabilities for both four H.
and FFA and so we just want to
recognize them it's a shame they
Thank you senator any other
announcements it's.
US singer and Sir Peter Wirth.
Thank you madam president so
the work up on the table and
then if there are I noticed up
front Senator souls and Ivy Soto
is there something about teacher
reports Senator Wirth.
It.
Madam president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred Senate bill six as
committee substitute for Senate
bill six do pass respectfully
submitted George when you all
those chair.
Yes it would option the
committee report.
Madam president your finance
committee to home is been
referred Senate bill seventeen
has had it under consideration a
report same with recommendation
that do pass.
respectfully submitted George
moon yo's chair etcetera menulis
move adoption the committee
report.
We're on adoption of a favorable
Madam president your rules
committee has had under
consideration amended Senate
executive letter number twenty
on October first twenty twenty
one to be served at the floor
pleasure of the governor the
committee recommends that the
Senate confirm this appointment
the three to be a lot old read
all the committee votes that
they be act upon with one motion
the record reflect the direct
phone individually.
Soon no objection the reader to
read the committee reports
Senate joint resolution DO pass
as amended.
Senate Bill Senate joint
resolution six do pass as
amended.
health and public affairs
committee.
Senate memorial six do past
events referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Seeing no objection that
committee report is adopted in
the journal will reflect that
the committee reports for acts
upon individually.
Madam president your health and
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Gerald Ortiz a Pino
chair Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
madam president I ask unanimous
Seeing no objection the card
reader to read all the committee
reports Senate bill sixty six do
pass and thence referred to the
past events referred to the
finance committee Senate bill
seventy nine do pass and thence
referred to the finance
then for for to the finance
committee Senate bill one thirty
four to pass and that's referred
to the finance committee
reports from the health of
public affairs surjection.
A seeing no objection the
committee report has been
adopted in the journal will
reflect that we act upon the
and report same with
recommendation that do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
William P. souls chair.
And that they were reflected in
the journal and the daily acted
on individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
will read all the committee
reports.
committee Senate bill ninety do
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
is adopted in the journal will
reflect that we acted upon the
key to committee report
individually.
Madam president your committees
committee to who's been referred
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Mimi Stewart chair.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president him since and the
committee reports Senate bill
forty two germane and that's
referred to tax business and
transportation committee Senate
bill sixty nine germane and
Committee Senate bill one
seventy eight germane and that's
referred to the rules committee
that's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee Senate bill one eighty
five germane and that's referred
to the health and public affairs
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report from
committees committee.
Seeing no objection those
Canadian reports are adopted and
the journal will reflect that
they were acted upon
individually.
objection more on announcements
and miscellaneous Senator Wirth
thank you madam president so
we're about to go to
confirmations I wanna give
center Hermio a heads up on that
so unanimous consent we go to
a meal thank you madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
of the honorable Barbara J. B.
he Lujan who has been appointed
Madam president to.
Pursuant to amended Senate
executive letter number twenty
three dated August twenty six of
twenty twenty one I move that
children youth and families
department.
Madam president members go
ahead.
Go ahead to talk about the
consider to be an incredible act
of bravery by volunteering to
step forward and assume
responsibility for one of the
having been a District Court
judge for ten years she was a
children's court judge so she
dealt daily with the issues that
this department is responsible
the protective services the
dealing with abuse and neglected
kids.
Foster children adoptions and a
and a whole other series of
issues that the department
struggles within that we all
morning from so many people who
who wanted to step forward and
say.
The governor is found an
exceptional candidate for this
of a nominee for this position
who will really work closely she
she was able to point out three
things that she particularly
wants to work on.
that that she really emphasized
in her presentation to the rules
committee this morning so with
that madam president I will
stand for questioning or
comments from other members of
Thank you very much madam
president.
You know what I consider this
nomination I ask myself the
question.
How do you define passion.
Is somebody who exudes a quiet
passion.
But a passion none the less that
Is oral arguments and opinions.
They don't realize the extent to
which the Supreme Court manages
all of the lawyers of the state
all of the judges of the state.
from time to time either they
take on or that we rather
cavalierly state and the
judiciary will help will handle
this.
as the senior justice.
position to
to address a number of these
issues.
Many of them related directly to
what's going on CYFD today.
walks in the mountains her
gazing at the sun sets.
R. etcetera and and taking on
knows that the work wasn't
finished yet.
And there's a lot to do and the
great thing about having Barbara
Vigil in this position is.
Should add that for herself.
knows the struggles and she has
the passion.
Every single day to get up.
With that incredible optimism
that she has.
department I am so incredibly
pleased with this nomination and
so deeply grateful.
to soon to be secretary of
Thank you next we will hear from
Senator Padilla.
Thank you very much madam
president I rise in strong
support I think the people that
got a lot of really great stuff
done but we have a lot of work
to do and I think when I think
of this conferee I I think of
before during and after madam
president.
standing there next to me
fighting to get things done for
other foster kids and other
children having challenges in
their lives but sure she was she
was right there.
I'm just so thankful to you
that you have in this role so I
just want I wanted to
acknowledge that and so as we
got a lot of work done madam
president this conferee was
there every step of the way and
sometimes into the middle of the
And now that you know if you
heard it from Senator Ivy Soto
could have very easily gone off
and travel the world and maybe
she does that when she has a few
seconds of free time but here
after a very distinguished
career.
And something tells me Madam
president that even after this
giant challenge and in her life
the after questions she's going
homes growing up in they always
said the whole.
If you always do the right thing
you should never have anything
to worry about and I feel very
good that this conferees going
to lead CYFD into the future and
Thank you the next I'll have
Senator K. Kernan.
Thank you madam president and I
just want to stand here and.
Also say thank you to this
direction of that department and
I want to say that I know there
many wonderful people that work
for CYFD and I think maybe
what's lacking is just kind of
the leadership that I know
about what they're doing and the
main thing is the safety of our
children and I know that that is
first and foremost in your heart
I trust you I have hope that
going forward we're going to see
to do this and for your genuine
spirit and in your willingness
to do what's right for children
thank you very much.
Still call justice the hell but
judge of the hill when she I
remember when she first came on
the bench and I had cases with
her and then being over here the
When she was on the Supreme
Court again wearing my
legislative hat and I just.
You know first I I I think the
and so to be willing to step up
and have the kind of leadership
that it's going to take to
really get this ship moving in
the right direction is something
Thank you madam chair I right to
rise in strong support of this
nominee retired justice Barbara
B. hill has always been so
the District Court bench and
hearing complex cases involving
children really gives her a
depth of understanding about
what these children face as they
advocating for on since I joined
the Senate and that is
protecting since it sensitive
information and also providing
language access to the most
Senator Ivy Soto said kind of
giving up Sunal sunlit walks to
serve again in our state and I I
too believe that with her at the
state will be served well so
thank you so much just as the
hill it's it's just such a
pleasure and please let us know
Barbara Vigil Barbara B. hill
worked on one of my boards of
for a nonprofit dealing with
seniors and disabled in the
many people have said but she
was I the avid dedicated board
member she came through with
what board members have to do
think that she has shown that in
all of her professional
positions as a judge as a
Supreme Court justice and now is
the secretary we have very very
Thank you madam president madam
president so usual but will be a
point to yield the questions.
was this your idea or was this a
governor's idea because I have
to assume it was a governor's
idea it's it's from all the good
comments in the praise it's a
want to echo the chorus of all
of those I are you I don't know
how much time you took between
your time on the bench and
accepting are beginning the
process of talking about taking
and I think the time here in
California and getting very used
to the the sounding very
relaxed and comfortable and then
when I heard this I said well
all of you is I first met.
Justice we hill Sen now W.
secretary V. hill in Los crucis
when she was a very on brand new
lawyer and that's why I want to
crucis had was a huge law firm I
think the most of in six lawyers
there something like that the
but and if I if I got it right
they're all male probably and
It's an inspiration when you're
young person.
And she was to me.
To to to have her as a family
Was no doubt in my mind part of
inspire me to want to be a
lawyer and so I want to share
that with all of you that her
roots go very deep and we know
her as a justice and as as a
career for many people
particularly the Supreme Court
and and in the case of our
nominee today just as we kill
that wasn't enough to reach the
thank you madam president
members Senator.
Thank you next we'll hear from
senator rod Regus.
Thank you madam president I want
to command Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
justice now Barbara B. hill from
way back from the District Court
in Santa Fe and one thing I
remember at least one thing is
that she was always one of us I
remember one time here in the
Senate lounge coming in and we
was always that good special
relationship and that's just
shows who she is Madam chair
madam president and I just
wanted to to say thank you for
commitments and ultimately for
your impeccable work ethic I
really appreciate that I know
we're in good hands in this very
difficult Department very
heartbreaking he issues that we
madam president thank you just
as we hear.
Thank you senator the next we'll
hear from senator o'neill.
globally running Burrell I was
here he would be really proud of
you internet was one of my
favorite favorite constituents
into a just up the street from
the juvenile cases is very
difficult to handle cases and
she was just wonderful judge to
work with on with these
traumatized young men and women
a it's not an easy easy job but
thank you so much for a for
going all of your.
Potential retirement into
stepping up for this thank you
thank you so much.
I guess and we thank the judge
for taking on this role
she's known to our family for
many years many of you may or
I'm proud of all of her
accomplishments and you know
it's a tough job with the I also
know that you will do well I
know the state Indian child
were forced to step it up.
Thank you senator any other
debate.
Senator Ingle followed by
Senator Bach.
legislature when the children
youth and families department
was created under the king
administration.
And by doubts about it we
Services Department the CYFD.
And there still is a sometimes a
question of who is responsible
for what and I'm hoping with
your ability to make decisions
And I remember governor king
swore to maybe there never be
more than forty people in that
department.
Well you know a few more than
that now and
nothing really gets done because
there's a shift of
responsibility and nobody knows
for sure our who's supposed to
do what so I'm hoping with your
we do need to have something
there where we can have answers
made and questions answered so
thank you very much and I do you
do have my support.
qualified to fill that spot but
on the other side it's a
difficult appointment to receive
and I have to commend her
courage for accepting the
appointment here we have a
just courageous that she would
step forward and and take that
position and take the helm and
take responsibility for that
department I have no doubt that
she's capable and I think
myself if there's anything I can
do to make your job easier
certainly reach out thank you
madam press.
Thank you senator any other
debate.
confirm the appointment of the
honorable Barbara J. Vigil.
And the and I do so by by voice
vote.
Nope.
you wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative none in the negative
the appointment of the honorable
Barbara J. V. hill as secretary
of children youth and families
members of the Senate to great
confirmation.
Sir Peter Wirth.
Thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go that our
Senate bill one eighty six
introduced by Senator Woods act
relating to public funds
requiring the state to make
eighty six have been read twice
by title is printed and referred
to the.
Senate committees committees
sense Senate tax business and
transportation offense to Senate
Creating the retirement savings
facilitation income tax credit
clarifying certain definitions
in the New Mexico work and save
individual retirement account
program allowing employees to
opt out of automatic enrollment
aligning provisions of the New
Mexico work and save act to
eighty seven Senate bill one
eighty seven have been wrecked
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee
thanks to Senate tax business
and transportation thence to
act relating to public safety
requiring certain persons
employed in filmmaking to
complete a hunter safety
training Senate bill one eighty
Health and public affairs
committee and thence to Senate
tax business and transportation
Senate bill one eighty eight.
Senate bill one eighty nine
is dangerous to any other person
or to the community I have no
release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community confirming the
prosecuting authorities burden
been read twice by Tyler Sir
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee
thanks to Senate health and
public affairs committee cents
hospital services fund providing
payments for losses incurred at
newly constructed rural
hospitals in rural hospitals
that expand or find new services
printed and referred to the
Senate committees Canadian cents
to.
Senate Indian rural and cultural
affairs and sense to finance
from the appropriation
contingency fund to promote
tourism and provide for
hospitality workforce programs
Senate bill one ninety one.
In general cultural affairs and
since to finance Senate bill one
ninety one.
Senate bill one ninety two
introduced by Senator Diamond
and act making appropriations to
athletic programs Senate bill
one ninety two.
Senate bill one ninety two have
been read twice by title is or
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee
that's to Senate Education
Committee incense to Senate
requiring prior approval of the
state treasurer for certain
payments and disbursement of
public funds making an
appropriation Senate bill one
ninety three Senate bill one
finance Senate bill one ninety
three.
Senate bill one ninety four
introduced by senator Munoz and
act relating to electric
utilities amending definitions
twice by title is Sir printed
and referred to the Senate
committees committee thanks to
Senate.
Conservation committee fence to
Senate tax business and
education department for the
expansion of a statewide media
literacy program in public
schools Senate bill one ninety
five Senate bill one ninety five
hundred twice by title is or
Senate finance Senate bill one
ninety five.
Senate bill one ninety six
introduced by Senator Baca and
others and act relating to
public health and acting a new
section of the emergency powers
code amending the public health
public health emergency order
for a public health order that
closes public places or limits
gatherings providing for renewal
or amendment of a public health
emergency order or a public
bill one ninety six Senate bill
one ninety six have been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the Senate
committees committee tends to
Senate health of public affairs
intends to Senate Judiciary
making appropriation to the
crime victims reparation
commission for sexual assault
services programs Senate bill
one ninety seven Senate bill one
ninety seven have been read
Senate bill one ninety eight
introduced by senator Neville
and senator Wirth and act
relating to public service
company regulation transferring
enforcement railroad safety
enforcement and ambulance
standards transferring personnel
functions bunny appropriations
other property and contractual
household goods pursuant to a
contract removing outdated
references in the aviation Act
and the rural air service
enhancement act repealing
provisions relating to aviation
Senate bill one ninety eight
Senate bill one ninety eight
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the.
Senate committees committee
tends to Senate tax business and
department of public safety to
conduct a statewide study to
assess gaps in service training
for law enforcement and first
responders regarding culturally
Senator moral thirteen have read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee sent
Senate health and public affairs
the public education department
to appoint a task force to study
the use of pesticides in public
schools and report findings and
Senate memorial fourteen.
Senate memorial fifteen
introduced by Senator McKenna
memorial requesting the
University of New Mexico to
the twenty thirty census Senate
memorial fifteen.
Senator moral fifteen hundred
memorial supporting
strengthening relations between
New Mexico the United States and
Taiwan in trade the exchange of
visits by officials and
Senator moral sixteen have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee since to
Senate Judiciary Senate memorial
sixteen.
Dovi Estrada Misia valley icon
Senate memorial seventeen.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president a unanimous consent we
Madam president your Education
Committee to home is been
referred Senate bill ninety one
has had it under consideration
and report same without
recommendation and that's
referred to the finance
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually.
At saying no objections the
reader will read all the
to the finance committee Senate
bill one forty do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee Senate bill one sixty
We're on adoption of a committee
report from Senate education.
Any objection seeing no
objection those Canadian reports
announcements and miscellaneous
if there's no objection we are
back on that order announcements
and miscellaneous senator Wirth.
I commend present just a couple
should be right outside the
lounge if you're having trouble
with your financial reports
she's there and can help with
that I guess as a number of
folks that still haven't filed
so she'll be there the second
his play save the bees which a
number of us got to go see ice
on Saturday night and just
really appreciate kind of the
work that he did and then saying
he and Senator Pirtle engage
just thought it was it was
really moving and I hope I hope
I I mentioned this I hope he and
Senator Pirtle certainly will
take this down to Roswell and
perhaps other places in the
state because it's again it's
words it was a sell out then so
you could become an even if you
wanted to there was film the
first night and so I'm just on
cloud nine pretty much so I I
of legislative people so like
you know the talk back session
first I wasn't that interesting
but the next two performances
really understand what it's like
on either side of the aisle to
be in this role so
I.
Thank you madam president and
you know it was a great event I
will point out that we did have
more Republicans there than
Democrats so hopefully hopefully
really good the the the audience
was engaging I mean that we
heard terms like self reflection
and things with regard to how we
deal with other people in our
daily lives with some of these
tough issues that we talk about
work across the aisle and making
good policy so hopefully that
message resonates I don't madam
president you were there and
appreciated your comments so I
of the social gatherings that
we're able to have in
relationships that we're able to
build and hopefully moving
forward we can you know help
help with the tone of the of the
chamber and and bring some of
that bipartisanship back that
Well I'm just going to add a
little bit of personal privilege
myself because I did see it on
Friday night
it was the way I describe it is
interaction afterwards really
shows what we can be like if we
will just listen to each other
and be more tolerant in our
thank you madam president just
want to correct my colleague
from from Roswell the last this
the remaining two performances
I just this place is magical for
me continues to feed me
creatively and I don't really
Madam president.
but I heard there was a lot of
buzz about the play and that the
that the actors voices were like
and that in the end no matter
how sweet we try to be sometimes
you get stung.
So but anyways thank you very
much.
All right we're still
Good suggestions.
R. Senator Brandt thank you
madam president I was doing some
scripture reading a little
Abraham through your offspring
all peoples of the earth will be
blessed.
We got raised up his servant he
sent him first to you to bless
try to make this pretty short to
there's a lot of people that
think that I speak pretty slow.
Need to think about the how are
good.
God and how he can can save our
country and save our nation save
good thinking some good minds.
And we need to make sure that
the the right thing is done.
That he looks down opponents
with favor.
And blesses this chamber.
Madam president a man's.
Hey man.
Is been particularly hard on
many New Mexico families with
the least resources.
A recent poll shows New Mexico's
emergency and thirty five
percent have less than one
hundred dollars think about
that.
What we might think of as a
Those families in rural
communities where community
resources are often lacking are
faring even worse than those in
urban areas with more community
resources.
Just because we are feeling like
a recovers under way does not
mean that all families are doing
well.
Thank you madam president.
About an hour per set aside to
hear from a representative of
the City of Albuquerque would
potentially the more I believe
the.
Other administrators are
potentially a bit caucus after
the floor session so I want an
ounce of time yet I think what
the play that flexibly but the
right now are you anticipate
immediately following the
session in the Senate lounge
thank you madam president.
Thank you we we don't anticipate
it being very long just let
realize you're gonna have a
caucus but for about fifteen
minutes following the caucus
adjournment the Senate health
and public affairs committee
will meet in three eleven and
and then Senator Ingle has a
bill and of this one that we
might want to pay special
attention to Senator Ingle of.
This legislation is always
the Senate to caucuses the
democratic caucus and.
Thank you Sir manuals thank you
madam president again members
make sure your juniors I'm gonna
go back to my office and we're
the exacts racks on capital so
we can get a balance of what
we're gonna be able to spend
looks like it's going to come up
quite a bit once we know what
quickly once we get it so be
prepared for that and what will
happen to the timelines don't
listen to the timeline that
they're doing right now because
we don't know what the exact REC
give you but we're still waiting
in and sell timelines are art
may get pushed back so the so
just be prepared when they
happen they happen and and we'll
planning on Wednesday
immediately following we being
the Republicans were planning
have a a quick caucus of our own
merely following the floor
session has want to make sure
the the chair for ones they know
that's going to happen it
you other announcements.
Senator Wirth do we have the
time for tomorrow so I can make
money on spent madam president
twenty six at eleven fifteen
tomorrow it's taking us about
three minutes these days so
everyone's there on time we're
out of there in three minutes
three oh three thank you thank
you.
You know that's setting in rural
and cultural affairs I think
well to just to these new that.
with that unanimous consent
sense and recess and eleven
thirty tomorrow morning.
All right there is there's no
objections the Senate will stand
in recess until eleven thirty
tomorrow morning.
