Senator Gonzalez present.
Senator Griggs.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan.
Here.
Senator Lopez.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president thank you for all the
standing for the pledge of
allegiance of in that today by
Senator McKenna pledge
allegiance management at today
by Senator how to meal and the
these elected officials to
represent the citizens of New
Mexico in good health and in
peace.
We ask that they be able to
Shalom.
Who'll throw.
News
Show all rural
and Chagnon spruce.
In the case.
Chair of rules.
On.
and to the Republic for which it
stands one nation.
Indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
To get things started today will
just turn over to senator Peter
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president good
afternoon everyone unanimous
consent we go to that our
cantor Friedman for your
beautiful words both spoken and
sung I wrote down a canopy of
peace a lot of that
I think we lost a can of these
Lopez and I've got a couple of
announcements of events Senator
Lopez I thank you very much
majority floor leader Mr
president animus consent to
allow cameras on the floor only.
of commerce provided lunch is
today at the in spot Loretta
from eleven to one thirty by
invitation.
And then tomorrow morning is New
other members for announcements
and miscellaneous centers where
making announcements anyone
wishing making nonsense with
Senator Stefanics to begin and
It is sent to all our
legislators on behalf of A. A.
U. W. New Mexico the national
organization of women and the
southwest women's Law Center.
security health care and public
safety.
This legislature passed numerous
measures to improve the quality
of the lives of New Mexicans we
pillars of democracy to fair
elections and accessible voting
for all eligible citizens signed
a a U. W. New Mexico now and
finance team is here if you need
help with your junior bill or
your during your money I'm sorry
and so if you have your forms
down here they're they're right
here behind me Adrienne and
make sure you get those to us
today before five PM in and I
will announce again before we
leave the floor they are here
they'll be here for just a few
minutes so if you have them
bring him over if you got
Your president I was able to
hear of Senator Wirth talk about
the luncheon at Union County I
was able to attend that serve.
But that's alright I just wanted
to tell you that it was a good
crowd is good food good
fellowship that's one of the
greatest little towns and in
part of the state
particular museum they even had
one of those guys that.
Talked about that kind of stuff
made pictures of it come into
the museum and spend the night
But I did tell a joke and if it
be all right I would like to
tell a quick story Mr president.
Senator.
It seems that the.
one of the his wife's friends
came up to her and says will do
you have any money left from the
general.
In the memorial stone cost
fifteen thousand.
To say wow that must be in some
kind of memorial stone in she
Thank you Mr president I just
wanted to take a moment to
compliment my friend and
colleague on the other side of
the aisle Senator Hemphill
vote alike and we don't always
dress alike but we do not have
to think alike to think together
so here's to a good work of good
policy we are collective body of
also a reminder to the few staff
the remains of the building that
still continues to get Senator
Hemphill and I confused when we
have our masks on that instead
of making it easier we're
Senator Shendo if you raise your
hand.
Session that information okay.
Thank you Mr president so I just
in terms of of items for today
it's it's basically doing the
work on the table with the
message from the governor some
committee reports and billing
adoption so we should be off
that Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
messages from the governor on
that order of Business messages
from the governor the reader to
read the message.
Pursuant to article four section
five B. two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature
Lujan Grisham governor Senate
executive message number twelve
the gentle show that the message
from the governor has been
received.
Senate executive message number
thirteen.
second session submission of
Senate bill one hundred a bill
clarifying the definition of
cannabis specifying the process
alcohol on the same premises
providing for joint powers
agreements relating to
inspections clarifying business
location reporting for tax
message number thirteen.
That'll show the message from
the governor has been received.
Some of executive message number
fourteen pursuant to article
bill one forty a bill enacting
the opportunity scholarship act
amending repealing or enacting
various related statutes and
message number fifteen pursuant
to article four section five B.
two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature
second session submission of
disposal of spent fuel and high
levels waste amending the
definition of disposal facility
and amending the duties of
composition of the radioactive
In accordance with article four
section five of the New Mexico
constitution I hereby withdraw
the following nominations and
committee on October ten two
thousand nineteen through Senate
executive letter number twenty
one.
Jeremy Romero for appointment to
the gaming control board Mr
message number sixteen.
The general so the message from
the governor has been received
some of the executive message
Technology research
collaborative Gabrielle mounts
for reappointment to the
technology research
collaborative for a two year
term commencing January two
year term commencing January two
twenty twenty two and concluding
on January one twenty twenty
four found Jonathan John Clark
January one twenty twenty four.
Spaceport authority Eric Joseph
shin wolf for reappointment to
the spaceport Authority four
Thompson for reappointment to
the Human Rights Commission for
a four year term commencing
January one twenty twenty two
and concluding on December
on December thirty one twenty
twenty five.
National Hispanic cultural
center board of directors I need
a Cordova for reappointment to
September one twenty twenty
four.
Holly James Barnett Sanchez for
reappointment to the national
Hispanic cultural center board
of directors for a four year
reappointment to the national
Hispanic cultural center board
of directors for a four year
term commencing September two
twenty twenty and concluding on
September one twenty twenty
four.
So one to article four section
five B. two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature
contractors and subcontractors
of the workforce solutions
department under certain
circumstances providing for
limited use of requiring
confidentiality of information
certain related statutes and
providing penalties for improper
disclosure of information
obtained through such background
two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature
second session submission of
Senate bill one thirty a bill
reflect the message from the
governor has been received.
Some of the executive message
number twenty pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
three seven a bill enacting the
diversity act creating the chief
diversity officer within the
state personnel office creating
diversity and inclusion liaisons
requiring annual reports and
making appropriation.
Senate the executive message
number twenty the general show
the message from the governor
has been received.
fifth legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council Service
drafting number two two two zero
general show the message from
the governor has been received
Senate executive message number
twenty two pursuant to article
four section five B. two of the
prohibiting the imposition of a
sentence of life without parole
on a child and acting a new
section of the probation and
parole act regarding the
eligibility criteria and the
adult sentence for an offence
committed as a child Senator
executive message number twenty
two general so the message from
the governor has been received.
fifth legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council Service
drafting number two two one one
seven five a bill removing
Force specifying when the
inspection of public records
acts Act applies to disclosures
pursuant to the election code
amending and acting definitions
state for election related
litigation addressing
qualifications of election board
members revising election board
providing for a program to
reconcile voter registration
lists allowing for electronic
poll book alternative adjusting
voter registration processing
overseas ballots amending the
image intimate partner violence
survivors suffrage Act adjusting
time frames to fill a vacancy on
candidates eliminating pre
primary convention designations
amending voting systems
requirements addressing ballot
preparation.
requiring the certification of
voting machines amending the
election fund directing the
establishment of county election
revising requirements for the
empowerment of ballots audits
and recounts amending the
presidential primary act
revising provisions related to
recompiling a section
authorizing legislative caucus
committees into the campaign
reporting act amending the
legislative session re roof fund
obstructing the polling place
amending the local election act
amending the lobbyist regulation
Act providing requirements for
municipalities to hold
impose a property tax subject to
election for a special levy for
purposes of that act
authorizing the creation of an
administrative committee
amending the tax increment for
Development Act allowing only a
government body to impose a
property tax for purposes of
that act authorizing the
creation of an administrative
audit tax to allow a government
component unit to be audited
separately from its primary
government entity and to require
that the component units audit
be included in the primary
confidential substitute address
Act conforming provisions
provisions are of relating to
certain special districts to the
local election act providing for
Conservancy districts
Conservancy districts and soil
and water conservation districts
amending the Conservancy act of
New Mexico amending the
parent making conforming and
technical changes amending
repealing and acting and
recompiling various sections of
the technical changes and
executive message number twenty
three that also the message from
the governor has been received.
Some of the executive message
number twenty four pursuant to
article four section five B. two
growth of administrative
expenditures by school districts
and charter schools Senator
executive message number twenty
four Senator so the message from
the governor has been received.
Mr president your rules
committee to whom is been
referred Senate joint resolution
respectfully submitted Daniel A.
Ivey Soto chairman Senator Ivey
Soto move adoption committee
report Senator have a motion to
have the committee report any
objections.
Senate bill one oh six has had
it under consideration and
provide seem to be germane in
accordance with the
constitutional provisions and
that's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion the
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually in addition
the reader to read all the
committee reports Senate bill
Committee Senate bill one eleven
germane and that's referred to
the tax business and
transportation committee Senate
business and transportation
committee Senate bill one
sixteen germane and that's
referred to the health and
public affairs committee Senate
and that's referred to the
health and public affairs
committee.
Senate we submitted Mimi Stewart
chair Senator.
Senate bill twenty eight germane
and that's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee Senate bill thirty
four germane and that's referred
committee Senate bill forty five
germane and that's referred to
the health and public affairs
committee Senate bill one twenty
germane and that's referred to
committee Senate bill one twenty
five germane and that's referred
to the health of public affairs
committee Senate bill one twenty
eight germane and that's
Committee Senate bill one thirty
four germane and that's referred
to the health and public affairs
committee Senate bill one thirty
business and transportation
committee Senate bill one thirty
seven germane and that's
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee Senate
to the conservation committee
respectfully submitted Mimi
Stewart chair Senator Stewart I
move adoption of the committee
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
introduction of legislation one
one introduced by senator are a
meal and others and act relating
to gas providing an emergency
exception to who may feel and
Harper LP gas container
committees committee then Senate
Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee that Senate
tax business and transportation
committee Senate bill one forty
one.
Senate bill one forty two
differential for fine cigars in
that act Senate bill one forty
two Senate bill one forty two
having been read twice by title
is printed referred to the
introduced by Senator Pirtle
relating to small business and
acting the small business
pandemic taking support
reparations act creating the
tax credit and providing for
certificates of eligibility
providing a process for protests
creating a fund making
appropriation Senate bill one
forty three Senate bill one
Committee that Senate finance
committee Senate bill one forty
three.
Senate bill one forty four
introduced by Senator Duhigg an
municipal clerks Senate bill one
forty four Senate bill one forty
four having been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee
vents Senate Judiciary Committee
resources creating the New
Mexico reforestation center to
address the state's current and
future reforestation needs
making appropriation Senate bill
committee then Senate finance
committee Senate bill one forty
five Senate bill one forty six
introduced by Senator Campos and
state agency or local public
body to join an existing
cooperative procurement
agreement for the procurement of
services construction or items
of tangible personal property
Public health and public affairs
committee.
Then Senator sherry Committee
Senate bill one forty six Senate
bill one forty seven introduced
by Senator Campos and act
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
Senate conservation Senate
committees committee and Senate
health and public affairs
committee then Senate finance
programs to improve perinatal
health outcomes statewide Senate
bill one forty eight Senate bill
one forty eight having been read
twice by title is printed and
introduced by senator Ortiz the
piano and others and act making
appropriation to the rural
libraries and Domon fund to
carry out the provisions of
thousand nineteen chapter one
sixty five sections one through
four as amended Senate bill one
forty nine Senate bill one forty
nine having been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
Senate bill one fifty introduced
by senators to phonics.
Senator Rodriguez and others and
act relating to insurance and
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
declaring an emergency Senate
bill one fifty Senate bill one
fifty having been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
introduced by Senator Stefanics
and Senator Padilla and others
and act making appropriation to
the workforce solutions
department to support training
the Senate committees committee
then Senator health and public
affairs committee and Senate
finance committee Senate bill
one fifty one.
Senate bill one fifty two
introduced by Senator Hamblen
state agencies Senate bill one
fifty two Senate bill one fifty
two having been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
the Senate committees committee
the Senate health and public
act relating to data collection
requiring certain executive
departments and public bodies to
collect demographic data
pertaining to sexual orientation
committee that Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one fifty
three.
Senate bill one fifty four
introduced by senator Munoz and
Senate bill one fifty far having
been read twice by title is
printed and referred to the
Senate committees committee and
Senate finance committee that
Senate bill one fifty four
diversification and climate
resilience Fund transferring a
portion of the remaining balance
of the extricate extraction
taxes suspense Fund after
necessary distributions and
referred to the Senate
committees committee and Senate
tax business transportation
committee that's Senate finance
committee Senate bill one fifty
five.
hearing requiring posting a bond
if a defendant is on release for
another matter prohibiting
courts from relying on risk
assessment tools or programs
committee then Senate Judiciary
Committee Senate bill one fifty
six Senate bill one fifty seven
introduced by Senator Steinborn
and others and act making
chili labor incentive program
Senate bill one fifty seven
Senate bill one fifty seven
having been read twice by title
is printed and referred to the
introduced by Senator Brandt and
others and act relating to
anatomical gives prohibiting
discrimination against
anatomical gift recipients based
an Associated Care declaring an
emergency Senate bill one fifty
eight Senate bill one fifty
eight having been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
Senate joint resolution eleven
introduced by Senator Pirtle a
joint resolution proposing an
amendment to article four of the
constitution of New Mexico to
limit the legislature's ability
three fourths vote of each house
to increase appropriations above
the limitations.
Senate joint resolution eleven
Senate joint resolution twelve
introduced by Senator Moores a
joint resolution proposing an
amendment to articles for and
twenty of the constitution of
offices Senate joint resolution
twelve Senate joint resolution
twelve having been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
amend article nineteen section
one of the constitution of New
Mexico to require the approval
of two thirds of the members of
each house of the legislature
is printed and referred to the
Senate rules committee and
Senate Judiciary Committee that
Senate joint resolution
thirteen.
Senate memorial eleven
Senator more eleven having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred referred to
the Senate rules committee and
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business announces
the same yes Senator Wirth thank
you Mr president just for the
other announcements.
Thank you senator Wirth we do
have announcements will start
off with Senator.
Serve on this.
Is present Representative we
have a very full agenda in the
only bill we've had in the
committee this relates to the
judiciary retirement salaries
and such we're gonna fall that
as we talked about last week on
report that you all have read
about.
And the people that were part of
the research and the data in
putting that together as well as
folks from UNM and others on
the defense perspective
Representative is the public
defender's office and private
practice in the defense I've
never heard about it from the
local government perspective the
association counties is impacted
after the get off the floor so
we know the time when we're done
here will need that time to set
up will start about an hour
after that and then announce the
start time thank you thank you
said this about this further
A quarter of two.
We're meeting this year members
just a reminder we're meeting
this year in a different room
from what you may be accustomed
to we're now going to be in
in so we have a of the about
eight bills on our on our
calendar nine bills actually and
the senators whose bills are
with this will be Senator
you Mr Mr president thank you
senator to subpoena.
Senator on this you want to make
an additional outside yes miss
president present I. probably
should have been more specific
I'm looking at the time look at
the notes will start at two
side so we'll a we'll start
right at two o'clock here in the
Senate on the floor thank you
thank you would you have for the
nascent Center souls.
Thank you Mr president.
Every day we should be asking
Mexico and it's important that
we keep their well being in mind
as we pass legislation and
budgets for the state.
The most recent data from the
Let me say that a different way
more than one in ten children in
New Mexico is living in a house
where there's no adult earning a
living.
rates you County at twenty nine
point six percent in the can we
counted twenty five percent.
Even in Los Alamos almost one in
fault that there's no income
coming into the household it's
incumbent upon us to ensure
these children have the same
opportunities as other children
in the state the annual kids
kids count dot org.
Thank you.
Thanks initials we do a further
announcement Senator phonics
thank you Mr president the
participate by zoom would you
please inform me thank you very
much thank you Senator annex
Senator Shendo.
Thank you Mr.
is one thirty over thirty
minutes after we will have a.
Meeting and then up that we will
have a.
The department of secretary
you etcetera etcetera.
Sentiment us.
Thank you Mr presently will be
tackling anybody in in our
committee will be listening to
agencies I want to remind
to make sure I o'clock today and
in its need to be in and done
because our problem is we have
to enter those manually and will
we don't have any errors or
issues with them and so as we
move along five o'clock the
deadline
it's a lot of labor intensive
work they'll do overnight to
enter all those projects make
will try to grab some lunch
since we came the floor noon and
then start hearing the some very
important agencies so thank you
we say solipsism but I do think
that to in a matter of unity in
the in love between us all we
need to understand where all of
this money is coming from that
we've all been talking about
have helped fund all this great
stuff and will continue in the
future thank you Mr president
Senator Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president the
committees committee will meet
will be meeting at ten AM in
room three oh three thank you
thank you any further
announcements Senators.
I
see no further announcements
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
of business committee reports
the reader to read the committee
report.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee to whom has been
referred Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate resolution
Senate respectfully submitted
senator Pete Campos co chairman
and senator Kerry Hamblen co
chairman Senator cliff R. Pirtle
code chairman Senator Hamblen Mr
members of the body that the
offices of the Senate have
signed an open session Senate
rules committee since two
percent resolution one as
amended.
introduced by Senator Ingle and
senator Wirth an act relating to
legislative retirement changing
the calculation for the amount
of pension pursuant to state
the Senate committees committee
and Senate Public Affairs
Committee the Senate finance
committee Senate bill one fifty
seven.
announcements unanimous consent
the Senate stand in recess until
eleven thirty tomorrow morning
see no objections the cental
center reason so eleven thirty
AM tomorrow.
