Senator sure on this I'm here.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Your.
Other Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores.
Senator monos.
Senator Neville your.
Senator o'neill.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president thank you please just
get on the stand for the
invocation to be given today by
The pledge of allegiance in
Spanish to be led today by
Senator Steinborn and the salute
to the New Mexico flag to be led
today by Santo Domingo.
This first like many you'll find
in the wisdom literature was
under sages who looked to the
natural world and in their case
tells us that wisdom begins with
fear of the lord.
Here in this case does not mean
terror but rather to be in
to the wisdom and Welling in our
surroundings.
So I invite us all now into a
moment of reverence awe our New
Mexico sky.
And as you breathe in and out.
Remember that each breath you
take.
Connects you to all that lives
on this planet.
Made from the dynamic dance
between the sun the treaties and
other green beings.
The installations and
exhalations of all life.
At the time long past.
This.
As we believe in the wonder of
our New Mexico sky this morning
Pledge allegiance.
reminder to put your phones on
vibrate on mute Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president good
morning a unanimous consent we
go that over business
Marvel during a sixty day
session we come in with very
short days cold days dark in the
morning dark when we leave and
you walk out now towards the end
All of us need to take take
those deep breaths myself
included cell.
Appreciate that very much so
Mister president I'll yield the
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Duhigg for the day.
Unanimous six unanimous consent
to excuse senator Candelaria for
the day.
cameras on the floor in the
gallery.
Seeing no objection so ordered
thank you Senator Lopez Senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so.
that point and we do have a
today for the new members we
have something that we haven't
done yet which the concurrence
and you'll see centers the
phonics that's a a bill that we
for the new members of the
public if we do if we decide to
reject their changes that goes
back to the house and they can
make the decision to drop the
so with that Mr president
unanimous consent we go that our
business messages from the
governor on that order business
messages from the governor the
reader to read.
In accordance with article I
section five of the New Mexico
constitution I hereby withdraw
the following nominations Roger
Montoya for appointment to the
And Judith Holcomb for
appointment to the Human Rights
Commission her nomination was
previously submitted to the
Senate rules committee on
October twenty two two thousand
received.
Senator executive message number
eight your president pro temper
Stewart and members of the
Senate in accordance with
nominations for appointment
Victor Paulose for re
appointment to the Human Rights
Commission for a term commencing
January one two thousand twenty
commencing January one two
thousand twenty one and expiring
on December thirty one two
thousand twenty four.
And Christopher Bowerman for
reappointment to the Human
show the message from the
governor has been received.
Senator executive message number
nine.
Dear president pro temper
Stewart and members of the
Senate in accordance with
Jackie Jack Lewis Fortner for
appointment to the University of
New Mexico board of regents for
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring in
December thirty one two thousand
twenty six.
twenty six and Randy phone Jean
Mexico for appointment as
student region to the university
of New Mexico board of regents
for a term commencing upon
received.
Senator executive message number
ten your president pro temper
Stewart and members of the
Senate in accordance with
article four section forty two
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring on
March fourth two thousand twenty
six respectfully submitted
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor.
the Senate in accordance with
article four section forty two
of the New Mexico constitution
and section twenty eight dash
one dash three eight Newman and
and NMSA nineteen seventy eight
upon confirmation by the Senate
and concluding on December
thirty one two thousand twenty
two respectfully submitted
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor.
business messages from the
house.
Seeing no objection the reader
to read messages from the house.
Message from the house of
representatives Mr president I'm
concurrence of the Senate to the
house amendment respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk.
The journal so that the message
from the house has been
received.
Bill one eleven as amended by
the house without emergency
clause House Bill two oh one
house bill ninety six as amended
substitute for house bill two
sixty two.
House bill two seventy one house
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill to ten.
amended by the house and house
bill three hundred three and
requests the concurrence of the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk of the house.
go about our business committee
reports on that order of
business committee reports the
reader to read.
Mr president your finance
Senator she Senator Lopez motion
a few of them right.
Just a minute.
we brought them with one motion
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually I
see no objections the reader to
read.
Senate bill seventy three do
pass.
Senate bill one forty eight do
passed as amended.
Senate bill one eighty six to
pass as amended.
Senate bill two thirty four as
amended to pass.
Senate bill two fifty six as
amended do pass.
do not pass but that Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill four thirty nine is
reported without recommendation
and for the recommends that it
not be re referred to the
Senator is we have a motion to
adopt the committee reports.
Saying no objection the
committee point been adopted in
the journal show they're acted
upon individually.
Mr president your Education
finance committee respectfully
submitted senator William P.
sold chairman.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that three
to be allowed to read both of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
pass and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted senator William P.
sold chairman center sells I
move adoption the committee
reports and as we have a motion
home has been referred Senate
bill one hundred three as
amended has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended respectfully
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate agree to be allowed to
read all of the committee
reports that we will and then
with one motion and that their
roof and that the gentleman
affected they were acted upon
referred to the Judiciary
Committee and house bill five as
amended do pass immense referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Senator
report has been adopted in the
journal so they were acted upon
individually.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I unanimous consent we
go to that order business
Stefano Stefani X. Mr president
I am move that the Senate
concurrent house amendments to
Senate bill two as amended.
amended on the Senate floor the
house remove the Senate floor
amendment which takes away the
paperwork that is required to
concurrence of Senate bill two
as amended anyone wishing to
debate.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president and I
On the on the Senate floor the
amendment was.
In order to not a share sched.
businesses like Walmart and
fee
Removed million so what this
what this does is the house the
let Walmart get there for the
Waved as well and.
And Mister president and and
in what I'm I am believing that
I I do not support this can
encouraging show Mr president
president senator the house in a
bipartisan manner approved this
bill with removing the house the
Senate floor amendment
president I'd just like to say
that the Senate in a bipartisan
manner put the amendment all
and the the amendment that we we
stand in opposition to this
concurrent.
We do have further debate on the
concurrence Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president and I
don't need the concurrent
in committee so of just because
they voted unanimous doesn't
doesn't necessarily mean it's
good policy you know the last
year with with regard to liquor
the big box stores they've
concurrence there's plenty of
time to go to a conference
committee this is a little
unusual for us to already be
doing this this early so there's
plenty of time to work out
Si no further debate sentenced
of onyx.
Thank you Mr president I move
that the Senate concurrent house
members to Senate bill two is
amended with the roll call the.
Senator is there's been a motion
Senator Baca.
The.
senator Byrd now Senator Campos.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator survive this no Senator
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzales passes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator how to meal.
Senator Hotmail yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Moores no Senator mo
nos.
Where are you.
Senate.
No Senator Neville now Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino now
Senator Stewart
Senator Pirtle no Senator hope
well yes.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator sure.
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo passes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Gonzales no.
Senator Ingle.
The motion to concur has been
approved by the Senate to send a
bill two as amended.
So close senator Wirth.
Are you yes I'm gonna visit
aspen to miscellaneous ideal
Senator Lopez Senator Lopez I
thank you very much Mr president
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Ivey Soto until he
Senator Hickey for item number
one Senate bill to to to.
We're in that order of Business
surgery legislation and I do
want to remind those who are
participating be ism if you can
Center if you can use your
microphone please.
My apologies Mr president my
wife always tells me I talk too
loud so.
placing Senate Bill two two two
on final passage has been taken
and this is now subject to
fellow senators this legislation
was brought to me by the
department of health to fix an
error in our non concurring
from twenty fifteen and when it
got amended they ended up with
the conflicting definition
around Ecker get and record
level data.
hospitals people and what have
you we're as aggregate pose them
all together in their definition
the definition components they
be collected and distributed for
in Alice's this is particularly
important in light of the fact
that we as a state.
health information exchanges and
that is clinical data
digitalized.
situation where provider needs
to get a previous X. ray
laboratory notes and everything
is digitalized now they can get
right to it particularly when it
was done somewhere else.
getting a all payer claims
database and with that all payer
claims database we will have the
cost information but to have
terms of aggregate and so I
present this bill and I am open
for any questions comments or
other thoughts thank you.
Senator Kernan senator Morris
vigorous present I'd like just
to tell the body that this is a
the bill that the doctor Senator
Hickey dislikes it has all these
errors and it was a bill that
care in these bills in the
future because this definitely
was not my fault or was the
Senator rules falls rueful Mr
president so we can blame him
you Mr president with the
sponsor yield.
Yes.
Thank you Mr president Senator
Okay so Mister president and
senator so this now will allow
the department of health to if
they want to know
they may already be able to do
that but are they can be able to
identify outcomes related to
individual providers now with
this definition change.
now it's only gonna get it at
the hospital level thank you
very much that's all I wanted
and thank you.
Further debate we have Senator
by the.
I think that might be the finest
photo I've ever seen of a state
senator and all in the entire
history of the state he looks
very happy there Mr president as
a person as he passes everybody
Say no further debate on this
bill Senator Hickey to close.
Mr president I move that the
Senate.
Mr president the last few weeks
here anyway and I'm still very
happy thank you Mr president Mr
president over go to the vote
are correct because a little bit
of hazing.
Senator Hickey.
Mr president.
I move that the Senate.
Senator Sears seeds.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senators
around is yes Senator Diamond
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hemphill yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores.
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle no Senator probe
yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator songes.
Senator sure no Senator.
Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
passed the Senate Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr president and
fellow senators Senator Wirth
thank you Mr president I would
just ask that all the members
Thank you senator Wirth we are
going to the next item that's
Thank you president and good
morning.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
say no objection senator Kennedy
explained the bill.
Pause here while I get my
statement.
Thank you president and members
of the body today I present just
be three oh four voting
districts geographic data.
league of women voters have
expressed and that is.
Frustration because there is
difficulty accessing New Mexico
Passage of this bill would
provide uniformity across
counties on how districts are
set up.
Mexico voters has meant it's
harder for voters to find out
what districts there and an
impossible for them to visualize
who else is in their district.
develop useful web applications
like vote for one one that
depend on voting districts.
Currently there's only one
we can't vouch for its accuracy
it's not in one place.
Moreover when organizations have
hundred and fifty dollars for an
electronic file.
it's important to note president
that the secretary of state
the state treasury her office
has a federal grant which will
enable her to hire a contractor
to carry out the project and
this is in the F. I. R..
secretary of state's office.
And Miss upon a pack she is an
open data expert and also a
volunteer with the league of
women voters.
Senator is we're debating Senate
bill three oh four as amended we
Revamp some points from that
first of all I I do want to say
that for witnesses were
extremely good and gave a lot of
really really good answers and
and I think this piece of
that that this extra data is
going to
preferentially be utilized by
these larger
third parties
I I just think that our election
system has become it has
involves to really.
Start to encroach on people's
to get berated with all kinds of
you know calls and ads and all
the sort of thing so so it's
it's not to at all critic the
escalate that campaign process
we're not having these huge
third parties come in I'd rather
kind of empower the individual
Candice just go out there say
their piece instead of having
large third parties thank you Mr
president thank you Senators
maintenance we do have further
debate on this bill.
Senator Lopez and Senator animal
you raising your hand.
smitteez as I think that
transparency and more
information to voters are is a
good thing it will also provide
natural breaks in formations and
also whether we did dilute
minority impact will it will be
all out there on a map with
registration data available
is really a sad commentary.
In order to get voters engaged
to we need to communicate with
them all kinds of different ways
communicate with them about our
issues and about the things that
are important to us and also to
ask them for their opinion about
what's important to them so for
Senator McKenna I'm sorry.
Yes center McKenna to because of
the bill.
that the record will show that
the role has been called.
Ask for rural and I ask for a
Call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
the audience Senator serve on
this Senator to run this test
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey yes
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
seat you want to pass.
Senator Ingle passes Senator
Ivey Soto.
Senator how to meal.
Lopez yes Senator Lopez yes
Senator McKenna yes Senator
McKenna yes senator Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the year.
Yes Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
senator senator Sanchez yes
Senator share no Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator souls yes Senator
Senator dole many as senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator Ingle.
The ones that.
By a vote of thirty one a
permanent six in the negative
Senate bill three oh four as
could rise and give a huge.
Round of applause for Senator
McKenna and her first bill
welcome to New Mexico state
Senate.
bill we've all been waiting for
item number three Senator
Pirtle.
As we are on Senate bill one oh
two it is time for Senator
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution saying
no objection Center peril to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president in the
is
Piece of legislation that we've
passed out of the Senate
multiple times just to go to the
house and run out of time I
don't know if it's sponsorship
changing our clocks twice a year
it has a huge negative impact on
the quality of life that creates
situations where people become
worse distracted we have more
car accidents heart attacks
with our families barbecue do
chores around the house and
those things so this bill would
simply take the four months that
we fall back to standard time
and keep us on daylight saving
time that would require
mantas.
Thank you Mr president present I
don't need the sponsor to yield
you will.
You're right of center per week
Senate thirty one because the
committee of Anthony.
I realize that in the committee
of Anthony one side of the
street is Texas once at a street
is New Mexico and it's right
through the middle of town.
It's on the Texas side.
The New Mexico side has been a
lot of people what a population
has a school has a Catholic
the community of order that that
essa.
Chaparral and someone part and
like Anthony in order and
someone park a very large
activity and I'll pass so buying
and shopping getting their
doctors appointments going to
the airport and doing all those
things.
On the Texas side.
If we adopt this policy and I
realize this bill doesn't
really.
the the only place Hutchinson
have with the place is really
booming in New Mexico and a
Senator ratio.
And when we talk about
diversifying our economy and
privatizing and getting away
your competitors don't have and
you maximize those.
What New Mexico has to
capitalize on is our border with
to try and subsidize those
industries because they're
relying on a physical border
that will never change we will
always have that border with
Mexico we will always have that
Please understand what happens
we just put a huge intermodal
railyard there I hope the newer
members will get a chance to go
see that flyover that sometime
have somebody take on a flight
Paso into senators in New Mexico
the Micaela daughters the in the
industry the produce the cattle
the food and everything that's
come across the border with
understand the implications if
one side of the border is a one
time zone for half of the year.
And the other half of the border
is on a different times on half
schedule and so forth and I
respect Senator and is is
motivation system except the
folks are smart they have cell
phones they can plan things and
and that's all true.
But I want the members to
Mexico once the streets Texas
and we're all in different time
zones we're not even on
different time zones
consistently but part of the
year we're on the same times on
the other part of your one on
the team's on same time zone
to work.
And trying to get to their
doctors and trying to catch a
flight trying to catch a bus.
Thank you for that.
this bill was was introduced I
voted for it in committee and
then I had constituents called
me so I voted against it on the
floor and I had constituents
the things one of them and this
is actually not a constituent
jury put Czecho raised the issue
that Senators advances just just
mentioned and his concern was a
an article that was published
that the with the main author is
the with the institute of the
medical psychology in Munich
under the papers final session
time and out of sync with DST
it's not a matter of adjusting
has our bodies on a basic
biological level because they
never adjust to daylight savings
time.
world Noone is based on where
the sun is at its highest point
in the sky for that data given
zone redefinition of noon by
effectively placing us in
Another article if we were on
permanent daylight savings time
the winter months would require
people to go to work in children
efficient in MIT press journal
published in article saying that
they took this is a summary with
they took advantage of a natural
experiment in the state of
Indiana to estimate the effect
savings time increases
electricity demand the findings
are consistent with simulation
results that I did if I trade
off between reducing demand for
They also in the estimated
social cost of increased
pollution emissions between one
point seven to five point seven
million a year.
Thank you Mr president of them
in Los crucis area we are in the
el Paso economic market then we
centers about this very clearly
through an accident of geography
we sit at the crossroads of
patented down at Senate that is
a there's one and a half billion
dollars where the goods cross
of the year we would not is just
unreasonable as far as just the
pure economics of it and so
please consider down there where
communities is just not
functional or feasible and will
cause economic disruption thank
you thanks center so they do
have further debate Senator
idea and and but the reality is
Mr president is.
Is I want the body to consider
the implications of this bill to
a major part of our state or or
in their airspace between two
different time zones we have
probably for four point of entry
a major airport.
You have families working on one
from not from all the Steinborn
and so
appreciate you know looking at
it from how it affects your
constituents but we got to think
about the whole state on this
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator Pirtle for bringing this
back I voted for this bill and I
have voted against this bill.
I have constituents that think
dark others who love the extra
daylight that will be provided
so as I did two years ago I'm
gonna vote no and I'm voting to
voting no thanks following that
we do have for the debate will
have Senator Griggs followed by
Senator Ingle then Senator the
subpoena Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president with the
What I want you to to do please
if you would is to update the
body on the process we're
Thank you Mr president you
Senator for that you know
there's a lot of confusion about
what this legislation actually
does I we've heard that it's
somehow moves moves us to a new
of the enabling legislation to
allow states to do this now I
think what's important to note
is that Congress is very
across the entire country so
that we wouldn't have these
issues that we already have now
with the fact that Arizona's on
standard time year round we've
ahead of Arizona it's not that
confusing humans will adapt
we're smart individuals we also
have these cool smartphones Mr
president Senator Stewart when
you drive into a new time zone
but it would require Congress to
approve what we're wanting to do
and would not come into effect
immediately.
Thank you Mr president center
mediate impact on on anybody and
you know Congress is just ever
so often a little bit dyslexic
and they have a hard time doing
much anything but try to think
many people believe this is the
right approach but I I think we
could or Congress could if they
would if they could just move
they did that that application
would not be.
Near as severe to folks but
agency presentation report thank
you for bringing the bill thank
you for answering questions.
Thank you Senator Griggs do have
Well the listening Senator Ortiz
Pena.
Thank you Mr president and the I
was gonna ask exactly the same
Senator Pirtle deal for the
chairman absolutely.
Mister president senator.
Wooden the memorial achieve the
same effect.
And and Mr president and senator
the first state to do this now
if we pass this legislation
would be the seventeenth state
so I think the fact that it's in
statute sins of much stronger
the times in the and the reality
is the majority of people enjoy
daylight saving time much more
I'm not going to discount the
fact that some people like daily
I think you know as a state that
enjoys tourism.
And and we were able to
accomplish this imagine that
extra hour for for skiing for
golf for all of these things
president since Senator I.
I'm undecided about how to vote
I I mean I I I think it does.
Amount to memorial.
love the the issues they get
brought up I particularly like
the one about the cows not being
able to produce as much milk
because he'll be he'll be in the
something whether or not we we
vote for this but
the I appreciate the opportunity
to debate to which is certainly
one of the more.
Intense issues that that I get
thank you Mr president if
Senator Pirtle yield for a
question Senator Pirtle the old
agency present I yield.
Thank you Senator Pirtle and
Mister president
And I was unaware that when the
time changes to changes to occur
there is some research that
shows are more car accidents
there are more Marty myocardial
perhaps you can all remember we
have flown across the country
and when we change it times out
or two we do feel that there is
year but include some of the
medical research particularly
from sleep physicians.
And Mister president senator
this research is a new this is
that I've tried to make clear is
although this becomes this fun
debate it has a serious side to
it people with with mental
health disorders the the the
getting off of their schedules
and and trying to figure out how
to adjust to that in the in the
young parents and that's really
Mr president Senator where this
came from was a constituent of
so she asked that I do daylight
saving time year round and upon
doing that discovered all of the
things that you're discussing
the increased heart attacks the
enjoy that extra hour in the
evening the extra hour to play
baseball have soccer practice of
the coaches can make it after
they get off of work and so the
preferred time is daylight
the fact that you do change that
causes these disruptions and
these health concerns thank you
Mr president.
Thank you Senator Pirtle and Mr
you could go through four time
zones in about fifteen minutes
so try that for kind of getting
taken out anyway thank you Mr
forth this legislation get
another time I have to say
president within I did not have
the honor to be in this chamber
and serve with all of you.
back each year I was a strong
supporter as was as is my
family.
I'm gonna support this bill
because as I said in committee.
fatalities there are more errors
on the workplace when we switch
our clocks and I have heard to
from my colleagues about their
way the bill is drafted as it is
this is contingent on an
amendment to the federal law.
And so that would give time for
Thank you president.
Thank you senator Canada we do
have Senator Brandt next.
I had no idea that cal's could
tell time.
Anyone else so this.
Having someone mentioned that
Senator Pirtle unitary right for
your family this Mister
president senator that is
correct Sir pirtle.
Do your cals still time.
twice a day every day and you
know they know this regardless
of what the clock says so
whenever we change the clock the
cow still is milked at the exact
and I've been trying to clear
that up for the last nine years
it wasn't our fault you know
farm work starts at sunrise to
sunset regardless of what the
this it's not our fault.
Mr president the Sir I I was I
think I'm still gonna blame you
guys for this one just you know
because it's easier for me that
so the other thing I heard was
that the somehow.
If we change the time the
military will no longer be able
to function and I'm amazed by
going on in the curling airforce
base and aria flaking he's New
England
which are totally different time
zones in fact you know the.
The way Texas is up there's
probably one base in our state
that that now I I actually I
think the base and and I'll pass
You know the the military can
operate.
they make adjustments just like
we do so the other is an issue
that's come up is is kids going
to school in the dark.
now.
And Mister president senator
that's a great point and and you
know they they they don't go to
school in the dark and that's
one of the
change what time the kids go to
school.
So if we wanted to change what
time the kids go to school
Mister president senator I think
it makes a lot more sense to
just change what time the kids
go to school as opposed to
you love it since their kiddos
to school at nine to ten o'clock
in the morning and they've seen
improve test results improve
learning everything around that
give them so I think this this
argument of the kids going to
school in the dark that somehow
we wouldn't be smart enough to
ensure that the we're going to
school in the dark but you know
bus in the dark and they seem to
make it work Mister president
senator and you know I I hear
that argument and and although I
I want to value child safety
one of the things always
Argued on the school board was
we would always in the high
schoolers to school the earliest
in the day.
latest above the high school
start time just an hour hour and
a half you actually get better
results.
For the high school and the
elementary kids because of the
haven't come out of that but you
know that's just one of the
things that that we know from
how the human body and and I
remember because I was on this
wonderful committee in this
start bringing this bill a
really respected doctor in the
state of New Mexico used to come
and testify on this bill the
member who that was.
Because and he actually is a
huge advocate of stopping the
time change because twice a year
we see this big spike.
argument wasn't which time zone
you should be on his argument
was we need to quit changing our
times it messes with our
biological clock in less you got
Arizona has been doing this for
years and it's worked really
well there that'll see that
spike in heart attacks it is
directly related to the time
change and they've proven that
because I I wanted you to be I
wanted to be Pirtle time not
Brandt time.
Thank you senator brand we do
have for the debate Senator
Tallman.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you as senator for bringing this
bill forward and we worked very
hard on and you're very
committed and.
according to the an aunt and
analysis of.
The.
Steve Kopelman this is it who's
you remember what the.
Why the county of the reasons
why the county association
supported this.
and those types of issues but
that that was what I I believe I
remember is is really that extra
hour in the evening for for
senator are just one other quick
question
Could you expand little bit
about the the criteria that the
federal government we use and
Congress has I think three bills
now and one of them is is moving
Congress is working on now and
so this this bill would just
help support the argument and
arguments of of those that are
that are supporting this at the
federal level.
Representative tuition debate.
Mr president yes Senator
Gonzales Mr president
Mr president and members some.
Of this is not about.
Higher bills but you know
Senator pearls and myself we
And not with what has been known
mentioned today Mr president a
member is some.
You know all about the southern
part of the state and then the
different concerns.
And you saw a couple of weeks
the kind of weather that we were
having.
And you take come.
You take of the children from a
angel fire Chama tiles probably
anywhere nor than from from
Albuquerque.
Five to twenty minutes on the
local sub weather is very very
harmful.
You know when children are on
below zero weather waiting for
transportation.
you know so if you were to have
children waiting for
transportation under daylight
saving you know for you take huh
normal route from anywhere from
Makes a big big difference and
this is one of the reasons why
you know I had always worked you
know in looking at the other
part but I do agree you know
that changing from one to
part on Mr president members I
just wanted to express that part
thank you.
Thank you senator is.
We do have a floor amendment.
During that time a reader will
go ahead and read.
Senate floor amendment number
Senator Lopez before we go ahead
and and move and explain the
amendment is given a number of
times so that way people have a
chance to get that out there
Senator Lopez of ahead of moving
explain what the amendment as.
But a lot of material on this
bill from constituents and for
people around the state probably
because I expressed an interest
move the I move amendment one to
Senate bill one oh two thank you
senator go ahead now and explain
with amendment as thank you Mr
president I apologize.
Senator Hickey announced about a
or said and what Senator Pirtle
has been up showing us and what
Senator Brandt has been talking
accidents in the streets that's
a time where people last year in
two years ago this the
assistance the legislative
assistance to my sweet even
it simply exempt New Mexico from
federal daylight savings time.
Many states have done that
and so I think the amendment
which we just wrote is pretty
We would take immediate action
to exempt New Mexico from
federal daylight savings time
and it's simply states New
Mexico will no longer
questions Senator we are going
to be Senator I turn it over to
my co sponsor US senator Bobby
Gonzalez Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you Mr president and
earlier than they normally do.
And the that is a big thing and
the one life that gets injured
is too many.
a big big responsibility you
know to everyone so you know in
those reasons and I just saw the
science has been mentioned in
the research you know of change
And Mr president with that of
will stand for questions thank
you senator we are debating
Senate foreman of all go to
Senate fertile thank you Mr
president and I think you can
president and you know I would
urge the body to to strike this
down if if the desire is to
debate whether or not we go to
piece and and guiding it and and
implementing something else and
this presents center if the
sponsor the amendment would you
Senator love is the health yes
Mr president.
For all of the time that we are
in the mountain time zone I
believe it would be how much
daylight.
Yes I yield to my co sponsored
as president.
Thank you Mr president yes to co
sponsor of the amendment.
And Mister president senator
that that's not correct four
months of the year would be the
same time as Colorado.
And then eight months of the
confusing because guess what now
Mr president Senators.
We're the same time as el Paso
for only four months of the
year.
And eight months of the year
behind Texas three hours behind
New York and would potentially
be the same time as California
eight months out of the year.
one very very sweetly and making
it the painless.
And that's where we came up with
permanent daylight saving time.
And Mister president senator can
you tell me how many states
Mr president let me look at some
of the stuff I've gotten I
believe it's well Arizona I
believe it's three.
Mr president the answers one.
in the United States Senator
Lopez Mr president I do not know
that of because none of them
have been accepted by the
federal government.
And Mister president senator I
their constitution in order to
pass permit daylight saving time
legislation.
Mr president I do not know that.
Mr president senator the answer
constitution that kept them
within the federal guidelines
and then the legislature came in
and pass legislation that would
have them on permanent daylight
And you know I find it funny
because I get contacted by by
constituents in every single
district I've had constituents
we want permanent daylight
saving time and here's why a
perfect example of Senator
Gonzales is district is a have
you softer and we all know New
Mexico is not a a rich state we
that he doesn't get off work
till five o'clock.
And if we went to permanent
standard time Mister president
senator.
He wouldn't be able to have
soccer practice kiddos would
kids can get out and play that
they can have that extra hour of
daylight in the evening.
That we have that time to
barbecue and enjoy time with
with our family.
Has been standard time and they
did that in the very beginning
but this option to go to
standard has been here for many
many years not one state has
the largest states in population
and land mass California.
Went to the people the people
said we want daylight saving
time year round.
So I think we need to be careful
in how we do this.
as presented to you in in my
bill.
Would require federal action.
And so I would ask the body to
reject this amendment Senator
on this one similar to it on the
other one about the health
concerns go at their more heart
attacks and it's the change so I
actually looked it up and we
attacks and car accidents with
an end of three hundred million
means it's a very small my new
change in health and we probably
shouldn't be making our
decisions on such a small
in car accidents and heart
attacks when we switch the other
way there is actually a slight
decrease in heart attacks and
car accidents and so using that
help as one of the reasons why
Number of cases when we have
three hundred million people
making the change every year.
And then we actually get it back
on the other side so for yeah
school in the morning that might
be more useful area of debate
but the I think it's more
personal preference than
actually trying to use data to
indicate that this is good or
to close on the amendment.
Mr president I believe that some
really good points were made by
Senator Pirtle about the details
because he's been working on
meet my emails have been don't
change let's just pick a time
and stick to it and the vast
preference has been for staying
on mountain standard
and the preference was to stay
on mountain and not not move to
daylight savings but this is not
a but necessarily a a popularity
contest about what is the what.
this amendment has tried to do
if we actually had a debate in
which both possibilities were
considered and we had studies on
Saying that.
Senator Gonzales has been trying
to do this for many years and
has been unsuccessful and he's
been unsuccessful in the Senate
what I think would be important
is for both sides to get
together evaluate of the data
and make the best decision for
New Mexicans and with that I
Mr president members of known
very well everything has been
very well stated thank you.
Thank you senators we are voting
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd
senator Byrd now Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
no Senator Duhigg Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto now
Senator how to meal.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Moores no Senator manos.
Senator Munoz no senator
Neville.
No Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope
no Senator Prochnow Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator share no Senator Shendo
Senator Shendo no Senator sold.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart noted Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman no senator
Wirth.
Hemphill known Senator Rodriguez
Senator Rodriguez no.
failed to pass we are back on
the bill Senators.
Senator Sedillo Lopez we're back
on the bill.
Any further debate on the bill.
bill one oh two do now pass and
that we follow the rules and
have a roll call vote.
Senator is where voting on
Senate bill one oh two two year
seats.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria Senator serve on this
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez no Senator Gonzales now
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator had a meal now Senator
Kernan.
yes senator Munoz.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Stewart no Senator
Pinto.
So Senator Pinto no Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez no Senator Sedillo
Lopez now Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart noted Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
has passed the Senate Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president and
members of the body.
Thank you moving on we'll go to
the next order of business.
twice amended on final passage
been taken is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the no objection senator Wirth
to explain the bill thank you Mr
bill will do is.
Prevents the motor vehicles
department from suspending
driver's licenses for pale it
failure to pay fines.
does not apply to a whole range
of criminal cases were
suspension of driver's licenses.
Is warranted done apply to child
support we're driver's licenses
the court the one remedy that's
being taken away here is a
remedy that motor vehicle
division has to suspend fees.
Now here's the thing this is
interesting and I I continue to
senator Wirth.
And and I just want and and it's
something that's happening at
the national level and a whole
number of states and I go
through the list have done this
based drivers suspension and I
just want to read Grover
Norquist's quote in support of
what we're doing here because I
Americans for tax reform denying
a person's denying it a person a
driver's license because they
all money creates a modern
So that's what this bill does
this bill basically leaves all
the other remedies to the judge
so the person still got all the
money there still can be a bench
And that's what the bill does
and again I want to thank
Senator Woods because I think
he.
When we talked about and Senate
finance.
He T. brought it right down to
good good bipartisan support on
this now the Senate finance and
I do think this is this makes a
lot of sense for a lot of
reasons people should not have
their.
Senate bill seven as twice
amended.
We do have debate we have
Senator.
thank you Mr president.
The one thing with this bill is.
President of twenty five dollars
speeding ticket.
Turns into a hundred and seven
dollar ticket because we have
all of the special fees that we
The ticket itself is really to
influence behaviour slowdown.
The the the actual penalties.
It's all of the other fees that
we pile on fees after free after
few has nothing to do with the
the whole idea of influencing
people to do the right thing on
the road.
Would make a lot more sense it
would make sense to everybody
the driver the state everybody.
The no go debtors prison or
whatever we call that over
there.
But there's a way to do it in
the way to do it is to take off
all of those extra charges that
The speeding tickets twenty five
dollars but the fees make it
over a hundred.
So thank you Mr president thank
you senator share centers for
those who are participating
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor yield seventy yield I do
thank you thank you Mr president
and senator of me I I haven't
seen this bill
president that's a great
question and I I'll take you
because there's different fees
and I couldn't agree more with
Senator share part of the
problem here is that we have
list of all the times that
licenses can be suspended and
should be suspended quite
frankly and basically these are
those you know when there's a
penalty assessment that doesn't
it's it's those at the bottom of
the list that don't involve you
know felonies D. W. eyes those
kinds of nature points and
that's spelled out in the in the
Which I think we all have a bit
of familiarity with.
Which I believe is a twenty five
dollar first offense and a fifty
dollar second offense
so if you don't pay it you're
gonna be consequences it's just
it takes away motor vehicles
ability to take away your right
to drive thank you Mr president
and that was a little bit of a
On that on the you you brought
up that the still or have to pay
it how does that take place now.
If you pass the US is that
giving now go on my credit
if you don't pay your fines or
fees the court has a process
where they can move forward and
issue a bench warrant and they
a real problem here we created a
system where there are huge
fines and fees.
And so it kind of pulls people
into this it death spiral what
this bill does I think the
exist for the court just don't
take away the person's right to
drive to work so they can make
the money to pay the fee and
that's what this bill is doing
this presents an and I I really
for me but I understand we're
saying we we've got all let them
have you know they have cars to
get to work especially in New
places in the state were so
rural we're not New York but all
get off the soapbox
and get back to the bill
Take place what I do here is a
little bit of a coup by on
enrollment and I'm expecting by
next year to see a bill with
the.
then to to build new courthouses
and to pay for the staff of the
court houses and to do all these
other things we just piled on
all these other fees.
And you're done.
That's where it needs to be and
that's what we need to get back
to thank you.
Thanks Center brand we do we
have any further debate we do
have for the debate senator
the Senate for all these fees
and fines that we keep piling on
piling on piling on you know
you're one of us gets a great
idea that taxed and driving is
bad and we have to work years
president because of someone in
like it's sort of secretary
number one forever never.
And so you give us great idea
Texan driving should be a twenty
including those law all these
are.
Service for the medical
difficulties affect the internet
just went out for second thank
a little bit off the subject a
bill that was brought up by
Senator Brandt in this debate
for the sponsor of the route of
the old memories of the texting
while driving and this has some
current law to resuming while
driving.
Senator Wirth do you yield.
Mr president and Senator on
Fontaine's are the answer to
legislation again if it's a
standalone device now if you're
using a headset.
That's that's an exception and
that's in the law.
so it has a built into your.
texting that's a problem under
the law I think was present
thank you for yielding a center
where they did not make sure I
can enjoy every minute of my
committee work and the Senate
Si no further debate so I'm
sorry we have set and saying no
further debate we have senator
to close thank you Mr president
I appreciate the debate I think
there's no question we have.
made is you know right now we
put someone in jail for not
paying their fees and take away
their driver's license this bill
takes one piece off the table
and I do look forward to working
action for not excuse me that
the.
Senate bill seven is twice
Amanda do now pass and I ask for
a roll call vote centers we're
voting on Senate bill seven is
twice amended to your seats
Senator Brandt passes senator
Byrd.
Senator Byrd now Senator Campos.
Duhigg Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores senator Morris
yes senator one of yours.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator by the a yes.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
senator.
Senator Sanchez no Senators
committees.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Tallman yes Senator Tallman yes
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator Brandt no.
By a vote of thirty four in the
formative six on the negative
Senate bill seven this twice
amended has passed the Senate
Norquist's organization to sign
a pledge that I would not raise
taxes and I never signed that
pledge I stopped getting the the
senator Wirth thank you ladies
and gentlemen Senate.
Will move on to the next item.
On the calendar we have so we
have item number five.
forty one as far as amended on
final passage has been taken so
subject to debate amendment or
substitution see no objections
Senator to explain the bill.
impact aid forest reserve and
half mill levy credits.
We started taking credit for the
says we're not going to do that
anymore.
And certainly we have put into
the budget the hold harmless
needed for the school districts
capital outlay process hi
looking at a ten year average of
unrestricted capital outlay to
take into account of the funding
period of time there are many
projects in process right now of
capital outlay none of that will
be impacted it'll take several
match so local matches could go
up over a period of years that's
essentially what the bill does
Mr president and I stand for
questions.
Thank thank you Mr present with
sponsor you.
I will
and I don't really have any
questions but I want to on let
grants and Gallup central is not
there and impacted is always
been an issue in the way they
got credit for the school
district so the.
The legislators of their the
us a the house members they want
to do it and so senator Sanchez
and I started this journey and
and I know representative L.
column had started awhile back
and I think I cared and even at
that money is what you call
payment in lieu of taxes what
the feds called impact aid to
those districts that that don't
have the the property tax
the dogs on the leash and and
that was kind of setting well
we're trying to do is fix the
problem for those kids.
And it affects almost every kid
bases Albuquerque there's
military bases and so it's not
just for for native kids it's
it's for those that have federal
lands are federally impacted on
and that was an issue and it's
not an issue for them to keep
their money and we're fixing
this problem now.
But I want people to know that
just because you get impact aid
for their services so in Gallup
we have two high schools
roughly eighty percent are
native American kids
resolved and Senator Stewart was
involved in along the way in the
last couple years and a lot of
other people
but the way that Senator Stewart
said it up according to the
that's a that's a good agreement
but I think the most important
thing that that I want to get
out of this and the school
districts had sent a letter a
year ago two years ago the green
we'll have plenty of money to do
this affect in the and he's not
there anymore but the one of the
Zinni superintendent said you
know I think their shares
even those any have zero match
so I may have to look that
further down the line.
But this fixes a lot of problems
for us in McKinley county.
and they're still maintenance
center blocks it's kind of
embarrassing for three to drive
thirty miles to Gallup to play
baseball or to practice it is
hard for twenty percent of the
of the tax paying citizens to
bear the burden for for
everything and it was done wrong
in the beginning I wasn't here
and I'm not gonna blame whoever
did it but it's getting fixed
those kids will be better off to
be better educated they'll have
a lot more services they'll have
share we don't need to football
stadiums but we can have
football stadiums with doors on
the bathroom
it's just it's just going to
help our district and can help
so.
To the sponsor thank you I know
this is been a long journey for
for a few legislators in a few
legislators are handed Center
Sanchez to he needs some thank
credit it's our kids better off
so thank you Mr president thank
you centerman yes we do have for
the debate we have Senator I've
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
I'm so
I didn't hear this I'm not in
any the either the committees
that heard it so I I just have
some real basic questions we've
Irrelevant in terms of what they
got for their educational system
everybody got the same.
able to get.
Federal money in addition to the
SCG and all the other districts
won't get that federal money.
title money is not in our state
equalization guarantee.
We have kept the state
equalization guaranteed whole by
So the formula is still
equalized these districts are
getting more funding that other
districts are not.
not part of the SCG.
So it.
It does add some deceitful as a
What we've done with the capital
outlay is to take it into
account.
And not just for the impact they
so that we a just local Max's
from any district that has a
on restricted so if if this
match will increase as it should
because I have outlay formula is
designed to give more money to
those districts that cannot
raise any money.
can be used for both capital and
operating.
And is there any any room.
The stated distinction B. or or
a division between the two.
The local districts console with
their tribal authorities on how
to use the funds and report to
the PED and the legislature
every year how they spent the
date I mean it's.
You know the nobody really
understands what's allowed.
And let me also say that.
that all has gone to the
districts what we've done is
reduced their SCG.
So
So we haven't in the past.
require them to use it in any
certain way it does require that
they have the tribal
consultation and that's federal
law already for just reinstating
Thank you thank you senator I
I'm just reacting I guess two
online in the analysis that I
saw this is this means that
districts that don't receive
impact aid Mister president.
it is a zero sum game there's
only so much money we can make
the pie bigger which we've done.
But the individual district
shares are going to be smaller
because the districts that
other districts will have less
funding because we have put the
money into the budget into the
SCG from the general fund.
so they're not getting any less
the impact they districts will
get more that's a better way to
think of it.
And they needed.
I would Mister president senator
I would respectfully say that if
you tell me that we're going to
cut this cake up this birthday
cake up we're going to divide it
cakes gonna be a lot bigger.
Yeah I'll only the same a cake
but it's not the same equity
that it was before.
It reduces the effectiveness we
can't brag about our SCG the way
we used to be able to thank you
just introduce a pandemic we do
have further debate we have
a long journey that everyone
well quite a few people have
worked on over over time and one
thing I appreciate is we have
now and included the half mill
supported doing whatever we need
to do through.
Capital outlay process is to get
us a better situation across the
state and certainly in the area
years they have said that New
Mexico is one of three states
with a very equitable formula
and I've been proud of that
because the history of that and
our schools to relying on the
general fund it became fair and
I know they were districts at
that time that that actually
lost a lot of revenue if you
you so I believe that was fair
to do this and even though it
was more area that
probably felt that they were
they were not being treated
certainly support this I think
my only concern is down the road
I mean we're talking about
back feeling we're talking about
putting money and to hold
and it's some point we may not
be able to do that at the level
even though it's recurring it's
still if it could be a problem
down the road and I do
remains and that becomes a very
fair process because you know
with the formula now that
changed a couple of years ago
and again we had districts that
simply could not build standard
facility so I'm gonna support
the bill and I appreciate your
hard work on it and and I do
Senators.
Si no further debate center
store to close.
I want to thank Senator Kernan
president I move that Senate
bill forty one is twice amended
do now pass and ask for a roll
call vote senators two seats
please we're voting on Senate
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs Senator great
jazz Senator Hamblen Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator how to meal.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator monos.
Senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator street is yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Stefanics Senator subreddits yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn is Senator Stewart.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond this.
Mr president.
Level four in the affirmative
there on the negative Senate
bill forty one just by amended
today's calendar Senate bill
seventy two as amended with
emergency clause Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president before I begin I need
Resent of Bill.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president I move this
Records show that all action for
placing Senate Bill number
substitution Sen objects
incentive explained about.
Thank you Mr president last year
we passed a bill in his house
bill fifty that to allow the
primarily the purpose of
deferring taxes primarily
property taxes for projects of
the that the county or a city
might want to implement in their
are the that bill said Senate
bill or house bill fifty last
year expanded that provision to
allow for
industrial revenue bonds to be
if you have a excuse me if you
have a Facebook project or
something similar to that.
That to.
Facility will draw employees and
those people will be a single
It's beneficial in throughout
whenever you do a transmission
line that isn't the case others
after the construction is
completed there are no new
payment in lieu of provisions
within the negotiated I. R. B.
so that they can of benefit
primarily their schools of the
only apply to aware of the under
current law where the power line
is currently located and the
problem there is that typically
you don't build transmission
lines in the most populated
can negotiate a payment in lieu
of the property tax based on the
millage of each school district
within that county or city could
be a city as well.
so that's to the bill that I
would stand for questions thank
you senator bill we're debating
Senate bill seventy two is
excuse Senator when US until he
returns to the chamber thank you
senator Senator among us is in
the chamber.
execute Senator yes
Representative the chamber to
Lee returns thank you thank you
thank you Senator Lopez saying
no further debate.
bill you know daylight savings
time really messes with a lot of
people and it and it makes it
very difficult for folks to
build concentrate away to second
that was an hour ago never mind.
Senate bill senators amended
with emergency clause do now
pass and ask for a roll call
vote Senator is tier seats
please.
We're voting.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator hit yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Moores.
Senator Munoz.
Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator committees.
Senator street is yes Senator
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Pinto.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative there on the
negative Senate bill seventy two
as amended with emergency clause
has passed the Senate senator
Neville.
Mr president and members of the
Senate I ask unanimous consent.
Of the Senate that the record
show that all action for placing
Senate bill.
debate amendment for
substitution.
Say no objection Sierra field
explain with the build us thank
you Mr president this is the one
have
Republican whip Craig.
Brandt as well as Representative
Liz Thomson as co sponsors this
Without one word of change the
last year we got through the
Senate go through one house.
Committee and then we ran out of
residential long term care
facilities.
They have these facilities are
have the following features
number one you pay a significant
upfront costs anywhere from a
addition to the initial fee
there is is significant.
monthly fee of three to five
thousand dollars.
And number three the these
facilities provide provide a
care and memory care they've
become increasingly popular with
folks who have the necessary
financial resources.
However a.
Having Carter.
On the.
The facility in my district
which is so of the largest of
The summer of two thousand
eighteen this time Senator I
have been working with the.
Group of residents who have have
us.
Senator concerns what are those
And Oklahoma Santa Fe in
Colorado number two the quality
of care is then slipping
complaints about the quality of
food and the quality of other
So the residents contract
contacted the administration
nothing happened annual
financial reports were sent to
the department of aging and long
term services however they
that right quipped their staff
for this these documents that on
a shelf until the summer of two
thousand nineteen when cabinet
to work with me to a draft to
build and help me shepherd the
bill through the legislature.
This bill is in recognition of
the department's commitment to
That every year the.
The plan be submitted.
What through with a lot of
residents who what would happen
Review disclosure documents
filed with the with the state
and number three.
It the man said the bills to
allow any person to report
of two thousand eighteen to
invest ask them to investigate
the financial reports of a high
have one further lifestyle
group.
violations were hopefully it's
eventually we will be able to
find out what those violations
are.
So Mister chair and
In conclusion is important at
Mr president this concludes my
remarks I stand for questions
thank you Mr president.
with this bill yeah we both have
these communities in our
district and the one in my
district is the neighborhood in
Rio Rancho and they reached out
facility actually on the board
so that they have a voice we did
that a few years back but they
continue to have issues and
these homes these community care
centers and of there you are
concerned about the amount of
they love and so some of these
controls are being put in place
to try to help to mitigate that
should happen and to hopefully
keep it from happening and so I
to age thank you Mr president
and thank you Sir Tolman for let
me be on the bill with you.
Thank you Senator Brandt Senator
this I also have one of these
facilities here in Santa Fe
that's a a terrific place but
they have had some real
challenges with exactly the
potentially having that
investment go away I think it's
something that this this bill
will really help with so again I
in fact I think I carried a bill
it's something I appreciate for
the constituents by
Representative and certainly as
for the bill thank you.
Thank you senator Wirth any
further debate senators.
bill numerous times I guess it
it took Senator Brandt join in
with him to get this to where
it's at right now it should be a
lesson for all our new folks you
so it's just a it's a testament
to Center common stick to it if
necessary civilians to keep this
up I heard from many of those
residents on their very grateful
CNN center common to close on
the bill.
Thank you Mr president I move
that.
negative by a roll call vote
thank you Mr president thank you
thank you senator where voting
centers tier states.
The clerk to call the roll.
DS Senator Campos Senator Campos
yes senator Candelaria.
Senator serve on this Senator
server is yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator Lopez
yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez Senator submitted yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Serpentis yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Stewart.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes.
you Mr president thank you
members of the Senate.
Thank you all we'll go to
senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business messages
from the governor on that order
In accordance with article four
section forty two of the New
Mexico constitution I hereby
submit to the Senate rules
committee the following
nominations for appointment.
Trish Ruiz.
Chandler Nicole head for
appointment as student regent to
the eastern New Mexico
university board of regents for
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring on
confirmation and expiring on
December thirty one two thousand
twenty two.
Barry Lyndon Haviland for
appointment to the western New
Mexico university board of
Mexico university board of
regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation and expiring
on December thirty one two
thousand twenty two.
Montoya for appointment to the
New Mexico military institute
board of regents for a term
commencing upon confirmation and
expiring in December thirty one
two thousand twenty six
expiring on December thirty one
two thousand twenty two.
Cathrynn N. gray for
reappointment to the New Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired board of
regents for a term commencing
regents for a term commencing
upon confirmation and expiring
on December thirty one two
thousand twenty six.
David a look pray for
appointment to the New Mexico
institute of mining and
Mexico institute of mining and
technology board of regents for
term commencing upon
confirmation and expiring on
December thirty one two thousand
on December thirty one two
thousand twenty two respectfully
submitted Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor journal so the message
from the governor has been
received Senator Wirth thank you
referred Senate bill three fifty
four has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
vote on them with one motion the
journal reflect their act upon
individually no objection the
reader to read Senate Joint
Memorial four do pass and it's
Hence Senate bill for twelve a
do not pass but that Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill for twelve to pass
and it's referred to the
Live it up my report is about
the committee report.
See no objection the committee
for has been adopted in the
journal show their act fund
individually.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
hundred eleven an act relating
to housing clarifying the
requirement for a written
statement of deductions in
certain circumstances increasing
certain civil penalties
issuance of a judgment of
restitution prior to a writ of
restitution.
Clarifying that issuance and
execution of a writ of
restitution our state during an
council providing duties
declaring an emergency house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill one eleven.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill one
for House Bill one eleven.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill two
sixty two an act relating to
energy creating the energy
installation website by the
energy minerals and natural
resources department requiring
reports House Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee and Senate finance
committee that's house energy
and natural resources committee
substitute for house bill two
assessment requirements for
students in kindergarten through
second grade House Bill to
twenty one this bill through
twenty one having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate Education Committee
administration act creating the
grants administration division
creating the grant opportunities
council providing powers and
duties creating a fund making
appropriations House Bill
fourteen House Bill three oh
three can introduced by
Representative Zachary cook and
actually need to liquor control
specifying unlawful inducements
house bill three oh three House
Bill to seventeen introduced by
representative Cadena and act
relating to higher education
amending the requirements for
eligibility for a student to
Senate Education Committee
that's house bill two seventeen
house health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill two hundred ten an act
Committee substitute for House
Bill to ten.
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill to ten house bill
one ninety eight introduced by
Representative Madrid.
An act relating to
been read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Education
Committee that's house bill one
ninety eight house bill ninety
six introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero.
trade business or profession.
And acting a new section of the
uniformed licensing act to
prohibit the exclusion from
professional licensure of Purton
persons with certain criminal
house bill two oh one introduced
by representative Cadena.
An act relating to
appropriations allowing a
minimum or medium risk defendant
Bill tool one.
House bill two thirty introduced
by Representative Daymon Ely and
act relating to real estate
licensure adding a definition
amending the real estate
referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee that's house bill two
thirty.
And house bill two seventy one
introduced by Representative
Jason Harper.
transportation fee fund making
appropriation house bill two
seventy one to seventy one
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Senate tax
business and transportation
for just a minute we can hold in
place please.
correct.
So we have house bill one ninety
eight.
Having been read twice by title
is referred to sent to Senate
finance committee that's house
bill one ninety eight to Senate
finance committee.
business senator Wirth thank you
Mr president so that is it for
the day and before we.
Go to committee chairs after
consultation with.
Saturday for a floor session I
think the committees.
Have a lot of work that needs to
get on Saturday and Sunday and
it makes sense to focus on those
committee so just for committee
Senator vont this in center cels
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you Mr president the
Senate health and public affairs
committee will meet at three
Of bills but a and try to see
the senators here bye Tallman
Steinborn Hamblen handlers were
carrying over Hickey.
one thirty and on Sunday will
have
a similar agenda were starting
the Senator servant this is bill
three seventy six so members pay
Thank you Mr president with the
adjustment to our schedule for
the week and I'm gonna take
advantage of that a little bit
so the Senate judiciary
committee will meet tomorrow
although the published agenda
have morning committees to get
some time in there for lunch
those are one thirty tomorrow
for Senate Judiciary Committee
will start today and Senate
Judiciary Committee at three
meet at our normal time or our
new normal time of eight thirty
on Monday morning I think we're
hearing almost exclusively house
built at this time.
Today thank you thank you
senator Senator Shendo
Representative your Senate tax
business and transportation
committee will be meeting
tomorrow at one so we will start
Senate conservation committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
nine AM there's a Senate
memorial and that Senate bill on
the agenda thank you.
Thank you senator.
Alamogordo
Long time Alamogordo community
leader.
Eddie Olson passed away
yesterday at the age of ninety
nine.
several years and Eddie was
Hey we're is a great family
friend of ours is a his wife
great great people great great
family.
Alamogordo.
if you'd like to make a comment
or two about a.
Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator this is truly a great
loss for the community although
they were involved in just about
everything including the the
community
the the commission and and of
overlapping into the county
and and your who just passed the
sometime ago
will be missed by everyone in
Otero county thank you Mr
president thank you senator Byrd
In the drink a we got was a
Harvey Wall Graham.
And Jagger Eddie's wife used to
make car the wall Bangor cage
because Eddie was such a dynamic
part of Alamogordo and and that
if I could just ask for a quick
moment of silence for for any
ocean and his family.
In honor Senator grades and
senator Byrd's constituent.
Thank you Mr president members
to kind of retaking my old role
as chair of rules since the
chairman is not hearing this
vice chair is not here I am
announcing that Senate rules
you Leader worth for the break
and so I think people will be
going home this weekend and
those of you who live in the
east and south of the state I do
really appreciated if you and
your families when to cross the
border and let me quote factor I
need here.
I don't know why they're doing
it but it's certainly from a
the school nurse and actually
drive thank you very much.
Hey Senator Hickey do we have
any further announcements
Senator sure.
Thank you Mr president.
Too bad we're not chickens
because then we would be free
range we could leave.
But but Mr president I think I
want to yield to a Senator brand
Thank you Mr president so you
know there's a great song out
there by being Crosby that I'd
Don't fence me in let me ride
through the wide open country
that I love.
Don't fence me in thank you Mr
president.
Thank you Mr president
I just want to you know there's
been a lot of talk about the
fencing outside.
And I think.
We for gotten.
I can tell you is a.
Retired Air Force officer you
know.
I've dealt with this living in a
Threats have been made to state
capitals.
We see the state capitol in
Idaho it rushed.
So I say that because this is
serious this isn't joking
around.
This is about the safety of
everyone this is a non partisan
the staff here and it's about
our safety here.
Now other states might not have
fencing.
And I don't have the
intelligence.
We have an elected official from
the state that was arrested.
For being invading the capital.
So.
Everyone in here.
And I would just say let's come
together let's not joke about
this I I really wish we didn't
have a fence.
There were protests on the
internet.
And that this capital using
terms of storm the capitol and
rushed around house.
See no further announcements
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president and thanks the members
is the end of the week and.
You know rather than go through
the list of all the people and
all the work that they do I just
I just think let's all stand for
This has been an extraordinarily
coverings and just respecting
all of us and again we got we
got a busy two weeks coming up
but let's take a breath and then
Mr president the server thank
you for that I I do want to just
thank the staff for the I want
to ask the reader to make sure
his voice is well rested over
the weekend and get lots of
fluids because you can be very
Wirth thank you Mr president
unanimous consent we stand in
recess until eleven o'clock on
Monday morning I see no
objections the Senate to Senate
races to eleven AM Monday
morning.
