Senator Candelaria.
Senators around this Senator
Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Hickey.
That Senator Hickey I see there.
Okay.
Thank you.
Senator Ingle.
Senator McKenna here.
Senator Moores.
Senator my nose.
Senator Neville.
Senator o'neill.
Senator probe.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator songes.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth.
Please stand for the invocation
given this morning by zoom by
reference Madeline Hart Anderson
pastor of Westminster
Presbyterian church in Santa Fe.
morning by Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
and the salute to the New Mexico
flag by Senator share.
Our creator who has created an
is creating.
Last with your guests of cold
and snow.
creation does not belong to us
but to you.
Keep us in a healthy balance
with the rest of creation remind
us that you desire for all of it
Your justice roll down like the
waters bringing injustices to
the surface and making us full.
need tending farms ringing up
purchases writing policy.
You have this body in particular
as they gather to work together
last that the regions they
represent.
Offer them wisdom guidance
compassion and empathy as they
need us show me clear paths
forward through the legislative
process.
peoples and all waters the black
bear and the yucca this whole
state might flourish and while
they work in this room of last
families and communities all
this and more we ask the name of
the god who was and is and shall
be on then.
I salute the flag.
off us thank you madam president
good morning to you as well
unanimous consent we go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous if there's no
words in your blessings
I certainly did.
Note and think a lot about kind
of the world outside we get in
see those longer days and I also
really appreciate your blessing
for all of our staff and all the
people that make this place work
is it really takes all the folks
And he very much appreciates all
the prayers that have been sent
his way in taxes he deals with a
family issue he wanted to make
sure everyone knows he's been
With that ideal to Senator Lopez
and then after announcements to
let everyone know we're going to
do.
Senator Lopez I thank you very
much Mr majority floor leader in
Madam president unanimous
consent to excuse Senator
Stefanics o'neill serve on tests
and Shendo until they return to
the chamber.
I thank you madam president the
today we're lucky enough to have
some visitors from Los Lunas as
you know no lo Salinas's one of
the bright spots in our state
that these administrators have
really handled the growth well
in the area managing that type
of growth is really just a large
A Susan do Chavez the chief
student services officer.
Deborah elder chief academic
officer.
And the superintendent Arsenio
Other announcements Senator
Duhigg.
Thank you madam president I have
special ed students and she is
now getting her masters in
social work from New Mexico
highlands university and looks
forward to being a leader and
Other announcements or
miscellaneous Senator Brandt.
Madam president I need unanimous
from Senator Brandt to Senator
Woods.
So is that a generic bill
Senator Brandt yes ma'am present
this.
miscellaneous Senator Gonzales.
Good morning madam president and
thank you I wanted to share with
the with the body home you know
here and this morning I have a
phone call for my grandson who
is almost five years old.
And the his name is some
terrible and he tells me because
You know so he just gave me that
extra charge for this last week
that we have but you know that's
what it's all about but very
nice to hear that kind of a
Thank you madam president so the
planned today is to do the
messages and committee reports
up on the table and then we have
folks down forced the
number nine.
So with that madam president
unanimous consent we go to that
our business messages from the
governor.
There's no objection or on the
order of Business messages from
state Senate dear president pro
tempore a Stewart and members of
the Senate pursuant to article
four section five B. two of the
various transportation
regulation from the public
regulation commission to the
department of transportation
transferring personnel functions
carry the limiting from the
motor carrier act we Dundon
permits for transportation of
passengers or household goods
pursuant to a contract removing
traffic rules and amending
repealing and acting various
related sections of the MSA
nineteen seventy eight
respectfully yours Michelle
Thank you madam president Ms
because I'm going out of
business messages from the
house.
There's no objection or on that
order of Business messages from
the house the reader will re.
five as amended by the house
House Bill fifty six and request
the concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
go that our business
confirmations.
Let me go back then president
let's do unanimous consent we
got out of business committee
reports.
If there's no objection were on
same with recommendation that do
pass respectfully submitted
George my nose chair.
For on a.
Favorable committee report is
seeing no objection the
committee report is adopted.
and report same with
recommendation that do pass and
that's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
Benny Shendo junior chair.
That was consent of the Senate
that three to be allowed to read
all of the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion and that the general
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
will read all the committee
Benny Shendo junior chair.
Senator Hamblen.
I move the adoption of the
committee reports run a
three has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that do pass
events referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
report is surjection seeing none
the committee report is adopted.
Sir Peter Wirth.
Thank you madam president
so just we're waiting for the
rules committee reports which we
need to get ready and before we
unanimous consent we go that our
business introduction
legislation.
There's no objection were on
that order business introduction
of legislation reader to read.
application of two thirds of the
states for the limited purpose
of proposing amendments to the
United States constitution to
limit the size scope and
Senate joint resolution fifteen.
Senate joint resolution fifteen
having read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
act relating to public projects.
Thank.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill fifty
five.
And act relating to public
private partnership board
creating the public private
partnership project fund
providing for an exemption to
the procurement code authorizing
five house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill fifty
five.
Having read twice by title is
referred to the Senate Judiciary
Committee cents to the Senate
relating to veterinary medicine
requiring issuance of six month
temporary permits to practice
veterinary medicine to certain
non resident veterinarians
located in New Mexico House Bill
fifty six house bill fifty six
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed is ordered
by the courts corrections and
justice committee and act
relating to courts providing
flexibility and changing
requirements for payment of
referred to the Senate health
and public affairs committee
since to the Senate Judiciary
Committee House Bill eighty one.
committee reports three victory.
Madam president your committees
committee to home is been
referred Senate bill one ninety
eight has had it under
consideration and provide same
Senator Wirth.
Just move adoption reduction
we're adoption of a favorable
committee report seeing no
No objection were back in the
order of business announcements
miscellaneous senator Wirth
thank you madam president so
what we're gonna do what we wait
for the committee reports I
think center Hermio is back I
think what we'll do is a few of
wait for the report again versus
jumping in a third reading I see
Senator Lopez also has an
announcement she'd like to make
Senator Lopez I thank you madam
president majority floor leader
I thank you madam president
unanimous consent we go about
our business confirmations
ideals Senator meal there's no
objection were on that order of
mortgage finance authority I now
yield to senator sold their
souls thank you madam president
pursuant to send executive order
not number thirty one dated
October twenty eight twenty
twenty one I move that the
conferee thank you Dr Solomon is
works at New Mexico state in the
college of engineering she has
an extensive resume in all kinds
all of that and would appreciate
that we passer confirmation.
Is there debate on the
confirmation.
confirmation of Patricia
Sullivan to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
Sullivan as a member of the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority for term commencing on
October twenty eight twenty
twenty one an expiring January
one twenty twenty four has been
who's been appointed to the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority I now yield to senator
Gonzalez Senator Gonzalez thank
That I move that the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
of on his way is to the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority.
hasn't a very extensive
background he is a graduate from
New Mexico military institute
Ross well also a graduate from
the associate degree from all
understand school of management
graduate of banking university
of Colorado graduate of school
of banking investment the
university of South Carolina
twenty eleven to present and the
settlement president there's
quite a few listings in his
resume but a he is very well
Seeing no debate Senator
Gonzales to close thank you I
just that the Senate do hereby
confirmation of and hello yes to
your seats if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
January second twenty twenty one
expiring January one twenty
twenty five has been duly
confirmed by the state Senate.
authority I now yield to senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president pursuant to Senate
executive letter number ten
dated January fifteenth twenty
twenty one I move the Senate do
president so doctor how has been
involved in utilities consulting
and a variety of different
worked with him and this is just
an excellent appointment in an
individual who will do a great
job on this Authority I stand
for questions.
Is there debate on the
confirmation.
and just for show of hands.
We are voting on the
confirmation of Douglas James
how senators to your seats if
you wish no please raise your
hand.
expiring twenty one twenty
twenty two has been doing
confirmed by the state Senate.
Senator Hotmail madam president
thank you madam president
percent ascent executive letter
number twenty eight dated
October fifth twenty twenty one
I move the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
Robert E. bush to the New Mexico
renewable energy transmission
years of broad based management
experience in utilities who has
been involved with the read
a board for many years including
Thank you is there a debate on
the confirmation.
Seeing none senator Wirth to
closed thank you madam president
By a vote of thirty four in the
affirmative zero and the
negative the appointment of
Robert bush as a member of the
New Mexico renewable energy
Senator Hotmail madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Jeremy Daniel Lewis who has
been appointed to the New Mexico
letter number thirty five dated
December twenty eighth twenty
twenty want to move the sent
here by confirm the appointment
of Jeremy Daniel Lewis to the
New Mexico renewable energy
Land Office has a long history
before that working in energy in
a variety of different
capacities and again is a
excellent appointments to this
commission.
There were two kids I do deals
thank you madam president
senator I don't know what the
record is of of most
confirmations in a row I just do
have a question do all of these
and that is the reason I do
carry many of the confirmations
also though you know over the
years I've really been a
supporter of the renewable and
energy transmission authorities
bit of the geographic diversity
when we're dealing with these
boards and and so hopefully the
four floors listening that you
know that's always a good thing
to have people from all over the
state from all walks of life and
president in animus consent to
excuse Senator Sedillo Lopez
until she returns to the
chamber.
Seeing no objection it is so
Centers we're voting on the
confirmation chairman Daniel
Lewis tier seats if you wish to
vote no please raise your hand.
I vote of thirty in the
affirmative seer in the negative
the appointment to Jeremy Daniel
Lewis is a member of the New
Mexico renewable energy
the Senate.
Senator Hotmail madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Isaiah's empty who has been
appointed to the occupational
health and safety review
I move that the Senate do hard
here by confirm the appointment
of ice is empty to the
occupational health and safety
review commission.
agent with smart local forty
nine and for the past twenty
years you know he's been a
foreman is been a journey minis
worked on H. fax systems and
Seeing none Senator pope to
close.
Madam president I asked at the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of I as a as a key
for a state is empty is a member
of the occupational health and
safety review commission for
term commencing on may twenty
one twenty twenty one and
expiring may twenty one twenty
twenty seven has been duly
spaceport Tax district I now
yield to Senator Hamblen Senator
Hamblen madam president's
pursuant to Senator Senate
executive letter number nine
dated January fifteenth twenty
president I've had the honor of
knowing Wayne savage in my
capacity through my day job
through the arrowhead center
Wayne is the executive director
of the Erro head park which
management and many other things
and he's got an incredible staff
there he's also a wonderful
community servant and also
happens to live in my district
as well actually a minute thirty
this in two thousand seven the
two thousand ten I do feel it's
very appropriate that he be
nominated to this committee and
I believe that he will serve the
community well.
the regional space for yes
district and asked for a show of
hands.
Centers we are voting on the
confirmation of Wayne savage to
your seats if you wish to vote
no please raise your hand.
I would have thirty two in the
affirmative seer in the negative
the appointment of Wayne savage
is a member of the regional
spaceport Tax district for term
commencing upon confirmation to
be served at the pleasure of the
degree B. was been appointed to
the spaceport Authority I now
yield to senator souls Center
souls thank you madam president
of pursuant to executive letter
The center to discuss the
conferees.
Madam president.
As others have said that Mr
Grady would probably be a great
close thank you madam president
I asked the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of mark
J. B. B. to the spaceport
Authority centers we are voting
on the confirmation marked a
commencing on may eighteenth
twenty twenty one and expiring
June seventeenth twenty twenty
two has been duly confirmed by
the Senate.
appointed to the spaceport
Authority I know you'll to
Senate committees Senator
Schmedes thank you madam
president pursuant to the Senate
discuss the conferee thank you
madam president Mr chair in
wealth is a talented engineer
with expertise in aerospace
engineering a retired from
Senate national labs and variety
hereby confirm the appointment
of their twin wealth to the
spaceport Authority centers we
are voting on the confirmation
of Eric Sherwin wealth wait I'm
Yield you yield I'll I'll then
present members and we have
Senators committee of he can say
Senator should mediation Bonser
Mr Schwinn wolf from the Senate.
Was that close enough madam
president more more times really
fast madam president thank you
Mr president.
They then president I I asked
of the Senator here I come from
the appointment of the actual.
Centers we on voting on the
confirmation of Eric Joseph one
I would have thirty six in the
affirmative here in the negative
confirmed by the Senate.
Senator Hotmail madam president
I hereby submit the credentials
of Ethan Epstein who has been
appointed to the spaceport
twenty I move the Senate do
hereby confirm the appointment
even after seeing who lives in
Albuquerque to the spaceport
Authority.
Senator Wirth to discuss the
fellow lawyer also has military
experience with civilian aide to
the secretary of the army for
New Mexico from February twenty
point meant for this authority.
Thank you is there debate on the
Senator Moores thank you madam
presidents woods Senator Wirth
you'll you'll senator Wirth I
Senator Wirth so
Madam presidents I believe he
lives in the north valley and we
have a PO box so I don't have
his actual physical address but
will give and he's one of those
people that serves that he have
a little discussion with you
perhaps before coming to Senator
Wirth.
I see none senator Wirth close
thank you madam president
members ask Senator reckoned
confirm the appointment of ease
and empty.
Centers for voting on the
may twenty six twenty twenty
three has been duly confirmed by
the Senate.
Etcetera Hotmail madam president
I yield to senator Wirth.
thank you madam president so
just for the folks that have
been waiting we do have the
committee reports down and so
we're going to get those
introduced and then we'll
continue our work on
committee has had under
consideration amended Senate
executive letter number twenty
three dated August twenty six
twenty twenty one in which the
governor makes the following
at the pleasure of the governor
the committee recommends that
the Senate confirm
disappointment respectfully
submitted Daniel A. Ivey Soto
chair center had a meal I move
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflected that they
were acted upon individually if
there's no objection the reader
will read all the committee
reports.
Mexico state land trusts
advisory board for a term
commencing on January one twenty
twenty two and expiring December
thirty one twenty twenty seven
which the commissioner makes the
following appointment Joanna
Procol as a member of the New
Mexico state land trusts
advisory board for term
commencing on January one twenty
dated January nineteen twenty
twenty two in which the
commissioner makes the following
appointment colonel David west
as a member of the New Mexico
Senate confirm disappointment
Senate joint resolution seven.
Do pass and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
Ron adaption of favorable
committee report.
Seeing no objection the
committee report is adopted the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually.
There's no objection were back
on confirmations Senator Hotmail
madam president I hereby submit
the credentials of Jason are
bully who has been appointed
Pursuant to Senator executive
letter number twenty three dated
August twenty six twenty twenty
one I move the Senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of Jason
are boldly W. secretary of the
this confirmation this again is
someone who is stepping up after
twenty seven years working at
the Rio Rancho police department
important role and madam
president you know you you learn
a lot about someone when you
hear the testimony in committee
and we heard some amazing
leadership character he walked
the walk that he talked and
again I think.
He's been serving since August
of last year all reports are
stand for questions.
Is there debate on the
confirmations Senator Moores
thank you madam on president
Center you work you'll.
Madam president secretary Bali
lives in Rio Rancho.
out then present after re
distributed your dish or go to
Rio Rancho.
gonna be centers to Phanteks and
I both representing Eldorado so
districts drinking a little bit
up here in Santa Fe not not
growing down to Rio Rancho.
good conversations just a kind
of a person that you will be
proud of this is service to New
Mexico's so been fantastic short
time we were together I think I
for your service ma'am I heard a
lot about you in our meeting and
it's quite impressive resume
your cell phone talkers will be
the next secretary of public
safety coming here shortly
really impressed with the the
there any other debate Senator
Brandt.
Thank you madam president I
don't need the sponsor yield but
just want to stand up and and
think
secretary Willie for his service
to my community you know all you
that he did and and has provided
to Rio Rancho and now will be
providing to the state so the
excellent conferee and I am
proud to support him thank you.
service in Rio Rancho he's a
credit to his uniform I think
it's really impressive when
someone of his caliber of steps
up to further serve if you'll
continue and I think he's is can
be fantastic in his job and I
look forward to supporting not
only his confirmation but his
term in office.
Thank you Senator Pirtle and
in person I could not be more
impressed with just how he
handles himself and really gives
me great hope for the department
that it's going to be moving in
a direction that really takes
dedicated themselves and each
other to public safety and so it
was really appreciated to see
that to see the support that he
has a knowing that the state's
going to be in great hands thank
meetings I requested some
information.
For from the secretary and he.
The liver before got back to my
office.
Thank you there any other debate
on the contrary.
Saying.
Sorry Senator Lopez madam
president no debate but just
I see none senator Wirth to
close.
Thank you madam president for
all the reasons stated I very
soon to be secretary Bowie to
the Senate so with that pass the
Senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of Jason R. Bowie as
secretary of the department of
safety and ask for show of hands
be served at the pleasure of the
governor has been duly confirmed
by the Senate.
Senator Wirth thank you madam
president let's all rise and
who has been appointed to the
state lands trust advisory board
I now yield back to you madam
president.
president I yield to them to
senator Wirth.
Thank you madam president
pursuant to commissioner of
public lands letter dated
January eighteenth twenty twenty
two I moved Senator hereby
That's okay madam president and
I appreciate that you ask you to
sponsor because she does live in
Eldorado full disclosure at.
minerals under governor
Richard since and cabinet she's
got an exceptional background of
land management issues and a
variety of different
wildlife freedom to roam as I
mentioned secretary for many
years so again I think this is
an excellent appointment by our
secretary of public lands.
appointment of this Prokofiev's
been involved as a volunteer in
many statewide organizations
thank you very much for your
service.
Thank you any other debate.
vote in the affirmative except
those voting in a negative by
show of hands for the
confirmation of joint approve
cop to this state land a vice
report.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative on the negative the
twenty twenty seven has been
duly confirmed by the Senate.
Senator Wirth thank you ladies
and gentlemen Senate let's all
rise and thank you and approved
Ma'am madam president I hereby
submit the credentials of Paula
Garcia who has been appointed to
pursuant to to excuse me just a
minute doubt pursuant to
commissioner of public lands
dated January the eighteenth
twenty twenty two I move that
Thank you madam president
members of the Senate as we all
know public Christy.
served in various capacities
including.
She has been directly involved
with the Interstate Stream
Commission she has also been an
creation of the Congress so the
less a sec just.
She continues to go ahead
despite everyone of us to give
our best as we move forward and
learn the value of serving
others so with that.
Madam president we're we stand
for questions.
Thank you is there debate
turned to gold and so I just
want to say stand and say thank
you for your continued public
service all New Mexico's a debt
of gratitude for your work on a
secular as and everything else
that you've done along the way
serve as an advisor Paula is a
champion for a secular as
agriculture in the west I at
NCSL and for that I am proud
that she will be taking on this
new role and serving in a as an
some of the same comments
Paula Garcia in the northern
part of our state has assisted
many citizens and communities
thank you Senator Gonzales thank
you madam president and I also
standing very strong support of
Paul Garcia I think one of the
they're very well informed and
it's a very appreciative also
she has taken a real strong
issue and really understanding
the budget of how it works you
know and how they can apply and
Seeing none Senator Campos to
close thank you very much madam
president members of the Senate
I ask unanimous consent that the
record show that the role has
C. a as a member of the state
land trust advisory board thank
you madam president thank you
senators we're voting on the
confirmation of Pollock R. C. it
tier seats if you wish to vote
Brandt floating no Senator Baca
is voting no Senator smitteez
voting no Senator share voting
no.
I voted twenty eight in the
affirmative I am the negative
the appointment.
has been duly confirmed by the
Senate Senator Campos thank you
very much madam president
members of the Senate please
join me as we congratulate
Senator had a meal madam
Ingle Senator Ingle.
Thank you madam president.
Madam president pursuant to
commissioner of public lands
letter dated January eighteenth
Senator Ingle to discuss the
conferee.
Thank you madam president then
president and certainly my honor
to discuss the.
We're quick pointed with his
world here's here's.
Has it agreement canticle
engineering from Texas Tech
University has extensive
knowledge in engineering.
a person on those boards that
understands.
facilities operations and design
things like that are building
from the state of New Mexico.
madam president and and I to
really appreciate this
appointment of colonel west I've
enjoyed working with him in the
past ten years as as in MMI is
medic medic in so many other
things is such a great
confirmation to to hear and
learn even more about somebody
that I've known for so long
thank you madam president.
Thank you madam madam president
I just say that he is a colonel
and the institute and I was a
corporal.
And you know I I know that he
and I if we were both there he
consent that the record show the
rules been called all of for the
present voting information at
those voting negative by show of
hands for the appointment of
if you wish to vote no.
west is a member of New Mexico
state land trust advisory board
for term commencing on January
one twenty twenty two and
expiring December thirty one
twenty twenty seven has been
of the New Mexico state Senate.
senator Wirth Senator Wirth.
Then president on another
confirmation there unanimous
of legislation and as I
mentioned up front will do items
number one through five in that
order and then item number nine
so with that unanimous consent
we go about our business third
Duhigg.
Thank you madam president I ask
for unanimous consent of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing SB thirty
five as amended on final passage
experts to enter the chamber
just a Shannon Bacon of the New
Mexico Supreme Court and judge
Nancy Franchini of the second
judicial sprint at second
judicial court.
Thank you madam president.
So.
Isn't last year this body
created a legislatively mandated
the table who represent a
variety of interests from the
judiciary the executive branch
legislative branch individuals
in the community who were under
first piece of legislation to be
proposed by the wings Commission
and it focuses specifically on
temporary guardianship and
conservatorship.
And madam president in order to
an attorney can file for
temporary guardianship or
conservatorship and they can ask
the court to appoint a temporary
guardian or conservator without
any notice at all to the alleged
timely oversight and there's no
real deadlines that would
prevent the petitioner or the
judge from kicking the can down
the road.
And when you kick the can down
the road madam president bad
being made for the alleged
incapacitated person and this
can lead to different kinds of
abuse sometimes it's more
neglect and abuse issues lack of
the person out as they go to a
judge and they say they need a
temporary guardian to make
decisions for them and then the
temporary guardian remove that
was appointed there was no
oversight McCann was kicked down
the road because there were no
hard deadlines no reporting
requirements and the guardian
never made contact with the
statutes are written loosely as
our temporary guardianship
conservatorship statue is now
and so SB thirty five six to
tighten the statutes up give
clear directions to attorneys
the changes that were seeking in
SB thirty thirty five and here's
what those changes are.
First SB thirty five requires a
timely hearing no later than ten
appointments is that we're
taking away someone's civil
liberties there right to the
associate will decide who they
associate with where they live
their medical decisions and this
hearing expedited hearing within
ten days is really important.
It also requires that there be a
showing of serious immediate and
irreparable harm to the health
their twenty if they have on or
any interested person and that's
a term of art in our probate
code because what often happened
in these proceedings before
and are long now recognizes that
someone's neighbor or cousin or
friend good friend from church
has a lot of information
perspective on the election pass
a person's needs and how they're
actually meet with the election
cast in person and present that
person's position to the court
at least two days before that
ten day hearing.
It also puts limits on how long
and that's really important to
stop this process of kicking the
can down the road.
And making sure that these
temporary appointments are
actually temporary.
away from the ex parte nature of
these proceedings and ensuring
that the person is at the center
of this process knows what's
going on and one of the most
important parts of this bill is
that it prohibits the temporary
court so there have to be a
showing to the court of why they
need to move someone from their
home to a facility or why they
need to spend that person's
assets to meet their living it's
report within ten days of
termination right now temporary
guardians and conservators don't
have any reporting requirements
they don't have to account for
any of the decisions that
Senator Moores the men present I
rise in support of this bill I
want to congratulate Senator
Duhigg on working on this and
the the effort you know I want
to make light as we talked about
issue product you know I know it
was pop culture but alright that
guardship issued in terms of all
of us and we had a really good
conversation what that meant a
present I think you're still in
the room at the time so I think
you thank you Senator Lopez.
I thank you madam president and
I. eight rises supported this
measure and madam president
members of the Senate we know
Task force commissioned hi to
I believe that this is a good
step forward for many in our
communities you there were some
madam president there is
a we had a scenario during the
COVID of where this truly with
the changes even so could have
been I think much more effective
for families where you had three
working with the family and
trying to find out where proven
at all the above the children at
least are able to be able to
access the funds from their from
forty looking how we can help
those in our community who may
be in need of a guardian and or
the conservatorship.
We're here to help thank you.
bill but also for in Los crucis
Doris Hamilton her son has been
fighting for retaining
guardianship of his mother is
case about what would be what
how this could possibly affect
me and my mother is her only
child so I appreciate the
sponsor taking this forward as a
step in moving towards fair
thank you madam president.
Thank you.
Is there any other debate.
Senator Pirtle and thank you
madam president I don't need the
did up and up to this point and
you know it's this is still a
lot of work ahead of us this is
an issue madam president thanks
to pop culture that a lot of the
young kids and people have been
president.
Senator Hotmail madam president
I don't eat the sponsor to yield
but I stand in support with my
friend Lori who's up in the
gallery who fought for years for
testimony I stand in support in
support of this bill and I want
to thank you Senator Duhigg and
Senator Lopez for bringing this
legislation forward thank you
madam president thank you
but I I would share with the
body the the sentiment of
Of our former president pro tem.
she still feels that we have a
way to go.
This is a big step forward but
the key issue remains the total
the yield still going to the
same judge who did the initial
decision making that remains a
troublesome issue that I hope in
the future we can deal with so
that that us Senator Paypen
pointed out we still have a ways
to go thank you madam president
thank you.
Any other debate.
unanimous consent of the Senate
the record show that the role
has been called in all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
What legal.
affirmative not in the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty five has duly passed the
Senate Senator Duhigg thank you
madam president thank you
of the Senate the record the
rules we suspend the record show
all action the state for placing
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
on final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
bring our state judges into
closer market place parity with
federal judges and ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that I'd
be permitted an expert witness
Senator Kernan I'm sorry we
finish Senator on yes we're
going to be debate and then
present.
I think you just asked for a
well too so I should be able to
get this right.
I just seeing no objection to
your expert witnesses glad
they're already here now Senator
Brandt is go ahead and finish
the end of the year the vacancy
was advertised and we had three
applicants from three hundred
and forty six lawyers in Dona
ana county three applicants they
went through the vetting
apply one recommended.
Last time we had a federal
vacancy in New Mexico they were
over eighty applicants for that
one position.
What's happening is the
and not feel are for the federal
vacancies this goal is to try
and does in fact bring our
justices on the supreme court
the highest court of our state
state judiciary and madam
president without all stand for
questions.
Thank you is there debate
Senator Kernan.
been pulled out of the formula
and just wanted to hear a little
bit about that.
Thank you madam president for
good question it's important
part of this bill as well too
the salary of the top court the
supreme court and then the in
what we call in for your courts
never like to use that word but
the inferior courts the courts
below this report receive a
percentage of that salary so for
five percent of that so it's a
stair step process if you will
in that existing law the
measures are also part of that
that stat that latter if you
by the legislature in the annual
budgeting process as opposed to
this kind of automatic latter
that they're part of and the
part of the reason for that of
course is to try to the measure
applicants and and good
competition for measure
positions as the higher courts
that may create that problem so
we're taking a measured out of
that stair step ladder be will
did support this but on I guess
I'm just curious a little bit
I'm not sure it was an
overwhelming agreement among all
the magistrates I just want to
make that statement wondered if
maybe
years ago I first introduced
legislation to what I I'm using
the word again the couple the
magistrates and so I think since
that time I've met certainly
this in part because there's a
substantial appropriation not in
this bill but in this session to
their retirement and to try to
bring solvency to the
magistrates as well to but
reasonably so because I'd
probably didn't give enough
notice of for the option to be
heard but we've had a couple
years to digest and anticipate
this thank you very much then
president I certainly support
compensated appropriately thank
you very much.
Thank you next will have Senator
Brandt thank you madam president
with the senator yield.
I can't think of anywhere else
in.
In our laws were retired
anyone's pain New Mexico the
federal workers is there any
else anywhere else we do that.
basis for many of the things
that we do Fund and budget but I
would make them more compelling
argument which is the judiciary
is precisely where we should be
the federal marketplace is
attracting some of the most
qualified and experienced
lawyers in the state many times
with decades of experience and
at the state level that's just
not happening so we'll get
Thank you madam president and
senator so can can you tell us
and senator telling us is being
tied to federal pay what what is
the current pay now for the
salary that a hundred and fifty
three three hundred ninety four
thousand hundred fifty three
thousand and of course Senator
isn't as you're well aware that
is far below what an experienced
to the judiciary not at the
Supreme Court low but other
places which are not applicants
coming out of private practice
are coming out of district
attorney public defender's
offices but the private practice
dollars going to court levels
below that at the District Court
level District Court judges are
currently earning a hundred and
thirty eight thousand four
hundred thirty eight dollars and
nationwide average to.
A out or is that just what they
pay him in every state in the
union.
it's uniformed cross the
country's wealth of officer
measures will be paid the same
same with District Court judges
federal.
So madam president senator you
know.
dollars in New Mexico.
The average income in New York
California is pretty high resin
not gonna argue whether or not
we we should be paying our
judges more understand you're
not getting enough people plying
I'm not sure that's the only
ours that's in the billions you
know they can raise that at any
time and now we're tying this.
We're tying us and in our future
hands to whatever their pay is.
this huge difference between New
Mexico's average income and
almost anywhere.
We have a very low cost of
living though also in New Mexico
whereas in California it's very
expensive to buy a home and the
the cost of living.
enough to understand the
difference in cost of living and
pay and and I just really and it
just concerns me to tie this to
the federal government's pay
wiser for us to to actually set
our own pay and not tie that to
to a another system of
government I don't see us doing
to do that in the court system.
I think that.
Yeah we we see our judges doing
a good job.
I do understand you want more
people flying.
maybe dust understand the system
the best and that's why they
apply.
Maybe they've been in the system
Anyway it concerns me that we're
gonna tie this to the federal
system.
we have no control over what the
federal government will raise
that rate to and I don't think
Thank you madam president then
president with sponsor yield
Israel Senator you Mr standing
right next to each other just
I have toward time talking to go
do the best I can we can hear
you.
Well no but I I'm sponsored hear
Madam presence Senator it
doesn't this bill doesn't
directly affect those although
of course is were increasing
salaries were ultimately
increase increasing the
retirement benefit that
corresponds with those hours so
this bill doesn't address that
for solvency purposes those
aren't those appropriations are
not in this bill.
Present center what are those
appropriations I'm just curious
I know an agent and I'm I'm
after the money is added.
Madam presence Senator
unfortunate agent the chair of
the finance committees not here
right now he's probably working
on exactly your question but of
the last numbers I recall the in
these numbers are far below what
it takes to bring solvency I
believe the judicial retirement
is now eighty million dollars
bring that solvency around and
and the good thing is that of
course with these large
appropriations if they
materialize this session the
funds become solvent sooner in
I know it's a study to all of
these things on a retirement
benefits and some of ours are
fairly solid some of them are
not even close in the the
judicial honors always been.
I'm sure with the.
The additional salaries there
there's an increase in the
contribution rate is that
correct.
Madam presents a yes that's
consent excuse senator when you
offs until he returns to the
chamber there's no objection it
sort Senator Wirth thank you
madam president I am rise and
support of this.
highlighting the disparity and
the pay issues with respect with
our judges compared to
neighboring states and different
different other jurisdictions.
Hello partner who left our firm
in twenty nineteen to become a
state district.
district bench with the cases
they deal with and so not only
are you taking a big reduction
in salary here also team right
But I think the the the point
that's that's super important is
that we need to be able to
attract a wide diversity of
folks on the bench and we really
Into this position and so I
think you've come up with a way
to do this I will say Senator
Kernan with respect to the
magistrates it's interesting I
didn't hear anything this year
bunch of lawyers now wanted to
be magistrates judges and all
running for those positions and
many magistrates didn't like
that so I think the fact that
the finance committee to make
this happen we needed to do it
for a long time thank you.
Is there there debate.
my husband being being a judge
so I just want to disclose that
my understanding is I do not
have to.
I excuse myself from the vote
because it is to a class of
Any other debate seeing no
debate center survive yes to
close.
Thank you madam president thank
you for the good debate and
legitimate concerns the the the
competitive marketplace and I'll
just let you know that that we
pay our senior investment
officer in the state investment
council two hundred seventy five
thousand dollars we pay the
and would continue be far above
what we pay our justices on the
supreme court of the judiciary
content with studies and
research and meetings and task
forces the things politicians
all due rather than get things
done sometimes and so madam
president with that said I move
that Senate finance committee
in the negative by show of
hands.
And right before we start that
Senator Lopez.
Thank you madam president animus
consent to excuse Senators
Gonzalez and Hemphill.
senators to your seats if you
wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
voting no Senator smitteez
voting no.
By a vote of thirty six in the
affirmative for in the negative
Senate bill two as amended has
duly passed the Senate.
to item number four Senator
Padilla.
Thank you madam president us and
consent of the Senate that the
record show that all actions for
Senator Padilla to explain the
bills thank you madam president
this bill was brought by the
department workforce solutions
as they were going through their
audit related to the tops
to iris stated information to to
go through a background check a
fingerprint ethnic background
check so in that process the
fingerprints provided by our
department of public safety or
of the bill related to
you know the process if you
decided to challenge that that
that separation of employment or
what have you so that's all that
the subs to really did clean up
eight dollars the department has
been willing to absorb those
costs thank you madam president.
So is there any debate on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
stand to support this bill and I
just wanted to and I actually I
have not seen the judicial the
judiciary substituted a
different from the substitute.
and the substitute is slightly
different it it took out section
I which was sort of the process
that you use to challenge
potential separation of your
employment because all of that
madam president is already
me an opportunity to stand up
and say that the bill makes it a
crime to release a sensitive
information that it that is
required is disclosed under this
that we don't have you know for
uniformity protecting sensitive
information but I stand in
strong support of this bill and
I appreciate the sponsor for
working with me on thank you
bill one oh three do now pass
and pass as consent of the
Senate that the record show that
the roll then called and all
those present vote in the
Senator Diamond do you wish to
the.
Thank you.
bill one of three has duly.
Passed the Senate.
Thank you members of the Senate.
Thank you members will go back
president asked Maez consenus
and that the record show that
all action for placing Senate
bill one seventy four on final
passage is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
logjam and wait line and truck
racks and truck traffic and
currently in other states you
know semis in Oklahoma are
required to be in the right hand
lane at a certain speed
in rural New Mexico that travel
from Gallup to Albuquerque puts
us in a position where we have
to either figure out how long
could don't know if it's four
hours and we go to Albuquerque
for a lot of our medical
situations and so we don't know
we have veterans that leave
in Albuquerque so we don't know
if traffic's can get back to the
log jam has just created havoc
in it's been two or three years
of this throughout New Mexico
there's ten miles of traffic we
have behind them it's become a
real problem in our area for us
to travel along I. forty and so
what this bill does it put semis
debate Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president with the
with the senator please feel.
Do you yield senator Munoz no.
Present center DOT has is in
support or neutral whatever you
want to call it the only cost to
them is is chaining signage and
that's a reoccurring in their in
they express it because I I know
I know this bill a little bit
could well maybe at a different
bill a few years ago and staff
that we heard so please do the
O. T. have any reservations that
secretary gets a text and I'm
sitting on the side of the road
with my feet on the dash and
waiting for traffic to clear
they know it's a problem.
reservations is really what I
was looking for I didn't see any
in the analysis so the logic of
the bill makes sense to me thank
you Mr president thank you
Senator Steinborn is there any
questions on this Senator Woods
yes do you yield to you Mr
president Senator isn't this
just a fairly temporary will who
knows I mean it's been going on
long construction zones that are
that are slowing everybody down
I mean even if you're if you can
drive in the left hand lane of
if traffic is backed up is it
really going to make much
difference I guess is what I'm
asking.
ever seen I seen one the other
day that had another mid section
of engines going with the train
and the train is probably a mile
mile and a half long and so
is the truck traffic gets heavy
twice as much truck traffic it
used to be truck drivers were
kind of drive a hundred a
hundred ten and fly by you and
then something happens and an
accident happens and then the
roads blocked up but the truck
traffic is getting continue DOT
We don't have a billion dollars
to to do that and until we can
get some temporary relief at
least some restrictions so those
drivers a least let traffic flow
instead of of of clogging it up
delays because to me the.
I I I know exactly what you're
talking about senator was cut
going to requests for a funeral
the other day and it.
Anything we can try anything and
if this if the DOT thinks this
will help a vote for your bill
senator Munoz thank you Mr
president thank you senator
I William.
Senator are.
I may have misunderstood I may
have thought I heard you say
this the.
Okay well that's what I thought
I heard and I'm not so I'm not
sure if things right or wrong I
just want to make sure I heard
that so the semi truck business
right hand lane from flagstaff
to Phoenix because of high
density in traffic of let's see
what other states I can think of
or is it right in reply to the
interstate as a whole.
Mr president in my bill only
applies to I. forty so once we
had a missed Palicki you can
switch lanes and get off and do
stay in the right hand lane is
as you go on I. forty.
This would apply then to all
truck traffic if there on the
major part of the highway and
not in the municipality correct
thank you.
Will the client senator and
chairman manual sealed.
Senator do you yield Mister
present center and thank you for
those kind words.
really dangerous I'm I'm curious
has the truckers trucker
industries have they been
surveyed about this proposed
change in the way they drive.
we don't care about the people
that live there we care about
moving that truck across the
state.
Thank you Mr president thank you
through.
Madam Mr president sorry.
Mr president center.
There are many put signs posted
this as sixty five miles an hour
too so this apply to us to be in
the right hand lane at sixty
five and so they will get
notices from DOT or weight and
noticed in other places.
Thank you Mr president and thank
you senator and chairman.
Thank you Senator McKenna
Senator Gallegos.
Thank you good Senator Gallegos
thank you Mr president thank you
Center and just a couple
questions is you working
understand so is there passing
each other on I. forty would if
if want truckers passing would
you still get the a two hundred
guess the thought is they would
stay.
As I enter New Mexico on the
Texas line there is on line just
in the outside lane is that
correct.
Mr presence I would of thought
if they're in the right hand
lane there would be the outside
regardless direction you're
going well would that be for
lane towards of the the right
aware that offramp and so they
would have to be in that line.
thank you for that Mr president
center as just that's what I was
an hour is that correct Mr
president I'm I'm sorry miss
present center can you state
that questioning and.
So from state to state and I
forty corridor they would be in
and they need to move in the
interstates in exchange lanes as
we move through MSA Albuquerque
right they can do whatever they
need to do and what lane is they
go through misspelled these to
hoping you would consider just
keeping them in the outside lane
as I go through all the prohibit
appreciated as just getting to
that point I think the
congestion is actually and
sponsor yield you yield Senator.
Present no.
Go for it Senator Pirtle and
thank you Mr president the
Thank.
Thank you Mr president I I do
have a serious question and
maybe you can help me with that
they can't drive in the center
lane Mister president senator.
Present center know when they
get to miss pallipes you know
that they may need on ramp on
friends they maybe switching to
lane but exit on the left hand
lane sometimes in certain places
and so they'll be able to do
what they need doing misspelled
the.
And and Mr president and senator
truck links for the next truck
are they supposed to the dive in
and dive back into the left lane
how would that work in and how
how Mister president senator do
you see the police officers of
Mr president center I I think in
you know they can move what
there's emergency vehicle they
need to move over and so they
can do that but as of their
passing somebody and this is the
problem that we're in right now
can overtake the semi and you
can't because it's wait gonna
slow down lose speed well here
comes all the traffic both lanes
are blocked they're both kind of
maintain the same speed and can
to be driving seventy five going
up hill and it just backs up
everything and so they're gonna
have that.
The ability to move if they want
Mr presence in our test so
Mister president center my
question is if if they're
overtaking a truck another semi
and then there's say another
semi little ways in front of
going to make that determination
Mister president senator.
Mr president center with that be
the driver.
The image present center there
it would be the police officer
it more dangerous with these
trucks waving in and out of
other semis and could
potentially Mister president
senator because maybe a roll
over or an accident that would
really back up trafficking could
left lane of the trying to
overtake multiple semis.
Mister prince and I I I don't
know you have the S. officer
that that saw that I don't know
what leniency they're gonna have
say okay well how much
discretion I have that right
currently the state police and
I'm just gonna say every agency
if you're five miles an hour
over they don't have the time to
write should take it if you're
And Mister president senator
what about you know we have on
ramps out in the rural parts of
the state of.
On interstates and you know the
left hand lane but I noticed in
this paragraph Mister president
senator that that we don't give
that exemption and that's really
a matter of safety and just
let you on the highway and then
go along your way at eighty five
eighty four probably even want
to go ten that might result in a
speeding ticket but Mr president
you gotta get Madam up I don't
think that's going to be an
issue hasn't affected anything
in other states I don't think
any of the officers see somebody
getting on an on ramp in the
private the loss the law
enforcement as I could call the
secretary DPS to come down here
and.
Have a chat with the.
And and Mr president Senator I
you know I I think it should be
courteous we wave people to go
at a four way stop we waive it
people we use all our fingers Mr
president Senator out and and
and the rural part of the state
so you know that's that's a
concern that I have that we
as safe as possible and the
reality is those that are in
semis and don't know what it
takes to to operate a tractor
trailer are the ones that are
one and it's it's pretty insane
you be driving down the highway
even a two lane highway going
the speed limit somebody will
pass you get right in front of
understanding that these
truckers are just trying to put
groceries in in paper tells and
you know during comment there
try to get that toilet paper on
the shelves as it was all
running out so we really just
need to appreciate them and what
Thank you Mr chair and the thank
you senator for bringing this
forward I I the Senator Pirtle
yes my question so I just have a
By the Santa Fe thank you Mr
president thank you senator Tom
and something to consider
senator Sanchez.
wave my hand right handed them.
Possible and left one please.
R. Senator one question does
this for a well this pertain to
Mr present center I I don't know
those might not be under over
the weight class and this is
freight trailers right
in the trade trailer as prying
and down I. forty.
Thank you senator Mr president
so if they have USDOT number
will they will that.
Restrict them or is it by
weight.
shot geyser Haaland horse
trailers or flat bed trailers on
an employment the five fifty
year lower truck.
Thank you senator Mr president
one more question so that
wouldn't restrict either of you
that does not pertain to a USDOT
number Mr president center I
honestly I'd I really need to
check that with DOT and and
fifty three and.
division code I was reading the
chapter in the section so.
I'm just present center thank
you.
Thank you senator Sanchez
one yes I suppose I will if you
the Senate good Seneal tell me a
CB handle.
Sermon yes I'm sorry senator
Morris Munoz big Big Bear.
just want to a whole litany of
things I assume I'm gonna
assuming correct me if I'm wrong
little better that if we're
gonna have just assigned to says
on the side of the road assess
trucks mostly on the right hand
this I'm sorry and I was
incorrect the speed limit did
not change for trucks I thought
it did but it's remained at
seventy five and I was corrected
by my my helper here and so they
remained at seventy five and the
that so they do what they want.
Service Mister president that's
it so Senator Williams you're
saying it's current law that
they have to stay in the right
confusion as president Senator
there are a bunch of people say
that is it current law right now
the trucks have to stay in the
right hand money Mister
president senator yes but it
Okay sort order I realize that
thank you for all clarifying
that so it is current staff to
orders after adding the free
trailers and we're not change
the speed limit of that some
violates the statute.
Mr president senator and page
eight line twelve and thirteen
it defines a penalty is two
hundred dollars.
don't know what the penal code
would be for a speeding
conviction I mean they can
always protesting court but I
don't know if this adds points
to their license on on CDL
just give my concern Mr
president Robert is that
C. L. I'm not sure what it is I
don't have CD all maybe you for
some of the guys might have
cereal in the room my bill
question but I think you're only
allowed a ticket or two and then
they lose a CDL so anyone in the
room year old from those act
drivers and I don't know how
many points but the first thing
that happens if they get a
ticket for anything over and in
a semi trailer senator Sanchez
is walking the room he may know
that
don't know any points that you
lose on your deal we're still
looking at a.
The agency representative couple
questions I have on that issue
with Senator Sanchez yield
the room other stars a spate and
I'm I'm going to us on the next
or do you have a CDL as you
mentioned earlier correct Mr
president Senator.
Yes Mr president center I do.
will to get before they lose
their license and our
livelihood.
Mister president senator I
believe it's half of.
Mr president Senator half of
twelve to six just that's why
you're not on finance right now
couple points we really could be
taking someone's livelihood away
if they get a pro ticket for
driving the left hand lane and
and women have of us mentioned
earlier so just really concerned
about them is present senator I
don't know if you have an answer
yet
is is and and I'm sorry I did
this but the it doesn't reduce
the speed it's just right hand
lane and else item and so
currently if they're speeding
they're gonna get a ticket.
concerns about the severity of
the penalty here losing
livelihood and you know the two
hundred dollars this isn't that
much but as president all joking
aside this is probably the
and that's probably the harshest
thing we've done in this chamber
the session on fighting crime
thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Sanchez for
Mr president with the center
yield.
Yes it will.
Thank you Mr president senator
so I appreciate your clarifying
it's currently illegal for any
of us to drive in the left hand
lane if we're not passing.
Mr presence enter if you're
President center thank you so in
most states.
You could potentially get
ticketed for driving in the left
we have than the statute we got
our laptop up and we'll get you
to answer.
Thank you Mr president and
center you know when I when I
first came up here really a
friend of mine had moved down
other states you'll see a sign
that says you must drive in the
right hand lane except to pass
and actually can be pulled over
hand lane but I wonder why we
didn't just make this for
everybody so that like most
states you have to stay in the
right hand lane unless you're
passing.
to pass each other's sixty five
and taking both lanes and
backing up traffic and then
accident happens and it may or
not may be their fault but I'll
give you the perfect example of
an accident happening that that
hazardous waste and then was
found to be a terrorist and they
chased him through town for two
days and the interstate was shut
down for almost a day and a half
and they had to re route that
killed a whole freeway and so
Mister president.
Thank you Mr president center
says like they're a lot more
problems than just the so much
for driving in the wrong lane on
there's no way to get around and
they shut down the freeway and
yeah it was it's a mess and so
but most the time that's at
like center I Ortiz Pino said
but I'm not sure that your bill
the way it's written actually
fixes any of this.
Because you keep talking about.
right hand lane except.
When overtaking another vehicle
which is passing.
just to translate for everybody
you're trying to solve which is
keeping trucks from slowly
passing another truck.
That's still going to be allowed
as long as they're overtaking
another truck.
this bill wouldn't keep the
information able to pass me when
I'm crawling up the hill is that
correct.
Senator Williams.
Ince's overtaking a vehicle.
This presents thank you I
appreciate that I just wanna
make sure clarifying that
with that issue as much as I
appreciate the issue because you
know I I do a lot of traveling
on the other states and I get
behind a lot of so I trucks and
is frustrating.
nothing to upgrade them
so we really need to come
through and and update our
interstates I think the the
three lane that you've talked
about that needs to be done on
we we have a lot of money right
now we just decided to spend it
differently
so I appreciate it appreciate
what you're trying to do I'm not
one to Senate bill one seventy
four amendment sponsored by
Senator Baca Senator Baca to
move the amendment.
I move Senate floor amendment
online's twenty four lines
twenty two to twenty four of
where it
indicates that you're authorized
introduced by Senator why were
you required to move over the
left lane for for any emergency
vehicle and so this just
basically opens it up in a sense
that maybe I didn't find or
someone else hasn't found for
your required to move over it
would just authorize that is
well it just gives a little bit
Williams is there debate on the
amendment.
Seeing you hearing none Senator
Baca.
Thank you Senator Baca we
members we are voting
If you choose to vote no please
raise your hand.
Please return your seats
Senators.
By.
now back on to debate Senator
Lopez I thank you Mr president
no debate but unanimous consent
to excuse Senators Campos and do
Hey good till they return to the
Quick clarification Mr president
at the center.
Manos would heal for a couple of
for the truck is still the same
as interstate speed limit of
seventy five right Mr president.
This presents what's the
interstate to seventy five
that's a closed box trailer the
to haul freight in is what
you're talking about Mr
president spends Center freight
train there can be anything and
me a lot of those are on a on
So I can be a cattle truck it
can be anything as long as it's
in the range of of a legal.
Thousand pound load of.
The two thousand it Mr president
agency presentation and the way
you describe the weights that's
correct.
Okay.
Thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Woods.
seventy four as amended do now
pass and and this past men's
consent of the Senate records
show the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
Showing Senator Brandt voting no
Senator Gallegos voting no.
Senator Lopez did you have
something.
Members by a vote of thirty
three.
In the affirmative and I in the
negative Senate bill one seventy
four as amended has passed the
Senate.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing Senate bill
thirty six on final passage has
been taken now subject to debate
familiar to you we had that the
same bill slightly different
last year Senate bill forty two
it increased the E. R. B. by one
half so last year there was a
one percent increase in the
current year there is also on
the time to increase that
percentage so this bill is paid
for in the budget and needs to
move forward the current year
and the current budget with that
Senator Stewart to close thank
you Mr president I move that
Senate bill thirty six do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the Senate the record show
the rules been called all those
present vote in the affirmative
no please raise your hands.
Please return your seats
Senators.
Well you can but your votes will
count.
By a vote of thirty five in the
Senator Stewart will now go to
Senator Stewart for Senate joint
resolution ten.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent in the Senate
that the record show that all
objection Senator Stewart to a
six point resolution also Mr
president members of the Senate.
In twenty twenty in March of
twenty twenty at the Albuquerque
a force majeure which is when
there is something that happens
that's beyond all of our control
of then they.
The lease can be looked at again
when they were closed to do it
over a period of time of the the
down slides to a year's worth of
revenue they did apply for PPE
that the downs and the state
fair have come to an agreement
on how the state fair can recoup
all of their lost rental and do
it over a period of time.
over a longer period of time so
it looks odd it's a joint
resolution we are we can only
decide whether or not what they
legislature approval of the
downs extending their lease for
ten years I stand for questions
thank you Senator Stewart does
Senator Pirtle and thank you Mr
jobs this is a great place for
people to work provides lots of
jobs but you know the reality is
we have a lot of businesses
across the state
with a lot of them but I have
side businesses in my district
that are closed down permanently
forever and they don't have this
ability to come to the
voting no and that that's the
reason why is if if I voted for
this and it would be a vote
against every small business in
my district that has suffered
loss cashed in their children's
homes basically leverage
themselves to the point where
they could lose everything.
And yes they lost a year but
we're extending it ten years as
as a state.
And it's definitely fair to the
employees there but you know we
need to really take a long hard
look at what we've what what
this governor governor has done
to every single small business
we're really shut down to no
fault of their own.
And yet it doesn't even get a
hearing.
But yet one business can come to
So Mr president members of the
body I just want you to to think
about that that that the votes
we make here have real life
Thank you Mr president and and
not to will have to stand in
opposition to this it's it's the
And the inotes of kind of a
funny thing will not pass the
environmental Department said
how many restaurants did you
shut down.
Thank you in a minute.
Thank you Mr.
on there was many many state of
private owned entities that were
hurt terribly during this
pandemic.
I won't be labor labor the.
This deal with this is this is a
Thank you Mr president with the
The settlement potential please
madam pretend you yield yes.
we know who owns this
Corporation.
A so Mister president.
This is a private business that
they lost a years worth of
income we're not doing anything
about that what we are
recruiting is the state's rental
don't get their millions of
dollars back.
What we get as a state is that
rent paid back over a longer
period of time.
so I hope that explained a
little bit more because the
previous two comments I think we
didn't quite get that thank you
Mr president center I I
Is that correct Mr president.
Mr president they do now they're
open now they certainly don't
if people do get paid back for
what they've lost but this
business is not getting paid
back what they lost we're just
getting the money just the
state.
If we didn't do this if this
joint resolution either doesn't
pass this chamber or the people
don't approve it what would
if we could we could lose money
just a state so instead of going
to litigation because the least
says if you've got a force
fair has as force majeure clause
Senate so if we don't do this
that then it'll total education
and we we could lose it all I
don't know what would happen but
that's that would be the upstart
Mr president it's really a a
potential solution to keep both
the state fair whole downs still
Thank you Mr presence so
we could potentially avoid
litigation.
we have this clause in the
contract that is that I guess
Which which which goes to the at
back to my original question.
Which is potential indication
you have two different parties
I'd like to know kind of who the
downs of Albuquerque is who are
Senator Stewart Mr president
again I'm not sure about the ins
and outs of that certainly of
the owner of the downs as Paul
Blanchard but the downside I
and of course the state fair is
state property.
Thank you Mr presence thank you
for that and I'm not faulting
you at all for the you know we
that has certain political
donations I'm not going to talk
about that but I looked up
pretty quick online.
And it just seems it makes me
dealings that are documented
openly.
that is makes me kind of uneasy
so I'm gonna listen to the
further debate senator Morris
thank you Mr president and
because one of the dress Senator
Schmedes are concerns I had the
same exact conversation concerns
and I'm had a time we heard in
rules actually look at the
contract and I don't know
anything about it and so I
concerns about it
review it and and leave a lot of
my concerns over just mentioned
and one of things that Mr
Blanchard did did share with us
is that because of the governor
because it was on state
government property.
But the other CEOs in the state
were able to shut down for short
conversations a lot of for
conversations include what you
just said her mentioning Senator
but I do feel more comfortable
about it after meeting with them
having a course review it and so
this bill Mr president thank
you.
Thank you senator Morris we do
have for the debate Senator Ivey
Soto I thank you very much
At the downs at Albuquerque and
so now he wants an extension of
this.
senator of the downs owner
worked with the state fair to
redo the lease so that he could
pay every bit of the rent that
to extend the lease so the
payment is over a period of time
so he will be paying total the
fair thinks he's a good tenant
they want him to stay and
they're willing to give us
extended lease so they can get
finding ways for people to have
loans forgiven we've been
finding ways for people to to
not have to pay rent we've been
finding ways but what I'm
understanding your answer is
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much Mr president and thank you
senator for those answers I
think I think this is this is an
unusual.
way to live up to their
responsibility and so Mr
president that are short I I
just want to create you bringing
this and the disk you know and I
thank you Senator Ivy Soto any
hearing hearing no other day
Senator Pirtle and thank you Mr
president and and I just want to
yes there's going to be a
financial gain from doing that
and so you know just just to be
completely clear Mr president
members of the body you know
Mr president if anyone realizes
but there's nothing preventing
them from renewing this lease at
the end of this lease without
our approval.
out and they could just simply
renew it and missed Prez I'm not
gonna get into force majeure and
try to figure out what that is
and if it even qualifies that's
a question that only the courts
Thank you Mr president I'm
carrying this because I was
really proud of what the downs
did with the state fair Senator
state fair and extend the lease
so that the payments could be
spent out over time and with
that.
Mr president I move that Senate
in the negative by show of hands
thank you Senator Stewart
Senators we're voting on Senate
joint resolution ten senators to
Senator Gallegos voting no
Senator share voting half of
that now Senator Woods voting
no.
Senator Sanchez Senator Sanchez
voting no.
Senator is by a vote of thirty
one in the affirmative eight in
the negative Senate joint
resolution ten has passed the
Senate Senator Stewart thank you
so much I thank you Senator
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed house bill twenty two
as amended by the house and
request the concurrence of the
Anything.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
announcements and miscellaneous
Senator Wirth so I have Senator
Ivey Soto thank you very much Mr
president
Of the character of
A couple of members of the
chamber particularly and some
other folks.
R. I came down with with the
something called diverticulitis
while I was in bed and not able
to move.
Senator smitteez are heard.
in your nose and throat guy that
what he was dealing with was a
little bit further south than
his expertise.
He also assured me that it
sufficiently stable and wasn't
sure if I needed to go to the
hospital or not he told me he'd
come back in about six hours
meanwhile if I just kept praying
it would all go away.
Bacon reach out to me but yet
taxed as I heard some issue and
I said yeah lots of pain on the
left side as she immediately
wrote back to is that I think
but also justice center
committees did come over he
actually consulted with a
colleague of has
to the hospital alternately I
did end up.
Getting taken to the emergency
room on Saturday evening.
ask them is that what you do for
hospice where you're not going
to make me are you not telling
me something.
but it did make the pain go away
they did discharge me and go
our health and and it's also
very important for all of us to
support each other.
as as as as as human beings not
state of New Mexico our our our
sergeant arms immediately came
over as well she checked in on
me may trials okay.
As did some of the members of
our staff but I do very much
have a better understanding what
was happening and then make that
decision ultimately that I did
need to go to the hospital and
get some additional care
and so anyways thank you all
Ivey Soto do you have a
committee announcement.
Rules committee will meet on
Friday and we have some
confirmations today.
Thank you Senator Ivy Soto
This president's present with
Sarasota yield Senator Ivey Soto
do you yield.
Briefly.
health just with specifics here
in the Senate but but in
addition to the condition you do
describe you also have another
diagnosis are you willing to
talk about the other Gallegos.
legislature.
Senator Cervantes resident ms
Center you took the line away
from you know I say was a set up
malpractice act in your in your
honor so Mr president Senate
judiciary committee will meet at
three o'clock please be prompt
we've had trouble getting
started last time we waited
about two and a half hours to
bill eight is our first matter
up and expect.
That's the bill that was in
Senate rules for six seven eight
hours so the bring some coffee
thank you thank you senator
waiting for the court some of us
had planned so we we kept those
plans anyways I just want to
remind Senator Ivy Soto that
excruciating pain I thought was
unbearable is what many of us
Thank you senator Morris and we
will now go to senator Ortiz
Pino.
Thank you Mr president and the
Senate health and public affairs
committee will meet at a quarter
changes in the interest rates
the.
The.
On a certain loans the housing
the housing of.
thank you Sir these if you know
Senator Stefanics thank you Mr
president the Senate
conservation committee will meet
at nine eight AM tomorrow
morning thank you thank you
a ladies
restroom so if anybody left this
year if you know we have it here
with the sergeant at arms.
finance is going to go into it's
two fifteen now let's let's
shoot about three o'clock we
have to go to another meeting
we're gonna wrap up start
make some changes in house bill
two and then ran begin to move
forward with that we're still
waiting in center where they
help their hearing this we
haven't heard we haven't got
passing and it won't be our
fault if that bill gets in
jeopardy or doesn't pass because
we've been waiting for that we
made some commitments we've
filled our commitments and now
prep to move forward thank you
Mr president thank you senator
Munoz we're not quite done
Senator Pirtle and thank you Mr
president I guess if that
doesn't come down I'm I'm pretty
birthday of my middle child
Hamish six years ago he was born
right in the middle of session
which made for an interesting
session that year we were able
to go to the local zoo we have a
just a really great time and and
I would hope Mr president that
the members of our could help me
wish George Hamish a Happy
Birthday.
any other announcements sight
seeing on senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president and huge
thanks to our pro tem for all
