Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Present.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Moores.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Steinborn.
You have a quorum madam
president.
Thank you please stand for the
invocation to be given this
morning.
the one was the object of our
collective faith.
With gratitude for this land.
For the rain outside and for
life.
We may have different faiths
us inviting us to live in to
participate in something greater
than our personal aspirations
and plans.
So today.
doctor who cares for those who
suffer for those who are on the
streets for the sick and for the
lonely.
A guard who hides behind the
faces of these little ones
best for this land and state for
the people who dwell in it.
But even before the think speak
and make decisions today.
Maybe they know how loved they
are.
And maybe this beautiful state
for if their their kindness and
leadership.
I prefer all of these things in
the name of Jesus the one who
Kernan the pledge and Spanish to
be led by senator Michael
Padilla in the salute to New
Mexico being led by Senator
print and cannot.
indivisible with.
Just.
On this news on this is the easy
part of.
Good morning everyone Senator
Peter Wirth thank you madam
president good morning to you as
well a unanimous consent we go
to that order business
announcements and miscellaneous.
an extraordinary invocation and
I just.
You know these are these are
moments to reflect and to think
about.
The world we're in what we're
doing here and I think you
session and where we're going
later in the day.
Okay any announcements from
anyone Senator serve on this
thank you madam president madam
committee still has Senate bill
one in the committee we've got
read the report and to the floor
yet and we're going to
Thank you any other
announcements Senator Manulis
thank you madam president Senate
finance we're going to hear a
few more hearings D. O. T. do it
Thank you a US senator Linda
Lopez thank you very much madam
president animus consent to
excuse senator Bobby Gonzalez.
Thank you madam president so
just in terms of the road map I
think you heard a Senate
judiciary meeting at eleven
o'clock I think the plan is to
come back on the floor at three
but that is the plan so everyone
has notice about that.
So with that madam president
unanimous consent we go to that
order business committee
reports.
referred Senate bill two has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that a
do pass and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Daniel A. Ivey Soto
chairman.
Senator Wirth I thank you madam
president a unanimous consent we
go about our business messages
from the governor.
We're on that order of Business
have issued an amended
proclamation under the authority
vested in me by article four
section six of the New Mexico
constitution calling the fifty
fifth legislature of the New
Lujan Grisham governor.
The journal show the message
from the governor has been
received.
thank you Mr madam president a
unanimous consent that we allow
the reader to read the amended
proclamation.
A seeing no objection the reader
will read the pop proclamation.
democracy and the fundamental
principle of equal
representation for equal numbers
of people must be upheld.
The equal whereas the people
legislature as nearly of equal
population as is practicable.
Whereas pursuant to article four
section three D. of the New
Mexico constitution the
legislature's responsible for re
available where as the state of
New Mexico received
approximately one point seven
billion in funds from the US
treasury department pursuant to
responding to the ongoing
pandemic and making investments
in broadband infrastructure.
Or as COVID nineteen has because
our state a significant economic
to this to to take affect
January one twenty twenty two
that may force them to shut
other practices and avoid
unsustainable financial
appropriations of the available
A. R. P. A. funds to it to
assist the new people of New
Mexico as a pandemic progresses
and make certain emergency
amendments to the medical
article four section six The New
Mexico constitution do by here
by.
issued this amended proclamation
and called the fifty fifth
legislature of the state of New
Mexico into special session at
is called for the purposes of
considering and enacting
legislation considering
concerning the following objects
and no others one.
Re apportioning districts for
Public Education Commission
three.
Operating all available A. R. P.
A. funds and compliance with
federal law for amending the
medical malpractice as
forty one dash five dash three
E. nineteen seventy six as
amended through twenty twenty
one to adding a temporary
provision providing that from
dollar amount recoverable by all
persons for are rising from an
injury or death to a patient as
a result of malpractice shall
not exceed seven hundred and
fifty thousand dollars per
occurrence for claims brought
twenty twenty one chapter
sixteen section three applied to
outpatient health care
facilities ascribed in section
one of this act.
On and after July one twenty
safety that this act take effect
immediately and quote and I re
appropriating funds for the
expense of the fifty fifth
Legislature section second
special session twenty twenty
one.
governor a yes Maggie Toulouse
Oliver secretary of state.
Thank you the journal show the
message from the governor the
proclamation has been received
that order introduction of
legislation.
Senate bill three introduced by
Senator Moores and act relating
to congressional redistricting
establishing congressional
districts for the election of
seventy eight Senate bill three.
Having been read Senate bill
Senator Pirtle and Senator Baca
an act relating to the
redistricting of the Senate
establishing senatorial
districts providing the method
for electing senators providing
Senate Bill for having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
rules committee thanks to the
Judiciary Committee Senate bill
four.
allocated to the state to the
department of health to provide
nursing staff to a license
hospital in San Juan County
Senate Bill I.
Senator Pirtle and act making
appropriation from federal funds
transferred to the appropriation
contingency fund to the public
education department to assist
school districts increasing
Senate bill six Senate bill
seven introduced by Senator
Pirtle and act making
appropriation from federal funds
transfer to the appropriation
contingency fund to the
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Senate finance
committee Senate bill seven.
Senate bill eight introduced by
Senator Pirtle and
Representative Terrazas.
department providing contract
terms requiring repayment
through a service making an
appropriation Senate bill eight
Senate bill eight having and
read twice by title is ordered
Sir Peter Wirth thank you madam
president unanimous consent we
go to that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
or on that order of business
announcements before we wind it
up for this morning Senator
Baca.
Thank you madam president a
unanimous consent to excuse
Senator Candelaria.
Other announcements Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you madam president I I
was just
like to bring the attention of
the body that was probably the
thought that was our job thank
you madam president.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto yes
madam president I I was I was
just by appreciate Senator Baca
Senator share thank you madam
chair I'm just wanting for a if
our Senate parliamentarian of
we can do that.
Senator Ivey Soto will you yield
madam president be happy of.
Senator share so madam president
Extraordinarily specific
including telling us exactly
what word we could in turn of
add in what word we had to
Madam president and Center
share.
we are Senate rules does not go
into detail as to how the form.
Madam president and and and
senator have we ever seen
anything like this that you're
aware of in the history of the
state of New Mexico.
Or that have
Use the specific language of the
title of the bill so we have
seen fairly prescriptive
with.
To to whatever fix it that that
certainly feels like that's
something right and we could do
for word as she put it in her
proclamation and it really is
word for word is what her
proclamation yes.
share of the proclamation is an
executive function which tells
us what may be considered.
The legislative process however
And of course every bill that is
considered in the Senate is
subject to debate amendment and
substitution.
And she did and I just want the
body to understand that that we
are the Senate we are the
legislature where the upper body
The whole idea that it be.
Dictated to us how to do it I
reject.
Let's do it.
But I reject.
business center Herrell pope.
Thank you madam president I I
would just ask everyone to stand
we lost an icon last night not
Indianapolis five hundred Anne
is the record for being the
oldest person to win that race
at forty seven.
Senator is if you can stand for
a moment of silence.
Thank you.
this time I ask unanimous
consent the Senate stand
recess until three o'clock this
afternoon.
Seeing no objection the Senate
will stand in recess till three
o'clock this afternoon.
