representatives Mr president I'm
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
as amended by the Senate in
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business
committee reports on that order
of business committee reports to
click to read.
the whole to home has been
referred house bill two as
amended has had it under
consideration and reporting with
recommendations that it do
passed as amended respectfully
Seeing no objection committee
report has been adopted.
Senator Wirth.
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve or one PM.
The Senate will come to order.
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
Mr president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the Judiciary Committee there
Thank you Mr president so we're
gonna go to third reading are
sergeant at arms are handing out
a supplemental calendar.
it'll be on house bill.
unanimous consent we go that our
business third reading of
legislation and I yield to
Senators.
Lopez and do ever do it again
Lopez however they like to do it
as soon to ensure that your Mike
is on mute and when you speak
have your camera on please also
if any individual was
participating in their office by
unanimous consent of all of the
Senate that the record show that
all action for placing House
Bill two as three times amended.
on final passage has been taken
bill that has been rewritten and
then amended and then re written
and re written again
and.
Mexico it will be at the
beginning
But Hey Beek because I know that
there are they're going to be a
lot of additional improvements
in the future going forward but
And I want to thank all of the.
The legislators and the
advocates who have spent years
and years working on this issue
It in addition to I know many
other legislators who have
who've worked on this for years
and years and I want to thank
all the members of this body who
that we have before us now is
better because of that attention
in the input from the members of
this body no matter no matter
much Mr president and thank you
Senator Duhigg
Just to add maybe just a few
words more to what Senator
Duhigg mentioned
Seven that back chair we're
Senator Ivy Soto was sitting and
we had many a discussion debate
and conversation whatever you
the the Senate you know we we we
had many a long discussion also
in Senate Judiciary and I've
been on their dream I my tenure
here and in the Senate.
again in front of Senate
judiciary and I've had many a
long discussion.
So Mister president in a we are
here at this point in time.
where we are today I to say and
agree that the other still more
I know that we will do as
chairman Martinez mentioned
earlier today and is some of our
framework from where we can
begin.
So I still look forward Mr
president members of the Senate
to an opportunity for us to have
So with that Mr president I will
give the floor back to Senator
Duhigg Senator Hey.
And Mister president R. to the
extent that there there is is
Senator Pirtle.
Myself and two other Republican
colleagues recalled into the
governor's office.
And we were told that we were
gonna work together.
that it's not contacted not
communicated with not brought
in.
And so what you're gonna end up
with is is is exactly what
everybody wanted as part of some
And I would be remiss if I
didn't give a shout out to Peter
Cobb not up in let's council who
did.
So amazing work on my bill.
Yeah the bill out by Thursday.
And yet as a legislative body
who's supposed to be independent
from the governor.
isn't that we're passing a
horrible piece of legislation I
think was most disappointing to
me is the destruction of the
legislature that we've witnessed
here.
You know buzz word we've been
hearing is bullying.
And we all know what happened
people were pressured pushed
oppressed.
Put in a corner.
Is that the legislature you want
to be part of.
That sure as hell is not the
legislation legislator I want to
be part of.
Look at it we're gonna read it
we're gonna treat it with
respect.
Basically what we've seen here
today is.
Well.
Why do we not come over and work
with you on the other side of
the aisle.
Because this is how you're
treated when you work across the
aisle.
be about coming across the
aisle.
But this is how you get treated
when you come across the aisle.
You get treated treated like
senator rue.
Thank you on your soapbox and
talk about how why can't
Republicans vote for this.
One were not included to our
ideas are rejected.
That.
We don't work as an independent
body we don't care about.
But does that benefit the
citizens.
Of New Mexico.
No.
I don't care about credit.
I don't care about having my
name on a freaking piece of
legislation that nobody's going
You know what I care about.
Is the fact that the legislature
is that.
I think that's the scariest part
of what we're doing here today.
I think that's the biggest thing
that I I hope the public picks
up from this.
The governor.
aisle I was willing to.
I was willing to stick my neck
out get emails from my district
how dare you do this but I
wonder policy.
Is this something that we want
to do moving for that when we
don't get our way in the sixty
day.
And they'll still go through
that we just call special
session and and force things
through impressed people and
bully people.
first of twenty twenty two.
Eleven full time to fix all the
horrible sections within the
bill.
That we laid out beautifully.
Yes my beautiful children.
That's what's important.
Following us in on Easter week.
Wasn't promised the promises
were not capitalize were made.
If that's.
What you guys want to do in
Centers we're debating house
bill two is three times amended.
Si no further debate Senator had
to close.
for that House Bill to as the
four times or three times and
four times amended do now pass
and I ask for a roll call vote
Senator Baca Senator Baca no
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt no
senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd no Senator Campos
Senators about this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Kernan no Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator to
subpoena Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes senator by the.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes.
Senator Sanchez no Senators
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo passes Senator
souls Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods no Senator.
Shendo.
And body appreciate the
opportunity to explain of this
is my only second session coming
over from the house and I it
breaks my heart see the
to she has mentioned this is a
historic vote the we look back
in time two years four years ten
years now and know that this
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president before we
wind up unanimous consent we go
that our visit nonsense
miscellaneous and that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
sergeant in arms Legislative
Council Service and Peter Cobb
not got a shout out but they've
all been working extraordinarily
hard these last couple days and
just before we leave I want to
hand of thanks for what they
did.
Seeing no objection so ordered.
Senate office.
Mr president I move that the
Senate sign and I.
