Committee for taking the time
today today we really really
appreciated
this bill as we saw last year it
was a sponsored by Senator
McKenna and she's also joining
shall be the floor if public you
get that.
Funds are
and this is a bill relating to
gross receipts taxes
just for some background that
there are cooperative agreements
between the tribes some tribes
and The New Mexico tax revenue
revenue Department and it is so
the tribes and the state that
they negotiate that agreement
and then they put that agreement
in statute one of the things
that was included in there was
that the tribes had to implement
a tax rate not less than the
local municipality around them
and so where you have tried to
have a higher tax rate the
actually that able to implement
that so and if the expert
witness she's with the public
act much and that's because
that's exactly what happened
this time to do so after years
and civil County ansible County
has a lesser tax rate of seven
point something however apple
has a tax rate of eight and
after clarify these numbers and
her last numbers so the track
actually can implement those
taxes so what is happening in
this bill is that we took out
that restriction you'll see that
there in one B. three so that
entire section was removed so
now the tribe's cast a tax rate
that whatever they do.
As long as families alerts to
the G. R. T. imposed by the
local municipality so that's
what we did here and in the
house taxation and revenue
committee we did make that
amendment and then we also
included the Navajo Nation and
Forcella patchy nation tribe but
then we have a we have an
amendment and we can talk about
that later I want to see if you
like to add any.
Good afternoon.
Madam chair members of the
committee of this bill is meant
to allow tribes to set their own
tax policy and tax rates taken
into consideration what they
think they need
to provide services to their
communities and this is fairly
critical as noted I think in the
fiscal impact report from.
Many times tribes have the same.
Needs for taxes as I referred to
municipalities but in some sense
it's it's states to.
and it's greater than the need
and the county.
And the tribes were hindered in
not being able to set the tax
rate that really worked for this
tribes also have the problem
that
They they don't have the same.
Opportunities for for taxation
that the state and
the municipalities and that
creates many problems one they
don't get property tax
yet they do help fund schools
and and everything else that
property tax in New Mexico I.
So this is this can create a
problem out at additionally ask
about head was being very
concerned
and sensitive to the fact of the
counties we work with Cibola
County all the time and we
thought well we would make it no
at the Representative the tribal
taxes could be any lower than
the neighboring counties but we
were approached about the
amendment and I needed to remove
this entire paragraph a
hideously contacted the the
attorney's receive look at me
that I work with they referred
me to this spokespeople for
counties that here the
legislature I spoke with them
and they had no problem with
this which may be say okay we
can do that we can take out this
whole third
And what that really does that
allows the tribes to set their
own tax as long as it is the way
this works these are cooperative
agreements and it's all all at
the discretion of the tribes and
the secretary whether to even
have a cooperative agreement
there's nobody that gets to
demand a cooperative agreement.
And they are negotiated and it
provides that the secretary can
only enter into one if it is
substantially similar to the
taxes of
that under the state system.
This becomes even grew up Rader
importance now that there are
efforts to lower the state gross
receipts tax
the local community's Act tribes
need to be able to take into
consideration there aren't needs
and set their budgets and
revenue streams from those
needs.
And I'm ready for questions
chair committee thank you thank
you Representative that'll go
out to those that are present
those that are in support of the
bills would you like to speak in
support of stardom stated
relented with.
Okay.
What.
Of the manager in San Jose on
the amendment no.
UP anybody opposed in the.
Because what if okay well.
Anybody online.
What are the positions.
And then there's no other
answer.
Okay thank you.
Representative would you want to
continue.
madam chair if we could move the
amendment the discussion
services.
So we'll.
And if there's Representative
news is no objections thank you
thank you madam chair.
This production does that for
discussion or to yep for the
question providers purposes.
So the amendment point to number
is.
Point to.
Two six six five point.
And
Thank you.
Inspecting the house taxation
and revenue committee amendments
one four five.
and then paid for online of
grand if I.
The.
That line that line twelve to
fifteen years king
And and and then there are
removing a requirement that I
have with much greater than the
tax gross.
Receipts tax rate and local
option gross receipts tax rate
to be credited against gross
receipts tax.
Receipts and compensating tax
rates so in essence what it does
is it.
It removes the house tax and Rav
Committee amendment except to
the point of the moving that
section that dictates that it
must be a right not less than
the local municipalities so
that's really the thank you that
working here.
Okay.
To.
Is that for the for all of the
members.
I have no comment on the
amendment other than to say the
with all of this course the
statute that is critical is nine
eleven dash twelve point one and
nine eleven dash twelve point
two sets out over Archie cards
can enter into this agreement
and set up the requirements for
those agreements in the state.
Thank you do we have any
questions from the committee.
In the event that.
To listen to adopt the amendment
to section second with senator
grace do we have any opposition
to the amendment.
So the amendment is adopted to.
House Bill fifteen twice
amended.
do we have anybody in the
audience in opposition to the
bill by twice the.
Fifteen.
That are present we support any
opposed.
The online nobody nobody online
If you're willing to fund we
have the more questions from the
committee.
Okay that you're willing to take
a motion from the committee on
house bill fifty twice amended.
Just before of.
Madam chair of Representative so
I knew the issue was there was
two counties and act more higher
rate.
Of business so this will fix
that basically.
Because we were limited madam
chair to what actually can
collect.
Under under G. R. T..
Yes but it applies for all of
the tribes understand rice is an
issue that act faced with their
multi county
adjusted as madam chair and
senator and committee members so
after is only Boller County but
there are times that have multi
counties so their tracks are two
counties in three counties so
that and if I were to fix its
tax rate than that would be
applicable on the tribe's last.
So that they can have one tax
instead of in one place for
different gross receipts tax in
one we've been trying.
And madam chair and senator I
think most importantly it would
be a tax rate that they see is
that for there.
you know the funds needed for
government services that they
provide to the community and and
even some of the resources that
are offered to folks out the
tribe or they welcome them to
use the library are for this
honor.
Again
I appreciate that I I think
there's a mention you know
governments disliked statements
validation of tribal government
does that sound right to impose
taxes to provide for services
and so forth so I appreciate
this fix I think you know all
this as I said a the economic
development you know and and
being on multi of counties this
is a good fit so.
Sure if I if I could if should
think about what Senator just
one thing to to clear up stuff
for me stays on page two where
we made for the house made their
amendment to tribal lines twenty
three through twenty five which
is that which is the the gist of
what we talked about last slash
two.
So we're we're I am down in
Ontario county we have national
tried and then we have the
villages reduction the more you
know very close.
What we removed what to have for
native which provision and said
that the tax will transaction on
the less than the total grocery
age tax rate for reduction.
It appears by striking that what
we've done.
K. let the tribe's ship whatever
rate they choose whether or not
it is.
It is a great way lower than
reduction is what that that
appears to me Madam chair and
and and Representative
so maybe you could explain that
a little more to me in that
context.
Madam chair of Senator groups I
tried Senate's tax whatever it
wants to we can do that it may
not get a cooperative agreement.
Because they have a qualifying
gross receipts tax has to be for
these agreements two thousand of
these agreements it has to be
substantially similar.
To that imposed by state law.
So I tried could not.
Representative was somebody
let's say something like fifteen
percent.
The secretary can go no thank
you.
Every government this is all
discretionary on the part of the
governor of the secretary
consent no I will introduced
cooperative agreement for that
purpose.
And the tribe cannot you know
they can collect that tax on the
tribal lands but they can't do
it anymore they could do that
even without a cooperative
agreement.
And and madam chair and
representative and which the.
The Mescalero tribe has you know
it was as a store gas station
private variety of things right
off the highway.
Which which could I'm supposing
I'm not I'm not thinking they
won't put fifteen percent I'm
thinking they might want to put.
Five percent of four percent
where the village right dosage
tax rate is eight point nine
percent.
And so.
That's the concern that I've got
about striking the language that
age that was the house amendment
and I don't yeah I mean I'm not
sure whether I'm I'm correct
because I don't know what would
happen.
Yeah Mescalero chose to
Say that they wanted to go with
a five percent rate which would
then not be generous to the
tribe they might track a whole
lot more business coming from
right ocean and down for for
that sure that with the stress
of this language educating here
and implementing it out that's.
Change it to the last spans okay
to me but we write the whole
provision that may be a little
problematic for more I my part
of the world and I.
I hope you guys are
understanding what I me.
Madam chair and senator we
actually had this conversation I
think it's on the house floor
maybe even in some of the house
committee and at that very issue
came up and I gave the example
of cigarette taxes so last year
the year before and finally
started coming in in the
legislature but we did implement
a higher cigarette tax rate
within the state however that
was not acceptable to the
tribe's what we saw the tribe's
do however was actually raised
the rate as well because the
needs are so high within the
tribal communities this is
something they're gonna do they
can't have property taxes so you
know there's a loss of money
there but they the needs of the
community members of tribal
members are so high especially
now because so many of the
casinos closed during the
pandemic where those revenues
plans to travel services so you
know I think and I think.
If people are thinking business
and competitive that's something
that I should consider that the
the truth of the matter is you
know these are tribal
governments even though they do
have
commercial operations they still
have a needs are greater than
the times that that that that
we've seen them especially with
the cigarette tax example that
they're not going to they're not
going to do trying to be that
competitive because state that
money is much needed.
Thank you madam chair
representative I mean I
understand I'm not sure that's
what this this allow I mean it
it allows something different
than what might be done.
And I believe I'm reading that
correctly and will anything
like that for you know I I don't
the only manager in that you
elimination should I mention.
That they would.
They would have a.
A gross receipts tax rate that
was substantially different to
work with it would cause.
Businesses in reductions to lose
patience I don't think so.
But.
They could I suppose
but it would have to be would
have to be distinctly different
and I don't know maybe in in the
example your ex for used if that
would be something that would
happen and even in what you're
talking about would happen this
way that the language shares in
New Mexico that.
And that's the only the only
thing we were staying where we
were and just leaving that
provision and I'm going to let
stand I think I think that makes
it a whole lot more palatable
for me.
But
I'm gonna think about that for
just a minute I I had read the I
mean I was thinking when we were
back where we were when we
struck that that that is
different to make sure thank you
madam chair.
Thank you thank you send rigs in
Texas madam chair not just make
a comment and the that's a
concern with the likelihood of
happens probably very.
Small you know on the federal
minister for a mess we have our
in all of our great set with the
Santa Fe county wide.
Why would you mean we're
collecting G. R. T. on that
because with these services why
we want to drop to two percent
it doesn't make sense so it's so
the likelihood of that half of
the.
Thirty four number so this is
for that.
And your thank you madam chair
thank perfection I mean I I
agree I think I just I just look
at that see that that that and
that's not what share some some
little bit of wind and I don't
it reduction may not be the best
example.
But it could be four hundred
four portion where the traffic
is is much greater.
And you don't.
That that's that's the COVID of
gas and I'm sticking to it I.
So so so listen the world of
bills we have an amended so one
of those.
Seven minutes into the into the
structure of.
Amendment one point five and
then also opposed to changes on
page one on the line for a level
that.
Correct correct.
So with that I'd so we're back
in the bill in the back of the
bill.
But the medicine.
Any questions.
But it's just that this bill
does to what committee I.
Thanks.
Questions on the numbers I
think.
Or the language and sex and.
But I don't have any further
questions.
Chelan to table a motion for the
best person for the past place
in addition.
Second question in the mail back
to the Sir.
No objections the motion of the
past.
Representative Lewis you have a
do pass on health bill I
submitted.
