Senator serve on this I'm here.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna your.
Senator Moores.
Senator my nose.
Senator Pinto.
Here.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator probe.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president.
The Moscow Rama in Santa Fe.
Please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be let
today be ism Senator Pinto.
The pledge of allegiance in
Spanish to be led today by
I will do let me make sure you
all know what the.
Which is the most merciful shot
on echo minute the name will
solve the new house what you've
religion as a way of life as he
advise now are able to harm and
Moses and Jesus I'm I'm an old
profits and messages as dispatch
you people and so you can get it
gone the lower the federal harm
and Moses Jesus and Muhammad
help us to serve a lot of people
world protect us from this
pandemic and make us among those
mighty is above all we of the
Sir in the state of the art we
live and best at the and we.
god bless you all of a sudden
I'm on the phone what law he
will director.
Yosemite ka yaala Republica
Representative the when not C.
own on day deals indivisibility
Senator is good morning like to
welcome you to the chamber.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president it is a good morning
unanimous consent we go to that
moment but I ask unanimous
consent to allow cameras on the
floor Senator then the
antiseptic hammers on the floor
would you like that in the
we very much appreciate.
so up front I know a Senator
Padilla I believe has an
announcement so ideal the
Senator Padilla and other
about a remarkable
accomplishment in my district.
No objection proceed Senator
thank you very much Mr president
members of the Senate I'm very
council here in our grand old
United States of America there
principal internet violence
wella has done a remarkable job
leading the school leading to
students and doing everything
thank you Mr president I know
that you've been to this high
school several times along the
way in your political career and
they'd love to see you there
whenever you have the time Mr
president
at arms Melanie and on this
senior class president and spit
on sorry senior class vice
president Medicine Garis junior
class president Lawrence Sondhi
president Regina Cannella
sophomore vice president Leslie
Jackson who is the adviser and I
just want to call miss Jackson
out also Mr president she does a
phenomenal job of leading this
and and the principal and
tenants violence whether we can
please give them a virtual round
of applause Mr president.
you on that on that visit.
Any other announcements senator
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president and I
would ask the members of the
and just a if you could just
join with me.
Of your god we just come to you
and just.
We thank you for.
The fact that you are the great
you would just so.
Touch the bodies and and heal
them.
and just we lift them up to you
we know.
That you know what's going on in
only you can in Jesus name I
pray amen.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Further announcements Senators.
that we excuse Sir share.
With the exception of existing
calls of the Senate so.
The no further announcements
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president and I
appreciate Senator Brandt
that are watching so we all
understand so because Senator
share was excuse for all
purposes except the existing
number eighteen so I'll work
basically on hold will Senator
share is gone on those two
matters and I just want to let
folks know that's the reason
And see how we're doing I do
envision again.
Are having a session this
evening.
unanimous consent we go to that
or business committee reports
on that order of business
committee reports.
The reader to right.
committee substitute for Senate
bill seventeen do pass
respectfully submitted senator
George K. my nose chair.
Senator me us.
backed on one motion there were
at that the general fund for the
wrecked on individually no
objection to retrieve.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
twenty seven two passed as
amended.
substitute for Senate bill two
ninety one do pass.
Senate bill two ninety five do
pass.
Senate bill two ninety nine as
Senate bill three seventy nine
do pass.
And Senate bill four oh four do
not pass but that Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
Seeing no objection the
committee for has been adopted
in the journal so that they're
acted upon individually.
Mr president your health and
finance committee respectfully
submitted Senator Gerald Ortiz
Y. Pino chairman that are the
spin off Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
four do pass and it's referred
to the Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill three thirty eight
to pass as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
pass and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
And House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for house
Gerald Ortiz Y. Pino chairman or
anticipate a Mr president I move
the adoption of the committee
report that as we have a motion
to adopt the committee for.
Seeing no objection the
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
seven seven three to be level
read all the committee for its
that they back from individually
but the records that that they
backed up with one but but the
records of their act fund
Daniel A. Ivey Soto chairman
Senator Ivey Soto Representative
report have a motion to that the
committee for.
See no objections committee for
Thank you.
Thank you Mr president some
thanks center when you just
wanted to make an announcement
but I don't see him at this
Senator before we go to third
reading I'm gonna yield to
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart this present ask
unanimous consent that we excuse
reminder please mute your phones
are for Mumbai rate in the
chamber and those that are V. is
assumed if you can just have
your microphones needed but when
you speak please turn on a
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the knowledge
action.
Senator explained the bill.
Thank you Mr president Senate
uniquely American tradition no
other major come country comes
close to looking as much as of
its judiciary as we do and in
here into the system is a
conflict between our desire to
have our elected judges be
private money in those campaigns
by doing things like prohibiting
judicial candidates from seeking
to discover who's contributed
who's contributed.
It also provides the judicial
So this bill would right now we
are I do public financing for
statewide judicial races and PRC
races this bill eliminates PRC
judges.
And it would scale the amount of
public financing the candidates
would get based on the size of
their judicial con District so
would get fifty five cents per
voter because they have less
voters and so they would need
more provider doing the scaling
approach approach ensures the
districts got a sufficient
contributions anywhere from a
hundred contribute five dollar
qualifying contributions in
districts with a hundred
thousand or less voters all the
way up to four hundred of
Mr president I'm I'm ready to
take questions if there are any
thank you senator Senator
debating Senate bill one sixty
as amended.
Is present with the sponsor
yield that indignity of yes Mr
president.
Mr presence I had not heard the
Be her call on this.
Present this presents Saturday
goes.
Senator I guess in both I was
conservative concern about as a
candidate but I can see where
this might even jeopardize some
separate issue let's say perhaps
they they didn't have sufficient
petition signatures that might
be a basis to disqualify them as
a candidate Mr president but
that would be a separate inquiry
the required number of
qualifying contributions in
order to qualify are than they
would not qualify for public
financing or this present if
they did work qualified as a
This presents etcetera then is
the.
process to look at the
contributions so
if they had the four hundred
secretary of state's office to
that.
And Mr present center so if if
I'm if I understand the question
is in the that after they they
had gone those qualifying
to make that determination or if
the secretary of state's office
would automatically give them.
Their numbers.
Mr president center thank you I
Thank you Mr president Senator
those are all my questions I
just had not heard this and and
I have just a.
it would take to be a candidate
so with that are you thank you
Mr president thank you senator
because we do have further
debate we have Senator
Stefanics.
of this bill I do think the more
we can
Of I don't want to use the word
move money around but the more
we can support public elections
the better for our state thank
you very much thank you senator
I'm not sure what to ask other
than up was so we're doing for
district judges what is
currently in place for our
candidates for Supreme Court and
court judges currently have as
an option so thank you and and
so Mister president senator so I
guess it's an optional for judge
to choose to do a public
thank you Mr president Senator
and and I I believe Senator
Gallegos mentioned something
about the role of the secretary
of state.
And it seems as though I
recalled recently well several
be some issue there and our I I
just tried to text my County
clerk to find out exactly what
that was but there was someone
fairness there and I'm not quite
sure what happened that I don't
public of finance campaign I'm
just not quite sure locally
through throughout the district
like in in our district it
encompasses three county so you
would include all of the
Just what kind of protections
are there with regard to making
sure that
someone's not left out that
wanted to be N. and something
happened I don't know what
happened that there was some
that I I'm sorry I don't know
exactly what to ask you but I
just remember that that was not
a good thing.
Sure and Mr presents our current
I'm I'm not sure exactly what
file to be one of these are to
be a publicly financed
candidates and would be able to
timely submits the required
number of qualifying
clerk and evidently
The candidate this one candidate
did not get public financing the
other candidate opponent did get
are going to be in place very.
Quickly so that we don't run
into an issue of a real change
by the secretary state that
prevents one candidate from
getting public financing so I
so much thank Senator Kernan we
do have Senator Sedillo Lopez
followed by senator Wirth then
Senator Pirtle centers the
office.
the public finance Division it
was a much different experience
than running as a for District
who's giving the money but what
I learned from that is lawyers
don't want to give money unless
they can appear at an event
where the judge of fund raising
Really distasteful and really I
think undermines public
confidence in the judiciary when
a judge.
Accepts money even though the
bill really helps the judiciary
avoid that that appearance
I think it's very important that
we continue to elect judges
while avoiding those appearances
which are so.
Distasteful as kind of an
understatement but it does
shield the judge from knowledge
of who actually gives the other
problem is that newspaper
publishes the big donors to the
judges so is so the judges might
Thank you Senator Lopez Senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president and
members I was a.
implemented and I distinctly
remember you know we started
with the PRC and then I believe
it was.
Then leader Kenny Martinez
And and it was the appellate
judges and that's what's been
there up until this time
which is the the constitutional
think Senator Kernan was asking
really good questions I mean
it's it this is totally optional
for judges for all the reasons
you've heard it makes a ton of
And so you know the thing is the
appellate process.
I wanna give a shout out to one
of our Republican court of
public financing being used by
both sides in the appellate
races and that by in.
And that willingness to
have that same option public
financing is especially
appropriate for judges I I
certainly think we should go
And our neighbors to the west in
Arizona how public financing for
legislative races
here in Santa Fe we have public
financing for city council races
and for more it's an option you
don't have to take it but I just
think the issue of.
Money in politics which is
Kerry this and move it forward I
also really appreciate that the
site Senate finance committee
realize this can happen within
the existing statute we're
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president.
I'm gonna have opposed the
legislation I do think the
majority of it is is a pretty
As originally written it was
written in decently fair way
where the pipe depending on
population
that would determine how many
First a hundred thousand people
act have to get more qualified
contributions.
And so when we look at districts
we get out and and Senator Woods
district where the there's more
cows than people it becomes very
hard to go door to door or find
these people to do these
go to all the corners of his
district he puts a lot of miles
on his on his vehicle and when
we look at Senator Ortiz Pinos
district a great distributed
full downtown area you know it's
quite easy for him to walk the
really really harms the the
judges in the rural areas to be
able to to get out to the people
and get these qualified
contributions thank you Mr
president thank you Senator
Pirtle any further debate
the Senate bill one sixty do now
pass then ask unanimous consent
of the Senate the pope.
To do that by roll call vote
I just want to disclose that I
mentioned that my husband is a
judge his of future races would
be and the.
Not not partisan races so he
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Cervantes Senators
run this test Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan.
no.
You know it's hard to hear with
your mask John and all the staff
but Senator Kernan no Senator
Lopez.
Senator Moores no Senator one
else.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville no Senator
o'neill.
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pro.
Senator Schmidt is no Senator
severe Lopez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez yes Senator sure Senator
Shendo.
Senator sold yes Senators
defending.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart S. Senator
Tallman.
Senator Brandt no.
right go to the vote they will
heal to Senate office thank you
very much Mr president
unanimous.
Consent to excuse Senators
Hemphill Padilla and Steinborn
I see no objections so thank you
by a vote of twenty two in the
affirmative thirteen the
negative Senate bill one sixty
as amended has passed the Senate
Senator.
the Senate floor and we just
want to congratulate her and
welcome her to the state Senate.
Thank you senator we are moving
on to item number three on
today's calendar that Senate
bill ninety eight as amended
economic development incentive
reports Senator Tallman.
Senate that the record show that
all.
Actions for placing a Senate
bill ninety eight once.
Amended
Seeing no objection Sierra to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr Mr president this
is one of three
Transparency and accountability
bills and sponsoring this year
And
In this issue when I read a
recent report.
issued by the pew charitable
trusts which stated quote New
order requiring this tax and Rev
to prepare an annual report and
tax credits exemptions and
deductions however the
evaluation of these programs
this bill correction.
Unlike most states to regularly
evaluate incentives New Mexico
subsidies are not required by
statute.
clarity of what the realistic
expectations are for what you
might get that in other words
are we getting our money's
worth.
That's incentive recipients will
be required to report the number
of full time jobs state were
able to create what wages are
paying and how much they are
largely be available only to tax
and Rev.
State economists in order to
shield competitive and
proprietary information but
So Mister president this a.
Bill only
Required tax expenditures.
over a ten million dollars to be
evaluated.
the now this is required for the
film industry however most of
the other tax incentives that we
providers that do not have a
economic analysis.
million dollars for the film
industry to.
Ranging down to one point six
million for software development
services G. R. T. deduction.
other states and valuation tax
incentives.
This bill creates an evaluation
plan for high cost economic
development incentives providing
For tax expenditures there this
is the heart of what we're
trying to do.
Is have a robust economic
analysis of our tax incentives.
Mr president don of.
The
This bill re faster a valuation
the is a balancing act between a
desire to maintain a high level
valuations of our tax
expenditures.
And.
that would have occurred anyway
the economic analysis of certain
high cost economic development
tax incentives required this
bill is a step in the right
words are we getting our money's
worth and finally Mister
president by December of a.
In January of two thousand
twenty.
The Albuquerque journal did a
Albuquerque journal had another.
Senator about these economic and
some of the valuations and they
quoted Dawn Iglesias chief
know whether a tax incentive is
doing.
What it was designed to do.
End of quote.
End of comments thank you Mr
president.
Anyone wishing to bait we have
senator Morris figures provided
here late well with senator Tom
and tell us what this bill does.
thank you Mr president Senator
Moores any other any additional
debate.
Senator Brandt as president
would would certainly give us
Number ten this is a good build
number nine this is a good bill.
Number eight this is a good
bill.
And the.
and I Sierra any other debate.
See no debate Madam closed on
the bill.
that the roll call and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in a
negative by show of hands thank
you thank you.
Thank you senator for.
Because it is difficult to hear
with the masks on if you can
state your vote your vote to
either loud and clearly are
using your microphone please
that'll help us tremendously up
here.
Senator Campos Senator Campos
yes senator from the audience.
Senators around this Senators
Senator Gonzalez vote yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal Senator had
a meal yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be now.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pro.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator socio Senator Stefanics.
Tallman yes Senator Tallman yes
senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
There would yes.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Lopez yes Senator Lopez
yes.
Senate Senator Tallman thank you
Mr president thank you members
of the Senate.
Thank you moving on we'll go to
item number four in today's
places Senate bill to eighteen
as amended.
On final passage has been taken
in the now subject to debate
amendment or substitution thing
of junction Senator Shendo to
certain income tax reforms that
we connected.
As a body in H. B. six during
the twenty nineteen session are
mandatory for taxpayers.
The two nineteen changes to the
U. D. I. T. P. A. provided that
the.
Corporate income taxes due from
chapter seven article five of
the New Mexico multi state
compact could arguably be allow
could hardly allow C. I. T. tax
of the you dip you dip pa that
was originally included in the
multi state compact.
There are sixteen states Mr
president including New Mexico
based sourcing rules for a the
corporate income tax so Mr
president that's the bill.
Thanks etcetera etcetera we are
debating Senate Bill to eighteen
rule is something that
Representative Harper and I
worked on for a number of years
and it was part of the twenty
really this is just a Senator
Shendo said this is to make sure
that our law remains as it is on
the books and there's not a back
door way to get out of that
further debate senators.
See no for that senator Morris
thank you Mr president maybe you
Mr president AB sauce are German
sendo would yield an answer that
senator Morris alas etcetera
Shendo etcetera etcetera the of.
Mr president.
insisted for leader of yield
Mister worth Mr president happy
to yield and so that's a state
agency bill this is coming from
the department of tax and Rev
and I think Senator Shendo had
Bills to fix an issue you'll see
that essay.
Thank you Mr Mister president
you for later I hadn't seen that
in nine years and for the first
six years I doubt we would have
thank you.
Any further debate centers.
Say no further debate Senator
Shendo to close on the bill.
Mr president I move that the
yes just want to make sure the
clarify that it sent a bill to
eighteen as amended with
emergency clause.
The clerk to call the roll.
put them final passes once again
okay of.
Mr president I move that Senate
bill to eighteen as amended.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt give senator
Byrd.
Senator Wirth DS Senator Campos
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator guy
it goes.
Senator Gallegos passes Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be now Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
yes senator for the.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
songes Senator songes yes
Senators committees.
Senator Canadian CS Senator
depending.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes.
thank you moving on to item
number five Senate rules
committee substitute for Senate
bill fifteen and ninety nine and
one might in line with the
That changed a little bit.
from from what it normally is up
on the on the board but I'm the
less I will I will yield to him
ninety nine with the mercy
Clause on final passage but take
it is now subject to debate
amendment or and substitution
see no objection Senator Ivey
Soto explained about thank you
very much Mr president was
a member of the.
For this chamber then there was
a member of the house that also
I came and signed on the bill in
and and but I do appreciate you
updating the picture there.
they will go throughout the
state and do a series of.
a series of hearings they will
Have a special session those
mass will be proposed we can
also consider other maps and
then we do our duties as
legislators and so that Mr
Senator Ivy Soto this is a a
long term time calming Senate
bill ninety nine also this is a
committee substitute of two
different bills Senator settled
and fall bipartisan group
Senator Pinto was part of our
effort I think about eight or
nine house members are also part
of the effort and work with the
collaborative effort around the
Senator Ivey Soto for his Senate
bill fifteen which was the
traditional way we did
redistricting legislation and we
came up with this compromise of
blended.
the house and I never got a
committee referral so I'm really
employees that were able to move
this bill with a little more
transparency you know more
public involvement down the pike
redistricting reform but this
definitely helps of those moving
down the field many of us want
reform in this this this field
and maybe in ten years we cannot
actually get that done properly
Center dissipated the yield.
I certainly do Mr president
thank you senator Morris thank
you Senator Ivy Soto for the
work you all put into this bill
I I would be remiss if I didn't
also bring up.
that Senator Moores and I and
Senator Pinto were part of we
met many times during the fall
and the bill before you is
was a matter for some debate but
it retains the essence of what
was proposed by that work group
which is that.
be charged with doing a lot of
the leg work in conducting the
public hearings and that
ultimately what was what would
be be brought to to we
solid bases the whole point of
it is to try as best we can to
avoid the litigation that is
characterized the last two
million dollars.
The state to argue over the
plans that we came up with and
ultimately a judge had to decide
which which plans would be
when he said we what we
ultimately are going to have to
do is come up with the
constitutional amendment but
that wouldn't be possible this
year on the short notice so this
we do have an amendment the
reader to re.
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bills
fifteen and one hundred ninety
nine with emergency clause
Senate rules committee our
amendment number one to set
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill fifteen and one
ninety nine and the amendment to
simply changes the date normally
particular here we have to we're
doing a slightly different time
frame and so they are being what
the bill has is that they would
be.
that this commission as well
some of the folks that that
might be a bit tight and so
we're changing the date to June
one that still gives them plenty
of time to get the work done.
president I move that Center the
Senate floor amendment number
one to Senate rules committee
says to for Senate bill fifteen
one nine nine do not pass and I
ask unanimous consent of the
Senate that it that
Seeing no objection senator
member number one.
Adopted we are back on the bill
anyone wishing to based on the
bill.
the fiscal impact report
brings up the and I just want to
assure people of there is money
cover the cost of the
redistricting of work it is that
correct senator Munoz would you
yield to to just confirm that
because the FIR brings up the
question of whether there's
center at Senator Moores was she
contended.
Mr president
of mistresses or or to see Pino
I believe that was actually in
the junior bill the million was
The courts in the legislative
and executive so that was part
of the provided money Madrid
all.
Thank you so so there really is
no need to I I don't believe
there is a need for any
president a center anticipate
any further debate.
Si no further debate Senator
Ivey Soto to close on the bill.
Thank very much and and I would
again thank the the Senator the
chair of our rules committee for
working on this bill for years
again I think support center to
see if you know that it's not
worthwhile like to be in the
more fair on the process and
when we get back here in the
fall we can actually legislative
process and we still control
that process but I do think we
senator has been a hard great
advocate for reduced rate form
since I've known him and also
want to thank us and or to see
Pino because this is a great
as president with the support of
my two co sponsors and the
Senate I now move that set rules
committee substitute for set of
bills fifteen and one ninety
nine as amended with the mercy
The Colorado.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Diamond DS Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg give Senator
Gallegos yes ma'am Senator
Gallegos yes Senator
controllers.
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Ivey Soto yes
Senator how to meal Senator had
Senator Moores yes Senator manos
senator Munoz yes senator
Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
the all of us yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator Stewart DS Senator
Coleman yes well then yes
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senate bill fifteen and one
ninety nine as amended with
emergency clause has passed the
Senate Senator Ivey Soto thank
you Mr president members looking
with our constituents thank you
all very much Senator Ivey Soto
moving on to item number six
hundred calendars Senate bill
two sixty five county
jurisdiction over traffic
amendment or substitution the no
objections center federal
explained the bill thank you Mr
president and Senate bill two
sixty five something that is
passed out of this chamber
person the right to have their
court case in the district or
county where the infraction
occurred currently the way the
the statute is written a a
of that decision to having the a
person being cited consent to
that and the reason for that is
is we have citizens that say get
ticketed in Roswell and they
would help our citizens and
ensure that they're not being
burdened more than they should
for simple traffic citations
thank you Mr president.
Thank you Senator Pirtle
Seeing no objection Sierra that
is excused.
Si no further debate Senator
Pirtle close on the bill.
Thank you mistress I move Senate
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt Senator Brandt
yes senator Byrd.
around is yes Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey Senator Hickey
yes Senator Ingle.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neil Senator o'neil yes
Senator need to be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Padilla Senator for the
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez Senator Sweetser yes
Senators committees.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
Senator socio Senator Stefanics
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes.
Senator Gonzalez.
on the negative Senate bill two
sixty five has passed the Senate
Senator particles Representative
fertile.
Thank you Mr president do it
again if you would like but I
appreciate the body and off to
four which will be Senator Ivy
Soto on Representative my S.
this house taxation revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty five twice
Mr president I move that that.
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty five as price
minute with the mercy Clause.
fifty five as try spend with
diverse claws are on final
passage has been taken this is
now subject out now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
Several years ago.
R. this chamber.
The only couple people.
And the legislature at the time.
Particular work of a came the
licenses.
Was forty years ago.
Mr president members of the
chamber there forty two
senators.
The last time we did alcohol
licensure reform.
What this bill is does is that
it.
Begins the process of
This bill.
And I'm not sure I'll.
And they'll be debate and we'll
get into some of the other
details.
license.
Right that license as if it was
their personal property.
They sell the license they lease
the license.
This is my driver's license.
This is my driver's license my
driver's license comes from the
state.
make me a better offer than what
I'm gonna use my license for I
don't have the option of selling
it to somebody else.
When I stop using this license
And that restaurant license.
Goes back to the state.
We align several of the
provisions.
In this bill we do allow for
alcohol deliveries under certain
About my motivation what this
bill.
First of all this is reform that
has been a long time coming.
Representative Antonio moe
Maestas.
Who has worked tirelessly on
this issue.
For almost a decade.
people such as Senator Griggs.
Who has a fair amount of
knowledge in this area.
And other people in this chamber
that of tackle this this issue
bill is not that we sell more
alcohol.
I do not believe that this bill
What what I am interested in Mr
president members of the Senate.
Is to change our relationship
with alcohol.
What I am interested Mr
president members of the Senate
With limits appropriate limits.
In the process.
So with that Mr president.
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
Daniel A. Ivey Soto Senator Ivey
Soto to move and explain the
amendment.
Thank you very much Mr president
came out of Judiciary Committee
and got a good look at the bill
and have some discussions.
Let me just expenditures couple
different things the first thing
classe kind of this I class icon
is the biggest counties.
Whether it's alcohol delivery if
it's a big box store delivering
the alcohol.
Airline.
From the big box stores it
adjourns Mister president
members that the the delivery
system.
transaction ensuring
accountability.
And it also ensures that they
use their own employees to do
deliveries.
We make sure that we have the
R..
There is a there's a drafting
issue where we had the closing
time for certain days but not
others we make sure we have the
closing time there.
that they may not serve a single
patron more than three spiritus
drinks.
Because again this is about
changing our relationship.
that when they do alcohol
delivery.
ID's are checked every single
time.
Under this bill if you if you go
obviously over the age of thirty
five.
He should have to show his ID.
R. but by contrast sitting next
the house you have to show your
ID every single time.
Both of them would have to show
their ID every single time.
And then finally of agency
restriction around churches and
schools for a licensee to to
song called.
We reinstate that.
restaurant a and B. where you're
actually consuming food.
With any drinks that you half.
And so that is allowed under
is that when people come out of
church on Sunday morning to have
a place to go to lunch.
We're balancing the two.
In a way that I think works
nicely is good policy for the
Pino.
Thank you Mr president would the
sponsor of the amendment
detailed and I thought that the
of this president have been
happy of two of its of Mister
we were able to eat food in the
legislature.
And he's been the the impetus
for the liquor delivery with
food initiative.
just the opposite first of all
we will finally have a lawful
liquor with food delivery law it
does require food to be
The Mr president and and
senator.
It says a person otherwise
qualified pursuant now this is
I'm just reading your amendment
so maybe there's other
authorizing illicit the person
otherwise qualified pursuant to
the provisions of the liquor
control act.
May apply for and the department
restaurant and he's not he's a
delivery service.
So is there some other provision
that covers him.
Yes this president Senator two
is for third party delivery
service which is referenced in
here so we know it exists for
third party delivery service
able to deliver from all the
restaurants in Santa Fe he would
be able to deliver food.
And also if delivering food also
have more debate on the
amendment with Senator Lopez
followed by Senator Pirtle
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez.
And I appreciate first of all
Mister president Senator Ivey
Soto that you did pay attention
to the concern that I did raise
six B. dash ten which remove the
restrictions on licensing near
churches or schools so Mister
president I appreciate your
that you did here the concern
that I did raise with regards to
that particular issue and then
also to Mr president
Credence subsection tourists is
no spiritus liquors are included
in deliveries of alcoholic
beverages so that does help a
little bit more Mister president
senator just wanted to mention
that thank you thank you Senator
partners have applied for a
craft distillers license and
though we have applied I do not
think that there's any financial
conflict in any of the votes I
will be taking on the amendments
had for quite some time so if
anything it will hurt my bottom
line but I think this is bigger
than just the craft distillery
that we are planning on opening
Nichols thank you very much Mr
president Thomas president I
move that the house floor
amendment number one to house
taxation revenue Committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty five as amended do not
Seeing no objection Senate
foreman of amendment number one
has been added we are back on
the bill Senators.
house bill two fifty five as
amended three times with
emergency clause amendment
sponsored by senator Ron Griggs
Senate rates to move and explain
fifty five is three times
amendment.
I see no objections Senator feel
explain which amendment does.
Thank you Mr chairman at this
particular amendment does does
Judiciary.
But we go to the.
The third amendment one and two
were kind of clean up go to
number three and insert some
when you read that what that's
intending to do is dispensary
licenses have two sides Mr chair
members of the body one of those
Our dispensary censures so what
we're trying to do as far as the
original bill.
The original bill again tax
deductions to to dispensary
dispensary license holders who
shall mainly package.
So that's what that's what that
Then the amendment number number
six removes language that
charges the retailers taxed
retailers in the vast majority
of dispensers there's no need
for the tax.
The number eight edge back in
And that charge will be for five
hundred dollars.
Then the last one eliminates the
dollars for restaurant type B.
licenses which adds to the sale
of of spiritus liquors to to
rush from licensors so with that
Ivey Soto.
I thank very much Mr president
and and personal take you
Senator Griggs for all the work
that you've done on this.
there's been a lot of discussion
about.
frankly a lot of pressure and a
lot of advertising about the tax
on the bill.
R. but we try to deal with
things on a policy basis in this
Of
of the of the tax deduction
being applicables to those for
actually serving by the drink as
opposed to us giving a tax
making a flat fee on the on the
rostrum B. at ten thousand
dollars.
My understanding is that the
bill at this point pretty much
for paying for itself and so
with that.
US president
This is a friendly amendment and
I want to create very much the
work that Senator Griggs has
For really kind of shaping this
and molding this and getting it
to the right.
Kind of sweet spot I will say
that one of the things that we
have been doing in the tax
committee and I want to commend
you know Senator Shendo and also
I think it's in the finance
gave those things out really
easy to vote important given
amounts and then when you're
short of money it's really tough
to get that money back and so.
deduction was to make sure that
we could pay for the deduction.
And the reason I stand up and
support.
restaurant be we get really
close to a revenue neutral
situation.
And so it's important there
there are a lot of things going
and so I just want again also
thanks Senator Griggs for his
work
In getting the shape and their
own stand in support Senator
No no further debate Senator
Griggs because on the amendment.
Thank you Mr president I move
Senate floor amendment to house
that's been requested up Senate
floor amendment number two by
unanimous consent.
Seeing no objection the Senate
three to house taxation revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty five as amended
four times with emergency clause
And Mister president I move
Senate floor amendment number.
Three to house tax and revenue
committee substitute for house
Mr president members what this
amendment is is to acep is
essentially asks that to there
will be no consumption as
explicitly says Mr president
normally call minis
so just wanted to bring this to
the forefront Mr president this
is
it's an issue that exists in
many of our communities where is
liquor windows I remember the
debate and such of course too is
that you get a of of
Senator we're debating said
apartment number three Senator
Ivey Soto.
Thank very much Mr president was
president this this is not the
provision that was part of the
original bill.
and and it was not part of the
alcohol.
It is consistent about us taking
control of what the of of what
the structure of the laws are.
and the advocacy she is done
over all these years.
and and so this is this very
much Mr president members of the
chamber this very much a family
of.
The I certainly understand the
the thinking behind this but it
just seems to me that.
And I'm not sure I'm not sure we
gain anything by by saying that
you can't buy them in the small
size
We may reduce the littering and
but at I mean if somebody wants
to have a drink after work and
they're willing to drive while
drinking bill just by the the
smallest size that we leave
this is not a solution outline
the size of the container is not
going to get at the problem that
we have with driving and
drinking but I.
I understand the motivation I
support of this ammendment you
know too many times have I been
at the also been also person and
somebody gets a tall set up and
goes to the counter orders too
rise and support thank you Mr
president.
Any further debate on the
amendment senators will have
senator Morris followed by
Senator about this thank you Mr
president would Senator Lopez
these minis up to put pieces of
cigarette **** all over the
highways and many bottles you
see all over the highways so I
see where I understand where
you're coming from on this so
this with this band it
everywhere not just the
Mr president is for those again
as it sits here like liquor
license holders on that cell so
those who and primarily Mr
president what the intent is to
go for those as in my community
the good Senator Pirtle did
mention that's what I've
witnessed also.
Representative so this would
also go for like Walgreens
everywhere else not just us
license holder.
Who allow that in their promise
is breaking their liquor license
and should be punished also
about behavior home has already
think it covers up our beautiful
state but I do worry Mr
president about the unintended
consequence of this like center
or to see Pino said instead of
what Senator Ortiz how they roll
on and his neighborhood but I
would worry about them you know
they want that many and then
just buying a pint instead
people would be drinking a
little bit more on if we did
this.
the amendment Senator about
this.
Thank you just for the most part
I structure the concerns of my
good friend Senator Ortiz ****
are Moores and I just wonder how
we're going to be consistent
Bible or you have to you have to
buy live instead of a but you
know it doesn't make sense to me
and it's the point that Senator
even more at the one time and so
I just caution us I I again I
don't know what's going to
happen if we legalize marijuana
I don't know what's going to
happen if we ban minis but for
us to assume that we know what's
friends us they're more than
Senator Ortiz Pino photos by the
larger quantity and and we may
be creating greater problem that
we're solving by doing this so I
one question Lopez deals yes I
do.
Thank you Mr president Sanchez
the
the use of the many on on
premise of.
at a golf course and out on the
golf course on the eighth hole
or wherever if you've got a
drink carded goes around is the
Thank you Mr president center.
Any further debate on the
amendment senators.
We do have Senator Pinto.
go on the bottom in the.
Prohibiting minis but in the
area I represent the problem is
they come in but will fill a
cart load of alcohol bring it
out and if they are.
doing that until they get the
liquor that the went to beer
liquor that they went into the
area to get in some sense more
of the bootleggers that are in
know those that are in this
realm of substance abuse
thank you Mr president thank you
members of the body thanks Santo
Sorry Senate floor amendment
number three I apologize yes of
and of.
Ask for
thirty to do a roll call.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
Senator Burt.
Senator Candelaria now senators
about this.
Senator to run this now Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
bridge.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen.
Senator Hamblen now Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle now Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Yes Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Moores now senator
Munoz.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
for the year.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator printer yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator syringes no senator
smitteez.
Senator Schmidt is yes Senator
severe Lopez.
Yes Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
shoals Senator shows yes senator
for funding.
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Steinborn.
senator Wirth Senator Wirth yes
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods knows Senator
Brandt.
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Hamblen yes.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz yes.
Twenty five.
The reader to read.
Senate floor amendment number
four to house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five as
president I I move this
amendment to a house bill two to
fifty five as amended I think
three or four times and don't
see on the board.
I want the body to be very clear
county by population it's only
limited in McKinley county and
through the years we seem to
struggle with alcohol in our
community and even during the
COVID.
tested positive for COVID we
asked the liquor stores to slow
sales not sell to people that
are not in vehicles that are not
walking down the street and a
about two hundred and COVID.
a lot of you may not know this
story either but my father
walked from Gallup to Santa Fe
to close the drive up liquor
windows.
A lot of my friends a lot of
their families a lot of their
sons a lot of their daughters I
have are affected and have died
sell gas you can only sell beer.
This will help the problem in
McKinley county tremendously may
big problem is is convenience
stores.
When's the last time you heard
of someone I have a D. W. I.
that hit a helicopter.
Last year two years ago we had
problem in McKinley county this
takes all the hard liquor away
from convenience stores the
number one problem making the
county the the state
liquor in Gallup to ten o'clock
on every single day at ten
o'clock the mad rush for liquor
in the stores was on real we
eighty gallons a day in that one
store.
A small convenience store one
eighty gallons.
There is convenience stores
lined up throughout Gallup on on
And so we cannot continue to.
Kill people because of the
problem that that what's
happening.
a mall there.
So members the body as a friend
is a neighbor as your family
member this only affects
McKinley County and I'm asking
amendment.
Thank you Mr president.
As I said at the outset this
bill is about changing our
relationship with alcohol.
what I've.
What I've learned about McKinley
County and the problems that
McKinley County faces.
Sting from every other place.
anything we can do anything we
can do to support the people
McKinley County we need to do
this is a from the moment.
Thank you senator as we do have
further debate on the amendment
among us to yield.
Hasn't yes.
Thank you Mr president is the
quick maybe one or two Mr
president the so was that I I
completely understand I
completely see the valid point I
diligently on for all the time
I've been here and I know a
couple years before I got here
to to to lead in his community
Centerman yes Mr president
center this is a major move if
you try to do this all over the
state and our problems in
McKinley county are not the
have drinking problems in in
order to keep them safe and not
on the streets we only targeted
McKinley County this is that we
don't see this as a statewide
his community and I appreciate I
plan to support the amendment I
just was curious why we didn't
just make this something that
every county would be eligible
to do for themselves as well
thank you Mr president this
want to tell the sponsor the
amendment
Really sorry to hear what's
going on here district I know
it's been a lot of struggle.
I spent quite a bit of time and
Rehoboth.
folks what's going on
had several patients of sat on
tribal courts tribal judges I
remember a patient money who I I
asked us of what what are the
Number two repossession of
property cadet issues and then
number three alcoholism.
Those are the big three issues
that that this lady shared with
me.
aware of the issues in your
district's under.
And it is very difficult also
recall a bill that I believe was
signed into law can't remember
if it made all the way through
and this was overwhelming local
law enforcement and I believe it
was allowing some
some kind of specific folks that
were trained to just to pick
Being specific for McKinley
County in this issue the the
alcohol issue in McKinley county
so I I do believe it does
Over the amendment but I'm I'm
just I'm really.
Just very kind of gonna remain
open and just listen to what
what folks have to say but I do
will have Senator Hickey
followed by Senator Lopez and
Senator Pinto followed by
Senator Moores Senator.
Thank you Mr president and
senator Munoz.
And I still remember.
Announcing young men that.
monument valley into the city we
didn't have the kind of.
Necessarily chronic.
Issues that there are they
And led to I would say the first
problem is alcoholism because it
causes the of the two problems
something different but I also
want to point out the amazing
work and we was all of a sudden
the feeling that you know we're
not seeing as much alcohol
centers cleaning out the the
drive up windows it really had
an impact.
And McKinley County still needs
being potentially very humane
and continuing the work the
amazing work of his family thank
you.
Thank you for Senator Lopez.
at first I say I rise in
supports of course for Senator
manuals for what he's trying to
do within his community but I
also in conjunction with what
Mr president members of the
Senate I just wanted to add to
this
you know for for some
communities in the state of New
Mexico and not just in McKinley
county you know there are
of the Senate I I combine all of
it together is liquor they're
all something that can help us
feel happy at some point or time
build this wonderful gas station
in your community and this
economic developments but you
have to let us sell liquor.
so that could be package liquor
to but you see what happens when
when they do come in
neighborhood associations or
expanding read only against us
but then again Mister president
deserves a lot more than just a
gas station that selling liquor
package liquor and
you know for me even though and
again Senator when US this is
president of when we got rid of
drive up liquor windows is just
another another facade another
picture that we have of readily
available going and put your
other venues other ways for
persons to get their liquor
there are stores plenty readily
available and I think you know
for us to be able to get down
and go buy your wine or whatever
Thank you senator we do have
Senator Pinto followed by
Senator Moores then Senator
Sedillo Lopez Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr president thank you
members of the body.
locally.
Because when we talk about COVID
and what happened the mobility
of that particular the mobility
to another went up north into
Farmington
by Pascal go into the
Albuquerque and windows liquor
windows in some of those
if the they could go
So those restrictions were not
there.
And it got to the point to those
that were not Google started
drinking the hand sanitizer
we see these trends for the
localities and with technology
on the rise we also need to also
look into that to see how can we
incorporate technology into this
Population that can manage and
bring down those numbers of
substance abuse thank you Mr
president members of the body
that's troubling me enough of
miss present of can I get the.
Senator Pinto to yield is a
possible on zoom.
Etcetera etcetera the of.
dive into it I I just want to
ask you as a member of the.
Is this area and tribal member
are you for this amendment.
I find it a bit troubling in
I there were holding the back or
I am not sure if
those fires knowledge on that on
that part.
And a lot of the historical
arguments made why we needed to
band I'll call the country was
exactly the same story
has a huge major social impact
amount of the culture and to be
honest Mr present what's
troubling about this and I've
and I wanted to hear Senator
Pinto about that sort of to me
cultural population can handle
their liquor and so he's got a
banned them from buying the
slicker or prevent them from
condition and how we address it
as a society is how which is
more important so that the and I
think that's what's sticking my
call right now is that we're
just seem to be targeting one
ethnic group concerned they can
really appreciate Senator Pinto
on with her explanation because
something's not sitting right
with me on this right now thank
In any local option district.
What will the sponsor yield.
The sponsor of the amendment
Senator yes yes Mr president the
sponsor the amendment Santo
or opt out they set that aside
and and the good senator Sanchez
Bill may legally correct me a
little bit but they said that as
a local option district in
McKinley county because when we
did that we had today liquor
excise tax and only McKinley
liquor.
So it's what makes this apply
only to McKinley County is that
correct Mr of Mr president that
is Mr president center that is
page two of the amendment
and section see on page one of
the and then.
Mr president I understand the
communities that have similar
problems in fact of.
In Albuquerque it's interesting
and so it feels like.
Like there should be options for
all local communities to address
understand you Representative
McKinley County but looking at
the problem that you're trying
to solve in McKinley county
county seems like we're leaving
relationship and I I don't know
if this amendment also bothers
me because it feels like it's
singling out one community when
there are so many other
giving local communities an
option.
To.
To do this also.
licenses and all that McKinley
County was able to retain some
of those licenses and some of
them moved out the city has not
made a transfer of a liquor
think it was denied some we talk
about doing things statewide
that's an awful left on what's
going to happen but when you
take the number of liquor
decisions decisions that my
father made when he walked and
they told in the liquor industry
that were intoxicated that were
left there overnight by the
liquor industry.
When people die and your friends
So it's not a race issue.
Let's talk about how do we save
lives we spend so much money in
McKinley county trying to combat
Our county opened up for Sunday
sales in the county and the city
open up for liquor by the drink
on Sunday.
We can't control the political
Saying that's the right thing to
do for us.
So while we cannot regulate what
goes on in the rest of the state
and we can't for sergeant on the
law and again there are
similarly situated communities
and it's it's just odd that that
to me if we gave communities an
to get a license to sell package
to sell liquor
You know they sell retail
gasoline on the premises and the
them to anybody who doesn't want
this in their neighborhood.
To stop it and so I feel like
we're leaving out the rest of
the state of to have this
people stop by liquor drink and
drive so it makes a community
less safe so I I am troubled
that this is not an option
available I will probably
has problems when we know that
there are other communities that
have those problems I would
prefer a local option so each
community could address their
problems.
president a disincentive sale
obviously no further debate on
the amendment.
We do have for the debate on the
amendment with senator order of
them will thank you very much Mr
president was president I want
to.
Miss president I do agree that
it is.
The the preferred way to do
things.
Just for moments ago I lost
track of time.
Just for moments ago we approved
an amendment that set different
Lends itself to greater abuse
versus non class a counties.
We approve that by unanimous
consent on this floor.
On the corner of Dr Martin Lomas
there's a Walgreens.
There's a Walgreens right next
about town park.
The people that Senator Sedillo
Lopez representative.
Feel empowered.
To organize.
from sell alcohol I might also
add the same people can just
drive two miles the opposite
direction to store.
That at some point action is to
be taken now should there be an
option for the rest of the
state.
Probably so I'm and in a follow
are the of our colleagues was
commenting to me.
When where he grew up well as
you could not bite refrigerated.
Beer.
And all of those we can bring
back as policy options and
discussions later may adopt some
we may not adopt others.
suggests were in the same shoes.
That's why support this
amendment.
Any further debate on the
amendment.
and the compassion that they've
shown in the struggles for for
our community
every efforts been made to to
try to make some change in
grocery store and they are not
even putting alcohol on the
shelves they leave it in the box
they sell so quick that sends a
message to me.
You talked to any maybe a person
from Zuni to New Mexico to
Pantar to the city where they
come into their training Gallup
the bootlegging problem during
the COVID was granted and
change the directory to not have
a D. W. Iraq.
Is good.
And I'm sure everyone in this
body we'll probably be getting
my they killed my family AT the
FBI.
They will probably be so
grateful for what you're doing
for them and their families
And ask for a roll call the
Senate that Senate floor member
number four.
I'm sorry sentiment for
enrollment number four to house
bill two fifty five senators
we're voting on Senate floor
Senator Baca the Senator Baca
yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator gray
goes.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivy
yes Senator Lopez VS Senator
McKenna Haase Senator McKenna
passes Senator Moores.
Senator Moores no senator Munoz.
Senator to subpoena yes senator
for the year.
Senator Stewart a test Senator
Pinto.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator smitteez.
Senator waiting yes Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator sold yes Senator
Stefanics Senator yes Senator
Steinborn yes in addition to
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes.
Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator Pinto no.
By a vote.
Of thirty four the Fuhrman of
reform in the negative Senate
Now is five times amended
sending us thank you Mr
president and thank you the body
I I can't tell you how grateful
we are.
But sponsored by senator cliff
our personal center for removing
explain the amendment move
Senate floor amendment number
five to house tax committee
see no objections Senator Felix
by Mr Memon this thank you Mr
president and and this
ammendment
We'll treat Sunday sales the
same as we do Monday through
Saturday
their booze and then driving
home and having it with them in
their car and so I think these
blue laws Mr president are
outdated creates a checker board
five.
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much Mr president certainly this
does bring in New Mexico and all
The laws from from a from back
in the era when there was no no
I call says that all of the US
constitution for all
So.
And I appreciate Senator Pirtle
Anyone wishing to debate.
See no debate Senator Stewart
close on the amendment.
Ask for a roll call.
Unanimous consent that is is
been requested Senator Corman
over I.
I unanimous consent.
house tax revenue in house tax
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five now
seven times amended.
We're back on the bill Senators.
should have one more amendment
floating around somewhere.
rise and support of this bill
there's a lot in here I don't
want to there's a lot in here I
do like I think in my nine years
in the session and how this is
probably the best example of
invested over the years in these
licenses and they are are
they're losing some of the of
the state as a whole we're
gaining whole lot special with
our tourism in our industry
especially this president a lot
help out the restaurants and
those who and special need and
also to modernize our liquor
laws a bit again only does
anyone in this chamber who is
going to be fully happy with
Mexico on but I think as a whole
does move us forward does make
some risk necessary reforms that
we've all been wanting to do
those are some families as for
some businesses I think we all
need to be aware that Mr
sponsor on my to trial of last
name from my grandmother's
convis related somehow I don't
see it by the way we look but.
together as New Mexicans as
legislators tap into each
other's expertise we can
actually work together and try
to get a good piece of
legislation so I want to
congratulate him on to graduate
Senator Moores we are still
debating.
We're on the bill Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr president I don't
that last several years is
tourism.
And quite frankly this bill is
critical.
For us to pass to help with
can sit down and that they can
have the drink that they want to
have in that they like.
So when when I was in Florida in
December.
And when I sat down for a meal
at cracker barrel.
I got a many I'd never seen a
cracker barrel for my life.
And it was an alcohol menu.
barrels and she said well.
You know with the Orlando area
there's only two in the country
that have a look license.
And that's what we're talking
about we want to be able to
track people in your state we
want people to come and visit
our state we want people to come
in and spend money in our state
won't grow our tourism in our
state if we don't do this I
stand wholly in support of this
bill fully in support of this
bill and I ask the members of
district in Rio Rancho has
hardly any restaurants because
they cannot get these licenses
thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt centers
understands how long this has
been an issue for me and for our
communities I represent.
Our licensors have tended to
move from more rural areas to
the Rio Grande corporal.
other communities are in will
will under under that.
But in our in our community of
of Alamogordo.
All of those are.
Chain restaurant chain
restaurants because for the most
part they have the ability to
four.
selling spirits if they can
afford the cost of the license.
What does that tell you.
I tell you that you know in
Alamogordo.
they might be able to have a
Margarita I might be able to
have a
You know a Jack and coke
I think with some of the changes
that have been made today in
this bill.
The other libations the inner
local libations which has
With some of the changes that
have been done to this bill
there's a differentiation
between the in our local license
and the restaurant tied the
I believe that by doing those
things we have we've done our
duty done our best to try to
balance the needs of the license
it is it is a step in the right
direction it moves down the road
and I'm I'm really proud of
Representative my Estes I'm
Because it is a tough left and
they've they've stepped up
they've.
They've took on a controversial
me when he did because I've
never seen senator Wirth
introduce a little bit.
But but he did.
And it you know the restaurant
up here in Santa Fe the
So thank you Mr president and
again you know thank you members
of the body we're looking at
this bill understanding is
important and and moving New
Mexico forward.
I I stand actually in opposition
to the bill a
the difference in early on we
saw the good sponsor races
license and say.
license a license he was holding
is worth about twenty Bucks.
The legacy licenses of some of
these places are worth several
hundreds of thousands of dollars
the Sanchez and all they've done
here and I knowledge that
license reform in this state
does have to happen and that it
would help a lot of individuals
this bill is going to do is
going to dilute the value of
those licenses to some degree
and I just think that this
problem in this issue was
those and they use those for I
had a lady call me and just
because we're discussing it for
being cast for further
collateral is ation on top of
have a whole lot of trouble
supporting it
based on the fact that there's a
select few license holders that
will at the end of the day
floor or weird is still debating
the bill.
be up front but they are
currently putting it on the blue
line.
so there will be another
amendment coming forward of the
body
with the.
I know it as Senator Ivy Soto
has mentioned this is been a
long time coming.
that Mr president you know
there's I think some things that
communities across our state who
have of an issue with regards to
liquor.
in a liquor and Mr president is
It is many times a because of a
lot of different issues and
families for domestic violence
and I believe sometimes leads
for some of the other crimes
be spread across the state of
New Mexico where we all have I
think a unique relationship with
that thing called liquor
regardless if it's
opportunity when we were college
to experience exactly where and
what liquor does in the world so
what it does and you know D. W.
Y. N. D. why is still something
nineteen ninety eight but we had
includes the lounge and several
others that were on old quarters
that were
president
Members of the Senate is is
still an issue that exists in
our community and we're always
looking for one way or another
in which we can do to make
access a little bit more readily
and maybe this bill will finally
get it done
in some venues but Mister
president members of the Senate
it's still the relationship that
about what we do with regards to
to liquor.
Of N. as senator
Services did mention you know
responsibility for having that
availability of another drug in
our communities.
but Mister president senators I
think it's still goes back to
our communities and it's not
just relegated to one
particularly of ethnic group in
our state it covers everyone.
so with that Mr president I
six to house and taxation house
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty five as amended seven
times with emergency clause
Senate
what this measure is attempting
to do and I know that we have
dealt with in a previous part of
it Mr president members of the
sections one of them of course
was removing
repealing should I say Mister
president where liquor could be
sold near a school or a church
where those
The letter could be sold.
and I know we amended on a
previous imminent Mr president
that the floor did adopt which
the repeal and still allows at
three hundred foot limit for all
sales.
Of the other section Mr
president that we are repealing
Mr president and you know for me
it's I believe that one of the
major grocery retailers here in
this business so Mister
president this this measure in
front of course would repeal the
repeal which is still allow
of foreign entities to be able
so this would be Senate floor
amendment number six to
House transportation no house
Center I'm so the thanks very
much miss present.
Police present there's such two
that that would actually be able
to hold it also.
Would result first fall in
ninety years of litigation with
the state but it would also
With with regard to the
exclusion zone around churches
and schools.
I agree completely that we
should not have package near
churches and schools.
Around churches and schools for
any license where you can sell
package which means you can sell
for pay off site consumption.
The difference is that the
amendment that we approved at
the beginning does allow
restaurants that do not have the
Thank you have lunch afterwards.
So with that it is.
Semen Center Lopez to close on
the amendment Mr president I now
move Senate floor amendment
number six.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Diamond now Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg now senator gray
goes.
Senator Gallegos passes Senator
Gonzalez yes.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Kernan now Senator Lopez
yes.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator o'neill.
Senator o'neill now Senator to
should be no.
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator songes.
Lopez yes Senator share.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator sold.
Senator shows no Senator
Past Senator Steinborn passes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart no Senator
Tallman.
Senator domino's Senator Wirth.
Senator should run this.
Senator savant is no Senator
Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos now.
R. no on the amendment.
I'm sorry no.
Senator Steinborn no.
By a vote of twelve in the
affirmative twenty eight in the
members to have that amendment
handed out to them.
Three iterations.
Senate floor amendment number
That part of the forty moving
explain the member that's just
give a little time for members
to.
That that handed to them.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator feel just restate that
we'll we'll get that corrected
the sexually Center for member
number six.
amendment
comes from our inner locals who
as we all know operate licenses
with more of a restaurant bar
my district in my in locals to
do something that different shin
differentiates themselves a
little more so that class B.
licenses aren't operating as a
M. R. A. which is a municipal
rehabilitation area.
Metropolitan redevelopment area
sorry.
behalf of a couple of his
constituents
if you had limited to Travis
county I might feel different
about it and I Senator bonuses
but since he wants to applied
Senate committee.
Is present with Senator you'll
the body kind of what the
overall issue is here then it
wouldn't work part time out
seating but can you just give me
a little more detail please and
There's no limit to the seating
state in a bar setting and so
this would put that at a six
limit so that we don't have the
chain of people using the B.
this would ensure that they're
not operating as a bar
restaurant the intent is to have
a drink at a restaurant and so
this would protect that unless
we're trying to develop a
Whatever that may be I mean.
I don't know one example that is
avid's Chiles I guess Chiles
And Mister president of Senator
you know they could I think most
of those are going to use the
traditional so that they can
it's right now is is decent this
would just strengthen it a
little bit more.
Thank you Mr president center
I I've chosen to debate this
concern in fact I had a widow
called me a widow who is an
owner.
Of one of these licenses
who has
basically equity or has has
banked on on this kind of a
license and and I feel like this
kind of gives a.
Yeah I it kind of delineates a
and so I'm I'd like to listen
hopefully this can be some more
debate on this bill on me I'm
just are on this amendment but I
I would lean toward supporting
this because I feel it gives us
a little bit of a.
question thanks committee we do
a further debate on the
amendment.
Senator Morris thank you Mr
president Woodrow Senator Pirtle
yield Senator Pirtle the ideal
into bars well what what you
said three drinks is that beers
and spirits liquid of liquor
this presents R. Pirtle what are
they limited to exactly so
Senate floor amendment number
your group and then each person
would be limited to three spirit
districts this presents that are
brutal was there any limits on
the number of appears that they
Some of the president Senator I
think I I support this because
we're talking about is if we
ranks you could have these
things open have long bars of
you're with people to get three
shots of liquor and injury
because many beers they want
just like they do in a bar
are on smaller establishments
were so we can go and have a
drink no more the spirit of
three Spirit districts.
But it's a small setting for you
president so
you might like to stand
Silvercity but I think keeping
these as a smaller
establishments really helps
delineate between the two Mister
president.
Pirtle the field thank you Mr
president senator I yield.
At the agency president and
several so I I understand your
the concessions to bring this
for.
explanation I said currently
this wouldn't fit their business
model that because of the eleven
PM shut off they're probably
going to go for the other
that time of the day or evening
so I'm just going to assume that
they stay open that late Mister
president senator but you know
they could change their business
model that for three hundred
of these licenses thank you Mr
president.
Center set up thank you very
much Jim Jim is present the way
that I read this though.
Is that you're giving explicit
they choose to locate an asset
in a national register of
historic places building.
That this actually what you're
actually doing is you're giving
and Mr president center and and
I may be wrong with with how it
is currently
with regard to seating but that
there wasn't a limit with the
go into one of our beautiful
historic buildings that it's
about to fall over most
communities would accept that I
doubt they would but you know
that would be great if if they
In addition you've got in here
in terms of a build any building
that is located within the
metropolitan redevelopment area
so that any building doesn't
have to be does it does not have
to be historic building.
This would not have that
limitation of the six patrons at
the bar.
This would not have the
limitations that you have here
designate a location as a as a
redevelopment area then it's
then it's fair game it's fair
game and there is no difference
between the legacy Lysons.
just seems to be and and I would
ask you to consider carefully
the consequences of this
amendment because I think
actually the very people.
Who have investments that you
those licenses and in a way that
that I don't think
Was the intended consequences of
careful about what the impact of
these lawsuits are.
Senator Pirtle Mr president if
if the sponsor of the bill would
allow me some clarification.
So currently is there a seating
limitation on B. licenses.
where this this concern is
coming from is right now any be
license can be wide open for for
bar seating and so that's where
it's continually the concern
or you know within the downtown
districts of many of our
beautiful small municipalities
and so that this would restrict
it to six at the bar unless you
building within one of these M.
R. A.'s but their business model
is more of a bar type feeling
being open till some later time
there anything preventing rules
being implemented to restrict
seating at at
bar seating within class B.
restaurant licenses.
R. as to how each of the various
licenses are operated and would
have the authority to restrict
the amount of seating not just
at the bar but actually restrict
rural if this is not adopted if
if we go to the public comment
and
all of that through the current
legislation that was president
and center portal we thought we
in a way that that that still
has value for the people who
made those investments yes Sir.
And Mister president center how
long would it take to draft some
things this president and
several so this bill goes into
effect July one twenty twenty
one the the new licenses would
not actually be issued right
away.
We what we don't expect to see
in the fall and the director of
of of alcohol regulation for the
state actually is one of the few
directors who is not strictly
issue issue rules before this
goes into effect and certainly
before in those licenses are
issued yes Sir and and Mr
president Senator is there as
have there been any discussions
of alcohol regulation is someone
who actually he wanted to make
sure that we had the
the closing time you want to
make sure that we have the drink
limitation and I want to make
asked him if you could commit to
looking into this issue were or
considering this would that be
something that he would be we
willing to discuss.
This president and several in
the of of making sure that we're
honoring the people who live
who've already had businesses
and them and the people that
they employ and and so and so as
gonna withdraw my amendment as
long as we're working on this
moving forward because I do have
a little bit of of interest in
having a little bit of
flexibility putting a six I
back in January hopefully with a
message and of work on this
issue because it is important
that we protect the the legacy
licenses as you stated and and
make sure that there's a
bill.
Senator Steinborn on the bill.
Thank you Mr president present
a amendment to split.
Senator Steinborn if you want to
go ahead the floor is yours.
discussion for consideration is
the idea that we're making a
pretty significant change in.
And our liquor law on the state
primarily in the provision of I
Mexicans.
And with that obviously I think
it raises the concern of folks
about the impacts of that I've
been doing research on other
states and.
and with their propose what's
the exist in Arizona is a lot
more significant here however as
a discussion is going on here we
have different communities here
in the state of New Mexico
as a friendly amendment is that
five years after the enactment
of this law that the department
of health we do a study on
looking at the impacts of liquor
delivery.
including.
candidly it's kind of agnostic
as to whether or not it's
positive or negative it's just
to evaluate that and we do that
look rather than do a look back
ten twenty years from now and
particular change which we know
will be consequential Mr
president colleagues I just
wrote it out hope it's it's not
perfect by any means we can
Senate floor amendment number
six to house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five as
amended seven times amendment
Senator Ivey Soto thank you very
much was present was president
of my house co sponsor and I
have had an opportunity to
relationship is periodically
checking in and studying that
relationship and.
And and determining are we
Soto just want to be clear that
we are in Senate floor amendment
number six Senator Brandt thank
you Mr president with the
sponsor of the amendment yield
that correct this presents
senator yes.
Thank you Mr president and I
appreciate that because its
first when your time us putting
basically a five year sunset I
look at what kind of impact
we've had on the project to that
in five years when we're here
and we're looking at this room
actually see that we've had a
decrease in some of the issues
delivered thank you thank you
Senator Brandt any further
debate on the amendment.
Si no further debate on the
amendment says time were to
close thank you Mr president and
and thank you sponsors for for
so Mister president.
Colleagues the move the adoption
of Senate amendment number six.
I ask for unanimous consent
Seeing no objection the Senate
floor member number six has been
adopted Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr president.
back on the bill Senators.
I'm not sure I quite hit
Senator serve on diss record for
floor amendments from the or two
ago.
But it's close that was not the
intent when we started this
debate but.
It's been forty years coming for
people to be able to say.
You know here's something that's
affected my constituents here's
something that I wanted to do
We're able to say.
Here's something where we can
change New Mexico.
I know that there are more
things that some people would
have like to have raised and
these are conversations that
Representative Maestas and I are
For house bill two fifty five.
As seven top seven eight.
Eight times amended.
Without ever since last.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt.
Candelaria yes senators have on
this Senator syringes yes
Senator Diamond.
Yes Senator Diamond passes
Senator Duhigg.
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hermio no Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan now Senator Lopez
no Senator Lopez no Senator
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neil yes senator to
subpoena.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
Senator Wirth Senator pro.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
souls.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Gallegos no.
Senator.
Manos.
Twenty nine to eleven.
times amended has passed the
Senate Senator Ivey Soto.
Colleagues thank you so very
much thanks for member.
challenge sometimes with us we
talk about economic growth we
get into this place we talk
about protecting certain small
groups of people and lose sight
the body with this thought as we
begin to design our state's
relationship with cannabis I
sincerely hope we do not make
the same protectionist mistakes
Cosponsor on the floor list yes
I would actually like to
recognize this is the source of
the distance again on the floor
thank you very much by two co
sponsors on this bill
Representative Maestas of
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
messages from the governor run
that order business messages
Senate bill two as amended with
emergency clause enacted by the
fifty fifty legislature for
session two thousand twenty one
respectfully yours Michelle
committee reports the reader to
read Mr president your Indian
rural and cultural affairs
committee to whom has been
referred Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill for
Shannon D. Pinto co chair
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pinto.
to make a motion I believe we
have.
To committee reports Senator our
meal down there on the floor.
Center how to mail.
sorry Mr president here I am
Madam chairwoman.
I ask unanimous consent of the
Senate Mr president that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
for House Bill two fifty six do
pass respectfully submitted
Senator Shannon D. Pinto chair
Senator Hotmail I move adoption
Mr president your conservation
committee to home has been
referred house agriculture and
water resources committee
substitute for house bill thirty
three has had it under
consideration and report same
Senate that the reader be
allowed to read all of the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the general reflect that they
were acted upon individually no
House agriculture and water
resources committee substitute
for house bill two forty one do
pass as amended and thence
referred to the finance
Stefanics chair Senators statics
Mr president I move the adoption
of the committee report have a
motion to about the committee
for.
See no objection Canadian forces
introduction of legislation on
that order business the reader
to read.
House bill one hundred twenty
two introduced by Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong and act
affordability fund to be used to
reduce the cost of health care
coverage for New Mexico
residents requiring the
superintendent of insurance to
report on expenditures from the
house bill one twenty two US
bill one twenty two having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Senate finance committee
that's house bill one twenty
two.
natural lands protection act and
the natural heritage
conservation act allowing the
state to acquire land for
conservation and protection
for the prioritization of
projects under the natural lands
protection act adding additional
state agency members to the
natural lands protection
committee renaming of frontier
making conforming changes making
appropriation House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for House Bill to sixty five.
sixty five having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Senate Judiciary Committee
that's House Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
substitute for House Bill two
establishing long term care
facility staff dementia training
requirements and certificates
providing for oversight and
rulemaking by the department of
health how state government
How state government elections
and it Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill two
fifty having been read twice by
title is referred to the Senate
health and public affairs
And act relating to health and
acting the easy enrollment act
establishing the easy enrollment
program.
Requiring revision of state
exchange to enroll consenting
taxpayers in qualified health
plans under certain
circumstances providing except
an exception to confidentiality
for certain tax return
information.
House health health health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to
send me to having been read
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill two oh nine an act relating
child welfare act.
Fighting additional requirements
governing child custody
proceedings involving Indian
children.
Creating the office of tribal
affairs within the children
youth and families department
eight how state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill two oh nine.
How state government elections
in in the Affairs Committee
substitute for House health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to on
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill to on I.
Senator Wirth.
president so just for the
members and all the staff we
will be back tonight at six
thirty is the plan so for
Order business announces
miscellaneous Senator Pinto do
have an announcement.
Centerman us sorry miss present
in here you that there are a.
Slapping hands over here
Senate finance I I think we're
gonna go in around six six
o'clock this evening we're gonna
review some stuff because we're
I'm sorry Mr president I did
hear that Nelson because
days house joint resolution one
is going to be a top of of
discussion and Senate finance so
we're gonna spend a little time
in committee reviewing that we
have some opportunity
together and in place we still
have a few little issues and we
need to to work through the
capital bill is in the house and
I think everything is on the
and I just want the body to
remember.
Again as we have that discussion
last night.
About a certain bill and I can't
say that the word but I wish we
discussion just to have and what
helps New Mexico move forward
and what our future looks like
because COVID has changed
everything for everybody across
steam as we move forward I did
hear some news today that that
all students are going to go
back into school McKinley County
and in April
why are college students going
savings but every kid needs to
be in school they need that
social contact they need to get
that learning gap.
But the universities need to do
the same thing.
funding in education so as we
move forward those universities
need to be start preparing to
get those students back into
school as we will look at
numbers and see if they're over
Thank you Mr president your a
Senate tax business interest
rate committee will.
Meet thirty minutes and minutes
after the floor session.
all material as they are in the
tables as well return senator
Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent the Senate stand in
recess until six thirty this
