Senator Baca.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gonzalez present Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator had a meal.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator committees Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo
Senator sold.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
Would like a court Mister
All senators to the chamber
please we're still needing a
quorum.
Senator is we do have a quorum.
Of all senators can please rise
for the invocation to be given
today a set us out some on.
The pledge of allegiance in
Spanish to be led today by
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
What a good we need we.
so the the group process the
blessed is the creation the
beauty bounty and lists of all.
We relate to each other.
May this opportunity as humans
right this the ecstasy of
consciousness bring Graeser to
our souls and purity to our
hearts.
Bless our communities with
opportunity and growth that we
may be ever abundant by the
grace of the sustainer of all
life.
teacher.
I bow to the great spirit
teacher.
Let truth guide us as we set
ourselves for the work of the
gratitude and service to all
mankind with peace to all like
to all and love to all sub.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico.
I'll be able to senator Wirth to
get us started thank you Mr
president good morning unanimous
consent to go to that order
business announcements and
sharing some words of invocation
and thought this morning we very
much appreciate it.
so just for members of the
those members until they finish
their work so that's why we're.
Delayed a little bit this
morning but it is that time so
center how to mail good morning
Mr president in the spirit of
women's history month I would
like to acknowledge and honor
less good and that US than level
cure real or imagined disease
known as good on that I was
these women have been an
integral part of the Hispanic
fabric in northern New Mexico
and in the more remote
One of New Mexico's best known
could on that as is a lake that
the elite that modest the Pino
who was born and raised in L.
commune situ close to my dad New
late eighteen hundreds and early
nineteen hundreds of elite that
specialize in working at the
event a so I thought that in
part that has to do this we will
includes four specialties
in the spiritual healer could on
that a is for the child.
Who uses prayer and ritual and
as the least common of the could
and that as during her time as a
and comfort of those who have
faith in them.
But I believe the service I
could on that I until she passed
away at the age of ninety five
she left a legacy of nineteen
knowledge of good and the sea
wall in New Mexico the art of
which is lived over four hundred
years in our beautiful state I'm
wishing all the women here in
the Senate chambers happy
excuse Sir Bacchus or more
server portal is there any
Judiciary Committee meeting it's
up for the purpose of the call.
See no objection thank you
Senator Brandt any further
announcements Senators.
the Judiciary Committee Senator
serve on days Senator do ich
Senator Ivey Soto Senator
What we'll do is get the work
done up on the table and then
when we go to third reading
we're gonna start today with
some house bill's so we'll
Senator Padilla fifteen Senator
Shendo sixteen Senator souls
seventeen Senator harm meal
eighteen house bill two thirty
that point so Mister president
unanimous consent we go about
our business messages from the
governor in that order of
Business messages from the
governor the reader to read the
message.
In accordance with article four
section forty two of the New
Mexico constitution I hereby
submit to the Senate rules
committee the following
nomination for appointment.
Stephanie M. Rodriguez for
all duties and responsibilities
and authority of her office
during the time prior to final
action by the Senate
respectfully submitted Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president's
Unanimous consent we go to that
order business messages from the
Senate bill thirty five as
amended has been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the house in open session and
return same here with
respectfully submitted Senator
substitute for house joint
resolution thirteen in requests
the concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Senator
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk.
Senate bill one fifty two Senate
bill two twenty two Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill ninety.
Senate bill one forty six Senate
substitute for Senate bill
twelve and Senate bill two
nineteen and return same here
with respectfully submitted Lisa
Marty's McEachern chief clerk.
committee substitute for Senate
bill three seventy seven as
amended by the house.
Senate bill ninety two as
amended by the Senate and
further amended by the house.
further amended by the house in
requests the concurrence of the
Senate to the house amendment
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk of
the house journal so the message
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president a unanimous consent to
go about our business committee
reports.
Sen object in the rhetoric.
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted to
senator George K. Munoz chairman
that among us thank you Mr
present ask Miss consider the
committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety six do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
senator George K. Munoz
chairman.
Mr president your conservation
committee to whom has been
referred house agriculture and
water resources committee
substitute for house bill one
seventy seven as amended has had
of the committee report it is we
have a motion to that the
committee for.
State no objection the committee
report has been adopted.
And Mr president your rules
committee to whom has been
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Daniel A. Ivey Soto
chairman.
Senator Senator Wirth thank you
Okay.
Can Mr president your rules
committee to home has been
rural and cultural affairs
committee respectfully submitted
Senator Daniel A. Ivey Soto
chairman.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill four
fifty four do not pass but that
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate rules
committee substitute for Senate
reports Senator is a motion to
that the committee for.
Seeing no objection the
committee for has been adopted
in the journal so they're acted
upon individually.
think I forgot Senator o'neill
this morning is also on
Judiciary so unanimous consent
to excuse Senator Neil except
for purposes of the call.
See no objections center.
just to give everyone a heads up
there are four concurrence
calendar reports I've passed
those out those sponsors are
here on the floor but when they
Sedillo Lopez for item number
thirteen house bill two hundred
and fifty one that order
business Senator Sedillo Lopez
thank you Mr president I'd like
her to enter the chamber.
Seeing no objection so ordered.
Senator Lopez Representative
before you began I just want to
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Hearing no objection.
Senator Lopez to explain what
the bill does.
training requirements act has
been developed to ensure that we
have a dementia competent
workforce in our long term care
facilities the bill ensures that
all direct services staff and
patients with dementia including
Alzheimer's this is a protection
for those living with dementia
of their loved ones who may not
be able to detect detect the
symptoms and also for the care
overseen by the department of
health income consultation with
aging and long term services
department and the training can
be law done online or in person.
for House Bill to fifty as
amended we do have debate till
the start with Senator Gallegos
followed by Senator Brandt
Senator Gallegos.
this in committee and just have
a few more questions voted yes
on and in.
Committee but I was wondering if
you could explain to me your
your expert witness could
Mr president the house floor
amendment makes two changes it
removes the qualifications of in
person video audio or telephonic
from the definition of direct
care services and it moves that
facility to provide in person
care those contracted abrupt
provide at least ten hours a
week of direct care by video
audio or telephonic means so in
defining direct care service
care staff member.
Senator would that make it more
this would be covered if the
person is providing video audio
or telephonic services.
Mr president and senator I
appreciate that I know that
phone and I'm not a professional
but I just want to make sure
they would have access because
there's times that I see here in
person and it is different than
when I hear on the phone so I
consultation of the
Adult you know long term care.
A person with dementia requiring
Senator Sedillo Lopez thank you
Mr president.
Committee and.
facilities at age eighty
approximately seventy five
percent of people living in
Alzheimer's live in a nursing
home compared with only four
percent of the general
population and then nearly half
residential care communities
including assisted living
facilities forty two percent
have Alzheimer's or other
dementias and we are checking
with with an expert on the bill
little history we've had
Alzheimer's and my mom's family
for this to be the second
generation is just I know that
in the span Act.
myself and others also it's
going to increase so always on
that number I was just curious
thank you Mr president.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
Yeah stand for more questions
thank you Mr president center a
project that the accent earlier
this can affect a lot of New
Mexicans in your tier the rest
Thank you Mr president and with
the center yield.
Yes Mr president I yield thank
you Mr president senator less of
No Mr president there is no
funding but the group that has
been working on this is been
working closely with the
departments and believe that it
it's actually looking at a I
believe it's a hundred three
thousand.
Cost.
publishes work Mr president of
not to be disrespectful however
I'm I'm not going I'm going to
paraphrase what he said not
perfectly reliable is what I
will perish a paraphrase what he
said
But the bill
with
With COVID and and the
restrictions now most of it will
be online and available through
training programs that already
developed in the department of
health of what has already
adopted the training.
Mr president research costs can
be minimal essentially zero
This presents a person at that
and but within our department of
health have to review them and
go through the process of
promulgating rules for those to
There may be some minor top
minor time involved in that
required so we would essentially
be just adding a a checkbox to
the individuals who go out and
this surveyors who go out into
the field and simply identify
affected that is huge.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president appreciate that
Senator not not doubting the
What was the
Adult the long term
Yes that was this so that the
thank you.
The June long aging and long
term services department and the
department of health have both
review the FIR and they've come
the of the adult Law aging long
term services.
who is Mr is exact can that'll.
Thank you Mr president and and
Yes Mr president the Alzheimer's
is that yes Mr president.
Thank you Mr president
Do you have an expert witness
with you on for.
This president the
representative of welcome to the
Senate it's good to have you
here with us and appreciate you
So what it one if the long term
care facility doesn't have a
patient with Alzheimer's or
dementia would they still be
people age and so one of the
most important things is that so
individuals can start the
workers can start seeing that
symptoms may develop be
honestly this training hasn't
been available before or even
required before
and so I appreciate your answers
in strong support of this bill
I'm so grateful to a Senator
Sedillo Lopez and Representative
Serrato for bringing it forth
you know that this is a huge
land up without town Hymers
disease and those of us that
have had experiences either with
family or neighbors or friends
situations for example and I'm
gonna be brief on this but a
situation where a person whose
memory is already so impaired
so someone else feeds them and
when that's going goes into
their mouth with the food the
food was set there because the
training cannot understand these
a difficult situations unless
you have the proper training or
you have actually lived with the
In this bill but I understand
that we have to start this way
and continue to perfect it with
more time and and more hours as
time goes by but I'm very
committee.
Is present with the sponsor
you'll please Senator Lopez
detailed yes Mr president I
yield thank you very much
Senator and Mr present center
training programs so how is this
going to be interpreted is this
the current list as of when it
signed into law or or is it just
the current list as of the time
of that the standards are being
applied so what they would be
responsible for keeping the list
current.
Okay okay thank you and miss
online or in person it's gonna
be four hours for this says
pursuant to subsection F. of
section four so we turn to the
we go to paragraph three
subsection to section three all
that says is is talking about
people that were kind of
grandfathered in hired they were
four section four as a whole not
just the subsection so that's
what I'm looking at do do used
do you see what I'm what I'm
saying Mr president and senator.
I I I I'm pretty sure it's it's
a typographical error and I I'm
like I said I'm guessing that
instead of subsection of section
I want to be a good bill.
Thank you Mr president I
that the bill is intended to
refer to.
When when we're saying that the
training program should be
online or in person and at least
four hours and then we're
referring down to.
this date receive training to
this you know equivalency that's
Mister president we are calling
Of was very good we're just
trying to determine whether to
be a reference to section four
or section five thank you Mr
president center yeah and I I
think section five makes more
sense because they were gonna
strike subsection F. of section
four and just replace it with
section five of the top of the
page three and I think that'll
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent that we
consult an expert who is the
Proceed Senator.
Thank you Mr president I really
appreciate that correction and I
accept that has a friendly
amendment of does it need to be
written out.
I'll be happy to do that senator
Senator well we're back we're on
the bill given time to center
street is to prepare that
amendment put it in writing.
Anybody else want to debate any
And this may have been already
asked but.
Is this a unfunded mandate or
the aging and long term services
department and the department of
health fort to allocate the
responsibilities for rulemaking
and the responsibilities for
training because the Alzheimer's
year it will not be expensive to
develop this training and the
research on the of Alzheimer's
and it's infants and methods of
spotting it has already been
of the respective departments.
Mr president at.
And senator so it's not going to
they're not going to be bearing
the cost of any of this Mr
president and senator.
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president thank you for the
question that's a good question
already done long term care
facilities
normally have training of the
staff members and this will just
be an element of it and it's a
very important element because
has time goes on so yes Mr
president
There they do provide they will
have to provide access.
The actual lawn care.
Person the one that is in there.
that's actually in there will it
will it raise the cost.
Of long term care.
To those individuals that are
You know double asking the same
question but I didn't quite
understand and for Mister
president Mr president Mr
president I I appreciate that I
worked with the long term care
facilities themselves and they
they were part of this they did
not raise this has a concern.
So tell me a little bit
something about the the training
part of it the.
This condition.
And but not too.
They're not going to diagnose
we're gonna recognize when
trouble with this I'm trying to
figure out kind of the scope of
this program so it's it's to
train people.
The scope of this bill Senator
Sedillo Lopez Mr president yes
it is.
Now some individuals will
was explained to us in the
committee but
Individuals who don't have any
kind of training will have to do
a minimum of four hours a year
and it will start with exactly
Senator what's thank you very
much Mr president that's that's
all I ask thank you very much we
do have a floor amendment.
Committee substitute for House
Bill to fifty as amended
amendment sponsored by Senator
committees.
Senator is to move explain
to fifty as amended.
See no objections Senators maybe
Israel explained with the moment
this thank you so Mr president
what what we're doing here is
making a tentacle correction
of the bill whatsoever but we're
just gonna refer to the portion
of the bill that talks about
issuing these training
certificate so we make sure that
all of these workers receive a
good catching a very friendly
amendment.
Senator is any further debate on
the amendment single for the
debate Senator minutes to close
Seeing no objection.
Amendment has been adopted any
further debate on the bill.
Committee substitute for House
Bill two fifty.
Do now pass and I ask for a roll
call vote.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Byrd.
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Duhigg Senator guy it
goes Senator Gallegos yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Hermio.
Senator had a meal yes Senator
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Yes Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Yes Senator Tallman as senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
But I have a thirty one in the
affirmative.
Zero on the negative house state
government elections in in
Affairs Committee substitute for
to welcome a representative
Linda Serrato this is her first
bill of the kids that passed the
Senate chambers graduations
Representative.
twenty House Bill two twenty
four and that's going to be
center for the thank you very
much Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
very much Mr president that
house bill two twenty four
essentially a lines are
community action board
membership requirements here in
the state of New Mexico with
our board requirements being
heck of a lot more stringent and
and in rural communities where I
know we're all focusing to
ensure that we bring as much
money into rural parts of New
Mexico as possible we do need to
years on the board which is what
our initial lab requirement was
Mister president thank you.
Thank you center by the US
centers we're debating house
agencies all over the state do
our community action agency of
Southern New Mexico is led by
the fearless don Hummer and she
does an incredible job she and
her staff help people in our
these different requirements and
it it kind of keeps them from
being able to do the job that
they need to do in the good work
that they're doing so I stand in
strong support of this and
appreciate Senator Padilla and
what I got a change mask can't
hear me with this one.
Senator.
That's why changes I'm just full
of today.
Hello Mr president.
So Mister president and a
senator if you will yield for
Mr president there's a wide
swatches swatches of poverty all
over the state of New Mexico Mr
president these community action
boards take federal block block
grants and bring federal dollars
They have existed Mr president
for several decades.
So Mr president I believe that
the community action board came
into existence.
And yet it seems to me that
poverty has increased especially
across New Mexico and so I'm
just wondering will these
aiming to jump this president
yeah so so Mister president and
and set and Senator share I I
couldn't agree with you more
there are a number of factors
that cause poverty and in the
probably very grateful that
we're doing this type of work
but again I think that having
additional ways to get this done
in our communities it's very
difficult to recruit some of
Mexico do seem to have been.
No I don't know if any point the
right word it's just difficult
to do things of the more rural
gets so from that perspective I
absolutely am supportive of this
problems but this is a burnt
been around since nineteen sixty
four.
And at least the way I look at
it things are getting worse not
better and so I'm just wondering
thank you senator we do have
further debate Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president the
sponsor yield Senator the deal
yes Mr president I will yield.
Thank you Mr presence the more
rural parts of the community so
there's such small communities
Mr president but it it has been
difficult to recruit to meet
so the municipality so there's
how are they set up throughout
the state.
This presents they come into
existence into existence based
on a community banding together
so they come together based on
the need and the money
unnecessarily just be defined
for a County the municipality
they could be around
you know a large swath of New
Mexico we have some counties
So this presents Senator can
they have more than one in the
county so could you have
like it could you have one in
one part of Albuquerque and
another and another part of
Albuquerque.
the very last of the bill you're
striking or more than a total of
ten years can you.
I understand the no more than
five consecutively well kind of
Go offer here that come back on
is that the way that would work.
Thank you Mr president I I think
you're a hitting a pretty
important point and one of the
reasons that that this is
legislation was brought it's a
plan together so that that might
take a little bit of time if one
to three years these are
volunteers Mr president so it
might be you know design
this up and running then you got
to do some process checking to
make sure that what they're
doing is actually getting that
the key points so you've got
quite a bit of time to actually
turn some of these things around
I and I really value Senator
teams however why would we want
to lose that direct contact
experience historical knowledge
understanding to ten years is is
to do seems entirely too fast
it's actually only letting
someone Sir for five years.
Consecutively and then they have
to get off of the board.
And I'm kind of wondering why
we're making go off the board
that you know we don't have any
limits for this board because I
think you're right and what you
just said that you've done all
this work you're finally
starting to get things together
and now you have to get off the
board that's the way I read that
you can get that work done in
ten years then maybe there
should be a positive positive
real refreshing and and and
rebirth of the board and so I
think that's one of the big
reasons why they want to do that
Thank you Mr president and and
so I I'm so I'm reading section
C..
And it says no person selected
under paragraph two or three of
get anything done and that's
kind of what I'm wondering
about.
This presents the right but but
the the thing is
that the.
There's no more than five
business going on with these
local community boards so I
think that that that's another
reason why the settlement and
that the change thank you Mr
president concerns that that's
agree with that Mr president yes
thank you Senator Brandt.
I think yours present Sir that
makes a lot of sense and
sometimes that happens fact
sometimes it happens a around
Center for the Mr president the
board it would be.
If you give me just a moment
president.
Then see if you take a look at
page one starting line twenty
three outlines the the specifics
on how the board members are
selected states clearly one
third of the board of the
except that if the number of
elected officials reasonably
available and willing to serve
is less than one third of the
membership of the board
membership on the board of the
of these appointive officials
other errors we might need to
clean up in here and then the
the next paragraph actually
talks about one third of the
members being chosen in
accordance with democratic
similar to the way you and I are
like Mr president thank you Mr
president thank you Sir
appreciate the you help me with
this I actually didn't know very
See no further debate Senator
Padilla to close on the bill I
thank you very much Mr president
I appreciate the questions in
the comments I think it was very
healthy and very good I think
four do now pass and ask for a
roll call vote.
Senator is more voting on house
bill two twenty four tier states
please.
Call the roll.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Gallegos Senator
Gallegos yes Senator Gonzalez
yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Griggs Senator Griggs yes
Senator Hamblen Senator Hamblen
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator how to meal yes Senator
Kernan Senator Kernan yes
Senator Lopez.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator sure Senator sure yes
Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator souls yes Senator
Stefanics.
We I can here and that way I can
see is finger going up so
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes senator from
the lobby of.
Senator from the law the a yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes.
By a vote of forty in the
Moving on surveys are going on
to the next item that's calendar
I don't number fifteen house
bill eighty nine.
And are you able to Senator
Stefanics.
eighty nine that we're on the
thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill
eighty nine on final passage has
few years ago representative
Nathan small myself and some
other legislators establish the
healthy soil Fund and all of the
farmers this bill would have a
tax deduction of our.
A write off on your taxes to
grant Fund and I was stand for
questions that is very debating
house bill eighty nine and one
wishes debate.
Senator Woods.
their own money to support a
program.
And I think that's a one of the
best ideas I've heard today it's
a voluntary contribution so.
Saying no further debate Senator
fenics Mr present I move that
house bill eighty nine do now
pass and I just for roll call
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Burt.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes senator
Gregorio yes ma'am Senator
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
senator for the.
Senator Stewart AS Senator Pinto
senator Sanchez Senator songes
yes Senators committees.
Senator smitteez yes senators of
the all of this.
Senator Stefanics Senator
Stefanics yes Senator Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Yes Guard.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes.
senator o'neill.
My vote of thirty six in the
affirmative they're on the
negative house bill eighty nine
class and I'll be able to
Senator souls thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended and that the
record show that all actions for
explain what the builders thank
you Mr president house bill one
sixty three make successful
completion of a financial
management course requirement to
earn a diploma of excellence
that financial management may be
offered as an elective in sixth
through eighth grade and
requires that half unit of the
required four units a
mathematics be a financial
management course the financial
accounts credit interest and the
cost of borrowing it removes
financial literacy is an
allowable elective course this
particular course I I'm almost
this would up our ability for
people to make good choices when
going for credit on homes cars
small loans at cetera it has
widespread support
credits just about everybody I
think believes that this ought
to be part of any revise that we
have we need to get it in so we
can start getting the curriculum
cleanup language within the the
whole area of high school
graduation credits and so
whenever is appropriate for him
to to move that amendment
Senator so we are debating house
one to house bill one sixty
three is amended amendment
sponsored by senator Craig W.
Brandt.
Senator Brandt to moving explain
president centers this really
does just clean up the language
we have a bunch of archaic
language within this law old
the sponsor of the bill and was
our souls we felt like why we
have this open let's get it
cleaned up that's make it
brand indicated it cleans up
some old language I don't think
we have anybody still on that
old degree plan so to speak from
two thousand and nine and we
need to make sure that the
Thank you Mr president will the
sponsor of the amendment yield
center brand do you this
president Senator I would be
On page seven eight you're
striking subsection.
have.
Mr president I I do not know I
don't have it the that section
of Law pulled up in my.
This presents that was my
not my only question I'm I'm I'm
I'm in your I think I'm gonna go
request we can roll this over so
we can look at this this the
strikes all the graduation
I'm not trying to damage the
bill I'm just trying to make
sure the amendment does what
what people say it does Senator
the very worst what we'll do is
we would pull the amendment just
run the bill as it is so that we
can fix this then and now we
just see the the summer
something like that but let us
give us a few minutes to figure
it out and come back to us
the moment and asked the
Majority Leader if we could hold
the bill for just a minute the
director bill yes he's going to
come over and make sure we got
seventy one and are you able to
see.
Senator Hotmail.
finance committees substitute
for house bill two thirty eight
and I yield to senator Byrd.
Our.
Market.
me a few minutes all make sure
I'm prepared for that thank you.
Senator Kernan.
Mr president are you calling up
Thank you Mr president I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
action for placing House Bill to
twelve on final passage has been
is a mirror Bill of Senate bill
two thirty six which basically
makes NMAA you Carlsbad an
independent bring an independent
Senator is we're debating house
bill two twelve.
Center for the thank you Mr
president and if the sponsor
would just deal for one or two
questions yes Mr president I
yield.
president and a lot can happen
in twenty four hours I've
noticed in this state and
especially in this legislature
that is any new news based on
the passage of that of your bill
I could check with my experts if
I have permission to of
introduced on the floor R.
connect with him Mr president
only the sponsor entered to go
unanimous consent for move coats
seeing no objection.
Thank ordered ensure the debate
we do have for the debate Sierra
Thomas first I want to comment
out on the floor debate
regarding the Senate bill is the
degree to which the committee of
Carlsbad.
Has agreed to tax itself to
support this local higher
and the cost of maintaining our
higher education infrastructure
but the reason I support this
bill is I think it's a model of
mills that they put towards
their community colleges.
and towards branch prompted
branch campuses of our
for the amount of money that HHG
is allowed to send to community
colleges versus branch community
colleges per student.
that local voters impose a one
male to do that.
For a independent it's to mail.
But I think given the
also port local investments for
higher education but the balance
between the state's investment
and local government investment
needs to be re evaluated but
because the committee of
you thank you Sierra that
Candelaria we do have further
debate we have Santo Domingo.
Thank you Mr chairman chairman I
certainly support this because I
university of Clovis the folks
up there decided that that they
wanted that to be their branch
and they passed it then takes us
full all of our branch colleges
many kiddos that are in it and
our in our school system so
we're gonna have to have some
adjustments not only in those
but in some of our universities
ranchers with enough students
are going to be functional.
But I do think Carlsbad Eddy and
Lea County have a in a heavy
industries down there that is
going to certainly fund a lot of
for doing this and hope the
Senate will support this because
I think this is very important
to make sure that communities
that are willing to to toe the
Mr president and
The subsequent to the debate on
on the Senate version of this
bill we had a the rules
The information that we got was
that the the region's hadn't
hadn't to the.
Taking a position one way or
conclusion from that and I think
you know if any of the other
members of the rules committee
of remember that discussion and
disagree with this but my
should be supporting thank you
Mr president think center this
panel for the debate centered
across.
This present with the.
question is present and etcetera
do we have any other branch
communities that have done this
to become independent.
Mr president center I thank you
for that I I I just want to
speak stand in support and and
you look at those areas that
have done that I stand with
the best of both worlds the
commuting Carlsbad will have
some authority and be able to
change the direction of the
Si no further debate I'm sorry
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr president of the
Sanchez please yield Senator
and yet I'm supporting a measure
that would allow one of our
branch campuses to separate and
it's unfortunate during during
my freshman year this came
across but.
I wanted to point out to you
leadership it's actually been
exited exhibited by Carlsbad and
for that reason I will stand and
support this absolutely
after this bill was heard in
lack of priority to this was
until this bill started getting
movie so I understand your
frustration I am still
supporting this bill and
regardless of how uncomfortable
you Mr president I rise to
support this as well as the
other evening when we discuss
this and the COVID that
community colleges can at really
Kernan close thank you Mr
president I move that house bill
two twelve do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that the
Senator Baca.
The Baca yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
yes Senator Duhigg.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Senator Hamblen yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator yes Senator Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Monero's.
Senator Neville.
Senator Stewart AS Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes senator Paul.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez Senator committees yes
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sure.
Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Stewart.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Senator Lopez thank you Mr
president unanimous consent to
excuse senator Hemphill.
Say no objection.
Thirty six in the affirmative
there on the negative house bill
two twelve has passed the Senate
me on that's house bill two
seventy one sent out a mail Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent of the Senate that the
rules be suspended and the
Seeing no objection Senator how
to meet explained the bill thank
you Mr president house bill two
seventy one will direct all
revenue remitted to the state
fund H. House Bill to somebody
one is strictly a statutory
cleanup bill with no fiscal or
administrative impact.
just curious the the person that
so
the house sponsor on this
so
the C. drive a truck.
would be sure that you know
which.
You always carry stuff for these
trucking companies and I thought
maybe he was you know you you
and him you know we're kind of
think we're done thank you for
the question Senator anticipate
a fall by Senator Brandt centre
participate on thank you Mr
president just a quick question
Senator how to Mr president you
have I'm carrying the Senate
bill which is the mirror image
to this house bill any Mister
president senator any any
differences at all of the two
bills Mr president no difference
absolutely.
Mr president first I want to
answer Center Ingles question
little car and and and we I I he
passes me all the time so I'm
you know I'm not sure
But
doesn't have one of the so Sir
Hermio is there any added tax to
this or may not tax but any
increase in fees or we just
moving from one place to another
cleanup bill and we'll just
direct the money to the NMDOT.
And president Senator deserve
any specific requirements of how
they spend that money.
use that to build a new rail
runner or extend the road
runner.
Mr president these are all done
for road projects not for
projects of the road with the
Roadrunner.
at a bill that will do that.
Mr president Sir L. problem is
we put this money in the road
fund and then the legislature in
their infinite wisdom take some
that it not be used for that.
I will support the bill but I
just think you know every every
time this issue comes up I'll
just keep bringing it up over
billion dollars was spent.
five six billion dollars in
infrastructure needs when it
comes to roads.
But we don't have any more money
because we spent it on a rail
the is only used by the
launching and still hasn't lost
so thank you Mr president thank
you senator but I do support the
bill we do need to clean up the
language in a but at some point
Have.
Any further debate centers.
Say no further debate center how
to more close Mr president I
move that house bill two seven
Senator Baca Senator Baca yes
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt yes senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg.
Senator Gallegos Senator guide
goes yes Senator Gonzalez yes
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
hanem you senator Hart Amir yes
Senator Moores.
Senator Monero's.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
portal.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Senator souls yes Senator
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth Senator Wirth yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator.
Five of thirty eight in the
affirmative there on the
negative house bill two seventy
one has passed the Senate center
how to mail thank you Mr
president and thank you members
of the body thank you senator
we're gonna go on to item number
unanimous consent of the Senate
that the record show that all
the action for placing House
Appropriations finance committee
substitute for house bill two
thirty eight
objections senator Byrd to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr president the this
bill allows one hundred percent
of the fund balances to be kept
in the fire protection grant
Fund council to be distributed
rates in the state at any funds
remaining at the end of the year
we sent back to the general fund
this is a more bill of two fifty
six which passed unanimously out
with that Mr president I will
take any comments questions or
input thank you.
Thank you Mr president moon now
that
House appropriation finance
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty eight.
be put now do pass and I ask for
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt is senator Byrd
senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gallegos as senator Graham
dollars.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes under how
to meal.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Munoz Senator Monero's
yes senator Neville.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Pinto yes Senator printer yes
Senator portal.
Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator
shoals.
Senator sure DS Senator Tallman.
Senator common yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Moores.
Senator Morris yes.
Senator Pirtle.
finance committee substitute for
house bill two thirty eight has
passed the Senate Senator Burt
thank you Mr president thank you
members of the body we're gonna
go on to item number nineteen
Thank you Mr president this is
item number twenty.
You're correct senator house
bill seventy six twice amended
item number twenty I thank you
Mr president I ask unanimous
see no objections senator Wirth
explained the bill thank you Mr
president so this bill gives the
New Mexico environment
of significant non compliance
and this is under the air
quality control act.
A significant noncompliance is
knowingly misrepresenting facts
when it's required by law and
having a permit revoked or
permanently suspended by another
state or by the US
Oklahoma number of others do.
And it's also something that
currently is allowed in the
solid waste act hazardous waste
Act and water control
with that I would stand for
questions senators we're
debating house bill seventy six
is two times amended we do have
a floor amendment the reader to
read.
Senate floor amendment number
I'd like to move Center for
minimum one house bill seventy
six as amended please no
objections Senator committee to
explain what the amendment as
that discussion and and had had
hinted that I would maybe try to
try to fix this on the floor and
I I don't think this was the
intent of the drafting of the
we're tying ourselves to other
states law which are gonna
change.
And here's what I'm trying to do
with this amendment.
Let's say your business you come
to New Mexico you get a permit
okay I have no problem with that
at all.
However if during that ten years
if Oklahoma changes their law.
Which causes a problem.
a ten year permit but this other
jurisdiction change their law
now we're revoking it I I I
don't I I don't think we're
we're wanting to do that
don't have a problem with that
at all but what I do have a
problem with is is going back on
our word revoking a permit just
because in other states happen
for member number one and I
yield to senator Wirth I thank
you Mr president so what I'd
like to do is ask unanimous
consent to have an expert Sandra
Ely from the environment
department who is on the zoom in
Also Mr
concern about the language that
you've got here and just they
wanted me to point out that this
would only this provision only
applies to a felony conviction.
these are pretty serious things
I mean I I understand.
Senator what you're trying to do
I just think they're they're
concerned the language doesn't
Mr president said Senator
eighties seeing no further
debate regarding closed on the
amendment thank you I'll
withdraw the amendment of the
members not meant to be
and I brought this up in
committee I've seen other bills
where we we tire saves the state
are sparse our state to other
states laws and I've actually
seen a reluctance in this body
they have different needs and
and let's not Mary ourselves too
much to other states statutes
because they could change them
problem denying a permit I have
no problem revoking a permit
based on a federal statutory
change but I I still have a
problem with revoking a permit
continues maybe we get on the
bill we can talk about that more
of I don't know maybe there's
another possible solution to
this at some point but without
twice amended amendment
sponsored by senator cliff R.
Pirtle Senator Pirtle moving
explain the amendment.
Move Senate floor amendment
we're going to have this policy
moving forward so this would be
for permits that are issued
after this law takes effect so
our current law Mister
president.
Senator debate incentive for
member number one Senator Wirth
I thank you Mr suppose and let
me just visit with my experts
quickly on this.
existing permits some of which
don't have a termination date
where if there's been knowing.
This representations or
You know what what's trying to
be done here I think there are.
Potentially situation where you
could have someone who is maybe
that's why the agencies asked
that this be considered
unfriendly amendment.
Center I'm sorry we are debating
senator member on before I go
in their in progress server
operating under particular
permit and then the E. R. B. for
some reason finds out that last
that the they can now pull that
permit how many are out there
asterisk expert Mister president
senator of.
you sometimes don't even know
there's an issue.
Thank you Mr chairman check my
experts yes Senator Wirth I'm
somebody knowingly and again
that's a high standard if they
intentionally lied.
And as a result of that got a
there is that level of
underlying.
You know issue and any and and
if you go down the list of those
items that can be considered I'm
if there someone had an
hearing in front of the E. I.
B..
And then if.
That hearing was challenged and
we talked about this the other
they feel this is so important
is if there is a knowing.
You know misrepresentation or
some reason that that's that
health could be could be in
back ten years and so the the
holders of these permits.
Of are they going to do when you
talk about this and you talk
to previously that you should
have disclosed that when they
requested the New Mexico permit
do they know that that they
should have disclosed that
have to go back in trying to
think did it did did I miss
something did I miss something
that I should have reported ten
years ago when I applied for New
no Mister Mister president
center current I think if
somebody knowingly
misrepresented a material fact
and that's the key piece to this
that their application for a
permit was granted under that
scenario the answer would be yes
and and again because.
when they applied for the permit
six years ago and the questions
that were asked of them in that
application.
I'm.
retroactively now and and I
guess we will pull their permit
if somehow someone bring
something to the the the
done just come go through what
the abbey intends to do with
regard to forty five hundred is
at how many set permits that are
out there what what is their
plan Mr president let me just
A couple things Mr president
Senator Kernan first I want to
be clear to the department that
will do this not the E. I. B.
you ask the had a change in the
last six years and I'm told that
it's basically the same
again this would allow the
department.
and if in fact again as I said
if there was a knowing
misrepresentation or it became
known that there was a prior
felony conviction underline one
but it seems to me it's
reasonable of with regard to the
amendment and I certainly would
support that thank thank you
senator and we do have further
Thanks Senator Ingle centers
maintenance on the amendment.
Thank you Mr
Mister president and with the
With the bill sponsor yield
to this debate and and the the
answer is been will it if they
have knowingly misrepresented
but I just wanted to have this
discussion with you and that
that's not the only requirement
My son how is is worried about I
don't have many other concerns
it's really about the revocation
and going back.
have a problem with number two.
I don't have a problem with
number three.
I I may have a problem and I
don't have a problem with number
I accept that I wish we weren't
whatever they do however number
for a and I like to.
Kind of run through this
amendment in the context of
number four.
And and so it says what we're
Could you just discussed number
four I know how how this
amendment would affect if they
constructor operated facility
house floor amendment did change
this specific provisions on let
me just read it and and happy to
discuss it so it basically would
control act if within the
preceding ten years.
Are the applicant internet has
constructed or operated a
except when such an on permitted
facility is discovered.
After the acquisition in the
course of a timely environmental
audits authorized by the
facility's emissions would not
require a permit and upon
discovery of that discrepancy
between the calculated
preconstruction maximum facility
floor amendment to some extent
correct exit address that a
process whereby someone with
operating without a permit but
doing so in good faith.
that if.
There's someone who's operating.
Without a permit that's a pretty
serious issue.
kind of ties back into that
knowingly issue because I think
it's someone in good faith has
have gotten himself here there's
a way out to without triggering
all of this but I do think
question to try to under this
lot of moving parts here because
we are changing or potentially
changing the air quality control
act during this
There are there are there were
there were there working they
can let's say they constructed
is still at a facility.
county can establish the new
requirements and so you know
what you've been operating for
five years you bill your
facility five years ago we
didn't the county of the you
ask my expert but I want to be
really clear about one thing and
I think we had this debate on
Senate bill eight the other day
currently the only fair board is
County he is going to be going
to be acting so I just want to
clarify that but let me just let
me go determine your question
something just ask my experts
thing is present in the those
threshold for obtaining a permit
required by the air quality
control act not changed for
decades and there's no plan to
change them at this point moving
forward.
is if statutorily.
We are allowing that it
statutorily are we allow if we
pass this bill and don't amended
At the time you built it we
didn't require permit but now we
are with a statutorily have the
ability to do that if they so
chose.
Mr president let me check again
on my experts.
process so again your your
question was specifically would
Senate bill eight if that passes
add something in the answer I'm
getting is that they already
As we discussed the other day if
that were to pass and go up I
mean that we'll give a new level
that's all the questions I have
on this ammendment for the
sponsor I appreciate your
answers very much I appreciate
you calling the experts
you know I I still have concerns
with with.
permit was granted they were
acting in good faith.
And now we're gonna change the
change the rules on.
And I I I just feel like there's
revocation pieces really
concerning to me hope hope we
can continue to to kind of
massage that for the rest this
debate Mr present center.
present was president of will
the sponsor yield.
Senator Pirtle the field.
My dad I'm sorry with the
sponsor of the billion Senator
the consequence of a of a permit
being revoked.
So Mister president I'm just
Act as the firm had allowed them
to act.
Mr president and Senator Wirth.
So.
my certain amount of sense are
in only standard.
Then thank you Mr court that's
that's an objective issue.
and Senator Wirth the reason
that that concerns me.
Is that as far as I can tell if
you would please check with your
expert on this.
But that is information that is
in regulation Mr president
center with is that correct.
Mr president limit let me let me
check on that.
So Mister president we have
process and and this president
and a senator Wirth when when
somebody is applying for a
permit.
You don't have the permit yet
Sir with would you not agree
with that.
So Mister president there's no
question that.
You know moving forward if
somebody does refuse to require
information that was required at
the time the application.
And then they've they've
invested they've employed people
it is my understanding then they
could revoke Department is that
correct on the way this written.
Mr president let me let me ask
the expert but first let me just
the first place I think the
question becomes if an existing
permits and what I just wanna
make sure I'm getting it right
so within existing permits if
existing permit holder if they
then said we're not going to
disclose that information and so
let me let me clarify with the
expert to be aptly chair on the
response.
So Mister president and center
Ivey Soto so the answer is yes
with an existing permit if there
were new information.
holder refused to disclose that
information then under this
statute this would give the
department the ability to take
just have to say that the that's
eight.
On the one hand I can certainly
understand as as new
environmental standards come on
board sometimes you need to
That the breadth of the
regulations and the information
that's required is unclear to
me.
At this time and what we're
saying then
Our
terms of information is
required.
And and it doesn't restricted as
far as I can tell the
information that is required in
And the Mr president and Senator
Wirth that is a for me that's a
that's a problematic process
when we are trying in this
state.
can and course we want them to
be compliant but we need to we
need to remain in is we targeted
in terms of what the information
would be that would be talking
about this presents senator
of this does create a great I
think some problems thank you.
Any further debate on the
amendment senators.
Si no further debate Senator
put an amendment forward that I
wasn't actually debated.
But the I do appreciate of the
questions and and the reason for
the amendment is really
subparagraph I.
line so that could go back home
for internet.
and so that should give huge
concern to everybody that have
somebody
permit here based upon that that
gives me concern.
And so I think this is a a great
amendment that says moving
forward this is how we're going
Senator Stewart voting.
Senate floor member number one
tier seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Senator Campos now Senator from
the last year no Senator
Candelaria now Senator should
run this.
Senator Diamond.
Gonzalez.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
how to meal.
Senator McKenna no senator
Morris.
Senator Moores yes senator one
knows.
Senator Neville.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino no Senator
Padilla.
Senator by the end of Senator
Pinto.
The Senator Pinto no Senator
Pirtle.
Sanchez Senator Sweetser yes
senator smitteez.
Senator Schmidt is yes senator
so the locus no Senator Sedillo
Lopez now sent here.
Stefanics Senator Stefanics no
Senator Steinborn.
No Senator Steinborn no Senator
Stewart.
Senator Stewart now Senator
Tallman.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzales known.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Lopez known.
By a vote of seventy in the
affirmative twenty two in the
negative senator member number
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seventy six is
twice amended amendment
sponsored by senator cliff R.
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle the moving
explain amendment move Senate
amendment number two.
Which of remove the ten year
look back so this would put the
after court of New Mexico or the
United States thank you Mr
president.
Senator David incentive for
member number one and then I
yield to senator Wirth thank you
Mr president so I need to make
sure.
I understand exactly what's.
H. S. P. I. C. because I don't
have the actual members of
amendments and contacts and it
does not appear that that
language is stricken any
amendments to contracts so maybe
center portal you can help me
with that did they actually
in context it is struck
and if you look at the yellow
page in our books it's the
number two amendment from house
they can happen here.
Okay I see that now Senator
Pirtle thank you for that so let
So Mister president this is why
I was confused so actually the
ten year period was put back in
trying to do so did not it
struck it from this one section
but it reinserted it in
paragraph PED in the first sense
and now reads the department or
the date of submission of the
permit application the applicant
or permit T. hasn't list all the
items so that amendment actually
broadened and apply the ten
The ten year period going into
the whole section so they can
only go back ten year now for
for any of these in the list.
Mr president's and I I
going to acknowledge thank you
Mr president.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
the bill.
Senator Ingle full by Senator
Griggs and Senator Kernan.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president with the
the is the magic for ten years
look back one of the of five
year look back or a fifteen what
my experts specifically about
that why they came up with the
ten years in addition answer.
So Mister presidents are ten
years is the existing look back
used in the other three packs
for the environment department
solid waste act hazardous waste
Act and water quality control
acts all allow a ten year look
back so that's why they're doing
it to be consistent.
and we talk about that the
the local agency may deny or
revoke.
additional house S. C. I. C.
amendment in paragraph four.
and I'll just read it if an
applicant a permit to use permit
is being considered for denial
director and plan approval
includes a period of operation
under a conditional permit that
will allow the applicant
infirmity a reasonable
opportunity to demonstrate its
Thank you Mr president Senator
one one last question and it it
just
Eight a permit.
Unilaterally changeable by one
party there's a there's a
language in the permit allow for
Mister president center can you
can you address that for me
Mr president checking my
experts.
for the larger permits they're
done every five years there's a
review of those and that's the
current.
That is cool.
Thank you Mr president sign
so I want to make sure we get
that right.
and thank you senator show.
I gash in well.
They're subject to that permit
for five years and they're
and things we got a permit here
that's.
Issued two years ago.
For term of of.
So Mister present a check.
A conflict with an overlap she's
just not sure exactly what
you're referencing.
Misprision I I guess what we've
got and Senator we've got a ten
It hasn't reached age age
terminate shares certain thank
now we're trying to we're
passion law that shows we can
look back.
And that permit has certain
requirements contractually.
Do does the law that we're
attempting to
Miss present a mask.
agency does not view a permit as
a contract.
It's basically the right to be
able to.
Have emissions at a certain
level.
An exception that would
otherwise if you are I tried to
do this without a permit I think
would be in big trouble so this
a.
A right granted by the
department.
Thank you Mr president Senator
nine I suppose I you know I
understand that but I also.
agreements that you enter into
or or normally binding.
And Mr president and and senator
I.
No I don't I don't know but it
permit for the contract
regardless of of who determines
what it is
Further debate we have Senator
Ingle.
Thank.
Thank you Mr president present
to Senator Wirth yield.
Center where do you Mr president
yes.
Mr president centering life
thank.
They're on the larger ones
that's correct the federal law
has a five year permit but then
there's also construction
limit whether any states that
are longer than that Mr
president I I assume because
it's federal law that's a five
year requirement applies to all
the different states okay.
No other.
There's a lot of things here
than HSD once this law is passed
have some real real of.
really approve of that but by
the time it gets to him the the
business's already.
Feels like they've been you know
just really really hurt badly
Department once this is passed.
Of.
Mr.
things in mind but by the same
token.
In the areas where there's a lot
of things built for agriculture
and things like that there's a
lot of things that you know
To deal with and the.
Unfortunately I'm sure close to
the Texas border that thing she
and get and get we have built
I'd use on just a little bit
worried about where we're going
with this thank you.
trying to figure out exactly.
Which kind maybe some of the
examples of the the type of
businesses that are permitted in
example three or four Mr
president happy to.
So couple different examples Mr
certainly covered and again
anything that's got air
emissions that.
Are currently regulated also
fall but those are three
examples for you.
even the waste isolation pilot
project would be something that
has an air quality permit is
that correct Mr president let me
check X. specifically on that.
Kernan potash yes but the way
style of isolation pilot project
now.
Thank you very much that's good
to know so Mister president and
and senator so if a permit is
discovered that
there was an issue with that
permit going back seven or eight
years and the E. R. B. make the
decommissioning or whatever
would be required.
With the closure.
Mister president I'll get to the
specific answer on
decommissioning I do want to
whereby there can be a
conditional permit and a way to
get back on track but let me
just get the answer to you if
the permit if they did because I
think the question is if they
Some is present center Kernan so
the process if they did not want
to go through paragraph are then
they could certainly take the
of appeals if at the end of all
of that they still are not able
to operate there's no
requirement by the department
that they do commission but
find at our their fines
associated with with this that
to of.
If they are determined to be out
of compliance here in the Abbey
under current statute for
someone out of compliance but
this bill this bill is not that
if this were to pass there be no
additional funds thank you Mr
president I do
with whatever company or permit
T. or whatever to to be be able
to.
All of the issue and I hope
that's going to be the case and
it really concerns me with
Thanks Senator Kernan we do have
a floor amendment.
The reader to read.
Move Senate floor amendment
number one to house bill seventy
six is twice amended.
See no objections center field
explain what the amendment
attempts to do.
government elections in any
Affairs Committee the house.
And where they put of any state
or the United States we're going
to make sure and clarify that
it's a court of New Mexico or
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I think my I still
have the same concern the way
this is drafted you're actually
si put those back in at the top
and if you strike that amendment
I think then we've got a
potential problem but set that
aside for a minute because to
of Texas related to an
environmental crime we would not
be able to revoke a permit so I
I see what you're what you're
doing here but I do think.
I think a felony or a crime and
I think Senators metes talked
about this at the these are
seared this serious stuff if
you've committed a felony in the
Senator debating senator member
number one.
Si no further debate center
to.
Mr president and senator just to
clarify the ten year that's on
amendment number one of state
government that we discussed
earlier where they put it at the
but can you tell me to of our
neighboring states Texas
Oklahoma and Kansas do they have
a the provision that if they get
convicted of a felony in New
Mexico that they would lose
Mr president my expert does not
I had heard that Texas does not
that they have language that's
only Texas and federal.
And so I I think that this would
be more in line with with what
Basically going to be.
Putting other courts in other
states that we don't have
control over or know how they're
set up and that does give me
some concern so that if we could
discussion Mr president and
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president center
portal I guess this is one where
I just.
I have a real
in the state of Texas the state
of Colorado.
Or any other state.
Or a crime.
By state or federal statute
I just again I feel like.
This is a situation where that
significant enough that's why
respectfully oppose the
amendment.
so you know I think this
amendment would bring us in line
with the states that we're
trying to emulate and and copy
so Mister president if it's
debate I'd be willing to close
center for the debate Senator go
ahead and close on your
amendment.
I move Senate floor amendment
number one to house bill seventy
six is twice amended and would
Senator Baca.
No Senator Candelaria most
senators have on this.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
No Senator Gonzales now Senator
Griggs.
Senator Hamblen Senator Hamblen
no Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator how to meal Senator had
a meal now Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neill no Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Senator Bob Now Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez now senator
Sanchez.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo no Senator souls
Senator souls no senator should
panic.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Wirth now Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Duhigg now.
Griggs.
Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs yes.
Madam Clark.
Barbara fifteen informative
twenty one the negative senator
member number one has failed.
I have another one.
Senate floor amendment number
for people to get chairman well
we're waiting to that amendment
being distributed I wanna remind
those individuals who are in
your office or participating by
zoom that you must remove your
Senate committees of the board
moving saying that amendment the
mistress I want to move some
on someone pull out the rug in
their feet and we're just.
And if I feel like we could come
to a consensus on on trying to
fix this problem so what this
that was issued by the
department.
We avoid the revocation based on
And so this amendment does not
apply to all of subsection P.
and I've heard the bill sponsor
state aid basically he likes how
one two three four five this
amendment only applies to
subparagraph four that's it it
leaves the felonies alone it
leaves the the other states
permanent that was required on
your that this this scenario
that was required of her quality
control act will work changing
they're probably changing that
this year and so all I would say
going to be more fair.
and avoid a a home rule change
where a all the sudden the
permit is no longer you know
valor's gonna be revoked that
that's what I'm trying to do.
is doing in trying to kind of
zero in on this specific issue a
couple thoughts first of all I
just again want to state that
this the only right now the
what the law allows
again I have visited with the
department and they feel like
for the same reasons.
That we're stated before.
they respectfully oppose this
attempt to do the limitation.
close on the amendment famous
present withdrawal imminent.
We're back on the bill Senators
we do have Senator Sedillo Lopez
followed by Senator Gallegos
centers the Lopez on the bill.
have served on the air quality
control board and the primary
function of that board is really
to look at local conditions and
local issues as I mentioned
agency Albuquerque box and also
because by at that time the kind
of wood burning fireplaces
without inserts had as well as
regulations we're able to to get
rid of it so one of the other
things I did is I looked at
Texas because people said we
And every year you're supposed
to so and demonstrate compliance
with the conditions of the
permit and every year you're
supposed to show that nothing is
stringent than we're able to do
just because of the lack of
resources we have so trying to
compare the way we do things
with very little resources in
but I know that they do have
regulations about this and it's
and they also see consistency
has this bill is trying to do
and there is provision for the
environmental bills that New
Mexico should be open for
business but not open for
exploitation and I think this
We have further debate Senator
Gallegos.
This provision with the floor
leader yield.
Where do you Mr president
certainly.
as your co sponsor of the can
you tell me which industry this
legislation focuses on.
about some of those industries
you know can be asphalt concrete
landfills oil and gas nine
others that are currently
regulated.
industry I've got a of our work
we have an asphalt plant in we
have to have training on to make
sure that the.
Of.
hot mix plant is that correct Mr
presents a Mr president yes that
was also something that Senator
Kernan asked and yes it does
apply to the potash.
towards a long gash she had
given me a nature that it was
not in I'm just trying to see Mr
president center how
others would that be a fair
assessment Mr present.
Mr president center I'm I'm by
no means an expert on.
Of the scope of.
Again I think it's any this is
not expanding you know the the
current industry that are
covered by the air quality
that industry is is regulated
and again I just remind the body
that this.
Dealing with kind of prior bad
It's that's the direction that
the bill goes but in in response
to your question I'm not going
to stand in debate and say
somehow oil and gas isn't
understand why we're becoming so
so much of penalty on this act
you know in in this body this
year you know we've done our
I think we currently have a
system to.
correct them and or put them out
making a mistake unemployed that
did something wrong
You know for mercy situation
Mr president the don't we
normally do a roll call once the
suggestion of a quorum has been
we can we can do that senator we
can we can go there chief
factors here just a reminder
Senator boxer.
Senator Candelaria I'm here
Senator serve on this Senator
Diamond.
Senator Duhigg.
Here.
Senator Hamblen.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator McKenna yes.
Senator Morris.
Senator Munoz.
Senator Neville.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Here.
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo.
Senator souls.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Woods.
have explanation of all on the
quorum Senator right this if you
know thank you Mr president I
I'm not sure Senator sure notice
there's a fence around the
building we couldn't go
anywhere.
steps today thank you thank you
we're still we're back on.
Where that would Senator
Gallegos is still have the
floor.
This presents sponsor floor
leader I I think my question
laws we're going to determine a
bad actor from an emergency
situation or an employee that it
I would say majority but they're
just part of our life how they
would affect the company over
time known that we're given such
senator so I would just note
that.
The record so so basically your
your question is if if there was
a negligent action and so I
would just note that the except
a knowing misrepresentations of
that would not be negligent or
the actual knowing
misrepresentation a refusal to
disclose the information
required by the provisions of
information is being asked for
obviously conviction I think
that doesn't involve any
negligence and then I do think
scenario I think that your
question does raise and this
bill specifically through the
floor amendment.
Paragraphs are the conditional
permit I just think that at
requested by industry others a
way to address those actions
under that scenario.
Thank you for that Mr president
understanding for years I had to
check our hot mix plant is
operating to see how the
commissions were of the
actually a little bit judgmental
on by the basis of the employee
but if
to the air quality act.
The disclosure is that from the
employees view or the coming
issue right NASA Mr president
in the field and and I know
Mister president and Senator
Wirth you understand the from
day to day the wind changes and
conditions changes but if if my
compliance then with the
disclosure be from the employee
or from the company.
Some is present let me let me
visit with my experts to be
your employer on the employer's
acting on behalf of you but let
me just double check and make
sure.
legal standpoint is the same
that would apply here so when
your employee is acting on your
behalf under the law as the
And you have an employee who.
Has acted you can be held
responsible for that.
Mr prison that.
Senator that's where my fear is
actually have the owner or the
manager or the president of the
company do all these tests
himself because if an employee's
judgment is different than that
Mr president and center at I
just I just have a problem with
that because even though they
are my employee the way the
of when I think our employees
are trying to do their very best
with the judgments that they
make even though they are trying
to make anything long term issue
your bill passing how would I
argue that to be able to see if
I could get that corrected with.
The department or with the act
proven board if they did not
agree with you you could then
appeal that to the New Mexico
court of appeals.
company costly owners quite a
bit of money and and I see this
is really hurting small guy but
Mr president soon my next
question would I know that
there's no next expiration date
understand your question there's
not an expiration date on the
violations so as I understand it
based on the amendment there's a
ten year look back period that
have missed stated I I know that
we had a.
An amendment on here to cut that
in half and I think she really
appreciated because it's a
president in center my next
question goes to there's common
and and she actually made it in
committee to Senator Sedillo
Lopez talked about the
quote I thank you Mr president
is certain to leave and
substantially mitigated as the
way I would answer that.
Thank you for that and the
reason I was asking is I don't
actually show New Mexico is the
fourth.
lease.
Polluted state.
Can you know if that would have.
Of production piece in that as
president Senator Wirth so
Mister president I don't have
that specifically I do know
vehicle emissions were a huge
and our water and this is just
making sure that those.
Bad actors who have gone to the
level that's in this bill just
Mr president and senator do you
think of natural dust has
anything to do with that I I you
I think there's no question
we've seen.
Seeing some of the the dust
infants and yes there's no
question that that dust is a
dramatically mitigated of course
not from dust per se but again I
think dust can certainly be part
of it.
populated state with your bill
how would this move this improve
our quality for number four
County are you interested in
being number one.
Number two in the nation.
our performance what it would do
the is give us the same
regulatory tools they have in
Texas Arizona that we have on
the direct result of passing
this bill would move us to
number three I mean I certainly
hope we can continue to move up
the list we all do that's
important we want to have clean
air we want to have clean water.
nation for the last sixty years
I don't know that this really
moves marked on that but Mr
president consider talking about
is fortieth in the nation
Colorado thirty eight o'clock on
thirty nine years on the twenty
Texas's but Mr president center
all close with this just to let
you know that New Mexico I'd ask
the.
Madam pro tem few nights fact
That we will have forty five
billion metric tons in that will
be in twenty fifty so right now
with this that makes New Mexico
nothing more.
Around in there.
And we're willing to for.
Our students and our education
system.
Senate floor amendment number
one to house bill seventy six is
twice amended amendment
sponsored by senator Gregory
house bill seventy six as
placement see no objections
Senator explain your amendment
thank you Mr president this is
more of a I I think more of a
strikes us section B. the reason
Mr president I went to strike
section B. is I just don't see
the nexus between the the crime
felonies related related to
environmental crime I think
that's completely relevant in
this but in subsection B. we
have crimes defined by state or
price fixing and bribery or
fraud and fraud is one that
really concerns me because fraud
is defined widely within
statutes under many different
crimes so.
the way the US you know the
statute is written or the bill
is constructed
again would be could even be an
Senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr president and
certainly understand what the
Senator is suggesting of the
department though feels that
what they're looking at and so
again want to have the ability
where you do have.
Someone who's convicted
air quality permit so again with
with respect to my.
Leader on the other side of my
fellow leader we speculate this
is a and on friendly amendment.
Thank you Mr president I move
Senate floor amendment one to
house bill seventy six says
twice amended and I just for
roll call Senators tier seats
Senator Baca yes Senator Baca
yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Burt.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Senator Duhigg no Senator Duhigg
now Senator Gallegos.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Hemphill no Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey now Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Lopez no Senator McKenna
no Senator McKenna no senator
Morris Senator Moores yes
senator wanting us.
Senator Neville.
Stewart on Senator Stewart and
Senator Pinto no Senator Pinto
no Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez no
senator Sanchez Senator Sweetser
yes senator smitteez Senators
maintenance yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Coming from.
Okay those are participating
resume could you please mute
Yes No sorry no Senator
Stefanics no Senator Steinborn.
I know in my video has been
disabled so I can't my video
Senator Stewart no Senator
Tallman.
Senator common no senator Wirth
Senator Wirth no Senator Woods.
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
yes.
Senator I was
just.
By a vote of fifteen affirmative
twenty negative Senate floor
member number one has failed.
We're back on the bill Senators
Senator.
to so Mister president senator
do we have any idea of the
numbers of of permits that we
expect to be revoked on day one
of this.
there's not an expectation that
limit let me ask my experts to
get a direct answer.
I would modify that to week one
if it would help.
Some Mr president my expert
agency easily from the
environment department says they
really have they've never been
able to act in this area before
additional tool for them moving
forward.
Okay Mister president and
senator.
Seoul.
We don't have any reason to do
Mr president center share I
would say this is a an attempt
to again have the same.
Authority that we have under our
this and for whatever reason
under the air quality division
we've been able to do this with
hazardous waste and those other
statutes but not here so it's
But we just said we don't know
what we don't know of any bad
actors so with that indicate
that we don't know of any bad
actors.
comes to regulating the
environment that we give our
regulators the tools they need
to make sure that there are
and.
Again given you know when things
rise to the level that are
outlined here.
By a policy decision yeah I mean
I'm standing here and but I
understand I understand the the
question you're raising I I just
think it is important that we
have this tool.
Had the let's see top twenty
five cleanest US cities for you
just particularly its top twenty
five U. S. cities Farmington New
Mexico is number one.
Not not in the top one hundred.
On the top fifty claim number
one so that was in nineteen in
We've got thirty they descend
insufficient data which I found
interesting because since I've
been talking about Farmington
and it's clean air for from this
American lung association
cleanest air in America
Farmington New Mexico.
And it was clean Esther America
for two years and prior to that
it was number two.
In so when I look at this ago
okay so.
If Farmington New Mexico which
has all of the hazards that air
everybody here is talking about
all of the evil that we need to
do away with.
Cleanest air in America
Farmington New Mexico.
Well we don't know about
eighteen and nineteen because
they just didn't measure us.
And so that's why I think when I
look at these kind of things go
while.
New Mexico itself.
Is a pretty clean state.
We've got industries that are in
fact taking care of the very
places they live.
stern American might not about
outside the fence for the
reciprocal to hear.
But.
It's because the people that
Those bad actors running around
destroying the planet at least
not in San Juan County.
And we don't have a million
eighty we don't have been Chavis
we don't have an Roosevelt.
So I'm just questioning if we if
we haven't if we don't have a
list of bad actors we want to
look at.
And we know that we have a clean
environment.
humans anything to do with it
there's still some things that
happen in the.
In our environment.
Very very clean state.
That's what New Mexicans do.
That's what New Mexicans have
done.
For a very long time.
That's the culture of New
Mexico.
terrible place we must be the
up.
The industries that pay for our
schools.
And pay for.
But I don't see the bad actors I
see accidents.
Occasionally I see some things
that should not have happened to
that do.
that was just left to to destroy
the environment.
Yep.
You can find things out there.
To take care of it.
Farmington New Mexico according
the American lung association.
For years in a row.
Oil wells.
Coal mines sand and gravel
mines.
Aber culture on large scale.
And we still have the cleanest
air in America.
And it's because we are New
Mexicans and that is what we
want.
For the industry that we have in
New Mexico.
The industry that we have in New
Mexico.
Our mining.
I've been over here even those
with the gypsum mine yes I do.
That the rest of you have okay
yes yes Senator Shendo this
because we both drive past.
Most of the rest of the world's
not this claim most of the rest
of America is not this claim.
And yet here's one more bill.
But we don't know who they're
more.
And the reason we don't know who
they are is because they don't
exist.
And if they did exist the other
They would deal with.
And I don't mean deal with it
with you know mob.
Other other folks would go out
there and talk to that.
president the bill after bill
after bill after bill after
bill.
Seems targeted at the oil and
gas industry.
We're not talking about a small
hole doing something in a small
while doing something.
In order to make America work
today.
Millions.
A day.
The volume so we're talking
about are huge and that's what
makes our life comfortable.
And yet I would challenge you to
have any of you ever spilled
something have you ever spill
Get on that pretty darn quick
and fix it.
That includes air that includes
water that includes soil.
with the half dozen other bills
and forty pass this chamber.
Is this is just one more.
Shut it saying we have contempt
In that contempt not only is in
these bills but it's in the
fence that surrounds us so that
the people can't come in here
and tell their story.
We're not hearing from the
people of New Mexico.
All we're hearing.
Is that we don't like come.
It makes me very sad Mr
We have to continue to run built
the to show contempt.
For New Mexicans.
We do have a floor amendment.
amended amendment sponsored by
Senator Griggs metes.
Senator maintenance to move
explained eminent name is
present like misinforming number
one to house bill seventy six as
general I like to go talk to
somebody before and I'm really
really sorry about that I I do
not mean this any disrespect at
all but as the debate continues
I just keep coming up with with
are very distrustful of
government and so are my
constituents and what's
particularly offensive.
By the way I don't come from a
these issues great thought and
but what's particularly
offensive to a conservative into
my constituents senator Wirth is
is when the government goes back
somebody or you free here you
took away something that you
made a promise to because of my
general disdain for government
and so that's why I think we're
seeing so much you know push
the the issue of can a
government break a promise and
can they provide and it picky
reason someone who is in the
government or in a place of
power that is particularly
picking is at all and that's not
what I've heard in committee and
I and and committee I heard in
my conversation Representative
Chandler is this is not trying
to pick it is trying to make
legit legit environmental
it was kind of a bigger amount
in this this ammendment is is a
lot softer and really I think it
fits the intent of the bill
because what I've heard over and
over again in this debate is we
their forms and yes I mean
that's I also say yes to that
all day long but I pulled up
what this amendment does Mr.
price fixing bribery or fraud
okay so let's look at what we're
actually doing in New Mexico
here's New Mexico statute on
a hundred fifty dollars worth of
fraud or a hundred dollars worth
of fraud petty misdemeanor
they're included in this act and
I think we want to be going
hundred dollars that's still
pretty lenient I think at least
is is far as and I'm not asking
you know what what this
amendment is asking for is if
someone is is committing less
more than five hundred Bucks a
fraud five hundred dollars worth
of fraud.
But if you're under that if if
you're a petty misdemeanor
less than ten or fifty dollars
or whatever that's not that's
just I I hope this is from the
hope it's in the spirit of a
what's what's called a bad actor
I I think we all agree that a
petty misdemeanor on your record
bribery a felony fraud yes we're
gonna we're gonna punish if it's
a misdemeanor probably not gonna
be grounds for looking back ten
you have every right to to make
amendments and I I really
appreciate the fact that Senator
that you are you know getting
into this to this level this is
a really important discussion
and I think you know the reason
personally think it's a five
hundred dollar fraud which is a
felony there needs to be
discretion and there is
discretion I would just point
you to you know the language in
agency may may deny and that's a
really important piece because
again I I think you've you've
made a very good argument as to
something that.
Because we for policy reasons
have do Fallon eyes to one of
these areas that we believe that
is one of those places where you
know I think you and I can come
around the backside Inc can
agree on things you know what
comes a criminal justice reform
we've really tried to develop as
because again are felonies that
shouldn't rise to the level and
trigger this and I think that
discretion is built in and so
for that reason well I certainly
Baca Senators.
Mr president with the.
A sponsor of the.
Amendment.
It is the yes I yield Mister
president.
For people in jail or.
Going to be in jail later can
you explain to me a little more
of how this would work in in.
from crime to felony would work.
Well Mr president senator thank
you for the question my my over
arching concern is is exactly
and while there's a level of
discretion the underlying issue
here about the environment is
very partisan in fact it's
harshly partisan.
That you commit a fraud even if
it's a petty misdemeanor we're
going to empower.
The HSD we're gonna empower the
going to empower local
government agency to revoke a
permit on a huge industry are
huge company or whatever or
small company just based on the
fact that a petty misdemeanor
that it gives in once again
being a limited government guy
this is giving the department a
little bit less discretion and
they can only base their
Mr president Senator do you
think that if we do not take
your amendment that we are
relinquishing some of our thirty
short answer your question is
yes and I think that's a.
A matter of preference and style
I think for legislators and
still developing my idea of of
in favor of speed speed
regulation and speed of change
you know it's a little harder
for us to get us together in a
change things and so you know.
other to the executive branch.
Mr president etcetera I
appreciate that because here
it's real Meryl focused I just
been in your amendment also
because I see that the
legislature does restrain trade
to our state but also in closing
I would just say that
few issues that I've seen the
we've.
because the constituents here in
New Mexico but I like your bill
stand for support for you I like
further debate we are in the
management Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president.
I appreciate the the amendment.
This is quite a quite a good
compromise State so you can
consider that a promotion as
well of.
with the good senator stated is
that.
For fraud and and if you could
remind me with that with the
amendment sponsor please yield
misdemeanor fraud is.
Yes
Mr president this says.
Whoever commits fraud when the
value.
misdemeanor and anything over
five hundred is to start the
felony we go all the way up to
let's see second degree felony
that's if you're above twenty
president amendment sponsor can
correct me if I'm wrong but it
sounds to me like a I mean you
could be heck and eighteen year
back when you're already in your
late twenties two or even early
thirties to if you're if you're
applying for one of these
I always thought we wanted to
take out the discretion you know
the bill sponsor pulled to
pointed at the language in
take that discretion away
because we wanted to make some
crimes non felonies because we
don't want that to be held
against somebody that was always
what we're at least what I've
talking about something that's
very minor and it's sticking
with a person for up to ten
years after filing this
president can you tell me or or
maybe your expert can can a kind
of clear this up for me what the
definition of the applicant is.
paragraph P..
Mr president under the current
law it's the company that
submits the application.
Mr president I always want to be
for example could be.
Thank you for that answer Mr
present bill sponsor and I think
we can put on our lawyer hats
because if we need to clear
interpret that is that it could
be an individual and unless that
definitions clear there's no
definition in here we should
certainly with thank go to the
Mister president really just a
forming a nexus between some of
these these crimes and and a
permit application I gave the
example earlier Mister president
and so you in federal law it's a
little bit different and I'll
just give you an example of that
for some point when you're in in
bankruptcy law.
be an attempt to conceal an
asset or filing an incomplete
forms
and and and it.
In this statute this bill that
relation of what listening does
it have to protecting our
environment.
And I would I would argue that
But since we have it in here and
the the previous amendment was
rejected you know at least at
the application based on that
I really appreciate this and
then I think it's a very
reasonable approach and it it
actually concedes much more than
executive and again this is just
another small example of that so
I guess what this what this
ammendment does if I'm reading
it right was really just
restricts how much power we're
give a little bit more if we
need to but one once we open the
gate that is forever gone and we
have massive examples of that
right now.
Thank you Mr president.
amendment basically present I
just want to rise and maybe
provide some clarity.
Fraud is not a negligent act
what is an intentional backed.
And I hope sincerely that we can
summon the same short.
Of four hour five hour long
concerned about the rights of
corporations.
in jail in prison.
Because they're addicts to
heroin and methamphetamine and
we put them in state prison and
applaud ourselves when all they
I oppose it then because of a
corporation again not a person a
corporation.
amendment Senator Schmedes to
close thanks very much Mr
president I completely agree
with senator Candelaria we have
about seven million.
over two million people we have
way too many people in jail Mr
president.
Mr president we have way too
much collateral consequences
not only with drug and alcohol
problems but with other issues.
So this ammendment and I I don't
small businesses the the
basically survive off of the
national labs.
Very small businesses.
and and you know that they are
So that this is not just
pursuant to you know some you
know scary oil and gas company.
And I have heard from this
legislature that we want to get
Because you had a petty
misdemeanor on your record.
I thought we were supposed to be
taken away those things in this
body.
your petty misdemeanors
literally that's what this bill
house your petty misdemeanor
against you for ten years it's
going to be on your your record
And so I I completely agree with
with the comments and criticism
foreman I I support those and
Is aimed at my constituents who
money ill have smaller
businesses and I don't want to
be holding people accountable
legislation this body to you
know ban the box and all those
sorts of things to try to ban
and eliminate barriers to re
entry.
For convicts.
And we need to eliminate
collateral consequences of past
crimes and allow people to move
forward with their lives.
judge says but let's not hold
them let's not add collateral
consequences for ten years and
tack that on to their sentence.
And that that's all this all
this amendment does.
certain felony conviction and
trying to get a permit to do
something but I I think this is
a a good compromise so once
again in closing Mr president
what let's not let's not have
number one and has been requests
for roll call.
Members your seats.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Baca.
Candelaria Senator Candelaria no
Senator serve on this Senator
Cervantes no Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Senator Griggs VS Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen no
Senator Hemphill no Senator
Hemphill no Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey no Senator Ingle.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez no Senator McKenna
no Senator McKenna no senator
Morris.
Senator Neville yes Senator
o'neill.
Senator o'neill no Senator do
should be now.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator
Stewart Air.
Senator pope no Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez now
Senator songes.
Senator Sweetser yes senator
smitteez.
Senator sold.
Senator souls now Senator
Senator Wirth now Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Moores.
By a vote of fifteen in the
affirmative twenty four negative
Senate floor amendment number
one has failed to pass Senate.
bill thank you Mr president I
move house bill seventy six is
twice amended do now pass gonna
ask for a roll call vote
senators we're voting to your
seats please we're voting on the
bill.
Senator Baca no Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt no senator Byrd.
Senator Burt now senator Campos
Senator combos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Gallegos no ma'am
Senator Gallegos no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Ingle.
Senator Ingle no Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator Hermio Senator Hermio
yes Senator Kernan.
senator Morris Senator Moores no
Senator one else.
Senator Neville.
Senator Neville no Senator
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle no Senator pope.
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez.
the Lopez yes Senator Sedillo
Lopez VS Senator share.
Senator sure no Senator Shendo.
Senator Stewart is Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman yes senator
Wirth.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
We need to.
president ladies and gentlemen
the Senate thank you senator
Senator Wirth I thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that order business
committee reports on that order
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three has had it
under consideration and report
same with recommendation vetted
to pass as amended respectfully
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted
George K. Munoz Jr Senator
Rodriguez moved to adopt the
committee report as we have a
Education Committee substitute
for House joint resolution one
has had it under consideration
and report same with
recommendations they do pass as
amended.
I see no objections the
committee for has been adopted.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go that our business
introduction of legislation on
States Congress to support
permanent daylight saving time.
Senate memorial twenty seven.
Senator moral twenty seven
house joint resolution thirteen.
A joint resolution proposing an
amendment to article four
section five of the constitution
of New Mexico to provide that
years house floor substitute for
house joint resolution thirteen.
US or substitute for House joint
resolution thirteen having been
read twice by title is referred
Some is present I believe that's
everything on the table so we
are going to take a little break
will be back at eight o'clock so
this would be the time for
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair the Education
Committee is not meeting
tomorrow please leave in.
Any further announcements
Senators.
fifteen minutes after the floor
session so we'll meet at five
o'clock.
Thank you senator Wirth Senator
Padilla.
Any further announcement
Centers.
