Senator Hemphill.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Moores.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Senator by
the.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pulled.
Senator Shendo
Senator sold.
Senator Stefanics.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president thank you senator that
SO you rise for the indication
to be given today the right
Please remain standing for the
pledge of allegiance to be led
today by Senator Burt.
The pledge of allegiance in
Spanish to be that today by
Senator Gonzales and the salute
clergy and communities of faith
here in New Mexico.
These last sixty days first we'd
like to.
Thanks senator Wirth and his
staff especially the with.
legislative and we we thank him
for that every he's been
thanking everyone of us at the
end of our prayers we thank him
today.
Let us pray.
we know you hear our prayers
today.
We thank you for the forty to
urge.
Guidance and wisdom that
sustained us through these
And we pray for their continued
prayers and blessings.
We conclude our work today not
in benediction but in
commencement.
we pray that we have honored
that sacred trust.
In this enchanted land we call
our home we we native peoples
who have lived worked and prayed
to bless and teach us the colors
of your ballots love.
Allow our work here this session
to be our witness and continue
to be our firm foundation of
and wonderful staff please face
the flag on the Dyess and join
me in the pledge of allegiance
to the flag of the United States
of America.
stands one nation under god
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
C. lay on the left side of
course the sample of polls.
And salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico in the C. as
session Senator Burke you just
give me the chills every time
you do the pledge of allegiance
and Preciado way that you do the
opening introduction.
Senator Wirth.
announcements miscellaneous
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president and many
thanks to our state Senate
chaplain Reverend I knew to the
the different voices in our
invocations and I just think I
just ask that we all just give
him a stand up and give him a
clap for everything he did and
can't wait to get him back in
Mr president will all be glad to
be on the other side of a COVID
zoom session and having those
indications here individually
president at unanimous consent
to allow cameras on the floor
and in the gallery see no
objections so ordered Senator
thank you Senator Wirth thank
called no objection so ordered
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr president and I'd
like to thank the members of the
body in the staff the for all
the work they did this session
people on zoom and that is have
been a whole different thing too
so I shut up to my family and
mostly you zoom into my nieces
Saying no further announcement
senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president so what
way right down those concurrence
counters and get those out of
the way and then what we'll do
is on third reading go to the
messages from the house run that
order business messages from the
house.
The reader to read message from
the house of representatives.
bill one ninety as amended by
the Senate.
Senate bill for ten as amended
by the Senate Senate bill
seventy three Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill seventeen.
Senate Senate bill two fifty six
as amended by the Senate and
Senate bill forty three and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
thirty nine as amended by the
house and Senate bill one thirty
three as amended by the Senate
and further amended by the house
and requests the concurrence of
Mr president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has passed Senate bill three
forty five as amended by the
Senate and further amended by
amended by the house Senate bill
one forty four is amended by the
house with emergency clause.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill three
Senate bill two twenty three is
amended by the house and
requests the concurrence of the
Senate to the house amendment
respectfully submitted the same
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk the
journal so the message from the
Senate bill one twenty nine as
amended by the Senate Senate
bill one eighty six as amended
by the Senate and Senate bill
three sixty five as amended by
directed to inform the Senate
that the house has passed Senate
joint resolution thirteen Senate
bill three fifteen as amended by
the Senate Senate bill one
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
The journal so the message from
the house has been received and
Mister president I'm directed to
inform the Senate that the house
has concurred in the Senate
with emergency clause and house
bill six as amended by the
Senate respectfully submitted
Lisa M. Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk of the house the journal
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr president unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
those in the chamber here's
here's the order will do amend
the order number thirteen of the
Center millennials Senate bill
three seventy five a number
seventeen Senate bill four
thirty nine Center millennials
eighteen Senate bill one thirty
three Senator Gonzales a
Stewart so with that Mr
president unanimous consent.
We go to that order of Business
concurrence and I would yield to
senator Munoz for Senate
concurrence calendar number
Kerr on the Senate Judiciary sub
two percent milk three seventy
five is amended thank you
senator Gordon explain what
those amendments were Mr present
a matter what happens this is
going to be the this is the
they had or tire off officer.
Any question Senators we're
debating the con of the
concurrence Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president and and
house.
Senator Munoz.
and answer the phone for my wife
can you say it again sentiment.
can you explain what those were
and why we're striking the.
Who present center I'm trying to
remember what we did in the
Senate finance eleven thirteen.
amendment that you have removed
the period and put in the.
I think this quotation mark I'm
trying to do this off memory.
and then on the on on the next
on thirteen.
Mr president center some of
those were technical cleanups
because the dates didn't match
up and so we we did not enact
this immediately this is got a
is that correct Mr president
center yes that is correct
because this is not an immediate
implication they have to put the
board together they have to move
some stuff around so the
implementation doesn't take
I'm sorry so first time I've
seen this as far as the new
things added in the house of
could you go over those with us
is actually pretty extensive
Mr president if you look through
that there's a lot of changes
but that really only thing that
That is all in the context it's
it's it's a lot to restructure
to do that because every board
has to be structured and that's
what happened.
Thank you Mr president is trying
to skim through this real quick
Mr present law is looking this
bill is always going to be in
motion this is to give us better
officers throughout and so
there is a train and train
changes we're gonna have to come
change what they're doing and
how they're doing training those
officers.
So much present could you go to
the second page of the.
or just the underlying questions
of this a new section.
Mr presence and your referring
to section be on the second
page.
and then so they just adding by
the law enforcement
certification board so it's
saying who's going to be able to
do that sort of suspension.
On on who gets removing officer.
license to reinstate the license
is that correct Mr president
center you're exactly right
thank you Mr president thank you
so.
Any further debate.
On concurrence.
unanimous consent Senator and
unanimous consent there's a
motion for unanimous consent to
concur for the Senate to concur
with the house amendment to
Senate Judiciary Committee
Over to the next currents
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr president members of the
Senate I move that the Senate
concur with house amendments to
Senate bill one forty four is
to include the interconnection
between students and teachers to
support remote learning the
reason for this
at the federal level once the
federal relief act was passed
this coordinates with that and
technology thank you very much
Mr president thank you senator
Senator debate in the
concurrence we have Senator
thank you Mr president I do a I
do have a question on this
so Mister president I know we
spoke about this.
A little bit
A in the basic idea Mr president
was.
Let the students go to school
with each other you get somebody
in that room is
As some kind of crowd control Mr
president so that there's
nothing else going on and then
Anyway Mr president whole idea
is to reverse exactly where
we've been trying to go in
So we put the students in the in
the classroom we leave the
there I actually think that has
two purposes one it's cheaper to
it lets the students interact
and I think that helps us a lot
with our other issues of of
Campos thank you Mr president
says Senator sure it's a very
good point social interaction is
a very important part of our
young people's growth and one of
they're away from their friends
and so I did think about that I
know that in the discussions
what people are looking forward
to is getting back to the
Senator all right thank you Mr
president Preciado Center.
Any further debate senators.
The same man Center compliment
Sierra was a close thank you
adopt the house amendments.
There's been a request for a
roll call.
Tier seats please.
Senator Baca yes Senator Brandt
Senator Brandt now senator Byrd.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
Duhigg Senator Duhigg gas
Senator Gallegos yes ma'am
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Griggs now Senator
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator I was older yes Senator
how to meal Senator Amir yes
Senator Moores yes Senator my
nose.
Senator my nose.
Led to go slide this time
Senator by the ATS Senator
Pinto.
Senator printer yes Senator
Pirtle.
Senator Sanchez yes Senators
committees.
Senator smitteez.
Senator is ready to test Senator
Sedillo Lopez yes Senator
Senator socio Senators
defending.
Senator subreddits yes Senator
Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn as Senator
Senator Woods yes.
Thirty four.
moving on to go to the next item
that's concurrence calendar
number fifteen I'll go to
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I move
That house removed the final
section of Senate bill forty
which was going to mandate that
educational community that they
didn't really want to do that
also so we took off the mandate
but the first five sections of
the bill really improve the
Made it easier and more flexible
for both of those programs to go
forward in addition we amended
so that if you've been in these
programs before you don't have
bill and I move that we can Kurt
to these changes Senator
debating the house amendments to
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
as amended will go to Senator
Brandt.
Agency presentation and just
wanted to clarify so we no
longer have the mandate of ten
days.
In it only affects new schools
of what I understand.
been in either program would
have to Bacon application but we
had all these provisions in the
statute saying that you had to
apply every year and we've taken
are really great that they left
in their that we pass.
Mr president center thank you
for that I have heard from our
teachers in the mandate was
really
appreciate the changes I just
wanted to clarify that
application for the new if they
had not had a previous program
hearing aid but I did understand
most of it with that I thank you
Mr president.
Any further debate centers
centers committee thanks present
Mr president center first of all
Maybe this is just the syntax
issue but sections section six
it didn't say new material in a
usual say new material
great question that's because
it's a temporary position so
when we put a temporary
provision on the end of the bill
it means it doesn't really go
students which is so significant
we tried to say let's do more
school next year and so it's
just for next year it's a
temporary provision it wouldn't
for me and it was this the the
purpose of striking this was it
because of I mean this was kind
of a moving target seem to
during session it did it have to
do with
Mr president no it said that
there was pushback from
educators on mandating and
pushed back on superintendents
I want calendar reform I want
districts to go to school longer
but you know.
I'm in the minority apparently
like that provision so so it's
gone it's back to just those two
programs that if you've done in
the past now it's going to be
easier to continue them there's
because of the changes in the
first five sections which I did
with superintendents teachers
unions the charter school
community
you know we I think we disagree
I'm I'm more of a less is more
guy on screen and and that's
fine but thank you for you know
I I I think this makes the bill
the leadership in the the where
with all to just listen and to
include those concerned so thank
you for doing that I know that's
not not easy to do sometimes
I do want to make sure that that
we that the intent.
Excuse me the intent of this
amendment is accomplishing what.
What we're doing because what I
turn back to page six of the
substitute bill it still says
that an elementary school
operating a four day school week
Is it was so do do we still have
a mandate in there of expanding
instructional days per school
year.
Senator or have we really gotten
all the language out.
So the those two programs still
exist in statute and so what the
first five sections do is make
those programs more accessible
the statute originally and
that's been some of the
complaints is that I don't know
how many I think we have about.
Of fifteen to twenty percent of
they only go for days so these
programs really designed for
five day weekend so we need to
change that but
they are calendar reform so you
statute of for four days a week
for four days a week districts
they would have to do five weeks
but that's only twenty days so
districts that want to do the
program but it's but it's still
voluntary program if you do it
you have to follow the statute
follow those those things okay
that makes sense in in in in the
next the next paragraph it
clearly says you know they shall
not be required to add
instructional days so I think
For the debate Senator Brandt
thank you Mr president is really
not debate I just wanted to
thank the senator for
allowing those mandatory things
come off you know of one things
chair of L. E. S. C. on not
adding more days but actually
going to year round calendar
and I think that's actually
something we really need to look
you on that through the next
year and would love to be part
of that because I think you
could really make a huge
difference in education for the
state of New Mexico thank you.
committee substitute for Senate
bill forty as amended and ask
for unanimous consent.
Centers is been a motion for a
Manson scented up the house
amendments.
When I go on to the next item
that's going to be number
sixteen we have center got an
idea just in time.
Senator Candelaria.
is amended.
Senate Bill explain of those
amendments are.
This presents the house
appropriation.
And finance committee amendments
thank you.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
president Sir
If you could help me out I was
trying to to look at the bill
Not sure that I'm catching that
in the amendment.
Some presenter for into the
concurrence counter believe it
be item number two.
Page on page five.
interest and other expenses or
obligations related to the bonds
authorized pursuant to section
three.
Of this twenty twenty one act
Improvements at the cancer
center would expire once this
new phase of bonds are retired.
So much present etcetera so my
understanding then is the the
that would just happen till what
if if if money is bonded
against.
and when this kicks into effect
and then bond against that
again.
Mr president that is that is
other changes to what we're
doing here would require us as a
body to come back and reconsider
that was present thank you Mr
president thank you center.
some of the same questions as
far as the sunset but I'm trying
to understand the first please
is on page four for you and the
on item two and I'm wondering
why it is useful this presents
Center earlier about the sunset
instead of leaving it in chapter
one where it was originally can
you help me with that Mr
president this is an incredibly
technical bill.
They know better than I do on
some of these things and so I
agreed with them and thought it
was the appropriate approach
Mister president.
piece was a sunset but the
wording was in section are
B. section one now as then
New Mexico to look for different
working in different language
and I could not see that but
I'll call you to answer thank
you for.
Thing is present just wanted to
rise and support of this
concurrence as well as the bill
my this is extremely important
piece legislation that's going
sponsor for taking care of all
the technicalities on on this
issue thank you Mr president.
Any further debate.
bill two twenty three is amended
by unanimous consent.
Senator quest Freeman's consent.
I see no objections the Senate
Representative day Hochman Vigil
who really really help navigate
this bill through some choppy
waters of real estate to now are
so special thanks to our house
seventeen center many of us.
Centamin yes I'm the chamber
will come back and we'll do that
one but we're going to Senate
concurrence counter number
ask the Senate to concur with
the Senate.
Senate bill one thirty three as
amended with the.
Mr president and members for the
this has done is on one section
of the bill.
Of what it does the gives that
transportation that in working
with this that this would be
very much into assistance to the
program.
The second part is of what he
we're debating.
The house amendments to Senate
bill one thirty three as
amended.
Senator Brandt.
Term as president with the
committee amendment number three
could you please explain what
that amendment did and why they
struggled.
Senator Gonzales and.
And they felt that all the.
Procedure for the legislation
will be much better if it was
taken off.
Trying to follow this in the
bill
so you took out
section for the H. and re did
that.
about air ambulance service and
we're going to infrastructure
improvements can you help me
with that the last two Mr
president and senator home run
And he says you know to New
Mexico you know if we're working
with the.
Some of the very small airports.
And we are looking at having
and have a operable you know how
the facilities for people as
they visit or Landon this
airport.
And that's why he felt that the
areas Mr president and a senator
have rent no it would be just
for very small minor
infrastructure.
bill sponsor yield for a
question Senator was on as.
Mr president I yield to Senator
thank you senator.
Mr president I in center I just
amendment and it appears that
it's it's
I guess it's striking.
The finance committee number
three amendment I I I didn't and
not we're not messing with the
floor amendment we're just
modifying what the Senate
finance committee did is is that
correct Mr president Senator
that is correct.
Senator Gallegos.
This presents the bill sponsor
you.
Senator Gonzales Mr president I
yield to Senator Gallegos.
apologize in the bill come back
from the house we are losing any
of the money or any of the
projects going towards Senate
bill one thirty three is that
correct.
the projects were being
eliminated it's just technical
wording is that correct Mr
president and Senator again that
is correct.
Do need help and I just want to
make sure none of that was
a minimized her taken out so
with that thank you Mr president
I yield.
Any further debate senators.
move that we concur with Senate
bill one thirty three as amended
with the changes that have been
proposed to us and I ask for
unanimous consent.
Senator Baca Senator Baca no
Senator Candelaria yes senators
have on this Senator Cervantes
yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Senator Griggs yes Senator
Hamblen Senator Hamblen yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Lopez.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
McKenna.
Senator o'neil yes Senator need
to be now Senator disciplinary
as senator for the.
Senator Stewart AS Senator Pinto
Senator propias Senator
Rodriguez Senator Rodriguez yes
senator Sanchez senator Sanchez
yes Senators committees.
Senator Shendo yes Senator souls
Senator souls yes Senator
semantics Senator Stefanics yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
By a vote of thirty day the
we're gonna go back to Senate
concurrence counter number.
Seventeen I'm gonna go back to
center many of us Senate
concurrence calendar number
seventeen.
changes are Mr president all
this did was move it from
provided cash balances and moved
it from General cat general fund
money to provided cash balances
the employees in the building
all the state police all
everybody that was here around
the capital helping us every day
everyone that had to get tested
every week at I appreciate that
The provided cash balances.
What we have provided cash
Mr president large enough to pay
the staff three hundred dollars
each misprint me back up how
many how many.
Okay Mister president so a
hundred folks living and not
living working in this building
through the through the session.
that included all that Mr
president this presents center
now this is only for the staff
that inside the building that
has been here during comment on
were here and around the
building that had to get tested
and so this is not for I'm sorry
like the secretaries who who
they were here part time so I
know we had a couple of tested
positive so they were here for a
week and then they went home for
two weeks and then they came
back they they also qualify for
of the General Fund did we not
appropriated in house bill two
to begin with Mr press.
Mr president and as we did this
this was I forget what they call
determined that there's a better
place to do that then then pull
that small dollar amount out of
the general fund and so the
Legislative cash balances so
trying to be just a little more
a.
You know legislatively.
So.
Anyway Mr I was I was I really
did think that this was already
sixty five thousand dollars.
And and when I drafted it that's
where we thought it should come
from and then along the way we
found out that there's plenty of
gonna come from.
Okay Mister president thank you
appreciate it more Mr president
and senator.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr president with
Mr president I know the dollar
amount I can't remember how many
people were actually here but
when we did the math and we
divided up and Senator
And so Senator Candelaria is
doing the math for me right now
is five hundred fifty.
Employees are here.
And that's if you do the math
hundred sixty five thousand
know this year deserves every
dime of this I just wanna make
sure that it's only being given
to those who have been here
every day are are here in the
building.
here in two or three shifts I
think there was a hundred or or
something and shifts it's quite
Ms orbit number plus the the
National Guard guys that were
testing so thank you Mr
president I really appreciate
that you've included them I
think that's that's hugely
important thank you for doing
that I just I still want to the
correctly in the it's probably a
rounding error thank you.
Any further debate centers.
Scene and senator Munoz to
close.
Mr president I I just want again
thank for everybody that that
very important that we respect
people and thank them for what
they did in and what they did
for the state of New Mexico.
by coming here what they did for
time they greet you when you
walk in there so friendly
everybody smiles and and
everybody's happy and they treat
us with the greatest respect of
all
To the janitors that are here
late at night you know they
state the other night we stayed
till two or three in the morning
and ran back up to my office and
they were there waiting to come
that works for you and everybody
that helps you when you move up
here in the sixty day period
you're pretty much come in on an
island if you ask the staff for
you're never in the papers are
are you never talked about but I
want you to know that that we
love each and everyone and I
appreciate what you did endorsed
in the session and during this
time.
etcetera etcetera question just
consent.
See no objections the Senate has
concurred with the house
amendments to Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
before thirty nine as amended
I want to highlight a couple
things about the staff at the
legislature that we all need to
be aware of.
Is less than the per diem that
we receive.
Their staff for the legislature
whose rate is less than the per
diem that we receive.
May last a while may not last
awhile may lead to something may
not lead to something the reason
doesn't Meister left.
For temporary employees.
We do not offer health
insurance.
This was an important matter for
us to do this year.
the permanent staff.
Who work year round.
And then work twenty hours a day
during the session.
To be here and support the work
that we do.
Thank you.
Thanks centers of the we're
going on to Senate concurrence
concur with Senate bill three
forty five as amended with the.
House amendments.
diem mileage and act changes no
this is not for the legislative
this is on state employees
boards.
And the through a.
That for purposes of budgeting
the it would be a lot better to
change the date so that it would
of the and the alignment with
Senator debating the concurrence
in the start with center
Gallegos.
Mr president with the spot for
you Senator Gonzales Mr
just going to ask and I know
those two budget during the
session and hoping the we don't
have to go back to the virtual
platform but our employees
some this is one of the areas
that was not addressed under the
old party mac that we had
because it has not been changed
since two thousand three.
Thank you for that Mr president
and senator I I just know the
twelve I was assuming from home
I did not to ask for per diem
make is far for them I just want
to make sure there are some
options currently some thoughts
on if we are aren't having
travel aren't having hotel and
meals the we'd consider that
think Miss presence Center.
Any further debate senators.
Senator Gonzales.
Well thank you Mr president
That is a request for unanimous
consent for House amendments to
Senate bill three forty five as
amended.
See no objections the Senate has
occurred to it with the house
amendments for Senate bill three
Center field explain to us what
those amendments have done to
the bill.
Very good Mister president
it was originally sponsored by
senators or cheesy Pino and
Moores.
thank you senator Senator as
we're debating the house changes
to Senate bill three oh four as
amended center Morris.
Thank you Mr president I want to
thank Senator McKenna for
effort of many many people
are Senator to see Pino and I
agreed to sponsor this
legislation after working with
voter advocacy groups and it was
a great process to New Mexico
First.
And Senator Pinto of all it was
involved in its center to see
Pino myself I think there it
which I think is how monumental
process it will become a help us
soon as I talk about in the past
are really we need to
introduce constitutional
amendment number years ago by
camel Senator Ivey Soto on this
chamber and then we had a house
members on those six are chamber
so this is some reform I think
going some of the history of the
lawsuits and everything else and
I'm not going to promise that
that's not going to we won't
have problems in the future but
I definitely think this is a
bipartisan nonpartisan Mr
president effort to really
change this process and with
that Mr president like to come
turn it over to Senator Ortiz Y.
Senator kneels not here Senator
pearls worked on many of us have
worked on for many years so this
present for the children or
center or to see if you know
Senator is a dental.
Thank you Mr president thank you
wording that went into this
measure when it went over to the
house and I especially wanted to
mention Representative Dow who
found a way to save the bill
yesterday afternoon would look
president.
Any further debate.
Senator McKenna close.
Thank you Mr president I do move
you did ask unanimous consent
centers is been requesting
managing sent for the hot for
the Senate to concur with the
house amendment to Senate bill
three or four as amended.
to the last concurrence calendar
it's number twenty one now go to
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr president I move
the Senate concur with the house
R. B. E. contribution bill.
of right left the Senate it
asked for a one percent increase
the first two years so for the
next two years there will be a
one percent increase in the
state's contribution to the ERP
measures that we can look to to
increase the solvency of the
fund Senator questions.
Senator is we're debate any
questions.
anytime.
Thank you Mr president I move
that the Senate concur with the
changes from the house to Senate
bill forty two as amended and
amended.
Senator we're gonna move on I
yield to senator Wirth to take
us to the next order of business
It says they sixty Senator
hopefully you can give me just a
little bit of a slack with.
We're announces miscellaneous
gonna do is start with item
number.
Fourteen.
bill two sixty six Senator
Hermio.
number sixteen item to all one
Senator Lopez.
Item nineteen house bill forty
six Senator Ortiz Pino item
twenty house bill thirty three
Senator Hickey item twenty three
house bill one twenty seven
Center RTZ Pino and we'll just
see how we're doing on those and
before I Senator Moores do you
want to make a unanimous consent
house bill ninety six
Ration I'm scared my name be
added back to house bill ninety
six Senator can you give us the
time we remove that the other
Criminal record licensure thank
you sentences then as consent to
add seven more is back on to
house bill ninety six see no
objections so ordered thank you
Thank you Mr president so with
that unanimous consent we go to
our business third reading of
legislation and you'll Senator
seven the homemade food act
that's co sponsored by president
of representatives Cook in
Matthews.
Senator proceed the subject
matter expert is miss Erika
Smith she senior attorney for
the institute for justice and
Representative Matthews of
that would make a big difference
for New Mexico food
entrepreneurs New Mexico has one
of the most restrictive homemade
food laws in the country this
require refrigeration these
items include baked goods jams
and roasted coffee beans.
The bill also legalizes the sale
of these homemade foods in
We have been contacted by many
who want to be able to sell
these goods Mr president if this
bill passes.
make money from home is more
important than ever.
And this bill passed the house
with only one nay vote Mr
president and I welcome my co
Senator would you like to add
any other information on this
bill I Mr president I'm sorry
Stuart Ingle.
Thank you Mr president present I
can't I can't devote any of my
secret cooking things right now
but this is going to make me
Senior center Senator Pirtle the
Jewish ADVATE.
Yes Mr president center Pirtle.
Thank you Mr president will
sponsor please yield.
their home rules rules about
food.
Mr president and Senator Pirtle
this bill would include
Albuquerque's ban of the sale of
cottage foods completely.
And it's one of the only cities
in the nation that has it as
such.
So Mister president senator does
So Mister president senator what
preempt means is the state says
that you can't make rules
different than what we dictate
Mr president and Senator Pirtle.
I'm gonna deferred to my subject
matter expert I'll be right with
you.
be able to Bennett but they can
make a comment if they wish.
So Mister president senator
we're we're removing the
requirement to have a permit but
Mr president and Senator Pirtle
Albuquerque would not be able to
Mr president and Senator Pirtle
could you repeat that question.
it will lift what we currently
have which is the N. M. E. D.
that requires a lot of paperwork
and required thousands of
dollars in kitchen upgrades
Albuquerque.
We pass this legislation in
Albuquerque can just put back in
the requirements that we
currently have under the state
which Albuquerque currently as a
we plan on forcing Albuquerque
to allow the sale of cottage
industry foods if we don't prove
preempt them.
Class class eight county and
home room and this a polity that
has established a combined local
health department pursuant to a
cell phone made food items
within the jurisdictions of the
respective county and
municipality that's page five
Sectionof.
Mr president and Senator Pirtle
Albuquerque would not be able to
ban the sale of cottage foods
anymore they be able to regulate
it.
producing homemade foods but yet
we're not accomplishing what the
legislation has been set to
accomplish.
And so that was the the purpose
of the amendment yesterday that
we ended up pulling that
allow them to have a mandatory.
A permit system.
Which is adding government
adding regulation to the cottage
cottage industry this doesn't do
anything to force them to allow
it.
Just a moment Mister president
Our which reads as follows
except as otherwise provided in
the homemade food at a political
subdivision of the state
including a home rule
of home made food items.
Does that answer your question
Mr president and senator.
Mr president Senator that the
first three words except as
otherwise provided.
legislation it provides that the
home rule municipality can
require a permit so we preempt
but yet we don't preempt because
we say except as otherwise
provided.
for New Mexico and if.
Mr present if you want to think
about going further with this
legislation.
those that want to expand their
businesses including online
sales for for a shelf safe food
items.
within a bill because it it
preempt but yet it doesn't
preempt so Albuquerque's the
problem we've established that
for some reason they don't like
you don't want to get sick from
eating somebody's apple pie then
don't buy it.
but on page five one it says
that the.
but yet we find a way for them
to treat themselves up Mister
president
what.
Other parts of the bill would
limit or.
location in the bill where it
talks about preemption.
Mr president and senator so
there is the preemption with
option for the permitting system
but having that process does not
Mr president.
With the senator please repeat
that.
Senator can.
sent Apryl to repeat the
original question for your
expert witnesses addressed.
Yes Mr president and Mr
president besides the the
preemption paragraph on page
I don't doubt that they're not
gonna charge fees for this you
can even have a garage sale
without paying a fee.
is there anywhere else that we
Mr president and Senator Pirtle
I would like to yield to my
Homer municipalities to regulate
these these homegrown food all
of allows for is a current
optional permitting process
optional on the part of the home
outs for for home rule
municipalities across eight
counties.
And this presents Senator doing
I really appreciate that I mean
I still have my concern the the
opening was there's too much
well as I do Senator as as a
clerk you know you have to
charge fees in order to do that
paperwork and and do the work so
hopefully they
debate we have center
participate now followed by
Senator Hamblen thank you Mr
president I I support this I
mean it does mean that I'll have
to drive to Russell to get my
apple pies but I'm willing to
you Senator McKenna for bringing
this to the Senate I've been a
big fan of this bill and I've
heard from folks like Tricia and
Kathleen and Jennifer who want
rural counties that will be able
to benefit from this folks
throughout the state who can't
afford a commercial kitchen
which is very costly for minimum
starts at three thousand dollars
but they have goods they can
who may need to add them earn
extra income or re direct what
they're doing because they can
no longer afford a storefront
this happened in Los crucis to
one of our businesses and she's
hope that we to pass this today
I think there are people who are
redefining what they do as an
entrepreneur or solopreneur and
this will give them that
opportunity so thank you Mr
of absolutely thank you Mr
president and Senator Brandt.
Thank you
Senator so I'm a little bit
confused from your opening and
industry in Albuquerque.
so is it.
Is it going to apply to
Albuquerque or not I'm just
really confused on that.
the most of strict rules banning
a cottage foods.
The sale of.
which Albuquerque is one of
those.
how does that apply to them
because they're under home rule
so are they still going to be
Mr president and senator Brandt
Albuquerque can require a
permanent provided they don't
Thank you Mr president and
etcetera so I'm looking at
section five.
Including a home rule
municipality or other
institution of the station not
apply law policy or resolution
that regulates our attempts to
Mr president and senator.
I'm if they had any questions
about that we certainly have not
received any concerns we sent
The president Senator.
The but does it.
Does that make it were
Mr president and Senator Brandt
is your question.
If Albuquerque has.
Has to comply with this law.
So Mister president senator in
the case of Albuquerque what
will they be able to do if this
bill passes and is signed into
law.
How will you be able to sell at
their jams and other homemade
food items.
Seneca Mr president and Senator
if the sellers want the extra
stamp of approval to shop with
their customers.
it allows the other two areas
not under the department's
home rule status.
However these areas would not be
able to ban or restrict the sale
of cottage foods under the act.
etcetera etcetera Brandt
yes we need to check on the
technology center McKenna I
apologize we need to check and
see we're getting reports that
the system is down.
Senator back online will resume
with debate Senator Brandt.
to do or have to do under this
law if I want to sell my
so what this bill does.
For instance if Albuquerque
wants to have a permitting
Does not need will not require a
permit.
So Mister president.
Senator.
Can Albuquerque put any kind of
would be subject to a joint
powers agreement.
Present.
Senator.
Senator Ingle I apologize.
and for for this bill and then
the kitchen will have to be
inspected by some folks I'm sure
from the environmental
Department sanitation department
some kind of a charge for the to
the person that's doing this but
the kitchen will have to be
inspected and then it'll have to
to be something there that
somebody takes a look at but
efforts it's it's a starting
point for this on on different
type of food products that'll
it'll have to be kind of felt
fulfill our way through this
like we do all of these things
that we are left to be done at
the home thank you.
and I see that finally on page
two
we're it does say a.
No the department department of
the environment provided that
when a class eight county and
Thank you for that that's that's
very helpful
so Albuquerque will I I guess so
I'm trying to understand this
because I think this only
applies to Albuquerque the
to decide you know what they
want we're not telling
Albuquerque they have to
do anything in particular except
that they have to figure out
some way of letting people do it
is that is that about right.
you know provides a an Avenue
but I honestly because
Albuquerque is going to be
allowed to do whatever they want
in this situation they just have
to figure out a way to do it.
that I am really glad to not
live in Albuquerque.
Thanks Center rent any further
debate Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr president I just
Yes it Mr president and the
Senator I know that
Is a dryland farm over there and
through does this allow you now
to legally
bake that banana nut bread in
your home kitchen and go out to
And on for online sales as well.
I'm sorry Mr president sorry I
got into Senator Ingle space
at the moment what I'm gonna be
of cooking and doing things with
but I have ordered a lot of
stainless steel wire.
enough money to get by during
those non producing
periods over there in port Alice
so we're I'm just glad to hear
that you're going to be able to
have a little extra income to
to claim all this now on your
income tax because since it's
legal you know you'll have to
probably
is it a cash business minute Mr
president can I ask is this a
those little jars that they're
packed in vinegar and oil and
but I'm not and most of their
sales I have our cash and
certainly certainly give the
Senator Mr Representative or Mr
Bridgen and if you're if you're
really nicer to me I'll put your
face on a jar of pickles.
Thank you Senator Ingle.
Any further debate.
Mr president senator I
appreciate this legislation
actually I was looking we have
some more on the agenda that
really deals with inspections
Mr president and center we write
with you let me get to that
page.
Senator MO you repeat the
question please for Center
Mr president and Senator it is
on page three of the bill.
section three.
There is a listing of licensing
And thank you Mr president
senator which agency is
performing these inspections.
Mr president and senator there
is a one day food safety course
it can be done online.
page three and it doesn't
necessarily mentioned the
inspection requirements are
these on site inspections are
being performed.
Mr president and Senator there
And you have to abide by the
safety rules.
Thank you Mr president and
senator and could you explain
what the safety rules are.
Thank you Mr president and
senator in water those safety
requirements that you mentioned
so if I understand this there
would be no oversight of
food six the safety and security
is that correct.
Center can.
Mr president and senator the the
business owner would have to
keep a clean kitchen and for
illness stop the sale of any
unsafe food and otherwise take
steps to enforce the act.
Thank you Mr president and
senator and I read that in here
that the seller has to maintain
division at all however we
ensuring that these are sanitary
kitchens and that the food is
safe.
why we're adopting best
practices for this bill.
Thank you Mr president Senator
is excited as I am to to try
all which is a surprise I'm not
sure if I'm more excited about
that than I am concerned but
overall I do appreciate the
legislation I think that this
will help some of our smaller
have for the debate centers
options.
Mr president with the sponsor
the bill you for a question
Senator McKenna.
Yes Mr president.
Mr president and senator of
once.
Once adult use cannabis is
legalized in the state of New
Any further debate Senators.
Saying no further debate senator
Kennedy closed on the bill.
Do now pass and I ask for
unanimous consent of the Senate.
that the record show that the
role has been called and I ask
Senator Byrd there.
Senator Campos Senator Campos
yes senator Candelaria.
Senator Gallegos and I'd like to
explain my vote Senator Gallegos
now Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Griggs.
Senator Ingle yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Senator had a meal.
Senator huh I'm here yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Moores yes senator
Munoz.
Senator one LCS senator Neville.
Senator Neville.
senator by the Senator Stewart
AS Senator Pinto Senator Pinto
yes Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator pope.
senator Sanchez Senator songes
yes Senators committees yes
explain of a Senator Cervantes
yes Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Senator sold.
Senator so yes Senator Stefanics
Senator Stefanics yes Senator
Senator Wirth yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Baca.
about this Senator run this
test.
Senator.
Senator Shendo.
Senator can I your bill has
passed we do have several who
want to explain the road before
we go to you to close Senator
Gallegos explains what.
Mr president but I just want to
government not to have to pick
and choose but that's reasonable
no thank you Senator Griggs.
Thank you Mr president and that
really what really did it for me
Mr president members of the body
was the fact that Senator Ingle
promised me a jar of baby Berk
pickles.
had an opportunity to make real
change to help people in a real
way there's five other states
that have introduced real.
do that we failed the people of
New Mexico yes this is a step in
the right direction but you know
sometimes baby steps isn't
enough Mister president there's
people that are hurting meeting
student of the Senate body and I
really want to thank Senator
Stuart Ingle.
four counties three of those are
classe so at least at least I
have one that I think this bill
is going to help so that's one
level of interest is from the
community just because the you
know the county lines are are so
close to each other in the
flooring out of his facility for
just no good reason he was just
caught up in a big umbrella
regulation the he's still on a
classic County I don't think
we can get relief and some more
commonsense regulation for those
folks that are still in these
classic counties but because I
do have a the county that's
that's excluded that can kind of
thank you for that presentation
and congratulations given that
passed we're going to the next
item on the calendar that's
going to be I don't over fifteen
and you'll to center how to meal
amended on final passage have
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution see no objections
center how to mail to explain
the bill Mr president I would
Natalie Figueroa who will help
me with the bill.
Thank you St objection of the
sergeant at arms can please
escort the representative into
the chamber.
Mr president will be
alternative licensure pathways
for special education teachers
we all know that we have a
teacher shortage in the state of
New Mexico in twenty twenty
educator vacancy reported there
with small school districts
superintendents to be executed
sixty percent of our teachers
prepared in New Mexico last year
we're prepared to the
alternative pathway licensure
debating house bill two six six
as amended in center shared the
page to debate a yes Mr
president I do session.
So Mr president.
inadequate training and so forth
but what are the standards for
for special education training
today.
a mentor and then while you're
being mentors in the classroom
you're also taking courses in
education in the evening or
weekends to comply with what you
need for your license.
Thank you Mr president thank you
Senator for that the this adds
fifteen weeks into that program
what happens during these
working on taking the lessons
learned and and putting those
into their lesson plans and
executing them in their
classroom.
Mr president that's correct so
it's an apprenticeship because a
classroom these are are seasoned
professionals were going back
into a second career in
education.
So Mister president and Senator
this.
Mr president we could even call
this supervised teaching
practice this is just a term.
saying that that the teacher
that's teaching in the in the
tier that's learning of both
have to be a member of of you
relatively large districts but
they're not you shops.
And and and they're not you
shops because they don't want to
be you shops.
Albuquerque public schools does
see the the value but others
don't in so I'm just afraid when
we start using words that are
that are closely tied to you
apprentices are almost always
you.
Mr president Senator.
Mr president there's no
requirement to be in a you know
student teaching is what we
typically call this but those
out.
So.
All right Mr president certainly
our attorneys in the room they
go through of continuing
education
So I I.
In I don't think there's any
attorney unions but.
But they still go through that
whole process every year in
fact.
continuing training continuing
education through this process
must present.
Yes Mr president of there would
educators whether you're in this
program or you're already
teaching as a seasoned educator.
So Mister president how does
this work with the smaller
start trekking from there pretty
quickly so it doesn't take long
to get to the five thousand and
then to the less than one
thousand of student category in
fact we got a couple that are
question now it can be done in
small rural districts.
Representative Figueroa met with
the superintendents from lake
author and estancia to talk
about how this practice
districts and so if you'd like
Mr president and senator I can
go over those five with you.
Yes Mr president I'd be very
interested in hearing what those
for those fifteen weeks a
district could choose to pay the
cabinet of a long term sub at
the same rate which is half of a
teacher's salary.
coming from the RTC or from the
supervised teaching for half
days or for two point five days
per week now potential
candidates can choose other
So we're.
The very first one we talk
about.
I'm sorry can you read the first
take over the on field position
now for those fifteen weeks a
district could choose to pay the
Canada and the long term sub at
the teacher salary and a half
right is that on a Mr president
is that on top of what they
already earned so if the if they
Mr president thank you for that
so what happens with this is
half the pay and this wouldn't
allow them to have a long term
sub with them which then
supplements that to be that rate
of a full time teacher.
So.
Mr president because these
teachers that we're talking
about are professionals who are
coming into education so this
program is and for teachers who
already have their license but
professionals who are coming
into the classroom not teachers
who already have their license.
designer and I decide I want to
go into special ed and so
whatever I made as a widget
designer I give up to work.
For half of the teachers pay.
the news room for the classroom
taking a pay cut while live band
was being led by a mentor
teacher earning my degree in
education and working at
month Mr president hi I have to.
I have to work is.
Half of the teacher and then the
For special ed of certified
qualified for got to work here
teacher versus a teacher
teacher.
So Mister president it would be
doesn't include any extra.
Any extra money.
Mr president no.
understanding that different
certifications actually earn two
additional additional money or
at least potentially could earn
you additional money even if you
tier system so the more
experience you get and the more
I believe education you get you
move through the tears and
that's when salary begins to
increase.
And and Mr president senator
Mr president this is pre service
and pre licensure.
So no.
special ed or any any any
seasoned a person why would we
want to do that.
Mr president because all of us
would like to practice and learn
before we go in and lead a
fostering a safe education in a
safe environment now not all of
us necessarily do it or leave
jobs because of money but
because we want to better our
So Mister president senator I
don't know if it's still true
but I I know that
Once upon a time specially when
I was in high school
there were I don't know.
and then the that was their
second career and retire from
the military after twenty years
or.
Some of them served a little
teachers anybody who is willing
to come into the classroom and
be willing to get that license
we definitely need we're staying
in the state of New Mexico a
number of people who are working
teachers in each classroom.
So Mister president and senator
I know it's a little off track
here but do I have to
season two I still have to go
back to highlands and get my
bachelor's degree in education
Mr president no.
You would take some evening
classes to help you with
So Mister president so I could
to retire from the military
decide want to be an educator
and Justice kind of a side note
Mister president.
So I've left in the the military
well I get a job as a full time
sub wallet take these other
classes is that how that would
is your a teacher candidate
who's learning from a master
teacher.
Okay Mister president so I'm so
so then I go to the school
district to say Hey I'm a good
math teacher so then I would
there would be some mentorship
additional.
Of the printer ship.
Mr president so in this bill
we're talking about special
education which is unique so
for example if you would learn
to plan lessons how to write and
I A. P. which is an individual
education plan how to manage a
classroom and those are just a
Okay Mister president so let's
let me get back on to special ed
specifically.
so there's a variety of people
is is there a generic special ed
program or they're different
special ed programs Mister
president.
teacher so you could better
serve the needs of your special
education students no matter
which area they're in.
Hello or or is it just across
the board is the generic and I
could I could work with with
want to be and which field in
the area.
Okay Mister president in one of
the things that that certainly
my sister not only did she go
through special ed but she
but she she's done that for
twenty years
it was kind of amazing to me
that you run into people all
over Farmington
bill I wasn't there Senator sure
but I thought eventually she
would figure out that I was
senator share.
But after about an hour she
looked at me go your Kathleen's
to Farmington things like their
colors in their alphabet no
numbers even though she's
herself
down syndrome and she was
teaching.
Okay general thank you so so I
know that there's certainly
those different levels because
they're all other people in her
special ed class.
And so that's why we just.
It just seems like a really
broad spectrum to say special
ed.
impact on her that she then went
out to teach those that she
could that's an amazing story
and thank you for that but
that's right so in the special
education classroom it you do
system is that the best way
possible that you can.
so thank you.
The so the.
I I know that we're worried
about the.
passed the law of unintended
consequences.
Of that happens more often than
anything else that we do.
Of the because of this extra
Mr president note now what this
happens is candidates can't
afford to go fifteen weeks
without a paycheck this would
allow them and the so it nothing
in the bill so that they can be
So the the this the school
district whether it's APS to Roy
can still pay the teacher at a
regular salary this nothing
have a master teacher in
addition to this candidate in
the same classroom.
So Mister president at my other
note now that you mention master
districts so expansion the one
to one that you talked about.
A with the master teacher come
from.
present Mr president so in
estancia there is a master tier
three tier so they come from
with the in each school and it
it's a tier two so it comes from
school districts have a master
and teacher.
teacher and that vacancy isn't
filled lake Arthur with then
send that candidate to another
school district to learn from a
master teacher before bringing
them back and so for those
Okay Mister present so so the
lake Arthur.
Of the teacher then would go to.
Ross will or Albuquerque or
whatever's the closest place
template eight miles away from
Lee Carter and I can't remember
the name of it but that is where
the candidate would go to learn
from a master teacher to then
come back fifteen weeks later to
to of of for that time just fill
that fifteen week gap Mr
president that's correct and
that's what's currently
happening in a lot of these
areas where there's not a
licensed teacher we have full
is going to help with of our
general teacher shortage or or
is this just released the
specific for the special ed of.
Population that we have.
that we need to make the pathway
strong sixty percent of our
educators are coming in through
these types of programs for they
learn from master teachers.
Misprision would the my friend
from.
Everybody yield estimate a yield
Mister president absolutely.
and I heard the debate before so
these Mr president center just
for on field positions.
Mr president that is correct.
understand the discussion was on
the teacher in the classroom
with the student what would with
teacher be the one that would be
a curtain direction lesson plans
Mr president Mr president the
candidate would be in the
classroom of the master teacher
doing
in the apprenticeship program
they would be directing the
students say be more watching
and learning is that correct.
doing some teaching to get them
comfortable Mr president and
then after the end of the
fifteen weeks those candidates
would be ready to leave their
own classroom.
Thank you for that and that's
president center spread is a
really really hard
area to go into I've been in
love the classrooms and they're
educators and so I I think that
you've given me all the.
answers that I needed I just to
stand and support your bill just
wanted that so few very
to the sponsor yield for a
couple of questions center how
to me a deal Mr president
absolutely Thomas present
senator
I was listening earlier in the
Would be a master teacher.
As it is not a master board
certified teacher or or or do
Senator in if you could look at
page three.
In that very first area.
and I can't remember at the end
of the trying to remember we
change some things within the
framework did we actually rename
that master teacher I I can't
remember.
amended which that did talk
about level two level three.
So as president center we had an
amendment that and I I guess I
missed it that we had an
president that amendment allowed
a level two.
To actually do the mentoring Mr
president yes two or three.
Mr president Sir can you can you
Educational Mr president it's
President and senator I'm trying
to remember
Is it a level two tier
is that after three years I
think I can't remember that
they've been teaching for three
years you have the opportunity
of moving to the next year.
Mr president senators so after
two years.
We're going to have you be a
Mr president so we're talking
about those who are our
supervising the candidates of
those level two is what I've
already gone through a full
licensure program that are
their full education degree.
Thank you Mr president answer
obviously at this point I don't
want to amend out that amendment
from the house because that
experience does not have enough
experience I I actually
preferred the way it was written
and we may have to come back to
that next year.
Because a level three teacher is
actually.
So that was just a natural thing
and so I was actually happy
about this bill one entitlements
level two and three so now I'm
I'm I'm a little bit torn on
mentor yet.
A level three has gone through
that that's part of becoming a
level three teachers taking on
those additional
responsibilities you know part
bit left let me move on and and
you had mentioned that this was
for people who had previous
careers.
And we're coming out of the one
careering going into another one
Mr president no what the
alternative licensure means is
that you have a college degree
but it's in a different field.
Other than education thank you
process and had an alternative
licensure and she actually
decided not to not to continue
teaching this year so we could
travel of all things this year
Even eighteen years of age and
you meet the educational and an
assessment requirements of the
upper the other parts so you
Pre requisites or any kind of
other training in special ed to
go into that or is that all done
through this process.
after by a master teacher who
will help in developing you.
So much present I know for for
my spouse in hers was in music
license as well as pass the
music assessment
to get that license or do they
have to pass the test to get the
that need to be taken but you
can take those after the fifteen
weeks.
I'm sorry Mr president I can't
session completing but we still
are in third reading.
Read the.
Mr president yes there are
exempt it but you can take those
get the original licensure I I
can't remember.
year window to complete those
exams during this alternative
licensure program.
So Mister president center if
you look back in on page two
right the top where it talks
on the state approve subject
area exam in the subject area of
instruction.
So what would that be for
special ed teacher.
Thank you Mr president I'm sorry
could you repeat that.
there you're doing right your if
you're getting a license or
alternative license to teach
English you would take the
English of.
Understand exactly how this will
go into place and so these
teachers can be eighteen well
that be really smart to get
through the prerequisites by
would come under the a
The master teacher done say that
but the the space your talk
about level two or three tier.
with the master teacher in the
same classroom and that need to
be given your own classroom
after the fifteenth week and I
and I appreciate that Mr
president Senator but where does
So the presenters can hear each
other Senator Brandt.
I think he's looking at the
answers present.
education teacher while taking
the related and inter will open
the course work at a post
secondary educational
institution.
for that them and they're going
to set up that program.
Because it doesn't say that they
can't be teaching in the
classroom and honestly once they
get that initial provisional
Mr president so Penn has been
consulted on this bill and they
will work with districts with of
one year on how they're going to
execute this and get it done.
It did not work out well for me.
the rules came down and did
nothing that the loss of.
and have them consult with you
on the rulemaking.
and then after they stab in the
back come talk to me because
then we'll have something in
and then they would they take
another test at the end of that.
Mr president of the.
that they take in the evenings
or weekends of those classes
would have exams Mr president is
there any requirement on what.
does it have to be a state
school is there any requirement
for the.
And and some of those
universities and institutions
are currently working on line.
easier now because now that
we've we've had COVID we did a
lot of updating on online
classes and all those kinds of
things and so they can do this
And so much president hopefully
the universities will continue
to allow those online because I
tell you when your
nontraditional student push Mr
nineteen ninety six.
And so I was definitely a
nontraditional student and had a
child and then had two children
while I was in college
have been a lot easier
for me I had to go to the
classroom and it was really an
interesting experience being ten
years older than all the other
universities and colleges to
continue the online platform
even after comment restrictions
are in place and you know I I
know I I appreciate that we're
going to but there was no reason
to not have our students in the
classroom this year.
The science didn't show that
students and so we lost a year
of education in our state for
absolutely no reason.
and so I'm hoping Mister
president senator that this bill
To get enough teachers but
honestly we struggle to get
enough teachers in every area
not just special to and so Mr
Si no further debate.
Center how to me to close on the
bill.
Mr president I move that house
bill two sixty six do now pass
and I ask for a roll call vote.
The clerk to call the roll.
Senator Campos Senator Campos
yes senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Duhigg Senator Duhigg yes
senator guy goes.
Senator Gallegos yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Ingle.
Senator Ivey Soto Senator Ivey
Soto yes Senator had a meal.
McKenna yes Senator McKenna yes
senator Morris.
Senator Morris.
Senator Moores.
Senator Moores yes Senator
manos.
Senator o'neil yes senator do
should be no Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator pro yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Sanchez.
Senator Sanchez yes Senators
Senator Sedillo Lopez yes
Senator share.
Senator sure yes Senator Shendo.
Senator Shendo yes Senator sold.
Yes Senator Steinborn is Senator
Stewart Senator sure DS Senator
Tallman.
Senator Tallman.
Senator Byrd senator Byrd yes.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan yes senator by
amended has passed the Senate
senator Sanchez explains vote.
More of a committee for Senator
Hotmail is talking about levels
Madam you.
Mister president senator thank
you for that compliment.
that I think this is the last
vote we're taking the session a
number one to the great sponsors
over there thank you very much
thanks in part that we do have
more work to the senators were
not quite done yet senator Wirth
that the house has passed Senate
bill two eighty five as amended
by the house in requests the
concurrence of the Senate to the
house amendment respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk.
house bill twenty as amended by
the house and further meant by
the Senate without emergency
clause respectfully submitted
Senator Ortiz McCutchen chief
clerk journal so the message
from the house has been received
and Mister president I'm
committee substitute for house
bill two seventy eight as
amended by the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk of
the house general show the
number twenty two said about two
eighty five as amended centers
run concurrence calendar number
twenty two that's the blue item
on your desk right there Senator
thanks Phil explained what those
amendments were please members
of the Senate Mr president this
is a the bill that.
house amendments of we're we're
pretty much cleaned up except
for they've added a section that
says when the individual is
transported he shall not be
personally responsible for a lot
of out of pocket costs of the
transportation this measure with
Senator Brandt to debate years
present with the sponsor yield
center participate in a detailed
Mr president Senator Brandt yes
those present sorry I still have
something happened to the
patient with the county or the
municipality be able to be sued.
Centers in a.
Any further debate etcetera
etcetera Moores.
Thank you Mr president would
Center or DC Pino yield center
I really appreciate you doing
this or call project close out
here what this bill hopefully so
if you could just walk me
through a little bit over the
amendment your servicer Senator.
Where are you Daniel.
Mr president.
the county will the referring
county will reimburse them if
it's an EMT who transports.
know that some the population to
talk about but what if the
individual actually has
insurance either Medicare or
Medicaid or something like that
would not be responsible for.
Thank you Mr I just want to make
sure insurance companies that
are still power have to pay and
that we're not relying on the
Senate committees.
Thank you Mr president with the
sponsor you'll please Senator
dissipated the yield Mister
president yes Senator thanks
agency presents under just a
this a is our or is that like
counties association counties
are they okay with with this did
they have any concerns.
Mr president senators committee.
present center number two
they're gonna be reimbursed by
the agency what what agency is
the.
Mr president this is a way in
which the law enforcement
presence and I I think that.
That probably makes sense I mean
otherwise I I wouldn't want them
to decline based on a financial
reason in a crisis and I think
present an undue financial
obstacle somebody could get hurt
so thank you very much thank you
Mr thank you Senators
maintenance any further debate.
request by unanimous consent.
That the Senate.
There is a request for a call.
that that request Senator
Moores.
We'll do that by unanimous
consent.
Thank you Mr president thank you
members of the Senate senator.
Mr president.
now and make a statement
informing the house that the
Senate has completed its work
and is ready to adjourn seen a
BA.
As president to the house
members that are listening we of
the Senator done with our work
for the here and our adjourning
see needing.
its work and is ready to adjourn
C. ng ADA.
Mr president I second that.
President Mr president madam
governor Lujan Grisham the
Senate.
Senator of the state of New
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent that the Senate table
and definitely all bills
remaining on the president's
table on the counter or in
committee except the bills in
the Judiciary Committee for
consent that the Senate
adjourned seen any day.
Mr president I second that
emotion.
I thank you Mr president just
before we go to Senator Campos
for the no longer awards I just
like with Senator Stewart to say
working through COVID in a
session that quite frankly we
weren't sure was even going to
happen given the challenges but
I really appreciate the respect
job and so let's give on the
task of in a big hand.
let's give them a hand.
And just before I yield to the
ager mark felt as they help make
this place Galle so huge thanks
to them so let's give them a
hand.
And with that Mr president
but we can't do any of this with
these folks that we work with
our Legislative Council Service
included those working in the
building services our customer
legislative education study
committee Rachel federal that
deal on her incredible staff our
chief clerk and her staff
who is leaving on to copy room
and pay roll I don't know how
the nor does it Wheatley she's
are committee secretaries are
zoom life stirs we've got a new
title for keep our majority and
on with our wonderful office in
a blanket and even some clothes
Carmen Gonzales friend FLOTUS
Our members secretaries many
that are at home now are
majority minority communications
directors and staff both here
and at home our state police and
our National Guard members who
capitol.
So Mister president we've had an
extraordinary session even with
COVID it's been a rough session
to I want us myself included to
move forward less partisanship
will benefit all New Mexicans
let's do more of that not less.
We also need to move forward
with more sensitivity we've all
seen what's happened when we
Linda Lopez and our freshman for
going to provide some training
for everyone so they can
understand their actions and
lastly we must continue our
efforts to work differently we
pledge to have a more
together I look forward to
working with leaders Wirth and
backed him whips Lopez and
Brandt to find creative ways to
make our Senate more efficient.
he's done with grace and wisdom
and calmness and even though his
eyes were closed the last few
days because he was so tired
freshman on both sides such
incredible I notice but from the
Senate intelligence in the
Senate finance committee such
diversity they really opened our
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr president I'd like
not.
Mr president I cannot abide by
this law I like to drink through
a straw I'm a pretty amazing
president all all will all be
brief I know everybody's ready
to get out of here but I too
want to thank our staff here for
all the hard work you do the
many hours that you put in I
piles of material to to make a
a more informed body and to and
and give us insight into the
bills that were we're examining
officers we appreciate you so
much for keeping us safe thank
you the national guards members
that stood out there night and
day for us and make sure the
everyone of you of your
fantastic new class you bring
just such a just so much
intelligence and thoughtfulness
and all of your experiences with
working with our team and for
being able to communicate and I
think you know even when times
get stressful we're able to
maintain the decorum and we will
side senator Linda Lopez Senator
Peter Wirth and senator and
senator and madam pro tem Mimi
Stewart I want to thank also the
families the families of
time and it is a sacrifice but
we do good work here and Pete
and they count on us us so with
that.
I'd like to recognize our guests
from the house of
representatives Mr president
forward to our maybe a special
session but certainly the next
thirty days session thank you
all so much and thank you for
having us thank you
here all those in the gallery
all those I work late into the
night you know coming into the
session we didn't know what to
expect we didn't know how the
technology would hold that we
didn't know how we would have
Yet here we are.
As I had given you a token of
appreciation on St Patrick's day
on there and said that the
harder the let the harder you
general legislative session that
we no longer have to have the
masks or have the plexiglass SO
many ran into so many times.
to continue to service that we
never take that for granted but
that we also recognize.
That this legislative session
give us also an opportunity.
Aside from all the distractions
bond together as servants of the
state of New Mexico.
And it's often said that the
greater the challenge the
greater the reward and the
challenges have been great but I
TV safety travel home and with
that I yield to Senator Campos
our annual milagro recognitions.
As you all continue to go
forward just give everything
from your heart.
And the second thing especially
to those individuals that maybe
that there's not gonna be that
fear hesitation.
The milagro awards that were
started about thirty years ago.
And it just happened that I was
But along with that it's stuck
with each and everyone of us and
I'm just going to get started
but to let you know that
throughout the sixty days
whether it be by zoom or whether
would be here in the chamber.
It's with each and everyone of
you.
These awards are given because
of a lot of careful thought.
A lot of hard work.
They're hard to given to be nice
to give one to each and every
individual here but that doesn't
always happen.
Want to read through these and
Gosh the names not there but I'm
gonna read it anyway.
There are individuals who go
about their business quietly and
efficiently they master their
That work translates into how an
organization is managed and what
ultimate outcomes if all.
best and professionalism
accountability and transparency.
S. Montoya works endlessly
tirelessly and with the highest
level of of efficiency to ensure
qualified decisions that best
serve New Mexicans.
Senator Baca.
Okay we're moving on to the
second one.
Well trained highly educated
intellectual state senator.
Thanks on a routine basis.
He pursues excellence and all he
genuinely struggle to place food
on the table for their families.
It is not only about social
justice and opportunities in
life.
But also clean air in a better
one of Senator kind of ideas
most successful efforts to
improve our way of life.
Care for others and work toward
building and that's astounding.
And great opportunity for
everyone the question.
Ranching farming in the great
frontier.
Our health is New Mexican
traditions and landscapes that
staples such as fruits and
vegetables meats and potatoes
and.
Milk and cheese and the
nutrients that sustain us.
standard second to none.
State senator cliff R. Pirtle.
Is a quick study who is focused
on the well being of New Mexico
families.
single time year round gains
more support.
He is committed to ensuring that
our western lifestyle continues
so that we can feed our families
Ladies and gentleman Senator
Clifford.
hesitation shares what he has
with others.
His generosity laughter New
Mexico a smile proved to be
infectious while he addresses
the most pressing financial
colleagues bring to him.
He reaches out to help others
and tries to accommodate the
needs his colleagues have within
Talking on his cell phone with
state agency leaders and chair
in the Senate finance committee.
As his wife told him.
Ladies and gentlemen Mr
chairman.
May god bless you all be safe as
you travel home look forward to
seeing you hopefully soon.
