Uh, as funding sits, it's a
little. Going to the state
police aircraft, I wanted to ask
is.
A significant.
Um, there will be a significant
For for quick response versus
still having this existing
aircraft in play. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I
think it's a great question. So
currently what we've done is
started to assess like what can
we do without all the aircraft
and so a lot of components uh
expand the life of the aircraft
to arrive, so it'll be in
service for once we receive
funding for a new craft so it's
gonna take time for that to
build. And so there's gonna be a
period of time where that
aircraft um.
Potentially even with delay and
needed for a mission that would
need to be reduced some of these
discrepancies, and when the time
comes, uh, and if we do receive
funding we're requesting two
aircraft, one that do search and
rescue missions, you know they
can, that's a lighter, smaller
aircraft that can do flights uh.
New Mexico being a rural state
and and even even some counties
and supporting throughout the
state uh improvement requests
this morning and I'm no one
understands the facilities that
you have.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I wouldn't say that
there is a formal process in
place. I am that process, uh,
regularly to really identify and
prioritize myself, um, just
understanding production and so
it's helpful to understand, um,
and so what I do is I, and it is
almost a wish list, and by that,
you know, we're addressing is
not cooling our officers, that's
a priority that sets precedence
over, you know, lock set
upgrades and so um I'm, I'm
really tasked with that ensure
that we are.
Um
Keeping track came on to DPS.
What I did is we really
formulated and we said we're
gonna go across multiple
districts. We're gonna track
units because what we were
seeing is in the preventative
maintenance portion of it. And
so as we've gotten these new
It's staff at each of these
districts and so that's been
helping us because that's what
we saw is that we weren't doing
incidents from occurring. Some
you can't control, um, but
others we can, and so to to
speak to that is that's address
these needs in the future.
Is that preventative maintenance
mechanism to understand.
Recent are those cost testing?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we don't have
estimates for that particular 6
million which is currently
underway, that is to address our
law enforcement records bureau
from the design services. So
we're at both of those projects
for the headquarters, um, that
we've already secured funding
for. We are basing it off of
those costs. It's similar in
construction, uh we did um
anticipate there would be some
more remedial costs, uh,
considering it was a lab space,
and so that is why you have seen
the increase.
that at $750 150,000 dollars a
square foot for a new facility.
Uh, and so I'm just wondering
where you all received that
cough and if you can speak a
little bit to how that came
about.
Mr. Chair, members of Facilities
management division who were in
collaboration with really helps
sort of identify those costs.
Um, I can tell you just from
experience on our new District
one facility for state police
one for about $460 a square
foot. I think, you know, the
expectation here or the
anticipation is is that we're
gonna see um
some.
Some increasing costs, you know,
it's a generally it's a, it's an
administrative complex, um, but
what it will house is our
district district 5 state
police, um, that's currently off
of, off of Carlisle and so it's
not completely administrative,
it's also going to have a
dispatch center that's our call
center for communications and so
there are some detailed features
in there similar to the lab
space that we did see that, that
cost increase and so really to
answer your question, I think
it's, it's an, it's an
approximation, um, but that
isn't an app.
Approximation based on just DPS
understanding what other
projects they currently have on.
A.
Cool
Um,
Secretary, thank you.
Try
Um, OK, I have, um, and I'm
sorry, I just.
We're at just over 35%. We're
working through a change order
to continue. What sort of
current fun. I don't know that
it really free up any space per
se. It's just that typically of
doing square range drills,
that's what you're limited to,
and that's the gut field and so
having classroom curriculum and
then put that into an or, um,
and so really it's kind of use
the facility again for
de-escalation in a real world
scenario type of type situation
and so currently when you look
at all of the.
Agencies that we trained at the
LEA, but currently when you're
limited to the facilities that
are available.
You know, we would have to train
room entries, and there was no
facility built.
With the community have a good
relationship with them and we
would use homes under
construction in order to, to try
to do that, but you're still
limited to what you can do
inside those buildings because
someone's had the property
belongs to somebody.
And so a state ran facility, you
can uh.
We are on the inside of those
buildings and so it really is uh
the way law enforcement is going
and so currently we really don't
have any spaces in the LEA that
would duplicate that uh the
exception of one small we
currently have a um like a
simulator system of TV screen on
on a TV screen and that very
well could could move out there,
but.
Um, and, and so is that folded
into the tree.
Um, as the chair of members of
the committee.
As a result of being limited to
so many priorities it's
something that we still need, we
just can't
be glad to put it on there, but,
uh, to, to add to all
seriousness, that is still a
need that we have, we have an
old, an old training, uh, at our
LEA and Ultra driving track out
there they were gonna do the
dirt work. That's still very
much in need. It's just that,
um, you know, we only have.
You're, you know, the priorities
I think, you know, anything they
would do naturally and so we we
work with and so any situation
uh air support is required.
Eventually there's no
jurisdiction per se in in that
sense. It just really depends on
Absolutely really speak to that.
I think it is probably what
you're asking for. It really is
representative of how we, how
they fall off and then it shows
Secretary Troy, thank you so
much. Thank you very much. I
have 3 the training facility I
heard two numbers 65% done, 35%.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my apologies, we,
we have 3 active projects. One
is the reality-based training
facility, and then I've also got
two headquarters renovations.
The reality-based training
facility is 35% and our
headquarters reservation, um,
both are tracking at 65 65% were
design development, we're almost
at 100% CDs. So thank you for
that. Sorry for the
miscommunication, but thank you
for clarifying. Not a problem if
you could um.
In turn up I think till Friday.
Yeah, till next Friday, any, um,
indication that we request are
due by next Friday.
Um,
On the Metro project, um, one of
there's leases and some leases
are smaller. If I could get.
X are lies what the total would
be, um, that would be helpful to
me.
Just to have a general number
without knowing. Yeah, so the,
the impact that addresses it and
so currently, I mean, for every
year that we go without a metro
facility, we have a $270,000
fiscal. What I'm asking is how
long those leases are leases for
a year, there's leases for 10
years. I, I just need that, but
I, I'd be happy to send
something in, but we and so we
re-entered we were up for leader
uh landlords and so we need to,
does that answer your question,
sir.
And the last question I had is,
um.
Thank you for the pictures of
the facilities around, you've
seen it uptick in workers' comp.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, no, I, I can't speak
to that um.
Myself, just because they don't
report to me as an agency to
stand up a loss prevention,
address any of these issues that
may occur at our facilities, uh,
and that is actually one of our
priorities. I do a pretty just
to ensure that from a safety
standpoint we're addressing
them. I'm people that that enter
our facilities and it's, it's,
it's difficult to address some
of the, the carpet, uh, trip
hazards, right? And so that's
what our loss prevention.
Person will help facilitate and
assist us with with all of our
facilities that we maintain.
They'll use that resource, give
you detail.
This. Any other questions from
That space how much um.
So there are you you're
referencing our hero. I'm sorry,
it's the Albuquerque and other
state agency to utilize would be
available.
No, we have not for that
particular.
What we do have is to answer
your question, that is correct.
So the consolidation would be
for exact number we're sitting
on some decent square footage
for a facility, and so that
entire facility also considering
From a special appropriation to
ICIP.
I know that we were,
we did Silva has been completed.
So here and probably nod his
head. Perfect, thank you. Um,
and then final question, the
committee, we have not spent
last conference last week, week,
and so once we have those
proposals, um, then the
facilities management division
along with support of
department.
Um, have you guys?
Consider that more um, what, you
Facilities, uh, um, some of our
southern facilities like it's
in.
Partnered with architectural
Uh, really excited to see you
guys moving.
Um, just wanted to a lot
recently.
Um, for spending on these prior.
Um, and then.
I was that
What is that figure would offset
those needs that. Um,
and overall of how the capital
investments.
The last
Several years both from.
Any questions from the
committee?
Thank you for the presentation,
um.
Good to hear. Um, and this new
And that was trying to increase
the size of that water tank and
then the Columbus, um, it's
specifically just a village
projectonana County, this is.
Um, and then, um, my only other
question is on the, you know,
why these priorities, um.
Um, communities along the border
to present their priorities.
And bypass um was a priority for
the city of Damming because it's
something that they've.
Um, dealt with community. They
studied it in different ways and
for various reasons, um.
It's kind of stayed in a.
An ambiguous status and so the
the city of Damming and um a
next step and on and so the city
of Deming itself it forward and
I think make that decision so
the gas feasibility study.
It's, it continues to be an
issue, yeah.
Additionally, on the Mexico
sauce and so it's um.
and so as we see a lot of
activity in the Santa Teresa
area.
Running the gas line across the
Speak to who can own and process
so interested to hear, you know,
From New Mexico 11, the main
route would be along a city
street because right now the
trucks are going on city streets
and.
Yes
If that piece is missing, um.
Yeah, so essentially um size of
the development that they would
be evaluate um what types of
businesses are mentioned, you
know, the chilly season is, for
example, in the Columbus at the
size of maybe a production
facility tank.
You could still build something
with the existing water capacity
Um,
And so
You all to maybe just come up.
I just want to put you on the
hot seat.
I think they both have issues.
So I just wanted to introduce
them all cause I.
And um a planning bureau that
that's underneath this division.
So Scott with um Marian that
that we're gonna actually get
filled soon. I mentioned she's
the local entity ICIP, but we
will eventually hire us to come,
um, hopefully before the next I
see. Um, and again, the funding
navigation any projects on the
ICIP that you need funding, you
know, outside of this process,
um, or if they're not gonna have
to find other streams of
funding.
I just wanted to introduce them
so that everyone, everyone on
the committee knows about them
and I just wanted to say welcome
to all of you guys, um, you have
a lot of important work to do
and we're gonna accomplish and
help support you in getting
there. Um, congratulations,
Wesley, for before we move
forward with military affairs. I
know we're.
this is really nice to see and
projects.
Great.
Um, and then it, it is a
relationship, uh, sequencing so
that we'll
One year of federal funds. Best
case scenario when everything
our expectations be ones and
they start to be spent down and.
So far as like.
You know, are we gonna have
Facilities that kind of like
All right, so.
So it's like classroom versus.
OK.
Um, and.
Presentation good deceived.
Uh
at the same time it's as you're.
And then scheduling.
So there, uh, heavily.
Seeley,
um,
apparatus, um, and so that's
number 2.
Right, that was the last
