proud to be seeing those kinds
of things, colleagues and in in
that growth mode that we're in
our space limited in expend
those dollars, the legislature
has appropriated to us. So our
first capital outlay item that
we're seeking is that $14
million to, uh, and I guess I'm
on slide number 3 now.
Uh, is to.
Expand actually.
Expand our Albuquerque space,
but decrease our Albuquerque
footprint currently and as we
continue to, we want to
consolidate one and ideally we
would like to purchase a
environment department building.
And with the help of GSD and
that's really what this first
capital outlay item is is
working towards is to find a
placeolidated Albuquerque, um,
ideally in a state, but if not a
state building, then one that we
lease and that's about a 75,000
square foot footprint that we
when we recently did our rapid
hire, uh, where we took 60 some
positions, pretty much all of
them at this point between
Albuquerque and.
So our growth area, how many
positions we advertise in Santa
Fe, um, every employee seems to
want to migrate to as.
and it was literally a 12 to.
Currently we're paying about 3.1
million in leases, we think we
can leverage our, I'll just say
non-general fund meaning our
permit fees and the inbos to
offset any additional cost to
that $14 million.
Um, with that, I'm going to move
to our second item, uh.
Request to this could be an
expansion or addition to
existing labs that we have in
the state like SLD or even the
crime lab, but nonetheless, we
are, we are probably spending
about couple of years on
analytical services has
everything to do with PAs
emerging contaminants, lead and
copper, as well as the illicit
drug um testing program that we
stood up under an executive
order and also even out of state
to labs and everywhere from um
that's not only costing more.
More every year, but analytical
chemist and there's well, so we
become sort of beholden to the,
the private sector and
consultants to do that work. Um,
so we're looking to build a lab
in addition to that lab, what
we're also think of the concept
of a commissary kitchen where
someone could go in and and sort
of make their recipes. We'd also
like to embark on using citizen
science available to public
education and higher edges of
opportunities scholarship and
greater use of the um sort of
wrap-around.
Services that the governor and
my colleagues to build that stem
pipeline that I'm just going to
To
Expand what we're doing, um.
Thank you. Any questions for me?
OK
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So Mr.
Chair and.
Committee
Person of the
um, sorry, just trying to.
Keep it all straight here, uh.
SLD will effectively what it
amounts to goal base, it can
It's a total cost. I don't mean
to be squirrely about my answer,
um.
Can't resist, um.
Uh, my colleague, Deputy Cabinet
Secretary Roderick has.
So
That's surface water only.
Mm.
Agreement is significantly.
before you go, um, just to touch
on the Albuquerque space, um.
As as as the committee will be
hearing um tomorrow, DFA's
enforcement space in
Albuquerque, um, not just for
DFA, but for all state agencies,
so it might be this is gonna
have lab space in it too, so I
don't know cause um I think
having space in Albuquerque is
gonna be good for all. We can
stop leasing space for those who
live in Albuquerque, so,
To bring on additional staff
serve for the sampling.
Um, so Mr. Sharon Kelly, I, I
appreciate.
That question as well. So in our
20 fund 80% federal permit fees,
so we can stance like today we'd
be able to staff the last.
Um
Mr. Chair and Kelly, I would, I
believe it's uh somewhere in the
neighborhood of about square
feet, we would have a square
footage is in, I mean, I get lab
setting.
Um, you on a.
Uh
Mr. Chair and and Kelly and I
apologize. Is that OK? Thank
you. Um, don't want to build out
a space in associated with one
of our existing reasons and and
they either space limited or we
don't have a long enough lease
to make this work. In addition
to that.
The capital side of this for if
you will, like the bricks and
mortar and some of the
equipment.
Could be all our staff too, so
they're co-located, oftentimes
you're driving up and down I-25
with Sam City and just sort of
at interface needs to be as
We, uh, Mr. Chair and Kelly, we,
we pull locations throughout the
Miles
So even if we were, we put most
of our people in Albuquerque. It
wouldn't serve functional needs
in the bargaining unit to do
that, so we'll continue to sort
of see where our
Uh, operations make sense, and
right now it's Albuquerque
because that's the pool by which
we can get most people.
Um,
Our Santa Fe campus could
collapse a little bit. We have a
second state building that we're
going to occupy which will save
the department about 5000 others
in Santa Fe that we're paying
privately. Is that the highest
and best use of of.
Um, to Albert 16% of the
workforce from Santa Fe to other
places in the states to help
you.
Um,
Mr. Chair and telecommute are
hybrid work evidently lessen the
need we're 100% in the office
and in the office and we don't
give people the opportunity to
have.
2 offices if you're between
Santa Fe and Albuquerque. I
mean, even the govX team, but
given the fact that we've
converted most of our conference
rooms to.
Uh, spaces where people are
elbow to elbow right now. I, I
think some kind of flexibility
with pre and allow us to honor
the spell process because for
them.
And a seat
In that duty stage swimming
upstream with respect to the
state system.
Uh, about.
About 60 million in the hole.
It is.
Were expanding.
Uh
Extending our thing your team
for.
Uh, just a few months.
Yeah, and Mr. Ja and uh Gerald,
thank you, thank you for your
question and about our
assistance with a higher ed
institution. I was standing in
Roto so Rodoso who made, you
know, great decisions
throughout, uh.
Turned to me and said, opening
back up.
First for those restaurants to
be making water and all sorts of
things.
But they had taken the right
step with science behind us.
That that water was safe and
they made the right decisions
and we supported them in that
but but we again made the right
decision and, and, and allowed
that to continue, so
um see it being in Albuquerque,
more so than Santa Fe.
Uh, there are occasions where we
have to fly samples out, is to
do sample work locations where
we still have to fly samples
out, so having the lab preparing
those federal guidelines is
still an important role for us,
and time is of the essence of a
drive 25 is an ideal.
Um,
And I do think the lab can serve
as a.
Work with the higher education,
research institutions, it'd be
great to bring over UNM and New
Mexico Tech and be part of of
that.
Sort of the concept of a
teaching hospital, make it a
teaching lab. I don't know if
anybody else is doing that and
as I said earlier, uh, also
allowing public education and
public schools to come in and
use.
The facility so we could, we
could leverage citizen science
Arizona, Oregon, and many other
states are doing just that.
They're empowering their
And
Also, if the environmental.
So the, the Sykes Act is a stamp
We just have the two requests,
the 1.5.
It shows 0 in 2026, so I see
that now.
Probably so the ICIP. That's
all. I mean, it shows correctly
on the ICAP that you don't have
anything.
I got that we got.
All right, any questions from
the committee, Allie?
Um, director. Nice to see.
Unbalance for these funds are
So next up is Office of the
State Engineer.
OK, let's go ahead and
on, um, Office of the State.
Thank you.
Make sure you do. Um.
Members of the board, I um, I'm
Liz Anderson, I'm the new state
engineer. Um, I just wanted to
thank you for having this year
and um wanted to just highlight
that, you know.
A lot of these requests, um,
Statewide?
How, how would you, um, our
first one here is the
measurement and metering, so I
think that I, you know.
These are have been um rolling
out meters, you know.
For years now, um, but as water
supplies get more and more
stressed, um, sharing agreements
and, um, administration of
water, having meters in place
is.
Absolutely critical. So the
request that we have here.
are in alignment with what we've
asked.
And I would just. Sorry, I
probably shouldn't work, go, go
ahead.
And I'll just pass the rest off
to see Hanna.
Good morning. I'm working really
closely with the several items
and I'll do them fair.
Um, so the item number 2 on our
list this year is elephant Butte
Delta and river Channel
improvement. This is an items an
ongoing effort that the state
has essentially to clear the
sediment um at the upstream end
of low gradient sediment laden
river system, and that means
that the water enters the
reservoir, it drops sediment and
that sediment becomes an
obstacle to getting my item.
For New Mexico and Mexico and
Texas, um, we're actually
embarking this year on an effort
to realign that delta. So this
is a a critical need for the
state, um, for multiple
purposes, uh, item 3 on the list
is Reservoir Improvements.
That item is bumped up on our
list this year in anticipation
of the connection of eastern New
Mexican mission, and there's
some damn infrastructure
improvement initiatives, both in
terms of the infrastructure
itself and efforts to ensure the
continued recreation ability at
the reservoir and so that, that
I, um, the next item, item
number 4, statewide assea and
Community ditch improvements.
It's new in some ways for us to
have this on our ICIP list,
Interstate stream Commission
over
The past many, many years has uh
shepherded capital
appropriations for individual
saas. On average we receive uh
around 50 of those individual
appropriations a year totaling
around 4.5 million. We will
continue to do that, um, but
this effort is just in
recognition of the increasing um
and significant need in the
across the state in particular
related to post-fire flooding
events, um, and I'm pleased
partners.
At DFA and also New Mexicoseki
Associate Commission have been
convening regularly to try to
increase coordination across
those AKA infrastructure
projects, um, and as part of
that conversation, it made sense
to us to include this sort of
blanket appropriation in our
ICIP list that could be utilized
in a very responsive way, give
us some agility in terms of how
we get the funding out to uh see
your projects across the state.
Um, and we would do that again
in a
Coordinated way with with those
other parties, so working NMAA
and NMAC, um, and so, yeah, 5
million there, uh, will go a
long way, um, and we recognize
that the need is really
significant across the state and
we'll continue to partner with
those in those entities to
address that need.
Um, and then just quickly the
last couple things here. Number
5, maintain rivers, restore
habitat and flood control.
Uh, as we see the impacts of
climate change were increasing
river channels for both uh river
conveyance purposes. We've been
pretty involved this year with a
sediment plug up on the Chama
River, um, but also to, to be
thoughtful in restoring habitat.
And so this request enables us
to address those needs and work
with both state and federal
partners across the state to get
that funding on the ground and
again, not unlike the elephant
but Delta Chanel work really is
critical for ensuring water.
Supply use our green
infrastructure, so our river
systems, to get that water where
it needs to go.
And then briefly on the last
two, so number 6 strategic Water
Reserve acquisitions were
continuing to acquire water for
the strategic water reserve,
which I think you want to
purchase or lease water for
flows for both compact
compliance and species purposes.
And then last, we don't actually
have a request this year for Low
Rio Grande aquifer, a
sustainability because we
received 300 million in capital
in the 2023 session, we're
working actively to expand that.
We anticipate future.
Request in subsequent years
related to that, but this year
we're working well with what
we've received. And I think with
that all all break and just see
if there's any questions and
thank you so much for your
attention today.
Questions from the committee.
You're, you're right there is,
OK, um, thanks and you know if
you guys have follow up over the
next like 6 weeks on how you
might get it full to us and
again, I'm not.
Um,
And
How that absolutely needs to
start and get done.
Uh, thanks Kelly for that
question. Um, and in fact, uh,
state engineer Anderson and I
need to talk through through
timeline, they are moving
expeditiously, I would say
they're, they're saying they're
ahead of schedule and under
budget, which seems impossible.
Um, you know, connection of that
pipeline to the reservoir and
actual withdrawals or are
several years out, um, but that
isn't for in our perspective,
that's a reason for us to get
moving on the work that's
needed. Um, we've been engaging
with a number of
Contractors to help inform
interstate stream commission
about the various options for
the dam infrastructure
improvements themselves, um,
scoping and engineering design,
construction of those will all
take, um, you know, a couple of
years potentially.
A good chunk of the time frame
of this this appropriation. Um,
and also I should say we may, as
it reflects here, be needing to
come back for more for those
purposes and so I think our
intention at Interstate stream
commission is to not get behind
that eight ball, but really get
out there and do that work soon.
Similarly, um, when it comes to
shoreline improvement efforts,
you know, that reservoir serves
critical recreational needs, and
I think we're very much thinking
and and talking with our
partners about how to.
With state parks, who manages
the park there, um, and really
engage the local community to
inform what that needs to look
like, and I think that will be a
multi-year process as well. Um,
so I don't actually know and
maybe Liz remembers their
timeline for being fully
connected, I think it's still
like 7 years out or something.
Um, but I think we're wanting to
move on those things sooner
rather than later, and then the
last piece that's worth
mentioning is we're balancing
Multiple needs out there.
There's actually 2 listed
endangered species on the
Canadian downstream of Ute
Reservoir. One is the Arkansas
River Shiner is listed many
years ago. Um, and then also
there's a PE 2 years ago or 2,
about 2 years ago, um, and those
species may need certain needs
of flow in this in the stream
downstream of you, um, that we
don't have the capacity to
deliver right now. So part of
what we're looking at in uh
addressing the infrastructure
needs is the ability to have.
That works that have a wide
range so that we can respond to
potential requirements there,
um, and also get out in front of
those ESA requirements, you
know, causing other problems for
water supply needs in that part
of the basin and so that's all
part of the mix in talking to
staff, we felt like 1 million
was what we needed to get, get
the work whether or not I have a
little bit less certainty about
what we'd come back to with a
request next session. Um, but
that, that fault, um, cause I, I
had asked the same question of
staff like.
Should we ask for more upfront.
That felt the like the right
amount right now. Um, and then
we'll have a better handle on
what we need once we're getting
closer to flood control.
Um,
Where are we at in the process
of Thanks for that.
Um, and I would say that item is
uh.
Framed statewide, but we
anticipate the bulk of that work
will happen in the Rio Grande.
Um, and the ability to have that
funding absolutely comes into
play in leveraging federal
funding as a think you all know,
uh, we've received significant
IRA chunks of money. In fact,
New Mexico was the first, um.
Outside of the Colorado River
basin to receive IRA funding um
for drought mitigation efforts
and that was that 60 million
that was received for the lower
Rio Grande. We also in the last
year received 5 million from
middle Rio Grande efforts also
of, of IRA money, different
things at play.
Um, so this money helps
certainly match and leverage
that money. Um, also this money
could be useful in working with
uh Army Corps of Engineers to
leverage there's about $300
million in the middle of Rio
Grande that will require
matching funding, um, so this
funding and the way that it's
framed in the request certainly
allows us to leverage, use that
to match and leverage the
federal funding also gives us
sort of the right amount of
flexibility to bring it to bear,
um, in the most appropriate
ways.
There's big projects moving
department of uh interior was
through Bureau of Reclamation is
working in the Lower Santa Casa
reach of the Rio Grande, so the
reach right above um Elephant
Butte Reservoir. We intend to
support that project, um, and
our active partners in it. And
then I would also say that this
money we've really been looking
at.
How do we partner with the
federal government.
To to bring as much benefit as
possible in our river system.
Too close.
Me?
OK, great. Um, uh, uh, how do we
bring this money to bear with
our federal partners, but then
also, um, in the river reaches
where those projects aren't
moving, how do we have a little
bit more entered into a
cooperative extract so that we
can also use some of this money
to partner with them in a way
Um, and then I was that's not on
me for Capitol.
Um, for, um, where are you guys
at with?
To do both.
But I think it would be.
Any other questions from the
question?
Um, actually, one is more of a
comment, um, right, and it's
kind of going back to the
surface Cali knows this too, you
have, you do spend your money,
right? There's no reversions.
That that's good and that you
that you do spend the money. I
think, I think by.
Only allowing funding for one
year could potentially just
comment, kind of a comment on
that, I think. Um, I, I know
what she's saying, I, I get. I'm
having, having that extra time
to go, um, just wanted to
comment on that and commend you
for spending the money that you
do receive. Amount might be
caliber.
Thank you for that question. Um,
I guess I would say, uh, in
general, particularly coming out
of that, um, water and then the
work around the governor's 50
year a lot more opportunities
for us to communicate and
coordinate across the YSE and
ISE than we did just a few years
ago, um, a lot of that has more
to do with some of the mention
than necessarily the Asaka work
necessarily, but there are.
Um, certain project and we're
really pleased to see that.
And also with our fed with
federal agencies, so, um, and
Jonathan Martinez, who's our
scia bureau managers here, uh,
Army Corps of Engineers through
cost share programs to use that
funding.
Um, in that arena. Uh, thank
you, um, I think the only other,
the only other question I had
was I know um the dams, um, and
you had mentioned having
counties, um, I think it might
be best for it to flow through
local government division or
DFA, um, so we could probably
have further discussions about
that cause I think as being the
Um, so having that flexi one
more before I go to, um, just
wanted to touch on the executive
state line on.
Where we're at. So we've had, we
had 5,050,000 all of it has been
issued, all the grants have been
issued, so we have um a
pre-encumbrance of um of the
whole $5 million only 154,000
has been expended to date, but I
know that they're working on it,
um, again, is a secular projects
as they keep going. I know that
they received 5 the needs for
the execus are, are great, um,
greater than the 5 million is
still a good start to continue
that, that progression of trying
to get all these.
So I see every year on each of
these particulars.
Instead of $1000. 10. Thank you
for that question. Um.
Great question. I think on some
of these items, there are
certainly capacity limitations
at the state, although we got
such uh legislative session for
staffing, which is gonna go a
long way for us, um, but also
capacity, thinking about the
Asian, we see the need is far
greater than the request here,
um, and also we need to develop
systems to to support the
funding, and I think that's
where we, I think you all know,
created in the last couple way
that that group is good kind of
funding.
Um, on some of the other items
like the river, the potential,
um, and in the 23 session, I
think I meant for
sustainability. It looks like
Mac particularly if there's arer
asks, um, and look for a 26, we
Any other questions for me?
So I think next we have um
scheduled a break, but I know we
took them if it's OK with energy
and minerals on spaceport is
A 367 um want to make this
comment. These are always nice
to have. We're also trying to go
paperless in the um.
Again, it's always nice to have
all the paper.
It's not.
Mr. Chair, should I start?
OK.
So my name is Scott McLaughlin.
I'm the Mexico Spaceport
Authority. I'm here with Rod
McGilvery. He is, um, our new
capital projects manager, which
we, um we asked the legislator
to finally be able to come here
and talk to all our capital
projects. So I, I did a quick
presentation. I'm gonna go
really fast, but at least you
have the information if you'd
like to.
So, uh, on page 4, here are some
of the activities that happened
over the last year a pretty
active spaceport. A lot of we
did just, for example, we did a
launch with up Aerospace just a
couple weeks ago. Well, they did
a launch a year and a half ago
very well, so this time they
said they didn't want anybody
there well they had a very
successfuls on the client, what
we're able to talk about, we can
always talk about it later.
Everybody's probably very
interested about Virgin Glas
real quick, uh, where they're
at, who brand new spaceships
that are spun. These are kind of
a next generation space 3 weeks.
Um, and I'll talk more about
what happens with those plans,
um, sometime in early 2020.
Um, on page 6, they did also
announce a, um, what you're
looking at at the top of the
page is east and the runway is
there, so on the left um
negotiating with, this is a
launch hanger that they're
building with their own money,
show you where that was they're,
they're potentially taking
options to build 2 more. Hage 7
Um, the Thunderbirds we.
We do have a cell phone tower
now, uh, that was about to, we
were, we're gonna ask the power
themselves as part of that, we
also use some of the, our
capital improvement talk about
to the public over in FD.
We held the space next year.
We have one for those who've
been out there, we have one
fabric hanger.
That's least about 95% of the
time.
We're with other funds capital
improvement funds were building
this the type of customers we
On page. Yeah, sure. So this is
a, this has been on our list um.
There were two separate, uh,
space we have uh stem area, um,
but of course, COVID kind of,
uh, so what we were able to do
is, uh, we the the design you
see but we were able to go to
our taxons but if there's excess
pledged revenue from um.
That, so that brings us up to 18
million, but our assessment of
the all the other space we have
is, is act and also was leasable
So the
Yeah, so 27, where we have the
list of cooperative with what
we've already presented is
happening is the federal
government is finally site like
Spaceport America, there's very
that uh part of that for us is
that we're all sewing capsule,
Just skipping ahead a little
bit, uh, just wanted to show
That that
Mr. chair if I may say that part
of what we're trying to do is
balance.
hangar we can generate revenue
have this balance, um, the way I
partner so we've got those
things that are asking, and then
we have uh it's site ready, you
know, get, get a building built
so we can get it, you know, a
spec building built basically so
that balance. Um, we, we respect
the prerogative of the
committee, of course, we're not,
I don't feel like we're over
asking and um, you know, we're
trying to build this.
We're just doing it as fast as
we can tize the start building
which we put last part of the
Capital manager now too.
Um
This chair, um.
Thank you for the question. Um,
Spalding and and the and the
replacement of the runway so
And passengers. So that's one
about how like you said, how to,
how to then at the same time,
that's why we went to the tax
district, so the local two
counties funded us to 13 to put
new roads and electricity, so I
don't know how to exact if
there's a big enough customer
that structure, but if the
smaller customers at that, I
think.
To answer your question is kind
of an impossible thing, right?
We're always trying to to
balance that.
Tenants pretty soon, we hope
that.
OK.
Um. That we you said twice a
week.
So right now we're in
negotiations for the and that
hanger should be complete
sometime in 2025 them up just
with the pilots.
Um, so sometime in mid 2020 and
then twice a week so about,
about so I, I put a link in
there to and but at that point
we should be seeing two flights
a week.
6 passengers, number of
employees at Virgin Galactic
will have will probably start
creeping back up to where it
was.
So it will be a lot of activity.
Um, and then.
Part of the reason I put the
slide in, so it used to be if
We're getting to the point where
quite literally spaces to
launch. The other place
providers are looking more for
inland may sound a little bit
crazy, but that will happen.
Now, what will happen is we
build the facilities, but there
are other spaces, but uh just to
give you an example, you know,
the, the, if that, if a
hurricane had hit the Cape
instead of where words and
that's unacceptable, for
example, so they're very
excited, so what I think we're
like us, we've we've been trying
to get viable if you can launch
from the Cape and you can launch
over water and your rocket does.
need to be launch over but the
market is, so that's part of
what we're aiming at. We think
we're in a very good spot, um,
the backbone.
Before you go, um, I am
concerned with that one that
that ZC project is very old
project.
I think that that one is the
That's good to know. So.
I know you together, if if we do
end up find the current project
that you have that's $10,000 to
fund rather not reauthorize that
Thank you, and I think that's
the kind of try to get that
funding on and. Ah, thank you
for the presentation. Thank you
Uh
Mr. Chair and members of the
This request is for $8,000,000.
So we have a lease right now.
Um,
The response program from uh
where it's Patty.
Thank you.
The articulating this is pretty
important located. This is also
a key location for us because
this is where we basically be
staged and dispatched out of
this facility the last few years
about our hot shop facilities,
this official location and this
Uh, specific state funds. This
is sort of the most flexible
Foresters team uses this as a
knowledge on this.
Uh, I believe our 4. certainly
the governor has.
An experience that's uh ADA
compliance this summer.
This is our facilities buildings
around the state forestry
offices all over.
Will not see
We have used those historically.
Require a CDL.
Sort of support on this slide
Um
Secretary Silva, we also have
were or are.
See
I if you, if you specifically.
That way you can see.
I'm trying to, if you can buy.
All the time I can get it to her
either way.
Right, uh, energy, minerals,
natural resources, I think you
guys are probably still up next
um for the.
Mexico Highlands University and
slide, um, it's presenting this
to you.
Um, I'm gonna start with the
why.
Um,
We all know that our state has
been experiencing incredible
wildfires, 1 million acres
burned, you add to that the.
The preceding years of wildfire.
We have an incredible backlog,
allow for adaptation of.
Be able to survive.
And uh we really appreciate time
to present this because in years
in the last two budget cycles,
um, we didn't go about it and
so, um, while the effort is.
Uh, Emner decided this year to
put in the request and follow
the proper process and I'm sure
that'll come up as you ask us
some questions.
Um, we have been abandoned the
capital that was provided.
Previously
Uh, but the good news with that
is that we were able to leverage
18.5 million of cap to this
actually, it's not all capital.
Some of it's special, that's one
of the issues, uh, but, but
regardless, the total amount of
18.5, we've been able to more
than double that with
commitments and actual funding
transfers from the US Department
of Agriculture so that we now
have um.
Uh, a reasonable amount of
funding to get this with that,
I'm going to turn it on to talk
about our reforestation. Thanks,
Laura.
And thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee for.
You know, inviting us here to
discuss this with us, with you
today.
So when we mentioned the
reforestation pipeline.
Uh, so when we're talking about
talking about a whole series of
infrastructure and programs
necessary.
To successfully reforest in
areas in the reforestation
pipeline. We start with seed.
And that is often a hidden kind
of missed piece behind the
scenes. The piece that is
typically much more and that's
kind of the, the anchor, and
that's where most of the
infrastructure cost lies. And
then, of course, after the
nursery come the planting
operator.
And we're in a good position in
New Mexico and that we actually
have more expertise than most
states.
or experience where we are
lacking and where our most
significant gaps are lie in the
infrastructure pieces, and
that's primarily in the nursery
infrastructure, the State Forest
action plan as, as you probably
know, calls for a new facility
capable of producing 5 million
seedlings per year. It's
reforestation needs which are
substantial.
Um, just estimates for the
seedling needs to to reforest
just the post-fire backlog in
New Mexico range from about 150
million to about 390 million
seedlings.
Um, so even with the new 5
million seedling capacity a year
or nursery rather that would
take us a bit to catch up on
that, but that would.
And then associated with that
nursery infrastructure is the
gap on the seed side.
Because of 5 million seedling
capacity nursery, of course,
needs a seed supply.
Capable of supporting that
nursery to grow those seedlings,
uh, many people are, are not
necessarily aware that the seed
is often wild collected.
And so we train and deploy
climbers to go out and collect
that seed, bring it back to what
we call an extractory.
Which is a facility to remove
the seed from the cones.
Process that, clean it, put it
into storage until the nursery
calls for it, um, just so in in
that facility and and so the
nursery and then the seed side
funds kind of what the state of
things is um.
It allows the US Forest Service
to collaborate and be completed
We are curtains uh where the
Reduce our seedling production
capacity.
And.
Provide $70 million.
Construct the greenhouse
capacity.
Um,
We would be notified about that
funding.
By now?
Uh, the deadline for claims
against the 4 billion.
To know December till we turned
With that, Mr. Chair, we stand
thank you all for the update and
for the one.
At least Laura was part of just
a week ago that you did for
Connor and I.
Um,
So, um, you know, this is an
important project and what.
Um,
More of a comment.
Um,
And
Given that, I guess, and that,
you know, the state's interest
in construction.
Um, with the funding you have.
You know, I, I feel like our
preference.
Again, sort of like if we can.
If we cannot delay the project.
The sort of additional funds.
Um,
And you know, I also realized
the timeline could be.
Um, but, you know, uh, maybe
this is sort of a question like
you're, you're pretty early
started.
Um, it's the money you have.
Design
Put a bit out for construction
with maybe bit lots in a phased
approach.
Um, and that if we did wait to
see what happened, you know, you
might be able to come back for
next year as opposed to this
year with that.
So anticipate further growing
that.
Uh, but right now, also, um, we
are, we are preparing to just
move that answer. Yes, but one
and maybe Gerald can comment on
this. Is that an NMSU policy on
the design that, that's not a
state policy. So you could
design.
I know NMSU has particular ways
that goes about this, but this
is not just an NMSU project and
there's not a law that limits
you from.
Doing design for the full
project and then.
Putting a bit out with bid lots
to something you have
construction wise.
Uh, within the design that you
have. So I, you know, my
encouragement.
would be and you know we can
have additional if if it is an
NMSU issue, um.
NMSU folks about this, but you
know, I would encourage you to
design what you want
construction in a phased
approach based on, you know,
allow us to.
You know, my ex that like.
You could definitely proceed
with starting to building it up,
build it out with the money you
have and that we probably could
approach our um without setting
you back, um, but.
Uh, on this project and I'm
excited to see where, where
we're at.
To address a very serious
Really interested in this
facility now they could all
utilize this produce these
ceilings that we need for the
state of, you know, we haven't
heard of this.
Thank you. Just to respond to
that, um.
Currently
Um, both of which.
Arizona and Utah.
This program and uh talking
about the design, the momentum,
the direction coming on and that
Sierra Pacific and uh
California.
He um
I think while we wait for FEMA
to talk about you, and you may
have already been doing this
federal funding sources outside
of FEMA, and I think, um, I
encourage you to do is work with
my team. I'm here, um, our
infrastructure divisions, um, we
also have a matching fund
potentially help provide the
match for this, um, currently, I
think uh we do have exceptions
to our policy and so obviously
if there's something that to
meet those requirements, so, um,
work with them, um, and, and see
what we this funding process,
FEMA's funding process, let's
try to find whatever we can.
Stewart, I'm the deputy
Look for ways to reduce
operational costs by making our
facilities more efficient.
So the, the way it works in
