but nonetheless we're. Today,
uh, I'd like to.
Just to give you a brief
overview, uh, of what we've
asked for. We've asked for 2
projects this year.
The first one is our annual.
A requisition, a request for
capital to support the basic
operations, uh, we have 6 active
steam locomotives. We have about
passenger cars that support the
carrying of our guests. We've
got 64 miles of road and
included within that are
numerous bridges, tunnels.
Structures of various types,
water tanks, all of this.
It's all vintage.
1925 or like.
Our annual request is
essentially for 1.275 million,
that's exactly what we asked for
last year.
You think that along with what
we expect to get from Colorado,
will enable us to keep going and
do the things we have to do.
I would be happy to entertain
any specific questions, but
essentially we use that to do
the capital maintenance on the
railroad.
Do the necessary regulatory
requirements to support the
rolling stock, particularly the
steam locomotives, they're very
fussy.
Uh
It takes a lot to keep his
Marvin and his people are the
ones that do it. I wrote he's
the guy that spends the money.
That absolutely folks from here
and from Colorado provide us to
do the capital maintenance work
that's necessary to keep he's,
he's our, our fountain of
wisdom.
But I, what I'd like to do is,
is focus a little more on the
second project that we're asking
for.
This one is is is a one of a
kind, we hope.
Um, it's to do some significant
repair to a drainage system.
That is uh important when, when
we run in the mountains, we've
got all kinds of water courses,
water, water runs downhill and
um it it doesn't run all the
time, but in the spring when the
when the.
Spring runoff happens or during
the summer monsoon season when
we have heavy storms, these
watercourses can carry an awful
lot of water.
What I've got in front of you
now is a little bit of a
handout.
Always nice to talk with
pictures, but basically, the
railroad when it was built.
Consisted of a right of way and
at the time it was cheaper and
easier to build wooden trestles.
And the wooden trestles are what
supported the railroad when it
crossed these these water
courses.
And uh as time went on, uh, they
became increasingly expensive to
maintain the wood and so forth,
the materials became scarce
because they've been logged out.
Uh, so the railroad embarked
upon a program to fill them in.
And uh if you I'll start with
the back picture. The back
picture was a a.
One of our friends found.
It's, it's undated, but uh from
where we can tell from the
record, it's about the mid
1930s.
And what you see there is the
process of what happened. The
wooden trestles that were set up
to.
And these water courses.
And support the railroad for
aging, but rather than uh than
uh do something and replace them
with other more modern trestles,
the railroad chose to fill them
in.
And when they did so, they just
brought dirt in and they
provided large.
Uh, cult-like structures to
carry the water during these
periods of of runoff and and
storm system.
Activity.
But what we wound up with is a
big fill.
Uh, if you look at the at the
colored pictures, you get a
little better, better look at
what it's like, uh, this
particular one is located at uh
one of the water courses called
Long Creek. Uh, it's a long
fill, it's about 700 ft long.
Uh, you can see there's a lot of
dirt there. If you, if you look
at the first picture in here it
shows the train on top of it.
Um, so it gives you a sort of a
sense of scale. The two large
cult-like structures that are
under it are actually or time,
uh, and I guess it's not too bad
when you consider it's been
about 90 years since this was
done, uh, one of these
particular culverts is, is
starting to fail, and it's
failing fairly rapidly and not
only that, as you can see the
process where they bring the
dirt in some of the compaction
and things that they do nowadays
was not being done. So the
ground itself is failing as
well, so we're, we have a
dilemma. Uh, we've got to fix
this or we're gonna.
have a broken railroad. We uh.
Well, it's, it's almost at the
middle of the railroad. It's in
a very remote area.
Uh, everything we do out there
is going to require extensive
mobilization to do it. We'll be
supporting it both with a heavy
heavy.
Impact from a contractor who
specializes in this but we'll be
supporting it as well and
everything will have to come in
by rail. There's no, no highway,
no roads or anything nearby.
What we're asking for is
essentially the funding to.
Support the repair of this this
particular drainage structure.
Uh, this is, we looked at a
number of options and we feel
this is probably the the most uh
cost effective way of doing it,
it should add at least another
75 or more years to the life of
the structure.
And uh we're seeking your help
today to to support this
particular project. That's the
background on it. I don't, I
don't I.
I'm a technical guy by nature, I
tend to get in the weeds
sometimes with so I don't want
to get into that uh and and bog
down the the discussion, but if
you do have questions about what
we're planning to do and why
we're planning.
Thank you, thank you for the
presentation.
Questions.
And
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much for the presentation.
Um, regarding.
The project that you're talking
about regarding the culverts and
things like that.
Um, did you do some sort of an
assessment or engineering, uh,
some sort of infrastructure
analysis to determine what the
needs are and how much it's
gonna cost and.
Um, I know you're talking about,
um, maybe some deteriorating,
but not quite sure exactly what
that entails, the magnitude and.
Uh, that's an excellent
question, and it actually ties
together with the uh regular
part of what we're required to
do by federal mandate is to
maintain what is known as a
bridge program.
And the bridge program requires
us to have an engineering
assessment done each year of all
of our bridge-like structures.
And, uh, on a railroad like
ours, we've we've got everything
running from a Sca trestle,
which is 400 ft long and 130 ft
high, it literally dozens and
dozens of culverts of various
types.
And we have a professional
engineering firm that comes
through and assesses these and
that's what brought this to our
attention that we needed help.
And they've they've helped us
with the, the design of what is
probably the most effective way
of dealing with the issue. So
this has all been done with the
assistance of professional.
Thank you Mr. Chair. If you
could provide that study, that
would be really helpful.
Any questions
Hi.
Thank you.
You for the presentation.
Um, I know you guys were dealing
with some.
Remember if it was supply issues
or cost increases or maybe both
with some of your just basics. I
think it was some of the
railroad ties and stuff like
that.
Um,
How has that sort of evened out
or did the prices get?
stuck at that high level and how
has that affected you?
That's essentially has been a
significant problem in this post
translation and to answer your
question, yes, uh, it is leveled
out some, but unfortunately it's
leveled out at a new level.
That's why we've asked for a bit
more than we've asked for in the
past, uh, a couple of years ago,
however, we do think that uh by
asking for the same amount that
we did last year, it's an
appropriate amount that
operation is going to support
the capital maintenance.
OK, um, and what's the status of
the um transition to uh and any
additional plans for that going
forward. Thank, thank you for
that question. It's an emotional
one with a railroad like ours
because it has such such a.
Broad historical roots.
Uh, yes, we are, we are in the
process of acquiring a a road.
But our transition is not to
dieselize the railroad, it's to
maintain the historic steam
locomotive fleet that we have.
That's our, that's going to
continue. We have uh.
Converted two of the historic
engines to burn oil rather than
coal, and this was done for
essentially fire protection,
fire mitigation we can operate.
More confidently in periods when
it's, it's very dry or
conditions uh make it a little.
Um, I rode the train last
weekend with my family and it
was lovely and it was
interesting cause we went up
with the oil or diesel one, or
is it the same oil in the it's a
steam locomotive, but it's
powered or it gets its energy
from oil rather than coal, so we
went up with that one and down
with the coal one.
And um.
Some of the docents, you know,
spoke to the emotional issue,
but.
I also thought that diesel was
quite.
I'll, I'll, I would, I would
refer you to Marvin, he's the
one that has to maintain both of
them. I think they're pros and
cons for either type.
Uh, the, the, the big railroad,
the glass ones that were
operating the steam locomotives
powered by coal or oil for many,
many years, and they were both
very effective means of.
Any other questions from the
committee to answer?
Just wanted to see if I could
get a status update on the cost
over grants.
Cost overruns grant that you
were issued is for 374,000. Is
that fully encumbered? Yes.
Uh, how much has been expended
on that so far? We would have to
get the exact number, but I
would say about. Would you be
able to email me the exact
amount that's been expended so
far?
Thank you.
Any other question? Only one I
have is, I think in years past
we, we got a breakdown of what
um you were receiving from
Colorado versus what you're
receiving from New Mexico, you
still have that breakdown, is
there a way to get a copy of
that from you? asked the same
question, yes, we, we'd be
happy. In fact, we recently
tabled the shows.
The last done what
Interestingly
Both states have been very
supportive, I think at this
point Mexico is a little bit
ahead like.
So for, for everyone in the
audience and and on a webcast,
uh spaceport, um, already
presented this morning and so
we're waiting for um Mexico
State Fair to arrive and so
we'll reconvene at 1:30.
So, we'll get started, um, this
will be export to Mexico and we
are webcasting, so make sure you
put on the green lights and.
The microphone.
Well
Yeah, yeah, because one thing
probably do this without the
green light. All right. First of
all, thank you very much.
Appreciate, uh.
Members of the committee, thank
you for letting me be here and
talk about Expo New Mexico and
this Mexico State Fair are
capital outlay projects. First
of all, I wanna be.
Thank you
for the historic support that
you've been able to give uh the
fair and expo to Mexico the past
few years. It's a, we've done a
lot of work and I've made a lot
of progress on a facility that's
236 acres, right, smack dab in
the middle of it, of
Albuquerque.
And understanding the age of the
facility.
Um,
So we're very proud of what
we've been able to accomplish.
Uh, I'm not sure, did you guys
get our
A presentation. OK, great.
I want to make sure
Um,
Try to rifle through this as
fast as I can. Um,
First of all, um,
You know, we've been able to
accomplish a lot last year. Uh,
we have a lot of great ongoing
projects. Uh, first of all,
number one is IT. The IT
upgrades that we've been able to
make, uh, an Expo to Mexico have
allowed us to be a first of all,
competitive in the market, but
also allowed us to instill
install the uh safety measures
necessary for a facility such as
uh Expo in Mexico. So again, um,
You know, this investment is
going far and when we talked
about master planning the
fairgrounds going forward, uh,
which is we're very much in line
on doing that. Um, that
infrastructure that we are
investing in is critically
important uh for not only, you
know, having something in there
for a developer to come in and
do things with, it lowers the
cost to them as well as to the
taxpayer. Uh, so again, uh,
Until that master plan is done
and there's actually
construction, we still need to
maintain that facility. Uh, you
can see that uh we are
requesting at this point in time
18 million in our total ICIP
with 12 million in our top three
requests, uh, is what we're
reporting for this year and so
this year, what we're doing
right now on November 10th will
be uh taking Tingly offline and
putting new seating in, uh, that
seating is gonna be critical
going.
For because no matter if we
decide if there's a decision to
make a new arena, build a new
arena, whatever. That green is
going nowhere, and the reason
why is that uh we have a lot of
shows other than the big
concerts, you know, that we we
have during fair or uh you know,
El John or boxing like that, we
have things called Spirit of
Hope, which is a cheerleading
thing, but they bring about 3000
people. Will they be able to
afford to be able or even find
the dates in the new arena?
Probably not. So with that, we
want to make sure
Sure and maintain that, and we
have been making upgrades over
the years to that seeing is a
critical part. Apparently back
in 1980 when they put the last
city in and people were a lot
thinner and uh but I don't
qualify to sit in those seats.
So we're gonna make sure that
they're, they're built in
today's standards, if you will,
uh, and you have a photograph,
if you look, uh, on our
presentation, you'll see the
tingly seating proposed. Uh,
that is Utah State Arena, and
what I'm giving you is an
example of what the scheme of
what the seating will look like.
It's a mosaic pattern, and the
reason that we're doing this is
that if you don't have a full
house and not every seat sold
out, it doesn't look like.
From the television camera that
it's full and this was taken
from uh actually an architect in
Japan for the Olympics during
the pandemic and wanted to make
sure things look full. So this
is where we're going and again
that project is, is gonna be
online and should be completed
by the end of January 1st of
February, so we won't lose out
on some of our big shows, you
know, perhaps Keith Urban and
Katy Perry, but I'm not saying
it may not happen.
Going it it'll happen. Um, but
you know the cost of of
construction and projects and
obviously has gone up the cost
of doing business and uh
construction is no stranger to
that. Um, you know, we are
looking at building in uh
emergency operations center on
campus that is still on target.
We're ready to do that as well
in the current appropriation.
Uh, I think, you know, looking
at the fair this year, I'm proud
to say that this is still the
absolute safest fare in the
country.
And I not because I said so
because the statistics prove
that when you can have an event
where you have 518,000 people
come through in 11 days and you
have 1
misdemeanor arrest, and that's
just people being knuckleheads,
uh.
That's an incredible feat, you
know, and especially in the
neighborhood that we reside in.
So, uh, we're looking to make
sure that a lot of that's
attributed to the camera systems
and I wanna think do it uh for
their assistance and help that
they've been a big part of what
uh we've been travel to do with
this system and tying it in with
the real-time crime center, uh,
in City of Albuquerque and BCSO
state police, everybody will
have access to that. We not only
camera the interior, but we've
been camera the exterior of the.
Campus, which gives us an
opportunity to see what's going
on before it becomes a problem,
um, but, uh, that's just a
little bit of of it, and then
again we're still, when we make
improvements, uh, we're still a
victim of, of poor construction
from the past, uh, doing
projects and not doing them the
right way, uh, and, uh, you can
see this is a one picture of
Viaspana that we've had to redo,
uh, they just laid concrete on
top of concrete and didn't do
the electrical properly. So when
we do these things, we make sure
that we make and do it.
Uh,
another project we did was, uh,
our gate 8, which is the gate,
uh, entrance gate on Louisiana
and Lomas.
We upgraded the infrastructure
out there. When I told my IT
guys, I'm not the IT guy, but I
do know that I want Costco
processing speeds with credit
cards. So that's what I
requested and that's what we've
been able to achieve with this
new uh uh uh upgrade at that
that gate, plus it's also
professional and there's a
restroom now involved, uh,
making it a little bit more of
an attractive facility. Uh, this
wine bar, we don't want to ever
forget about it, we're still a
livestock, agricultural fair,
and uh we have many
shows and a lot of livestock
shows during the year. And so we
want to make sure we're keeping
up with those uh uh facilities,
the swine barn is a very
important, um, facility that we
put in a lot of money to
renovate and uh that's just the
roof part but we actually did
all the stalls and the and the
the pins as well as the uh
surrounding building structure,
so it looks like a nice new
structure, and it was very well
received this year, uh, at the
fair.
Um, those are just some of the
projects that we have been done,
the agricultural building, we
built a new structure there. Now
we're able to utilize that
building year-round rather than
just mothballing afterfare,
which means revenue for us which
helps us with our operational
budget. Uh, if we looked at our
top three,
Request for this year, it's
infrastructure, electrical, and
HVAC, uh, starting with the
infrastructure, uh, again,
infrastructure includes, as you
well know, uh, sewer lines,
which we need to desperately
slip line, uh, again, it's very
important during events that
when the toilets flush things go
away completely. And uh we've
been able to band-aid that for
several years, we're not at that
point anymore. We need to make
sure that we uh replace that.
Uh, so we have those.
Projects slated for
next capital, uh, if we receive
that, um.
Paving concrete, uh, again, all
the parking lots that we have
during fair and during events
become pedestrian walkways. Uh,
so we've gone to great lengths
to, uh, uh, to improve and not
just repay what we've been able
to do is you slurry uh and work
that into uh uh a a higher grade
of aggregate, and one of the
examples of that paying off for
us was the Midway parking lot
and we've had two fairs now on
that, and it is held up
fantastic. Uh, we all
So uh run uh some uh little uh
race car kind of events out
there too, so it's held up
amazing. And so it's a big cost
savings for us, uh, and we can
spread that out a lot further,
uh, and we plan to do that as
well. Again, these become those
walkways, we want to make sure
that the trips and falls are not
there, uh, because Secretary
Duet said, make sure you don't
have those trips and fall, sir.
Um, water lines, all that stuff,
all that has to be addressed as
well as gas and then, you know,
the net goes into the electrical
itself. Electricals its own
animal, it's its own beast, um,
uh, you know, it's a lot of uh
uh of infrastructure out there
and the transmission systems of
some of them are aging, but
we've been made inroads on
replacing a lot of those, and uh
what we're really looking at is
not really heavily critical, um,
pedestrian ways where there's a
lot of traffic trying to bury
those cables in those.
Lines underground. It's more
efficient and uh it's a lot
safer and it also improves
sightlines and so that's one of
the things that we are
continuing to do and then we're
Believe it or not, one of the
proud things I to say that we're
almost done with the
infrastructure for IT out there,
um, you know, it's nice to see
when you've actually been able
to invest money and come to an
actual conclusion and an end of
that projects and then it's just
kind of a maintenance thing and
uh so we're about 85% done and I
think this next phase we'll do,
we'll do some roller cameras and
it's now just basically uh
putting access points into
certain buildings that we don't
have and extending that net with
the.
bone is completely finished and
now we're one of the, you know,
fairs in the country, if you
will, fairgrounds that has this
kind of communication. Why
that's important is all these
large shows or even small shows,
uh, communication aspects of
what they do are critical or
they will not come, so.
That's uh something that we're
very proud of. Uh, then we're
going to do heating and cooling.
I mean, these systems that we
have, we have a lot of
evaporative coolers, uh, a lot
of radiant heat. We're gonna
upgrade those two in our big
heavy load lifting uh buildings
like Luhan, uh, the agricultural
building, uh, creative arts and
stuff, ensuring that those are,
are more modernized lead kind of
uh uh product.
Checks that we have going
forward. So again, a lot of
infrastructure, a lot of things
that we continue your, continued
support and uh again, I think,
uh, you know, I want to thank my
team and my people. One of the
things that we do, I wanna thank
a gentleman that uh I've known a
long time but works for us. His
name is Gary Zink, and he is my
capital outlay actually capital
project manager, and having that
type of person on the amount of
projects that we have is
critical for our success.
Again, we have to do these
projects. We just don't shut the
facility down and do all these
projects. That would be great.
Then we we'd be broke and you
wouldn't see me anymore. And I
know that would be disappointing
for you, but we don't want to do
that. And uh Gary ensures that
there's a, there's a good
timeline in working that. The
other thing that we have that
we're not just banking on state
capital money. We have a $7
million project going on right
now that's being done by
military affairs and uh uh New
Mexico National Guard and that
project is uh
Renovating the dorms in the
youth hall facility that we have
to house what's called the job
challenge and that will take up
the at-risk youth that have been
going through the pro uh the
program in uh Mexico Military
Institute in Roswell and giving
him an opportunity to work now
at CNM to be able to either get
a trade or prepare them for
college, but they're now going
to be housed in that area and uh
very excited plus there will be
a commercial teaching kitchen
that will be on that uh area
too, so they'll be able.
come out as, uh, you know, the
culinary degree, uh, if they so
choose. So again, just giving
opportunities and, and looking
at a different way to use the
fairgrounds, that's what the
master plan is, is hoping to do.
There's always a lot of talk
about what you can do with a 236
acres smack in the square middle
of Albuquerque, New Mexico, and
uh but I believe that what we
do, especially with our uh uh
using our property as a received
agent store site for.
Not only FEMA, but for the
state, so any natural disaster
that ever comes around, we are
there and open for that facility
to be able to accommodate and
expedite any kind of things that
they may need. Um, I could go on
for a long time, but I know
you're short on time and then if
there's any questions you have,
stand for those questions.
Thank you um for the
presentation questions.
Secretary.
Mr. Morning, thank you and your
team for being here today. Um,
in your slide, you said uh IT
upgrades nearing completion.
What percentage is that, sir?
About 85%. I mean, we're there,
I think my next year will be
pretty much complete with the uh
basic, it'll just be little
things after that.
If you wouldn't mind if you and
your team could send that
information to us, um, so we
have that percentage. Thank you
very much, you're doing a great
job. Thank you.
Alright.
Thank you for the present.
Um,
I think I know the answer to
this, but ask you anyway.
Um, so, uh, given that this is
all your request for this year
are mostly like.
Infrastructure upkeep.
Um, and repair.
Um, these projects would not be
affected by or the need for
these projects would not be
affected by whatever the outcome
of the master plan.
Correct.
That is correct. Thank you for
clarifying that. That is an
important thing to know.
Infrastructure is required no
matter what you do, again, uh,
when you're looking at
redeveloping a property such as
Expona Mexico, when you already
have the the sewer existing when
you have the water lines and the
gas and that's already there,
it's a lot easier process and
then bring it then, you know,
from home. So yes, any of these
projects we're doing it it'll
still be uh necessary for any
type of redevelopment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much for the presentation.
Couple of things. First,
Thank you all for so generously
hosting us for the Pathways to
college and career day higher
education department and of
course all the higher education
institutions, you know, where,
uh, we're present along with a
lot of our other sister agencies
in order to really promote all
of the good work that uh that
the state is doing, including
higher ed.
And so, so thank you for that.
Um, it was, um, uh.
It was nice to walk onto the
state fair, uh, campus, uh, and
there not be very many people
and then all of a sudden bam,
it's packed and so, so that
that's, that was wonderful to
see. I also just want to say
how.
Um, in the time that I've been
on this committee.
Just how much thoughtful.
And strategic investment has
been made uh at Expo New Mexico.
Uh, you can see it when you're
when you're on the grounds and,
and, uh, you know, one of the
things that that we've been
talking about over the past
couple of days is.
Is
How do we demonstrate that state
investment
Uh, not just physically, but
also how do we document that
when we first started this
endeavor, uh, when you started
this endeavor, you know, this is
how much need there was at Expo
New Mexico, the state
investments over time have
actually reduced it to be only
this much need moving forward,
and I'm wondering if you all
have that in place, uh, it's a
deferred maintenance backlog, if
you wanna call it, uh, to
understand, you know how much
each.
Year's investments have actually
gotten.
Uh, done for Expo New Mexico,
and then.
A percentage or a dollar amount
of what still remaining, and I
think that's good for for us to
be able to understand.
Maybe it's not next year, maybe
it's 2 years from now if there's
a committed investment of X
amount of dollars, we may get
you there.
At some point instead of.
We don't know when we're ever
gonna get there, so just
wondering if you have something
like that.
Yes, and thank you for the
question. I appreciate that. Um,
yeah, we, we do keep records of
what we're, uh, in fixing and
we're, you know, when you talk
about deferred maintenance, when
I walked, I came into the
fairgrounds 14 years ago, uh,
there was 0 fiber. There was no
cameras, we barely just had
gotten VoIP telephone systems. I
mean, so, uh, there was a fax
machine and there was uh a few
computers, and I'm not.
I'm not over-exaggerating. It
was, it was very sad and I
didn't receive capital money or
MCI that far did not receive
capital money for 3 years.
Uh, the state was very tight at
that point in time. And so this
has really been over about a 10
year period, if you will, that
we've made those investments
and, yes, we've tried to
strategically look at where
would the best bang for the buck
be, and we, we analyze that
daily. It's not just something
that we think down well we got a
committee hearing we're gonna go
to the state and find some
stuff, uh, or get some money
and, and then away we go. No,
it's, it's actually when we put
these numbers down on these
requests. We understand that the
state's not.
could be able to fund totally.
If you wanted to get all the
deferred maintenance done on the
fair and renovate that you're
looking probably closer to
$2000. Well, the state's not
going to invest that at one time
and hasn't had that money. So
we, we, we figure out this is
what we can do in one year.
We believe that these are the
types of projects that we know
that we can get it done in a
year. And then we look for
alternative fundings like I
said, we, we partnered with uh
uh the Mexico military affairs
and then this was actually
federal money that went in.
We've applied for certain grants
we're looking for through
tourism and some other things to
do some things for Route 66. So
we're always looking for where
that money comes from and then
we want to make sure that we're
building the operations to where
that what we're booking and
selling we'll be able to fund
that.
So like a a business, so we
don't have to keep coming back
all the time, but I couldn't
give you an exact date of how
long that would be. We're gonna
find a lot of that out, I
believe, in the master plan. Um,
again, you know, we, we, we need
to make sure that we are looking
at uh doing the things that are
necessary to service the people
in New Mexico, and they're the
ones that are gonna decide what
I guess is best for that
property, um, um, you know, I'm
looking at projects at this
point in time where you'd have.
Uh, not only, uh, say an arena,
there's a project in Reno, for
instance, that's happening at
the Grand Sierra resort. They're
building not only just an 800.
Uh, tower 800 room tower, but
they're building a 10,000 seat
arena, and they're also putting
affordable housing in with that
project as well to support.
Entertainment thing. So these
are things that as I'm going out
right now and my team, we are
talking to planners around the
country and we are asking what
is going on, what is happening
around the other country, one is
looking, and then we need to
look at Albuquerque. We
understand that uh affordable
housing is a critical component
for the city to be successful.
So whatever entertainment we do,
maybe that becomes part of it,
so it's, so when we focus on
what we request from, from the
committee and for for capital,
it's like.
Infrastructure, things that
don't matter what you do and it
was a great question. No matter
what we do, it's stuff that will
be needed and we'll be here for
a long time to come.
Um, so a lot of the, uh,
projects that you're bringing
today are infrastructure, so put
some of the problem. So I think
what the ARPA funds as of right
now they have to be encumbered,
you know, by December, and I
don't think there's any
available balances, you know, we
are looking at contingency plans
and things of that nature, but
as of right now, um, we're not
seeing any, any way of getting
them any ops.
It was a it was a good hustle
but if something does come up we
can definitely discuss that. I
mean, we are, we are meeting
next week with the governor's
office to kind of talk about
what um.
What's still out there, what's
not obligated if there is
anything, and that's, that's a
good point we can look into. Um,
and so I. Any other questions?
Um, so I did, I did attend my
daughter's graduation, um, this
last summer, um, at Tingley, and
so it it does look a lot nicer,
um.
The one, the one,
One part that was frustrating
was exiting.
Parking lot. So, um, I just
think that and that's probably
not the first time you've heard
that, um, so are there things,
are there plans, maybe this will
come out in the master plan. Um,
are there plans to kind of help
ease that control of traffic,
um, when you're trying to exit,
I know, and when you're leaving,
there's typically one exit open.
Um, I don't know if there's
other exits to open or better
signage to direct traffic to
those exits, but you can speak
to that.
That's actually a great
question. Again, it gets down to
that old adage you're putting 10
pounds of poop in a 5 pound bag,
uh, so it is, it is what it is,
uh, you know, you looked at, uh,
you know, and I just got to say
this, so you look at Bloomfield,
and I love this event. I think
it's so, so wonderful and it's
great for the state and think
about it, but I'll be a son of a
gun if every freaking morning.
It's a 3 hour wait to get into
the fairgrounds. The traffic's
backed up to the big eye and
everybody's loop, he has the
blue, yes it's good. I get 3
cars backed up on Lois.
My God, morning you're gridlock
in the city. So, uh, you know,
uh, just a little jealousy. I'm
OK, I'm OK. Yeah, but it is
something that we work on was
all the time, yeah, it, it's
never a perfect, uh, uh, you
know, the the type of events it
also depends on what else we
have going on. If we just had
one event going on, then it's
easy because we just have that
whatever, but when we had
graduation going on, we had
horse shows going on another end
you have horse racing things
going on. So it's, it's kind of
a balance.
Sometimes we're subject to uh uh
staffing.
And uh we've been able to make
inroads on that as well. We've
uh incorporated, which I'm
really proud to say that we, uh,
basically hire um uh under
contract.
You know, booster clubs banned
uh, football, you know,
whatever, uh Decca, and these
guys are always looking to place
to fundraise. I'm short of staff
because you know, how hard do
you think it is to get somebody
to sit there and have a flag for
8 hours a day, and I know what
it's like cause I've done it,
you know, and so those are
things that we have been able to
do, we did during fair. We had
much better traffic control. Uh,
so what when you say what, how
do we know that some of this
stuff is working? Let's talk
about gate 8 renovation that we
did.
Um,
On the first Saturday, we ran
out of a parking by 1:30.
When I say it was full, so that
means, yes, we got people off
the street.
And we got him into the parking
lots. That's not always been the
case. And so that that we knew
it and it's a great problem to
have. Fortunately, we also had
Park and ride and we had a great
media plan to be able to direct
people out there. So it really,
it really helped, uh, but yeah,
we're always looking at, you
know, better ways to move people
in and out of the campus.
Yeah. Thank you for that. um,
and yeah, I mean, I think it's
just part of, like you said,
everyone's getting out at the
same time. Um, I think even at
that on that day there were also
other graduations going on
afterwards, so I think there's
people coming in as we were
exiting, which obviously you
can't open up both lanes.
Understand, just.
Good, good question. It's a
real, real time. Um, any other
questions from the? Thank you
for coming up from out the fair
with my family this summer and.
Um, just the changes in the
upgrades that have taken place
since I started going to the
fair in 1975 are amazing.
Um you all work really hard. It
was very well run ship.
You're operating analyst and
getting to tour the swine barns,
that was one of the highlights
of my year, so thank you, I just
appreciate all the work you do.
Thank you. That's thank you very
much, you know, because and on
to that point about swine we all
love bacon.
So
On that note, um.
Thank you. It was a long trip.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Yeah
No
So next up is public education
department.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Amanda Luardes with the public
education department, Capital
Alley Bureau, um.
Director
Uh, our request is short and
sweet this year. We're actually
requesting 1.5 million for
filling stations for charging
stations, and um propane
stations.
Uh, this is used for electric
buses, and I believe there's a
couple districts that are
currently running propane.
So this is to fund um future um
charging stations. So with that,
I stand for questions.
Thank you.
Any uh any questions from the
committee, Ali?
Um, just so you don't have a
bus, school bus request this. We
don't, Mr. Chair, uh, Ms.
Carswell. So last um fiscal year
we requested 2 years in advance,
so we are.
Doing well with that funding for
next year.
Um, cool. Yes.
Um, and, um, I'm just kind of
wondering for the like charging
and fueling infrastructure, are
there any other options for
paying for this, um.
Or and or.
Um,
Or any districts doing it
themselves or with the EPA
grants, or are there gaps in um,
Miss Carswell, so PD doesn't
have any additional funding for
that, but uh.
This past year, we were able to
fund for.
Of the infrastructures for those
that received EPA funding and
then um I believe Las Cruces is
the only one that actually paid
out of pocket.
And in those cases, um.
The essentially the EPA grants
weren't sufficient to cover the
infrastructure to go with the
buses.
That is correct, and that's
still the case now also to cover
uh the full amount for an
electric bus, so we are able to
supplement that as well with the
funding that we received last
year.
The question
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you for the presentation. Um,
just a quick question, and I'm
not quite sure how this works,
but when PED receives funding.
Does any, do you like, uh,
Um,
Like assigned the funding to
like the school districts, so it
comes through PEP and then
funnels down to the school
districts through.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, Miss Silva,
so what we, we do an application
process.
And then we score them based on
the need, and then that's how we
um.
We determine the funding for
each district, so like this year
we have only 4 applications, so
we'll score them and then.
Grant the funding.
Hm
So what types of um funding
requests do you see from the
schools, so.
Uh, basically school buses and
then this infrastructure, so
it's just so right now, so say
for instance, APS is receiving
uh 20 buses through the EPA 6
through PED, so this is just to
make up for some of the
infrastructure that they're
gonna need.
So it's, it's mainly buses, it's
buses and this infrastructure
buses and then um infrastructure
to support the buses. So yeah,
so support the feeling um
stations and alternative fuels,
so propane as well.
So the only request you come to
um.
This sport is just for buses
and.
Yes, unless there's additional
requests throughout the PET but
not this year.
Other questions from the
committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. Appreciate
it.
Um,
I just had a question on, and I
think this is to to deputies,
um.
Question as well, maybe is.
Do you know
Where
Do you know how much of this
infrastructure is how much of
this funding is gonna be
necessary for infrastructure
versus.
Bosses if I'm understanding that
correctly or it's all
infrastructure. This request is
strictly infrastructure
infrastructure and do we know
where, do you know which sites
are already going to receive
this funding? Uh, as of right
now, we do not, we do have 4
applications.
So, uh, we'll be going back
within the next month to square
those in.
And allocate those funds.
Um, and then the other question
that I had, I think you
answered, and that is.
Uh, I guess when we talk about
about fueling and charging
infrastructure, um, I know that
PED has, has, has requested in
the past and been funded for
propane and so.
And I think you mentioned this
that this would include propane
infrastructure as well. That is
correct. OK, that's all I had,
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Right Kelly.
Uh,
Amanda, do you or anyone else on
the committee happen to know the
status of the Volkswagen
settlement fund and
Whether that's not
However, you're asking if
there's any funds available in
the Volkswagen settlement fund.
That I don't know, I think.
I think the PED received
appropriations previously in
that fund or from that fund, um,
I'm not even sure if you
actually use those um or not.
Santa Fe. Santa Fe. I know that
it was, it was difficult to use
those funds whenever they were
appropriated originally, so I'm.
Wouldn't recommend using that,
but I don't know what's in it.
MPD does currently have funds to
if anybody any districts request
electric buses. We have the
funding to provide those buses
as well.
Any other questions from the
committee?
Um, I have a couple, um.
Yeah.
First one, so with 1.5 million
be enough?
This year received we received
over $2 million with requests a
majority of that is APS for 1.1
million. So, um, if we wanted to
fulfill everybody's request, no,
it will not be enough. How much
would you need to fulfill
everyone's? Uh, 2.2.
Um,
Second thing is I'm surprised
Antonio's not here. Did he
finally let you come.
He needs to let go.
Happy to see that.
Um, and, and, and lastly,
When we talk about ICIPs, um,
and, and this is kind of um on
the line of deputy secretary's
question, you know.
I know that a lot of the school
funding is funded through the
PSCOF and there's no, there's no
real need for them to submit
projects through an ICIP.
However, I think we see lots of
projects coming through the
Capitolville each year for
schools and I still believe that
it would be good to get them
onto an ICIP process, um, it
doesn't have to necessarily be
for their facilities, um, but
it'd be, it'd be good to know
what these schools are needing
outside of the facilities, um,
whether it's playground
equipment, whether it's tech.
Technology, um, anything that's
related to capital, um, because
I think lots of requests come
through.
Constituents and not necessarily
the school districts themselves,
and I think it would be good to
have that list of projects that
the schools actually need and to
kind of make sure that these
projects that we are funding are
coming through the school
district district's evaluation,
um, and not just from
constituents. So just wanted to
put that out there again. I know
um I did receive a request from
a charter school to get put on
the ICIP. And the reason why
this is becoming more and more
important is that that ICIP can
now funnel to the request form,
and I think it would be easier
um for them to be able to make
Request if it's already in the
system.
And, and if, if you all at PED
need help training the school
districts on how to use the
system. We're more than happy to
help. We are gonna be
transitioning over to a new ICIP
system hopefully next year, so,
um, love to have all the school
district attend the training as
well and, and get them set up
with their own. It's the same
logins that they use for CPMS so
they already have all that
information. It's just being
able to use the system.
Yeah.
Any other questions?
Thank you.
Uh, next on the list is early
childhood education and care
department. Perfect then.
Workforce Solutions doesn't
mind, we can take them and.
the
Good afternoon.
Uh, Secretary Nayer apologizes
she couldn't make it today, uh,
the one specific direction she
gave me was to keep it short.
So we will, uh, we will do that.
Um, we have hard copies of the
presentation if anybody needs it
or you may already have it. I'm
gonna skip the agency overview,
um, and agency vision, um, but
basically we've, we've got um 26
locations around the state, um,
where we have our work what we
call our workforce connection
centers and basically, um, we
work with people looking for
work and we work with businesses
who are trying to um find
workers. Um, we also work with
businesses that are having
workforce challenges. So,
Um, we've got 26 centers around
the state of those 26 centers, 9
are state-owned centers. We also
have staff co-located with
income support um around the
state as well.
Um, one of the things she did
want me to mention is that we
have a federal mandate right now
to rebrand our centers around
the state, um, there, the US
Department of Labor is trying to
go national by calling all of
the centers around the state's
American job centers.
So, um, we're going that route,
we're looking at new signage
and, and, and what we've got to
do to do that. So along with the
rebranding comes, of course,
reintroducing businesses to the
centers, reintroducing, um, uh,
job seekers to the center, so
that's something that we've got
coming up.
Um, so I asked today is, um, as
far as facilities go, we're
looking at about $4 million ask,
um, it's, it's basically funding
that we requested last year and
didn't get, so we did get 3.9
last year, so very thankful for
that. We've got 6 projects
moving forward. Um, what we're
looking for now is um $964,000
for our Alamogordo office. Um,
we're looking at 815,000 for
Carlsbad, um, 671 for Hobbs and
close to 1.
dollars, well, a little over
$1,000,000 for our Las Cruces
office. Um, the majority of this
is heating, air conditioning,
um, health and safety type
stuff. Um, our facilities are
really old, um, but because they
are state-owned, we don't have a
lease cost or or a rent cost. So
we'd really like to keep them up
and and and and stay in those
because we we have moved to
lease buildings, the costs are a
lot higher, so.
Um, and then the other piece of
the ask is um um EV EV charging
stations, um, we would like to
see if we can work with you
folks to put some at our Tiwa
building in downtown Albuquerque
and then potentially some at our
other offices around the state
and that comes in just a little
over $1,000,000.
And that's all I have cause she
told me to keep it short.
Victor
I like short, thank you.
Um, on your first priority, the
15% cost escalation reserve, how
did you come up with 15%? We've
been here for 2 days, I've heard
anywhere from 4% to 20%.
How did we come up with the 15%?
Um, I've got Diana here
facilities manager. I don't
know, is that something you can
answer?
Um,
Yeah.
Sorry, I want to question ask
the contractors that I actually
went to get bids with and
basically at the time that we
estimated that it was with all
the costs with everything
falling behind from COVID and.
He marked it up 15.
Thank you.
Kelly.
Um, just to follow up to that,
um, when were the cost estimate?
Ma.
Over the last year and a half.
OK.
Um, and.
You got these projects are going
through GSD, is that right?
Any other questions from the
committee?
I think
But I see he doesn't appear to
match the presentation, so we're
showing for the first priority
5.1 million.
And it's titled DWS Upgrade.
And then there is, let me see.
That's for the statewide
infrastructure, but it's 5.1
million.
And then the second priority
says DWS upgrade, which also
says 5. So the ICAP needs to be
updated with the actual requests
that are being submitted here in
the presentation. Apologize for
that, we can do that.
OK, please update that by
Friday, I mean by close of
business next Friday.
I have one week. Absolutely. Any
other questions? Bye.
I take mine though. Sometimes I
forget.
And remember, um, related to
your first request just
programmatically, could you guys
tell us a little bit about kind
of what your current trends are
in terms of um job seekers
accessing services. Yeah,
absolutely. Um, what, what we've
seen post-COVID is initially
the, the number of job seekers
was low. So when you look at an
office like I mean we don't have
Albuquerque in here, but when
you look at our Albuquerque
office to give you an example,
we pre-COVID we were seeing
close to 1000 customers.
a week that we're looking for
work, um, post COVID, it was as
low as 100, 150. We're back up
to about 500 to 600, and we see
it steadily climbing. Um, our
smaller offices like the ones
that we're asking for Elamo
Gordo and those types of offices
were probably looking at about
100 customers a week that come
through.
OK. Now are the services being
delivered online and in person?
Um, our services are delivered
both online and in person. The
other thing that we've had to
do, um.
And it's been a request from
businesses, right? People just
can't find employees. So a lot
of times now we're setting up
shop at Walmart's under the
porches, um, we're trying to go
over the job seekers are. So
we're all over the place.
Any other questions?
Committee.
Um, my first one was kind of
already answered. I was gonna
ask if you have the capacity to
do all these projects, but since
you're going through GSD, I
believe they do, so, um, the
second question relates to the
electric vehicle, how many
stations are you wanting to put
in for 1,000,000 and.
And would you need more funding
for more stations, um, what is,
what is the goal from from
putting these stations in?
Uh, honestly, this is a new
adventure for us, so um if we
can at least get them on our
downtown, uh, because we've got
a fleet of, I don't remember how
many vehicles, but it would be
nice to, as we slowly transition
those two electric that we can,
we can do that.
Go ahead, Anna.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
we'll help out with that. So,
um, it depends they're fast
charging stations and also
whether or not they have the
transformer.
5 to.
5
Around there. Thank you, 5.
Thank you, uh, Carl.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you for the
presentation, you know, I
actually.
Uh, I don't have anything
related to your capital outlay
presentation, what I wanted to
actually just, just say is thank
you to.
To secretary and and and your
team for partnering with the
higher education department as
we look at uh certificate and
credentialing programs, there's
uh a lot of funding that we were
fortunate in order to to receive
um through growth funding this
last legislative session and and
that partnership with uh with
your agency, you know, uh, it
will definitely help us to be
able to ensure that our higher
education institutions are being
able to utilize that funding.
But also
Make sure that we're tying in
with uh with the uh initiatives
that you all have as well, uh,
in a lot of your apprenticeship
and program, so, um, so just
wanted to, to express that
gratitude. So thank you. Yeah,
and I'll tell you we're excited
about that. Um, we've got a lot
of people that are looking to
skill up, um, not necessarily
looking at associates and
bachelor's degrees, but just um
credentials and certifications,
especially those industry
recognized and we had no way to
cover those.
before, so that partnership with
higher ed is gonna be awesome.
Any other questions from the
committee?
See, thank you, thank you.
Right
We will
We'll take a break for a little
bit and we'll kind of try to see
if we can wait for ECECD to get
here, um.
We'll look at 2:30 and if
they're not here by 2:30, uh,
We're good? Yeah, we're,
everyone's here, so we'll go
ahead and get started. OK.
I am
Mark Dominguez from ACCD, the
ASD director.
Meet you? Probably haven't seen
you guys, but.
New, so this is my first go at
this approach, uh, Roy is my
deputy director Juan Quintana is
my you can see we have our
capital request.
For FY 26.
So just to give everyone a
brief, right, like for early
childhood education, we have our
mission and vision.
And obviously it's an important
agency that has a lot going on.
But focusing on the families and
young children, but as we go
through our request, it's really
focused on as we see the
expansion and growing
opportunities.
That's really what the target
recommendation is going to be
geared towards.
Um, slide 3 really just
reflecting our commitment to the
Mexicans to create a cohesive,
equitable and responsive
prenatal to 5 early childhood
system.
Is where we really focus, right,
to support families, strengthen
communities, and enhance child
health development, educational.
So, that being said on slide 4.
Really just to summarize as most
of you guys, all everyone could
read.
is just the progress that we're
really targeting towards. So
there's 3 targeters that we're
looking towards, um.
In particular, Las Cruces, as we
are at capacity and we have to
continue to grow from an
expansion standpoint, slide for.
Um,
If we also look at Rio Rancho,
we understand that Rio Rancho
continues to grow. We have a
presence of 9 individuals there.
We're seeing a big influx.
Of growth that we want to see
there even from a population
perspective, so we're looking at
some opportunities there.
So from my headcount support,
both Las Cruces and.
Um,
Rear ranch or capacity from more
locations, so we're looking at
22 RFPs to expand our location
or grow our expansion.
From those locations.
So
that being said on slide.
You could see the request for
Las Cruces, our first priority
is $600,000 in request.
Rio Rancho's 400,000 and 4 other
outlying New Mexico locations is
$300,000.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, um, it should, we, we
need to clarify too. We had
200,000 in our original Rio
Rancho request.
We are increasing that to 300.
We're seeing that.
Uh, that expansion need on the
west side, um, particularly with
pine tree being pretty full, um,
and we're gonna, uh, we, we, our
goal is to open up a Westside
office uh that expands out to
about 40 people total and um so
we're, we see the need for
300,000 rather than the 200,000
that was originally put in the
request.
Just wanted to clarify that.
Sir, Mr. Chair,
Um,
So as you can see from a
directional standpoint on page 7
is really.
Just the breakdown of Las Cruces
rear ranch on other New Mexico
locations.
Um, and really the concept is to
really to equip and furnish a
new office location, so asking
to furnish and have the capital.
Locations across New Mexico with
particular focus towards Las
Cruces and.
And Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I'm sorry, that was
the rule.
That concludes.
Thank you and welcome.
To the committee, I think, um,
no, you received funding last
year for um some projects that
were that were given to other
entities right and through
through the grant process, so,
um.
Nice to see you here, um, for
yourselves and trying to get
something accomplished for for
your agency, so, um.
First question from Anna.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. Good to
see you guys.
So, um, the Rio Rancho office.
That's a state building.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, uh, it's uh leased
space. And so is the oops, and
so is the. It is too. Yeah.
So, um.
Out
So I think, you know, as long as
the furnishing and equipping
isn't permanent in nature, I
think it could potentially be
used for that, um.
It, it, it is general fun, so at
least this year is a general
fund year it seems like, so I, I
think it would probably be OK.
Um, I think when you're looking
at severance tax bonds, probably
don't really want to use those
for furniture and equipment
necessarily, but.
Um, I think as long as they're
not.
Attaching anything to walls, um,
and even then they probably
could as long as it was within
their lease, um, and as long as
they continue to own the assets,
they should be fine. Uh, is it?
What kind of a, is it cubicles?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee.
Our anticipation is it'll be
modular furniture or cubicles.
Um, office desks, risers, things
like that.
The stuff that you can
Uh
Move and retain. So usually what
happens when we do. That was
something that girl just said
too, I think, um.
You know,
You also have to capitalize it
as well as from an accounting
perspective, so, um, depends on
the cost of the items as well.
But yeah, I think, um, and I
know Andrew's here sitting next
to us budget side, you know, I
don't know, um, if this was just
intended to kind of be more of
an operational type thing or if
um if there probably wasn't room
for this request in your
operating budget and you're just
trying to find another means of
getting funding for it, which is
fine. Um, I just think we need
to consider whether this is
something that really should be.
Funded through the capital
process or if it should really
be do the operating side.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
We
We've been moving uh staff.
Uh
Recently, and what we've seen is
that the cost.
Um,
To improve the the new location.
Um, is quite considerable
sometimes and um, to take it out
of Obud really does hurt.
Um, from a, from a program
perspective because we really
got to take the money from the
program in order to fund the
move, so, um, and that takes
away from their ability to serve
clients.
And so we really looked towards
the um ICIP process,
particularly as you notice we're
not asking for um building
improvements, we're just looking
for the furniture side of it.
Uh, so that we can, uh, not take
away that that uh capital or
that.
about dollars on the program
itself. And, and did you, um,
did you submit this as a special
appropriation too or just
through the capital process?
Uh, uh, Mr. Chairman, members,
uh, through the capital process
only.
Um, what programmatic?
Parts of your budget would be
affected if.
You did do this through your op
ed like.
You know,
Which programmatic. Uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
uh.
Mostly childcare, but we're also
seeing a pre-K need and um.
So the pre-K is expanding as
well, um, but childcare
primarily.
So are we talking about like
childcare for those services.
And then pre-employees.
With the pre-K grant program and
stuff like that.
And this year we're asking for
3939 new FTE.
So it's a pretty big footprint,
um, in the grand scheme of
things we have about.
3
350 FTE, so we're asking for
more than 10% increase in our
FTE capacity.
Um, thank you for those details,
um.
And
are
Are these capital requests tied
to those new FTE in your app but
request for this year or are
they for existing?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, it's really for both.
Hey
I see.
So on the #3 request for the
rural office offices you're
saying that that request changed
from 200 to 300,000.
Mr. Chairman members of
committee, yes.
Please update that in the ICIP
and have that done by next
Friday so that way we can get
that get that captured in your
official ACIP. So I did do that,
um. OK. Earlier this week, I
think. OK, perfect, we just
haven't pulled updated reports,
but you said it's already done.
Perfect. And then just the other
thing I wanted to address real
quick is we do appreciate your
presentation, but please next
year if you could supply it to
us paperless, email it to us by
the deadline, that would be
greatly appreciated. We're
trying to get everything
seamless and paperless, so it
really helps when we have the
Presentation to incorporate into
our icing. Stop the old school
method. Thank you. And as you
can see, you weren't the only
one.
Yeah
Any other questions from the
committee?
Um, Mr. Chair, just if we could
something for something that we
need to talk about.
Yeah, and I think um so I think
just for for ECCDs um frame of
reference, you know, if we allow
your agency to come in and get
cubicles through the capital
outlay process, other agencies
will begin to do it, um, and so.
I, I think I would prefer to
kind of see this as a special,
um.
I think that's on the King.
Um
In either case, I think that
that's what we're looking at,
not that you don't need this,
um, I think we all up here agree
that you probably do. It's just
coming through this process will
create open a can of worms.
Thank you.
And just for those listening on
the webcast, um, higher
education department will be
going next, um, they were
originally scheduled for
tomorrow on Friday, but we are
going to allow them to present
this afternoon.
Instead.
OK.
It's
It came in an email.
Or is yours.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to
present to you this afternoon.
Thank you also for.
Uh, for giving the agency an
opportunity to go ahead and
present early, uh, understanding
we were on the schedule for.
Uh for tomorrow afternoon.
Secretary Rodriguez sends her
regards, um, she is not able to
join today, but she did ask me
to.
Thank the committee for all of
the recommendations that this
committee has put forward.
As
And uh and she thanks you for
the uh for the time. So you all
have the presentation in front
of you.
This is the uh higher education
department's capital for all
higher education institutions.
Uh, my name is Gerald Honey. I
am the chief of staff in the.
CFO for the higher education
department.
I'm also s.
Our presentation today is gonna
cover several several items.
It's gonna talk a little bit
about the higher education
department's capital outlay
process.
It's also gonna discuss um what
our capital outlay summer
hearings are and who the
individuals are that sit on
those capital outlay summer
hearings.
And then I'll dive into.
The specifics on our capital
outlay funding recommendations.
Talk a little bit about what the
total amount of funding requests
that we had were.
Uh, and then how we broke that
out into the actual
recommendation that we bring
before you today.
And then we also will talk a
little bit about some of the
specific projects that I wanted
to highlight in this year's
recommendation because as many
of you know.
Us have increased drama 6 years
related to cost of construction.
And higher education does have
several uh large considering.
Uh, and are recommending and our
funding.
Recommendation this
this afternoon.
So if you go to the 3rd slide.
I want to talk just a little bit
about the capital outlay process
for higher education
institutions.
Our education institutions are
statutorily required to create
capital outlay plan.
That plan allows higher
institutions in order to
strategize and develop their
capital outlay needs for their
campus.
And those then get built into a
five-year capital outlay plan.
That master plan drives their
capital priorities and is
require required to be sub
submitted to the higher
education department each year.
We utilize that plan along with
their five-year plan in order to
review their priorities for
funding each year.
One of the important things in
our process at the department is
that we only allow a certain
number of requests to be
submitted each year.
And our research institutions
are allowed 3 requests are
comprehensive and community
colleges and tribal colleges are
allowed to submit two requests
um each year.
What happens after that is, um,
those funding requests come to
us through what we call is our
capital funding request and
management system. It's a
software system that we
implemented several years ago.
It helps us to not only receive
those applications, but it also
helps us to house the
applications as well as all the
re in order to score and track
our projects.
The agency review is done by the
Capitol Outlay Committee.
And that capital outlay
committee I'll talk about in a
little bit of who those members
are, but that committee does
travel with us throughout the
state for our hearings and
reviews all of the applications
and scores them within our
system.
And then we come to this
committee here where we bring
forward our ultimate capital
outlay recommendation for the
for the entire state.
If you go to the next slide,
slide 4.
This slide gives a breakdown of
our project evaluation measures
and how the department reviews
and analyses.
And scores each of the projects.
We have 3 overall measures,
that's project needs stewardship
and energy and sustainability?
And each of those particular
measures, we have a rubric that
is broken out on this slide that
talks to under project rationale
and need, we look to see how the
project promotes enrollment
growth retention and degree
production.
The impact on education and
workforce needs and alignment
with institutional mission and
advancement of the higher
education institutions strategic
plan?
Facilities assessments, which
determine the project need, and
then of course, whether or not
the the project itself supports
on campus or off-campus
enrollment.
We also have a a section for
energy and sustainability that's
in support of uh of the
administration's initiatives on,
on um on energy and
sustainability.
We look for institutions to have
an energy assessment or audit
completed on the projects?
Ensuring that whenever these
projects do come forward that
they have a operational cost
reduction associated with them
and that they implement the
design of the projects.
And then of course, the support
of the governors.
And then lastly, we have
stewardship.
Uh, which is preparation of
project estimates?
Facility condition.
Or FCI and SAS net asset value
assessments.
On the facilities when they come
forward.
And then, of course, their
maintenance cost reduction.
And then health safety and
security issues.
So this is the scoring rubric
that the agency has developed
and that the uh every project
that comes for our review are
scored against.
So on the next slide, I'll talk
a little bit about our process.
I'll highlight the fact that our
capital outlet committee is made
up of representatives.
Um,
From other state agencies, as
well as our chair.
Our chairman is Mr. Luis Campos.
Uh, he is a, um, private
citizen, not in state
government, uh, that chairs our
committee, but he has lots of
experience and knowledge and
construction, uh, for higher
education and in the public
sector.
And then myself, I sit on the
committee as well as Mr. Brown
with the Capital Projects
division at higher ed?
And then we have Mr. Wesley
Billingsley, uh, with Mr. Harold
Trujillo with Energy Minerals or
LFC, uh.
And they make up that committee.
Uh, the department holds
hearings every year, their
capital outlay hearings for
higher education institutions
present their projects to the
committee.
We held those hearings this year
at New Mexico State University
and Alamogordo New Mexico Junior
College in Hobbs.
UNM's health Sciences Center in
Albuquerque?
Islands University in Las Vegas
and C.
These hearings are important
because it gives institutions
the opportunity to present the
projects and allows the
committee to ask questions and
get feedback from each of them.
On the next slide, I want to
highlight our recommendations.
So you'll notice on the top
right of the slide for capital
outlay, this includes new
construction and renovation?
As well as infrastructure total
cost, uh, that we received for
projects was $653,554,000.
Out of these requests, there was
institutional match of 63.6
million.
The request from higher
education institutions to the
agency was 212,000, I mean 2120.
And our recommendation is 149.6
million.
The details of this can be found
on the
Other document that I provided
that has each specific
institution broken down. You'll
notice on the left of the slide,
we also had support for
supplemental requests.
Supplemental request is
something that the department
initiated post COVID in order to
assist institutions with the
increase in costs.
And
Institutions that request
supplemental funding must have
received funding as a
recommendation through the
higher education department.
And as funded in the legislative
session.
So we had $136.6 million in
requests for supplemental?
The previous funding amount for
these was 44.5 million.
They requested 58.3 million and
we recommended uh, again, the
breakout of that is in the in
the other exhibit A sheet that
that was provided.
And then the department also
supports demolition funding.
This is something that we uh
started a couple of years ago in
an effort to reduce square
footage on college campuses.
Uh, this initiative assists us
with reducing some deferred
maintenance needs on campuses as
well, and it also reduces the.
A liability on campuses for
facilities that have been closed
down and can potentially uh be
used um by individuals who uh
who are, you know, wanting to
sleep in those buildings at
night or whatever it may be, and
so we have a recommendation this
year for demolition as well.
The total cost that was
requested was 29.5 million.
Institutional match was 500,000.
The request
It was 27.2 million and our
recommendation is.
This is a high level breakdown
of of our of our total requests,
um, broken down by uh by the
different type.
And as I mentioned, the, the,
the exhibit A has a specific
list.
On the next slide, what I'd like
to do is highlight a couple of
the larger project requests that
we're considering this year.
You'll notice on this slide,
this is the University of New
Mexico's humanities and social
sciences complex and Ortega
Hall?
This request is a facility
replacement request.
The humanities building was
built in 1974 and it's a 67,828
square foot facility?
Or take a hall was built in
1971.
The estimated costs for this
entire $10.
That's
Removing these facilities and
building a brand new 80,728
square foot facility.
The department did provide a
recommendation last year and
they didn't governor approved
$52 million from the higher
education general obligation
bond that is going to the voters
now in November?
Please vote
Uh, and then $20 of general
fund, uh, that was.
So this allowed you and him to
have $54 million to secure $54
million of funding.
They also have a $13.3 million
match of their own institutional
funds.
And so they're requesting this
year 59 million project.
Uh, the department's
recommendation is 50 million,
and that's part of our.
Again, this is the largest
request that we do have.
The 2nd, the next slide I have
is uh is one of our other uh
requests for New Mexico State
University.
This is the enems you phase 3
biomedical building. It's a
replacement of the animal care
facility built in 1978.
This facility is 4,0002 square
feet and I did add a picture of
this facility in the slide for
you.
The request from NMSU is for $16
million to build a new 10,604
square foot facility?
This is a lab facility.
Uh, so the cost per square foot
is higher.
Uh, the match funding that
they're providing, uh, is
$7,084,000.
Which is an NIH grant funding.
And the request is for $4.5
million and our recommendation
is for 4.5 million.
I think what's important to note
about this facility is that this
is part of the larger ag
modernization that took place
over the last 5 years at New
Mexico State University.
It had close to $70 million of
state investment already on
multiple facets so this
particular facility is an
addition to an existing
biomedical building that NMSU is
constructing using NIH funding
as well as some state general
obligation bar.
This facility will actually
complete the ag modernization
phase build out at.
The next facility on the next
slide that I have is really to
show a supplemental request.
This is the eastern New Mexico
University Student Academic
Services facility replacement?
Uh, the picture that I show on
the screen here is their current
facility which.
This request is to actually
remove that facility and build a
new student academic. Uh, the
total cost for this new facility
is 20 $35 million.
The state did provide uh last
year uh through recommendation
from the uh from the department,
uh funding along with match
funding from the uh from eastern
of a total of $27 million.
When this project went out to
bid, uh, the costs ended up
coming in.
Um
Higher than originally
anticipated.
So the request this year is for
an additional $8 million in our
recommendation is $80 million in
order to.
again complete the construction
of this new SAS building.
The next slide that I have is
actually a demolition.
This project is a request that
came forward last year.
Uh, the department only funded
$277,600 last year recommended
funding for and uh that's what
was received by the institution.
This is for NMSU's demo of Coal
Village.
The whole village was built in
1966 and it includes 26 separate
buildings with 34 and 5 attached
townhouses per building.
The total cost for demolition
for this facility.
Based on estimates by NMSU is
20,007,795,000?
They requested 200,500
15 million.
Um, this facilities are
bordering.
Interstate 10 right off of the
New Mexico State University
campus right next to NMS Eonia
A.
Uh, these facilities are in need
of being torn down and so uh
this is a large ask for demo,
uh, however, uh, it does
include, as I mentioned, 26
separate buildings.
The next slide that I that I
wanted to highlight is.
We've been talking as a
committee about uh ways in which
we can pervert maintenance needs
outside of capital.
In fiscal year 23.
Uh, the higher education
department initiated a process
in order to make a a separate
recommendation outside of
capital for buildings.
Uh, that building renewal and
replacement funding was actually
defined by the department in our
updated space policy.
And how those funds could be
used.
And the way this funding worked,
uh, and the requirement by the
department was that our
education institutions are
already transferring from their
operating budget to support
building renewable.
And so what the department did
is we required all higher
education institutions to
continue to make that transfer?
And then we requested additional
BRNR funding in order to to
supplement.
That funding in order to try and
address deferred maintenance
needs um moving forward.
In fiscal year 23, um, we put in
a request for $32.5 million and
we $32.8 million and we received
$8 million.
In fiscal year 24.
Uh, we put in a request for $35
million and we received $150.
And in fiscal year 25, uh, we
received 32. So that funding
combined has actually.
Allowed higher education
institutions in in order to
really address a lot of the
deferred maintenance needs that
they have on their campus, and
it's also reduced the type of.
of building renewal and
replacement projects that are
requested through the capital
process.
Now we still have additional
work to do in securing
additional funding for building
renewal and replacement.
However, uh, what we have
received has made a large impact
on our institutions.
And again, this funding
supplements.
The existing funding.
We wanted to make sure that they
continued to keep their funding
in place and then we just
provide additional support to be
able to address uh these types
of projects.
And when we talk about building
renewal and replacement. We are
talking about.
Those types of projects that are
uh life cycle replacement type
projects, not large capital
outlay investments.
So these are replacement of HVAC
units, replacement of boilers,
replacement of.
Doing, uh, you know, minor
improvements as necessary on
facilities and as I mentioned,
we did, we did, uh, define that.
So overall, uh, the higher
education department uh
recommendation, uh, as I
mentioned before, you know, is,
um uh is a does include uh
several or quite a bit of our
higher education institutions
throughout the state. It
involves infrastructure
improvements, safety and
security improvements, uh, some
new construction, uh, and some
renovation.
Uh, as well as demolition and
supplemental funding.
And with that, uh, I'll go ahead
and stand.
Thank you for the presentation.
from the
Mr. Chair, uh, Gerald, thank you
so much for the presentation.
Um, I just had a a question
regarding that you build and we
talk about being compliant with
the governor's executive order
regarding energy efficiency.
Like that
So, uh, does higher education or
any of the higher ed institutes,
do they do uh investment grade
audit and um.
As a result, projects and if so,
uh, do you see any cost savings
as a result of that, and do you
keep track of that?
So thank you for that question.
Um, so we actually still have
implemented in our process.
Governor Richardson's executive
order, uh, on, um, on ensuring
that all facilities over 15,000
square feet are constructed to
lead silver or greater.
Uh, we also have uh promoted and
have had quite a few higher
education institutions do energy
performance contracts.
Um, those energy performance
contracts because they are uh
tied to uh the need to, um, to
validate those savings over a
long period of time, um.
We have received data and they
and we have seen that those
projects are in fact reducing
overall operational costs that
higher. Uh, we've also seen that
when we do energy performance
contracts versus just energy
efficiency contracts.
Um, that
The data is better. Uh, and so,
uh, so energy and minerals
because they sit on our
committee.
They actually have all of the
data related to all energy
performing them for us.
Uh, but, but to answer your
question, yes, we have seen that
by doing those types of
projects, it has.
For higher education.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, we also do, um, have the Eco
projects and I internally as
well.
So I round or something to see
uh what you're realizing is cost
saving, so we are cost cost
savings are reversing and um a
lot of what we're realizing is
we have, uh, in order to
maintain the requirements of the
IGAs and the escO projects that
we have to set.
Temperatures at a certain
temperature, certain.
You know, requirements to be in
compliance with the IGA.
the higher ed Institute have to
do that, and if so,
Do you see any pushback from
your occupants?
Are there any, are you realizing
anything as far as uh uh issues
with some of the occupants
regarding complying with your
IGAs and projects.
So thank you for that question.
So I will say that we have had
uh on a couple of occasions,
times whenever the uh the.
Assessment each year that that
goes in and and reviews to
ensure that we're maintaining
the, the savings uh is done, uh,
that there have been times when
adjustments have had to be made
and the majority of the time,
uh, from what I've understood
from our facility folks at
higher education institutions
when they, what they've informed
me of is a lot, some that some
of that fluctuation does have to
do with.
Temperature control.
Uh, what a lot of our projects,
what a lot of institutions have
done with our projects now is
really ensured that they are
that they are installing, um. If
they are installing control
systems.
That don't allow for that type
of of uh of manual adjustment.
Uh, and so they're, they're all,
they're all on timers and
they're all centrally
controlled.
Uh, and that has made a huge
difference in, in that
variability of uh of.
Of cost
And so that's one of the ways
that that we've seen that that's
been.
Thank you Gerald and um one
other question regarding, um and
her electrification.
Uh, fleet electrification, are
you? I didn't see a request in
here for um a um comply with
that executive order as far as
your fleet's concerned, is that
because
Most of it comes to us, are
there any vehicle. So thank you
for that question.
So, as an agency, uh, the
department does not have any,
any of our own vehicles.
And we utilize, uh, you know,
state motor pool.
For our higher education
institutions, but I can say is
that a lot of them have actually
looked for funding in order to
to uh install, um, a lot of uh
vehicle charging stations on
their campuses, and they've also
moved to purchase electric
vehicles for their own campuses
as well.
Those requests don't actually
come through the department
because we don't entertain uh
vehicle request.
Uh, so those, those requests
typically will, will run
through um either, um, um.
Specials or through direct
requests for for funding of of
vehicles outside of this.
The other questions from the
committee, Kelly?
Thank you for the presentation,
Gold, um.
How did you guys
Arrive at the um $300 BRR
special.
US
So the um.
The way we, the way we came up
with that request is.
We took
The amount of funding that
institutions receive annually
from for instruction and general
funding?
We take the amount of funding
that institutions are
transferring from their ING
funding.
And providing it uh and
transferring it to uh BR and our
needs, and then we just added a
factor of 5%.
And the reason why we did that
is because uh we know that the
needs far outweigh the dollars.
However, the first two rounds of
BRNR funding?
Because it was so new.
was worth challenging for
institutions to develop.
Um,
To develop the process and
methodology for actually
utilizing this funding
differently than capital outlet.
Uh, and so, you know, as we.
The other piece to that is.
We wanted to be able to gather
data.
On what the impact is of this BR
and our funding.
As it relates to number one, the
total deferred maintenance of
campus and then 2, I it's
reducing these types of requests
for capital.
Uh, and so once we have an
opportunity to gather
sufficient.
Data
We will come forward with a
more.
I don't want to say more
appropriate, but we will come
forward with a request that that
more supports what we know by
data.
Institutions need for PR.
Um, thank you. So that, so the
30 million is.
Um, would just represent a total
increase of 5% versus their like
mandatory transfer from their
ING.
Or is it
Yeah, so, so the.
The the 30 million represents.
Uh, 5% of their.
Total
ING
Um, allocation to the R&R.
So if, if we provided that.
30 million again this year in
total, the institutions would be
getting.
Like 8%.
Of their ING for BR and because
they're transferring 3 about
that.
So 3% is, is, is about average,
uh, some institutions transfer
more some, but our distribution
methodology is based on that
transfer though, so if you
provide, if, if there's if $30
million is provided.
We're still gonna go based on
how much they've actually.
So, so we'll, we'll do the
distribution based. Thank you.
Um, and then what are, um, the
policies around how they can.
So building renewal and
replacement, uh, uh, as I said,
those policies are outlined in
in our space policy.
And what our space policy speaks
to with BRNRs.
And I should put it this way.
Our space policy outlines
different types of funds and and
what's allowable in each of
those buckets, so it
specifically talks to capital
outlay and what's eligible for
capital outlay and then building
renewal and replacement, what's
eligible for building renewal
replacement, uh, and so.
What we, what we've outlined in
our space policy is we are and
our funding can be used in order
to support.
Um, infrastructure that supports
a a uh an instructional facility
on campus.
And when I say infrastructure
that supports it, I mean.
If it's an HVAC unit that
supports that facility if it's a
parking.
Parking lots that supports that
facility if it's if it has to do
with um gas lines, electrical,
uh, those items support that
facility so building renewal and
replacement of that facility.
Uh, and that's in a nutshell
kind of how we are and our.
I used.
We do not in our space policy
allow BRNR to be used towards
construction of new facilities,
uh, you know, we don't allow.
The other question.
I have a few questions.
These are just questions you
would ask yourself.
Um, the third one first, um, you
have off the top of your head
the total number of projects
that you're recommending in this
recommendation.
So the total number of projects
that we're recommending is
actually.
Uh, 43.
And the total request is
2210747.
Um,
Are there any institutions not
receiving funding in this
request?
So, um, in this particular
request.
Uh, we had 2 institutions that
did not request funding?
Uh, and those institutions
because they did not request
funding, uh, we didn't have a
project to consider, uh, so
those ones are not, are not
included in in our
recommendation, uh, and then.
And that would be um.
Southwest Indian Polytechnic
Institute and then the other one
is uh the Institute of America.
Uh, they're two of our tribal
colleges.
And for this committee, uh, just
so everybody's aware, the tribal
colleges and universities do
come through the higher
education department for
capital.
Thank you for that, and then
last question, um, we probably
need to have more conversations
about, um.
Just with the affordable housing
need in our state.
Demoing
And again, I know that these are
older, obviously dormitory style
buildings, um, but are there
already been any conversation
about some of these older dorm
buildings instead of demoing
them, being able to utilize them
for affordable housing. I know
most of them sit on the campus,
so.
Uh, you know, like, that's for
Eastern, for instance, it'd be
difficult to use that. Um, I
don't know, like, I know Cole
village is close to the campus.
Um, I know that obviously it's
on their property, um.
Are there any, are there any
institutions that we could
utilize some some dorms
potentially for affordable
housing in the future. Um, I
just think.
There probably aren't any, um,
but if there are some probably
some conversations about that.
Um, I just, I think about
demoing spaces for for people to
live in.
Um, I know with this particular
one, there's lots of other
issues with it, so it probably
wouldn't be the best
alternative, um, but just
thinking about how we solve that
problem in the state.
But that could be a way to do
it.
So I appreciate that and I will
tell you that the department has
has been having conversations
with with institutions about
about the opportunity to be able
to provide housing for their
faculty and staff as well.
Because that's an that's an
issue that we have been
experiencing in a lot of the
rural areas of the state, uh,
where housing is limited, uh,
and then to bring in new faculty
and staff has been difficult
because of.
Um,
You, you actually answered, I
think, uh, the, the question,
um, correctly by saying that
these particular facilities
would take so much investment in
