Good morning everyone. My name
is Antonio Ortega.
Running on time, but we're
running early so I'll just
introduce her so she'll be,
she's the deputy secretary for
our education department.
And I am Wesley Billingsley. I'm
the um infrastructure division
director and the chair of the
committee in place of Secretary
Post.
Morning everyone, I'm Andrew
Minor. I'm the state budget.
Good morning. I'm Tanzin Lucero
Reval, and I'm with State Budget
division. I'm the executive
principal analyst for Capital
Outlay.
Good Morning, everyone. I'm
Sarah Dela Rosa, executive
analyst in capital outlay
extraordinaire.
OK, so thank you uh the floors,
the floor is yours whenever
you're ready. We are webcasting
so uh make sure you turn on your
microphone.
Um, whenever you're ready to
speak and kind of push it away
from you, um, I know if you
speak directly into it, it's
gonna create this big, this
buzzing sound, so I had to stay
away, we can hear you as long as
they can kind of hear you
through the microphone, they'll.
Right, thank you. Good morning.
Um,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Antoinette Vell
and the Deputy Secretary for
Aging and Long Term Services
department. Let me push that
away a little bit more, um.
I have a few members of my
leadership team here with me
this morning. I'd like to
quickly introduce and do a top
of the wave kind of overview.
Um, joining me to my right here
is Denise King. She is aging
division director.
To my left is Tasha Martinez,
who is our capital outlay bureau
chief.
Also joining me are Letitia
Ortiz, our ASD director.
Debbie Gonzalez our um third
director, which is a consumer
and elder rights division and
soon will be Melissa Sanchez,
who is our.
Um, director of
Office of Indian and Elder
Affairs. I was thinking about
the acronym.
Um, do you have your
presentation, right, um.
I want to start by basically um
saying that, you know, we've
made significant progress since
last year, as many of you know,
Secretary Schreyer is no longer
with us and we do have a new
cabinet secretary joining.
Um, in November, so I am manning
the ship and all that for now.
Um, but I do want to say that,
um.
In particular for our agency.
We've really took note of what
our challenges were, um, last
year's hearing was to really set
the the structure.
And the procedures in place to
do a, a really good job of.
Of managing um this program.
Um,
It's taking really a disciplined
approach to um identifying where
uh we can better support our
local partners where we have the
accountability and fiscal
stewardship to our oversight
agencies and members of this
committee.
And really uh build capacity and
credibility within our agency to
um handle this program.
If you'll go to the slide that
talks about program evolution.
Just real high level top of the
wave here is.
Um, outlining change personnel,
um, entirely. We have a whole
new team with a new bureau chief
and um two new staff and then we
have 2 new staff positions
coming on board.
We have integrated technology
into our process. A lot of this
was very manual, you know, um.
Can't complain about Excel, but
it doesn't necessarily serve its
purpose entirely, so we have
moved to some technological
innovation.
We are mirroring some best
practices thanks to um HED on
instituting, um.
You know, process elements and
forms and things like that that
are going to be really useful to
us, um, to our constituents that
we serve in our local
governments and our partners,
um.
This is one area that
definitely.
Uh, doesn't hurt, um, and it
really sets them up for success.
It helps them understand the
expectations and the processes
that we've established.
And it is really an
overcommunication.
It also gives us an opportunity
to understand where they are
experiencing challenges with
their understanding and where
they are in the process and so.
Um, this has been really
beneficial to all of us. We've
had training sessions as well
for our um local government
partners. We are going through a
CPA training with you. I
understand, pretty soon.
And I think the biggest part
about this too is the building,
the rapport and establishing
those relations is, is critical
to the integrity of the capital
outlay process in and of itself.
The next slide talks about
capital application categories.
It's really nothing that you
don't know. I just wanted to
note those in the categories for
funding usage.
Um,
The slide that talks about
application timeline and
recommendation.
Uh, this is really just for you
to understand where we have.
Uh, stacked ourselves, Tasha
began in April.
And there's been a lot of stuff
done in a short amount of time.
Um, acting swiftly and prudently
to ensure that we can uncover.
We are still in the discovery
phase, we are still learning.
Um, there are some things that,
um, are still items to be
addressed and she will help
provide some detail to those
questions, but, um, again, we've
accepted the challenge and know
what our work entails.
The next slide is the emergency
funding request. This is just a
total amount of what we've
received and submitted for
emergency funding.
Um
We have also included capital
projects that we'd like to
highlight if you have any
questions or there's interest in
understanding where there's been
some.
Really good practices or
successes put in place.
And then the
Slides that are 7 through 10.
Um, as our agency operates, we
operate by planning and service
area 1 through 6, and what we've
done is broken those down for
you for the FI25 in case there's
any questions on the number of
senior centers that have applied
and, and whatnot so.
Um, that will give you that
detail if you're interested in
that.
And
Um,
The rest is really uh our time
to hear from you and ask us
questions. So at this point in
time, we stand for questions.
Thank you, thank you for the
presentation.
Um, any questions?
Good morning. Um, thank you for
the presentation, um.
Thank you, Tasha, for your
responsiveness to LFC questions
so far and um, it's really good
to hear that you guys are making
a bunch of changes um to address
some of the challenges of the
last few years, so I appreciate
that.
Um, I would love to hear a
little bit, um, about the
highlighted projects that you
have in your.
Sure, it's Martinez.
So I know that cloths um.
7000 or $4,0004 million
available here, um.
That one is the ribbon cutting
happened earlier in May on the
16th.
We've also had the renovations
for the Crown Point of Crown
Point.
Part of one of the asks for this
upcoming with the next phase.
We also have the new
construction in addition, I had
visited briefly at that senior
center they're, they're
expanding their services. Um,
they've outgrown their center,
which is some um.
They actually why when I showed
up during lunch one day, there's
usually something going on 75%
completion of those, uh, those
projects.
And then, um.
The son Felipe Senior Center has
been more of a code compliance
and renovation. We're seeing
that with a lot of their needing
to be kept up or windows or
doors and as well as their HVAC
system, um, which we're seeing
across the state, a lot of them
are having to.
I do have other ones, uh, the
this is a new uh Gallup as well
is waiting to get the bids in so
they can start and also have
their own ribbon cutting. Thank
you. um, what are you guys
seeing, um.
Either in local governments, um,
or at the senior centers
themselves in terms of
Um,
You know, kind of staffing
stability and I guess um
capacity at that level to.
It was like
They kind of got hit
particularly hard on that level,
it seems like during COVID and
it took a little bit longer than
in some other.
Actors to dig out of, so how is
that going?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members, so we've seen
that there's quite a bit of
turnover for these applications
are no longer there, um, this
last session or this last
application we saw that we had a
me because the turnover is
really high. We're seeing that
there's difficulty in people
that are staying are really
committed, um, like we are in
serving. Senior centers, um, and
the senior.
Um, and does the agency have any
kind of strategy that.
I mean, I know it's not exactly
your job, but you know,
providing some kind of supports
or something for centers that.
Um, have appropriations.
Absolutely thank you for the
question Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Ms. Carswell.
So, you know, I spoke a little
bit about overcommunication. And
so a couple things on the agency
side, we have a communications
team now that is really a
division that helps.
repair the communications and
keep a constant.
Um, notice and collection of
emails and and social media and
you know, all that stuff to
ensure that people a number of
uh of challenges of platforms to
do that.
in the sense that.
The relationship, um, from our
bureau to the local governments
by those touch points is really
going to help us understand when
those changes are occurring in
Stash um staff turnover.
If, if we maintain that
communication and we know at
least we have that relationship
to be told that. I think that
really facilitates us being more
proactive than reactive to the
situation.
Um,
There are a number of planned
training sessions at our
calendar like there's
communications that goes out
about that calendar. We have a
capital outlay Bureau 2, there's
capital outlay available for our
things is the fact that we have
ASD division and over into our
aging network division, which is
really responsible for the
senior center network across the
state.
the division director Denise
King.
It is really aligning well with.
If, if she's aware of what's
going on in the senior centers,
that relationship is easily
conveyed this way triangulate
all of this, if you will, to
ensure that we in a, in a.
Positive way, um, so that we
make sure that we're trying to
keep tabs on what's happening
and
Yeah
Great, thank you. Um, that's
good to hear and sounds like,
um, so, um.
You know, one of the reasons I
bring that up is just that our
committee has been kind of
concerned about um.
Some of the outstanding balances
on the.
Well, it does look like some of
that started to move a little
bit more.
Um, but that's likely to come up
again as they consider these
requests, um.
So, you know, kind of a another
twist on that, um, could you
guys tell us a little bit more
about your
vetting process for the
applications and kind of what
the scoring criteria were and.
You know, which among them were
more important.
Um, and how you arrived at um.
The, the overall number you did
here kind of like where your
cutoff was.
Thank
I came in thus we had
approximately 167 applications.
Uh, that were started and or
submitted.
I'm gonna say a two tier.
Scoring
And prior projects.
Um, the capacity to be able to
complete the application was
complete and all of the forms or
matched.
And I believe there's another
that just says, um, if all of
those pass they, if they pass
those, then they move to the 2nd
where they're scored at DFA
involved, so we had Wesley, all
of the PSAs, and then we broke
down the PSAs by non-metro um
providers that were assisting
staff and management as it was
um necessary above 10,000.
If it was um the narrative we
would review the narratives and
identify if they were explaining
enough of what was the issues.
Also, we were looking at their
capacity if this was the next
phase, which was planning and
design or construction stood
that the vehicles, um.
You get a lot of mileage on
them, um, transporting, um, so
after that there were, we came
together to discuss if there was
any need to be kind of pushed up
because we felt that it was a
necessary and emergent 67 was
considered, um.
And if you guys could send to
DFA if you haven't already the
um.
The list of projects that are
included in the recommendations
with the amounts that would be
great and the last few years,
um, the department is also
provided us with some detail on
the.
The scores for all the projects
and the various.
Categories you rate, so if we
could do that again, that would
be awesome.
Um, and then I think my last
question is, um.
There are also were a lot of.
Challenges during COVID and kind
of afterwards with vehicles in
particular, it seemed like it
was maybe mostly a cost thing
but also um.
Also, um.
Possibly like a cost increase
thing and so how's that going
and is that kind of?
Leveled out, um, and less of an
issue with more recent
appropriations.
Um, Mr. Chair and committee
members, that was we're, we're
seeing that the increases in
like meal trucks has increased
from what I understand. I've
only been here since April, as
stated by, they are taking
longer for them. It's taking um,
up to 60 other questions from
the committee.
Thank you very much for the
presentation.
So, um, just a couple of
questions on your state fleet. I
didn't see a request for any, is
that because all of your
vehicles come through.
Um, Mr. Chair, members.
Most of ours are fleet through
GST,
Most of ours are fleet through
GSD I believe it's our APS
division that
that another funding source. I
do know that we got some type of
questionnaire about um a few
that are on that listing.
Um, so we have found that, uh,
agencies that have an internal
uh bureau regarding capital
outlet.
Um, we see they're prevalent
others.
Um, so along those lines on your
uh application process, do you
have the centers, do they come
to you? Do they present you are
going through the application
process if there is an actual um
system.
Yeah
You then require them to have a
um replacing systems do
question, um, yes, Mr. Chair and
committee members, um, so for.
We do, um, for the first one, so
yes, there was a few questions
in there, so for the first one.
Not prior, so during the
application we do ask them uh
there that that's why we wanna
make sure that it's on the ice.
We ask that there's a certifying
letter so this application is
being submitted and then within
that there is also a question
session, a narrative section for
them to explain why they're
asking for a replacement or why
they're asking what those
issues, um, though if I may, I
want if I can add that up for
just a moment.
Um, on your first is uh.
That on site
Interaction happens because.
Our aging network.
he's king right here.
Spends a lot of time in those
senior centers talking to
people, so.
Moving it to this division made
absolute perfect sense because
she's already got the she's
there on a regular basis and
explaining the correlation.
To their needs is, um, so that
in and of itself is is.
It was an easy fix.
Um,
It takes a level of trust for
them to understand and to read
and processes that are set and.
Um when it comes from a trusted
voice and I think the
relationship is built. It's
easier for them to digest it and
they understand the value of the
relationship with us, but they
also understand that, you know,
we mean business and there is a
process and we're gonna help you
succeed, but in that constant
visit back and forth, um, you
know, and she's at, she's at all
those places where.
On the deferred maintenance
side, one of the things we're
looking at is, is to help the
communities understand what's
futuristic or anticipate what's
needed.
Next in their phase of senior
center operations.
I sort of assessment.
Um, on, um, that.
Gives us an opportunity.
Breathe have some forethought as
to what they're, you know, city
plan or county plan waiting each
year to decide that there's
budget constraints and, you
know, decisions like that that
have to be made some sort of
assessment ahead of time plans
are simply because we are
expanding our services as an
agency as well, right? Provide
support, financial support, um,
business opportunities to
provide senior services and
delivery of services, um, and so
if the fact that we need to have
more services provided to our
senior centers in space or
renovation.
This, that and the other, so
ensuring the circle of life of
this is really some type of.
Um, yes, just a few things
regarding the ICIP so on there
currently there appears to be 3
different categories and so
they're a little bit different
from what they were in the past
and they may have changed. I
just want to verify that with
you. It looks like right now the
three categories entered are the
first one is senior center
statewide. The second one is
senior centers and usually there
is the emergency one, but
usually there's one that reads,
um, mills and vehicles, mills
equipment and vehicles.
And then another one for new
construction or major
renovation, so the categories
are a little bit different. Have
the cat categories changed?
Mr. Chair and committee members
to and so, um, I believe in the
last ICIP they merged it into
one.
Um, because they were saying
there wasn't spending down uh
completely in some of those
funds because we are not really
able to identify what
emergencies are going to be
there if it's gonna be more
construction, so it was combined
so that way it's a it's broaden
it, we make sure that we're
spending down all of the funds.
So that's, that's the reason
that it was went from being
split into those three different
thing is the mounds in the ICAP,
so they need to be entered into
the project, but that does need
to be updated by next Friday.
And if you need help with that,
just call. The other thing I
wanted to ask is about something
that is needed. Do you work with
mortgage finance authority, and
they receive federal funding for
senior housing and also for um
different upgrades to senior
housing such as.
Things that improve efficiency
with energy in the wintertime
especially and even with cooling
in the summer.
Mr. is not something that we
are.
We have staffed
Yet, um, we are.
Part of conversations. Thank
you. Um, who is Ibava housing?
But it is something second piece
is we are in an 811, which is an
entities, if you will, um,
speaking about some of their uh.
That particular program on the
811 side since before my time, I
just was trying to get a handle
on so that we can figure out how
best to execute.
Ma
Not to be the answer and then if
we could just get the list of
thank you.
Thank you, so I have a few
questions, um, I won't, uh, I
agree with Tally, I think we
need to get the balances down.
Um, I know that you're working
on getting budgets establish um
and you know, if you need any
help, you need to ask us and
we'll continue to provide that
assistance, um.
Because as, as Kelly said, I
mean, when, when legislators see
those balances, um, they, they
tend to not want to give more
money to those areas, um,
hopefully we can continue to
work with you over the next few
months. I think that's, I think
some of them were probably
frominnitures, um, from prior
years it just never got
recorded, so uh we'll continue
to work with you.
Um, my first question is about
the statewide, um, you have $3
million request that you speak
to that request and why you were
in the last couple of years, are
you seeing more emergency type
situations um come up during the
year that are requiring.
Immediate funding. Mr. Chair and
committee members, so we are
seeing an increase, um,
generally these are um for class
under 10,000, so they don't meet
those um.
are also just they've just run
out there in areas where their
municipalities are unable to
assist with those, so, or we're
having um. It's a few things, so
I'm trying to think of all the
emergency. They're, they're
coming through almost weekly
now.
And there for HVAC, they're for
ceiling tiles. They're areas of
um doors with just the, the rot
from the wind and you know, from
nature and and those things. So
we're just, we are seeing an
increase and the majority of
those are under 50,000 involved
in accidents or have been just
have just gone over there
100,000, 200,000 limit, so
that's the reason for the
increase is we're just seeing
now that as we're coming out of
COVID, um, we're thinking that
some things were.
Not necessarily maintained and
we're starting to see that
there's some issues with those
smaller entities. We also are
making sure that those any of
those senior centers that are
not going to delay any of their
services and a lot of them have
to do.
That was my next part of
statewide funding, so, um, you,
you do, is it an application
process, um, do they just reach
out to you? How do you, how do
you receive those requests?
So first it's or it's through
one of our one of our team
members, and then they complete
an application they have to
submit and create a routing slip
so then it goes through to see
if we have the funding for
emergency, and then they get an
inter.
Thank you. It sounds like, um,
similar to what DFA does with
their emergency funds too, so,
um appreciate that response. Um,
you mentioned 6 to 8 months on
vehicle delivery that's actually
not bad from what um has been in
the past, I think it's been over
2 years. I'm glad to see or
hopefully that it's not just you
all hopefully it's around the
state where where that lead time
is coming down a little bit, um.
I still urge all agencies to try
to get into those grant
agreements as quickly as
possible and have have the
entities, um, you know, get into
the RFP process, um, so that
they don't have to worry about,
um, you know, the reversion
requirements of the two years
for vehicles, so, um, I was
happy to hear 6 to 8 months, um.
Hopefully that's accurate.
Um, but I think that's good if,
if it is, um, I know.
And I probably have
Um, a lot to say about that as
well, but um, I was, I was happy
to hear that. That's great, um,
all this, um.
I see that the the ribbon
cutting ceremony happened. When,
when is the opening date for
that facility?
OK, so it is open for seniors.
OK, great.
Um, and then lastly, I think
over the past uh couple years
we've had some issues with, um,
I guess the tribal community is
applying for, you know, through
your process, um, and I know
looking at the slide, you know,
for, or, or applied is let Pawai
at the Clara and house and.
There's obviously a lot more
tribal governments than that,
so.
Can you speak to the some of the
issues that you're continuing to
have possibly on travel
applications, um, why you
believe they aren't applying,
um.
And, and how we can maybe get
them to apply into the future.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'll take a portion
of that.
Solder Affairs is.
Responsible, if you will, the
purpose of that division and.
Melissa Sanchez, I believe might
be here, but um, we started out
in October.
delays there are a number of
that interaction. I think the
other piece is the changing ship
every year is, is a.
It's necessary I understand it's
a part of the process sustain
this relationship and move the
project.
This has taken just a whole
different level of understanding
and approach to those
relationships.
Um, because of that.
To just own it.
Piece is that.
and
Um, sometimes doesn't align with
our fiscal year.
Our IGA is in and of itself.
Native to the year's fiscal year
time.
process easier, but uh it's,
it's and to support and honor
also. The other piece I think is
that post COVID.
Um, for a number of reasons just
now making that decision to open
decisions are.
Of their own, you may see a lot
of these that have not reapplied
but you're still making those
decisions. We have after Melissa
and the team challenges are and
how we can
in getting an.
Um, thank you for that, and I
think if you need any help from
from DFA to kind of coordinating
that, let us know. I know when
we're putting the tribal
packages together each year, um,
with the governor's office when
we see senior center projects
and why are they coming through
here? Why didn't we're only
missing, I think one.
For us, we are ahead of
schedule.
So
A good, good story to tell.
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Secretary,
I just want to say thank you
very much for the explanation,
um, not quite sure if everybody
knows as far as committee and
he's request, sometimes there's
561 requests per agency.
So when we as a committee have
to go back.
Any other questions?
Sorry, I have one more question
I forgot to ask, um.
Uh, one thing that our committee
has been trying to do for state
agency capital LA higher ed, I'm
trying to encourage for locals
to is prioritizing.
Um, additional funding for
existing projects.
Um, in instances where, uh,
either they were phased or, you
know, fell behind because cost
increases that was holding them
up.
Um, so we're senior centers able
to apply projects if that was
needed.
And if so, did you guys
prioritize that and are any of
those kinds of projects. I was
thinking I'm sorry, Mr. Chair
and committee, so um.
Yes, we had some we're
definitely with this next go
around he probably in PSA 2 and
3.
I'm just gonna follow up on that
one can.
You identify which ones those
are, um, whenever you send us a
spreadsheet, which one's
working? Any other questions?
Morning secretaries.
Hosers.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the, to appear before this
group and talk about our.
Capital outlay request, um,
briefly, I wanted to just
identify the staff members I
brought with me today, uh,
Deputy Cabinet Secretary
Michelle Gallagher Roberts.
She's in general aspects of a
capital outlet.
Uh, I also have with us, uh,
Lino Herrera. He is the director
of our facilities management
bureau, his deputy Marco
Salinas, uh, Jesse Greenspan,
who's our government relations,
um.
Liaison, as well as uh Daniel
Zeman, who does marketing and
communications. So, um, I just
want to note on the front page
of uh the presentation is sort
of a really cool work in
progress photo from uh Fort
Stanton, uh, uh, nurse's
quarters, and, um, that project
is actually now complete. We had
a really lovely ribbon cutting a
couple of weeks ago, um, and
have received so many
compliments from that community
about that building and you're
going to be hearing a lot about
Fort Stanton this.
Here. So, uh, just wanted to
kind of preface that.
Uh, as a real quick reminder, I
know this group is very familiar
with us and how we operate, but
just as a quick reminder, we
manage our buildings, not uh
GSD, um, I'm sure Deputy
Secretary Silva would love to
have all of Fort soon, um.
Um, we, uh, our buildings are
valued at over $1 billion.
That's actually from 2017 and
given all of the investment
we've done, um, that is probably
actually gone up, uh, we have
the 7 museums, the cultural
center, 8 historic sites and the
Center for New Mexico
Archaeology, uh, which you don't
hear a lot about, but that's on
599 and that's where we have our
archaeological research center
as well as I'm sorry,
archaeological research
collection as well as Office of
Archaeological Studies, and we
Also have collections facilities
and design and fabrication
facilities all over the state.
Annually we serve about 2
million people. Um, we have 239
structures, that's 1.3 million
interior square feet over 1000
acres of property and many if
not most of our properties are
on some form of um national or
state historic registry, and
also my new fun fact for this
year is we actually um managed 3
municipal water system.
along with the wastewater
system.
Uh, moving on to the second
slide. I just wanted to talk a
little bit about our facilities,
um, planning process and
management process, um, you may
recall, um, when I came into
this position in 2019, uh, we
worked really hard to actually
develop a facilities management
bureau. The department had just
started to do that when I came
into the position. Um, and we've
really expanded and grown. We've
completed the process of moving
all of our facilities people
under the facilities management
Bureau. So we have a
35 FTE working around the state
and that includes the director
and deputy director I've uh
mentioned. We also have 4
regional managers around the
state. Uh, we have a project
manager and we have specialized
personnel, so we have uh
electricians and plumbers and
locksmiths and other things, so
we've really over the past 6
years built up a lot of our
internal capacity to not only
manage but actually complete
projects ourselves. Um, so our
capital, uh, projects team which
consists of representatives from
the office.
The secretary facilities
Management Bureau, and then the
divisions themselves, they meet
biannually to do site visits
where they walk all around
every.
1 inch of their property and
identify needs, problems,
opportunities, um, that team
meets and develops a set of
recommendations that they bring
forward to me and ASD director
Greg Geisler, and we talk about
it and that's how we get to our
ICIP then throughout the year
there are monthly meetings with
every single division, including
their financial team where we
track progress on projects, tech
projects, uh, progress on
financial expenditures, identify
barriers, identify projects that
have come under budget.
And where we're going to move
that money to, um, as well as
projects that maybe need a
little bit more attention. Um,
so I'm really proud of the work
we've done and a lot of the
credit goes to the woman sitting
to my left for really having
brought this process, um, into a
really good form. Um, so I
highly recommend hiring a museum
registrar to run your capital
outlay. They're really, really
good at keeping track of things
cause that's just their job and
temperament and training.
Um, so just at a high level, um,
always our first when we start
to do it. I'm now on page 3
where you can see actually um my
deputy cabinet secretary in Leno
and another member of our
facilities team on one of these
capital outlay walkthroughs or
these site visits where we look
at things, um.
We look at planning, um, we
always obviously the first
priority is the health and
safety of our employees and our
public. Again, we have 2 million
people coming through these
facilities a year oftentimes
children, so that is always
where we start. We also really
emphasize proactively managing
issues as they arise and
starting to come up with plans
as soon as they are identified.
Um, we do need to balance safety
stabilization and preservation
with our visitor service
experience and revenue
enhancement, um, we, for lack of
a better term, I forced my
department to eat a lot of
vegetables in the first few
years because we had a lot of
things that we had to take care
of, and now we are pivoting to
look at those things that are
fun and exciting, um, and you're
not gonna hear much about them
today because unfortunately
those never get to be our
priorities, but they are in
there and they are important,
um, and then we also really work
hard.
to understand that every site is
unique and diverse, it's
audience, it's mission, its
problems are diverse. And from
that we build a timeline that
basically ranks things from an
immediate need to a long-range
plan.
So, um, as you all probably
remember, we usually cluster a
lot of projects under one set of
requests, one set of groups, so
we have our top 5 priorities
this year, um, running from
critical repairs, uh, all the
way down to those fund revenue
generation things. So, um, I'm
not going to belabor that you
have the amounts there, but I am
gonna um spend a little bit of
time talking about some projects
in each category and, and give
you a sense of what is rolled up
into those. So on page 5, you.
Look at um critical repairs,
these are life, health and
safety issues, uh, 7.3 million
this year. Things like fire, uh,
suppression and mitigation,
security, IT upgrades, HA repair
and replacement and ADA
accessibility. And on the side
you'll see some examples that
include asbestos remediation and
fire resistant roof shakes at
Fort Stanton Emergency theater
lighting and a couple of
theaters at the cultural center,
um, erosion control and river
river stabilization at
Redondo, so remember a lot of
our sites are in rural areas.
They include agricultural
property, livestock property,
river property, um, and
upgrading a fire panel at the
Museum of Indian Art and
Culture. But I do want to spend
a little bit of time talking
about um 2 million of that 7.3
million, uh, which is slated for
public safety issues at Fort
Stanton.
So, um, we do have a mandate to
preserve and protect historic
structures. Uh, we, we inherited
Fort Stanton, um, about 1518, 15
years ago, um, at that point, I
believe we got it from uh
corrections. Um, it had been a
facility. It has a long, it's,
it's a treasure historically it
is, it is a really significant
treasure, but it's more
contemporary history. There's a
lot of flipping over of other
state agencies, other partners
who used it for their purpose,
and then sort of left it that
way when it moved to the.
Party. Um, and so we have a
great news site manager there.
I'm really proud of all of the
work that we're doing at Fort
Stanton since 2019, we've
invested, we've made the largest
single capital investment in
Fort Stanton since the WPA era,
so we have put, I think by the
time I leave this office, I will
have spent more at Fort Stanton
than the 10 million we spent to
build the Vladim Contemporary.
Um, part of that process has to
be to understand what is
historically significant, so,
um, some of you are familiar
with what's called the cultural
landscape report, what you need
to do your federal registry. It
identifies what is called the
period of significance. So
that's the historic period which
is most significant for our
site, and it helps you. It's
really important to understand
where your priorities lie in
terms of preservation and
renovation. So we have that
process complete. And through
that process we've identified.
We have some buildings that are
what are called
non-contributing. So in a lot of
instances, these are buildings
like a gym that was built in the
80s, residential things that we
have better examples of, um, and
in some cases just metal shacks
and storage sheds that all these
various tenants literally going
back to um the territorial
period civil war period.
All the way to present day put
up.
And really if we invest in
removing some of these
structures, which are public
safety hazard, which are a
health and safety issue. We will
be better able to tend to the
buildings we have, so it's like
weeding your garden. So I know
you all hate paper, so I only
brought one copy.
But Jessie is gonna pass around
some examples of some of these
structures that we are asking
for money to help demolish and
remove, and you'll see they are
not historic.
And the cost of repairing these
things would be exorbitant. So
we really feel like this will
help with fire mitigation. It
will help us focus future
projects, um, and it'll also
help the community. Keep in mind
there are people who actually
live at Fort Stanton. They are
community members who come
through there and these
buildings are, are really a
hazard for them, for their
families, and for our visitors,
and you'll see those examples.
So just wanted to highlight that
since that is a a pretty big
request in our top priority
item.
Um, moving on to page 6, which
is our second priority
structural stabilization, um,
that is 10.5 million, uh, it's
really about things like, uh,
stabilizing foundations, roof
and stucco repair, drainage
issues, and sinkholes, um,
replacing HVAC systems and um as
you can see on the right is a
really sad building that's in
the middle of getting
restouccoed.
I'll give you one guess where
that building is.
Stanton, um, and it actually
looks beautiful. I almost wanted
to ask to replace my um
presentation because we've
actually finished that work
along with the render window
restoration and you would not
recognize that building. Um, so
these are things like we need to
stabilize the floor at the
Coronado Historic Site Museum,
that's a Johnga building it's
historically significant, um,
wall stabilization for the
museum support center, um, for
this museum of Space history.
This is a facility that's
actually not.
Up on the hill at the museum,
it's down by the zoo by the
railroad tracks, and it's where
we store our large objects as
well as um fabricate, and we
need to make sure that that
building um is stable,
restoration of the commanding
officers building again at uh
for that actually should say I
think Fort Stanton should.
Um, oh, that's right, Fort
Selon, it's buildings an
overstatement at the um Adobe
ruins of the commanding officers
building, um, repair and
replacement of the roof at the
natural history museum and Bell
Tower repair at uh Lincoln. So
as you can see these are
significant projects, important
projects, but they do fall into
that basic stabilization.
Rubric.
Um, on page 7, our, our third
priority is preservation of
property 5.8 million, um, this
is historic preservation on
listed properties as well as
protections of collection and
collection storage, so you'll
see in some examples are, um,
the artifact processing wet lab
at the Center for New Mexico
Archaeology Foundation and water
barrier for the Victorian
cottages at Los Luceros, um,
this little dovetail nicely with
the major renovation.
Doing of the hacienda there.
Preservation and rehabilitation
of the Chavez library at the New
Mexico History Museum. It's the
2nd most historic part of that
building after the palace of the
governors and um plumbing system
and boiler repairs at the 1917
building um at the Museum of
Art, and I just wanna highlight
the lower picture on the right
hand side with the latter is
actually us putting up the
Taylor Messia Historic Science
site at the Reynolds building,
which will be the visitor
center, um, we opened that.
Uh, with a really great public
celebration in the middle of
August, so we've completely
renovated the first portion of
the Taylor Messia Historic site
that is open to the public and
um by the fall of next year, her
sister Massa, we would welcome
the opportunity to show you some
of that work we're doing there.
Um, page 8 is about our, uh, 4th
priorities, life cycle repairs,
efficiencies, and visitor
service, um, that's $14 million
and it's for things like
lighting upgrade, landscape
erosion control, signage, and
so, um, you'll see that.
Some examples are farming
equipment for farm and ranch,
um, some road repairs and
signage for Camina Lejo, um, and
actually this is where um we
also include our statewide
transition to electric and
hybrid vehicles, so the way that
we're approaching that is um
phasing them out as they reach
their mileage limits, um, so we
have a plan for how to do those
based on um the natural life
cycle repair those that should
get us to meeting that
qualification for that
requirement.
Um, and then last but certainly
not least, is a revenue
generation, 7.8 million, um,
these are, of course, are things
like new exhibits, exhibit
upgrades, gallery upgrades, um,
we need, we, we operate a lot of
theaters, um, and planetarium,
so equipment and improvement
there, um, and so some of the
exciting things we're talking
about, um, renovation in the
Bartlett Gallery at the Museum
of International Folk Art,
um, Mofa is what we refer to it
as it's a division that hasn't
received a lot of attention in
terms of
Capital, um, over the past few
years and so for Santa Fe
facilities, MIA really is our
focus this year, um, it's coming
up on its 70th anniversary.
There's a world of opportunity
there and um that's really what
we're excited about in Santa Fe
and focusing on having completed
the latum, having completed the
renovation of the done some
significant, too significant
exhibit upgrades at MIAC. We're
now really focusing on the
Museum of International Folk Art
here and then um we need to
update our exhibit at the
corner.
Not a historic site after we fix
those floors and then also just
increasing our Wi Fi and
infrastructure out at CNMA.
So, um, briefly on the very last
page, I just wanted to um.
You know, we talk about
Facilities improvements and
really mechanical ways because
that is essentially what they
are, but um I'm very proud to
say that of our capital outlay
prior to FY 25, the current, um,
fiscal year, 89% of it has been
encumbered or expended.
Uh, when we factor in the
capital outlay that we just got
at the beginning of this fiscal
year, we have 65% of it, uh,
encumbered or expended, and
although it's not a capital
thing, I know it is a topic of
conversation. We did get some
American recovery money, $5
million for uh capital projects
outside of Santa Fe County,
functionally, that is all
expended or encumbered, and when
I say functionally, what I mean
is there's literally 67% that we
will be applying to APO.
And we will be completely
wrapped up with that. Um, but as
I said earlier in the
presentation, we did the largest
investment in Fortston since the
WPA era, including over $3
million dollars invested in
their water system, which is not
exciting or sexy in any way,
shape or form, but the last time
I was out there, the chief from
the local fire department came
out and talked to me and he let
me know that that community's
ISO rating has gone from a 6 to
a 4 solely based on the
investment that we made in the.
Water system.
Um, so that means that their
funding from the state fire
marshal will increase and it
also means that residents in
that area will have lower
insurance rates, and if you
don't know where Fort Stanton
is, it's literally 10 miles as a
crow flies from Riodoso.
So that is a really significant
thing to have achieved with this
capital outlay that not only
preserved our facilities, but
helped everybody around us,
including GSD and veterans who
also have facilities out there.
I also want to point out that we
were able to leverage over $1000
in congressionally designated
spending, um, around the state
for online access digital
archives using Capital Outlet.
And we were able to leverage
another $1000 plus in female
funding for fire mitigation at
Los Luceros, Basque Redondo, and
Fort Stanton ass.
I'm sorry to be a little long
winded, but um.
I'm happy to stand for
questions, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the presentation.
Questions from the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much, Secretary, for your uh
presentation.
Um, I just wanna, uh, really
commend DSA uh DCA not DSA DCA
um or then um having worked with
you from the program, what it is
today is truly remarkable, you
guys, it has been a pleasure
working with you. We've
partnered on so many programs.
Um, we've been able to align our
uh projects and some of our, uh.
Um, properties touch one
another, so we've been able to
park a lot of projects. So, um,
I just wanna say that.
Hi, good to see you guys. Thanks
for the presentation, um,
appreciate the time you guys
have spent with us this interim
in your capital projects.
Um, and.
Uh, to kind of echo Anna's
point, it does seem like the
facilities management kind of
structure of yours.
And I wonder if you could tell
us just like a little more about
that and in particular, I'm kind
of like wondering how the.
Um, regional managers being in
place and kind of the internal
capacity to do some of the stuff
and maybe just be, I, I would
guess they're kind of like.
There's more coming up to you
guys too about what the needs
are, um, so how is that kind of
like influencing um.
How you go about. Thank you, Mr.
Chair,
committee member Carswell, uh,
the rest of the committee, first
of all, thank you for the
acknowledgement of the work and
as I said, a lot of the credit
goes to Michelle and Tolino, um.
What we have developed is really
a um a round facilities needs.
So, um there were some
facilities, people working in
the division prior to the
creation of the facilities
management bureau, but those
individuals reported directly to
the division directors. They now
report to those 4 regional
managers which are based in Las
Cruces, Albuquerque, uh, Fort
Sumner, and then here in Santa
Fe.
Um, so all of our facilities
people now report, uh, we've
added some key administrative
positions, including a position
in southern New Mexico, um,
which allow us to move that
money a little bit quicker.
Uh, I think our vehicle is
actually the the office of the
secretary vehicle is the first
on the list to be replaced
because we put so many miles on
it between the two of us we're
constantly traveling and when we
travel, um, Michelle in
particular always makes sure to
reach out to division directors.
So I would say on an average day
we are talking about.
Capital projects.
Um, Michelle and I directly, um,
just making sure things are
moving along and I will let
Michelle add to it.
Mr. Chair, um, members of the
committee, yes, thank you for
the acknowledgement. Um, it, it
has been a long road and I think
we've seen the benefits across
the department, um, really in
some key areas, so, um.
Leo Herrera, his deputy Marcos
Simias um have really taken a
lot of they deserve a lot of the
credit, um, they meet weekly
with their regional managers,
um, I know that they speak daily
with all of their regional
managers, um, and then are often
on the sites and if we put on
miles, those guys put on way
more miles, um, and so they are
really honestly, it's being
boots on the ground seeing it
for ourselves, um, talking to
the staff, seeing, um, the the.
Projects making sure that those
are all uh moving along and when
they hit hurdles because every
project hits a hurdle, um, um,
either pivot to another approach
or um sometimes face it, um,
sometimes, uh, you spoke about
phasing that is something that
we have to do, especially for
these large projects for
Stanton, many of these projects
are just too large of an
elephant to eat in one bite, um,
and so we phase, um, most of our
projects and if they're not, um.
Probably under face them,
um, and so I meet with staff I
meet, uh, we talk about every
project we create at the
beginning of every fiscal year
when we have the funding
allocated, we create a project
plan um which we've shared with
you um in the past, um, that
tracks where the funding has
been budgeted, um, and then we
meet monthly to go over each one
of those projects to determine
what their status is, what is uh
going right, what is going
wrong, how do we fix it?
Um, how do we get back on track
and so, um, and as his secretary
said when uh projects either
come in under budget, how can we
reallocate that funding to other
projects that are perhaps a
little bit more than we had
anticipated or costs had gone
up. So, um, really it is about.
Making sure that every project
is, um, no matter how the size
of it is moving forward.
Thank you, um, and I've asked
you this recently, but for the
benefit of the committee, um,
what are you guys, are you guys
have any, uh, having any
challenges sort of getting folks
to do the.
The work around the state given
the location of some of your
sites. How's that going?
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, um,
Um.
We had that was a challenge that
we had had in previous years,
um, we have built a good working
relationship with a lot of our
contractors on statewide price
agreement, um, and now they are
much more willing to travel to
our other sites because they
know they can um get a project
and complete it, um, and so part
of that is, um, there is an
easing of supply chain. We're
not seeing those issues anymore
and so people and contractors
are willing to travel. Um, we
have not seen that.
That's a challenge, um, at our
sites.
Um, thank you, and I was gonna
ask about the progress of Taylor
Messia, but you already
addressed that, so, um, just
wanna acknowledge that you guys
have gotten that done quickly
and I'm sure the legislature is
very appreciative of that. It's
a project, a lot of them cared a
lot about.
Um,
So, and then the last thing I
was gonna ask is just could you
guys provide us kind of like the
breakdown of um.
Projects or potential projects
within each category of your
request that.
You usually do to um Wesley and
he can, uh, Mr. Chait member
Carswell, um, committee, yes,
we're happy to do that. It is
essentially reflected in our
ICIP um under each of those
categories, but we're happy to
to send it over.
Any other questions from the
committee?
I think both of mine were
answered um I wanted to know
more about the water system and
so I'm sure that's been exciting
for you all to have to work on
water systems.
In addition to everything else
that you have to do, um.
With some of these historic
facilities stands as well, um,
so you answered that question, I
think.
Uh, the other one was more about
the breakdown when you only
receive $5000 from us and maybe
another 5 million from PPRF in
the past, like how do you kind
of um strategize and and
prioritize those projects. I
think you kind of answered it,
but um, unless you want to go
into more detail, I think you
did a good job already. So those
are my questions, um.
I know that that's probably
difficult to do. I, I mean, this
these requests alone are over
$400 million and I'm sure this
isn't even all of the projects
that you could potentially, um,
come to us with actually, that's
a good question. So uh do you
have a total amount of like if
you had to repair everything,
what would that amount be? um.
Or it's hundreds of millions,
but you have that that. Stanton
alone was um estimated by the
National Park Service to be
almost $1 billion.
So if you could write me a
check.
I appreciate that. Um, so yeah,
that was all I had. So, um,
thank you.
And next up is Department of
Transportation.
Morning, secretary.
So.
The state road fund oh, I'm
sorry, represents the state road
fund.
You ain't nobody out there heard
my.
Oh, it'll be in the minutes, I'm
sure, um.
So again, our, the sum of our
budget is, um, almost a
fifty-fifty split between our
federal apportionment, the
funding that we received from
Federal Highway Administration
and the state road fund, right?
So each a little over $500
billion combining into an annual
budget of about 1.2.
But because we have projects
that are active throughout with
the the life of our funding can
be as, uh, as far as 5 years, so
we typically will have about $2
billion budget with active
projects kind of carrying over
for. So our federal
apportionment funds are $500
billion. They essentially are
reserved for our federalized
projects, otherwise mainly our
construction budget, and then we
use the state road fund another
$500,000 to operate as an
agency, but also to conduct all
of our maintenance activities
throughout the state.
So what's happened historically
as it relates to capital outlay,
the need for uh um equipment or
salaries and operational costs,
all of that comes out of the
state road fund, right? So the
state road fund essentially
become rations for the
Department of Transportation.
What's happened since 2019, of
course, is we've seen a sharp
increase in the cost of.
Doing construction with a flat
funding um scenario that
essentially a capacity.
And so as construction crossed
over the last 5 years have
conservatively increased by 20%
with a flat budget where
essentially able to do 20% less
work at this point and so a lot
of what we're doing over the
next couple of months is
developing some strategies and
we pulled together a group of
really smart people to come up
with ways that can sustain our
funding over time. So if you
look at the chart on the right
hand side there, you'll see that
our four major revenue sources,
which are gasoline, special
fuel, parenthesis diesel weight
distance tax and vehicle
registration fees.
are the lion's share of our
state revenue funds.
Well what's happening over time
as you see, right, is that those
revenue sources are declining,
and they're doing so has become
more efficient and ultimately we
electrify them and move into
clean fuels, then those the
reliance on diesel fuel and fuel
tax is, um, is becoming
something we need to pay
attention to.
And so to get a a more simple
picture of what's happening uh
in the long run if you go to the
next slide, you see this um
inverse operation between what
state road fund revenues are
going to do over time if we
don't do overtime.
And so what's happening is in
addition to having to wrangle
with the increased cost of doing
construction, we essentially
road fund the increase in
operational costs, right? And so
over the past 5 years, for
example, maintenance building
upkeep, routine maintenance
building upkeep, and uh a lot of
building up grades through esco
projects across the state.
And so as we continue to
increase what we pay our
employees, increase the cost of
doing construction.
Tap the fund for um uh deferred
maintenance and, and building
renovations and repairs, we
essentially are taking money
directly off of our roads.
That's fundamentally what we're
doing.
And that's being compounded by
the fact, right, that escalation
cost of doing business is just.
Increasing significance.
So, uh, what we're asking for
and I'll I'll hand this off to
Mr. Valdez and he can go through
the request is not only what we
anticip facility in
infrastructure improvements over
the next few years.
But every time we present
routine um subcommittee.
We present to them over $60
million in annual equipment
needs that are necessary for our
patrols, you know.
Any piece of and so we're trying
to chip away at that a little
bit, uh, with a request there
and then the the last piece, the
third request is essentially the
sum of what um we role we play
in the states, um,
electrification.
Um, of our transportation and so
that's a couple of things. One
of them is working to
essentially build out the
state's EB charging
infrastructure for the general
public, public facing fast
chargers, but also what we need
to see.
And so we're we're asking for a
sum to continue to do that work.
And that comes on the heels of
actually doling out all of the
resources that we have both
federal and state for
electrification across the
state. I think for the last sum
of money that we have in the
bank, um, for the construction
and commissioning of uh electric
charging stations across the
state, so.
Um, go into the details. Thank
you, Chairman, uh, members of
the committee and the secretary
uh mentioned, we have 3 asks,
uh, the first one, of course, is
for the $31,232,000 for
facilities and infrastructure
around the state, uh, previous
slides you saw you saw our
footprints, you know,
representing 20% of the total
GSD square footage around the
state, uh, note is that every
single one of those dollars that
we've.
Ever use has come out of the
road fund.
And so those are dollars that
instead of putting guardrail
instead of filling in potholes
instead of reconstructing the
roads that we are children and
our families use to get to where
they need to be we're taking
those dollars out. That's been
the hesitation over the years
when we talk about road fund is,
it's a very difficult decision
to be taking dollars out of our
road funds that are intended to
really uh produce the ability to
be mobile, safe, and, um, you
know, getting people and goods
where they need to be and so.
The last thing we use is road
fund for these for these needs,
uh, so our, our facilities have
deteriorated. We have some
slides, uh, then of course the
10 $10 million secretary uh
mentioned about heavy equipment,
light duty vehicles, um, as we
all know, we talk about the
monumental amount of funding
that we have received not only
formulaically 60% of BIL to get
products going, uh, but the also
40% of discretionary grant funds
we've had a pretty good track
record in going after federal
funds.
Uh that represent 40% of
discretionary funds with every
single one of those projects
that we've been successful,
there's a 20 up to 20% at times
50% cost share that come with
that discretionary grant fund
and so those dollars, I just
want to make a comment there.
Excuse me, Jerry, sorry about
that, but one of the things that
uh the Department of
Transportation is really good at
doing is spending money to the
tune of 100.
Revenue going out the door.
And um as a result of every year
Federal Highway Administration
allows for aid for states that
successfully.
Um, move their federal resources
out into fiscally constrained
projects is we get a second bite
at the apple to go after funding
that other states so that we can
increase our annual budget by
that sum.
Well, for every dollar that we
go after, we have to come up
with 20 cents, right? And so
when the state road fund is
tapped with all other
operational related
expenditures, it limits our
ability to go back to the
federal government and say we
spent all of our money and we
have another 80 million
understanding that in order to
get the 80 million, we need to
have 20% of that reserved in the
state. So for every $1 we don't,
uh, well, for every $5 we don't
have in the state road fund, we
can't do.
Come in and do projects that
we've essentially developed and
have on the show. Thank you,
Chair, members of the committee,
and then of course the last $200
you know, we're under an
executive order, we'll be
working with General Services
division and a deputy secretary
Silva and I have been working
tirelessly to really get this
off the ground, but we will be
enforcing that executive order
will be transitioning our state
fleets, uh, so from even a
public facing perspective as
your employees, our employees
are out on the roads. They'll
need.
Charging infrastructure so when
they're transporting children
and see why the vehicles they'll
need to be out those vehicles
charged up our patrols need to
get from point A to point B. So
this $20,000 and there's a map
here that I'll be showing you in
a minute, uh, although we've
made tremendous efforts and
we've actually closed the gap on
range anxiety and individuals
can now traverse our state north
to south east to west, there's a
tremendous amount of gaps,
disenfranchised communities,
disadvantaged communities still
need community charging.
To ensure that when they
purchase an electric vehicle,
they're able to charge and that
they can get to where they need
to be uh and receive services.
Uh, so on the next slide you'll
see that on the on the IIP
request 31,232, here are some of
the big priorities that we have
and when you look at um one.
$1,050,000 for portable water
accepted upgrades, um, you know,
water is a fundamental. I was at
a presentation, Water is life.
We can't expect for our patrols
and we're gonna have them speak
here in a moment to be able to
turn that water on and brown
water come out and think that
it's that it's, it's acceptable.
It's no longer acceptable and
so.
Um, we, we gotta get our, our
water septic upgrades taken care
of. Our mountain air patrol, the
building renovations, as you can
see some of the photos, uh, the
the the the disintegration of,
of the facilities themselves,
they're falling apart at the
foundation.
I'm just gonna run through the
rest of the astra Pless patrol,
building renovations quest to
patrol building renovations,
wagon mount patrol, building
renovations, patrol electrical
upgrades, uh, as well as the Las
Vegas water wash based system.
Uh, one of the, one of the
things that, um, I was
completely surprised to find out
when I go visit these patrols is
that what they're getting ready
to make sure that those roads
are clear that our children and
you know, GSD DOT, DPS making
those calls to close roles or
keeping open, you know, those
calls are made to make sure that
we keep people safe. Our patrols
are already there from
overnight. They're working at 12
to 12 hour shifts and they're
out there on these vehicles.
They're in the dark, a lot of.
These patrols don't have any
type of lights. They're trying
to, they're trying to work on
their trucks. They're trying to
get.
Ready to get out there to make
sure our roads are clear using
the headlights of other.
Vehicles to do the work they
need to be. We've outgrown these
trucks are much bigger than they
ever were our bays don't, don't
support the ability to put these
large 10 yarders in there to be
working on some dudes, some
don't, so, um, these are the
priorities, um, that this that
this uh ask will address to make
sure that our patrols and our
employees have the facilities
that they need to meet the needs
of our communities all across
the state. On the next page you
can see.
Some of the electrical upgrades
for the patrol yards as well in
order for us to start looking at
upgrading the lighting, um, to
upgrade, um, you know, even to
the for the installation of
charging infrastructure.
Uh, in those patrols, we don't
have electrical components to be
able to support those types of
upgrades, so it's really
building that foundation so that
later capital asks that we're
able to then uh increase that
electrical capacity to give them
what they need at these patrols,
including the existing lighting
that is again, it shouldn't be a
negotiable.
I mean, our employees should
have lights in the patrol yards
when they're wake when they're
there 24 hours a day working to
make sure that our families are
safe and getting to where they
need to be.
Uh, the Las Vegas Patrol wash
Bay, you know, um, right now,
uh, this addresses an
environmental hazard. EPA found
that the current process for
washing the equipment was
creating a threat to the water
table. Think about that, even
the ability to wash these
vehicles was is having a
negative impact on the
environment, so, um, the impact
of the residents and the
surrounding areas is critical.
We want to address this
immediately. The recommendation
is to install a wash bay with
leakproof cat ponds in a water
recyclable system.
Um, uh, why in Las Vegas?
Because we get a lot of snow
there, we're we're washing off
those vehicles. The worst thing
for our trucks, uh, and I would
invite anyone during the snow
season to pay a visit to a
patrol to see what that process
is when you see these big orange
trucks going down the
interstates, there's a lot of
prep involved to get them ready
and get them out there, but then
after the fact they're having to
wash these trucks, make sure
that that salt is accumulated on
the vehicle is washed off
because it also has a negative
impact to the life cycle of that
truck.
So we make sure that before
those trucks are parked that
they're taken care of, the
salt's removed so that we're
again, that's why these trucks
are able to have a longer life
because our patrols take extreme
care of their vehicles.
Um, electric vehicle charging
infrastructure if you go to the
next map, um.
There's 22 icons on that page,
the little lightning bolts
represent the state funds that
we made investments thanks to
thanks to our, our lawmakers and
our governor, we've made
investments of of $12 million
across New Mexico and some of
the most rural parts of our
state. We started with
disadvantaged communities first,
uh, we wanted to make sure the
market's gonna do what the
market does, right? People ask
me at times, why aren't you
putting chartering stations
where the electric vehicles are
where where.
Where, where, where, where are
the vehicles, who owns them?
Well, I ask
Well,
Vehicles are mobile.
We want them to have the ability
to go around the enchanted
circle and to see the colors of
our leaves changing in October,
we want him to stop on their way
to spend critical GRT dollars
all across our communities,
these communities are really
rooted in tourism dollars so
these charging infrastructures
need to be put in places where
people go, not where cars are
purchased, not what cars are
registered. So if you notice the
blue icons which represent
every.
Every investment we've made on
on state dollars, we have over
40 locations with approximately
86 charging stations across New
Mexico, places like Sierra Maria
Chama Ojo Caliente if you want
to go to the mineral springs and
take a, a, a hot spring for a
little while, uh, uh, Columbus,
New Mexico, V, New Mexico.
Um, and so we're making those
investments, but as you can see,
look at all the empty space.
Look at the northwest in the
Navajo Nation.
That needs to be dealt with.
We have an additional hotspots,
those represent the $38.3
million that we received from
our federal formulaic Navy
program that is predetermined
through the federal program
every 50 miles along our
alternative fuel corridors, uh,
there's 2200 miles total, um, in
New Mexico that we received 38.3
miles. Uh, we've already awarded
20 locations across all three of
our interstates, uh, RFP was
closed.
Awards should be out, uh,
shortly in regards to the
procurement that was just closed
out last week for the additional
1200 miles that represents 20 on
our interstates and about
another 25 every 50 miles on
those US and New Mexico routes,
um, we'll shortly have
approximately 70 active
construction sites and even with
those 70 sites when you look at
those those icons that.
Represents a pin on the map.
It represents 2 or 4 charging
stations. That's it.
That's it.
Those of you who drive electric
vehicles, if you're at a
charging station and there's 3
or 4 cars in front of you, even
with the BC fast charger that
you can be in and out.
In 20 to 30 minutes.
Multiplied by 5 cars in front of
you?
It's still 150 minutes, which
represents more than 2 hour
wait.
And so the community charging is
the next phase of what we're
asking for to make sure that we
have accessibility you can drive
up and down Currios Road, and if
the gas station has a line out
the door, what are you gonna do?
You're gonna go the next block
over to fill up your gas tank.
Much in the same way if those
charges are occupied, you should
be able to go up the road and
charge up your electric vehicle.
And so the Asper community
charging with the $200 million I
think is critical as we uh drive
the reduction of carbon in our
state and the adoption of EVs
goes up.
So Mr. Chair, uh, you'll indulge
me this and I want to introduce
our guests who came with. I want
to thank them, um, you know, uh,
with the 2500 employees, more
than 1000 of them are working
out in our various patrols, men
and women who um essentially do
everything from a routine
maintenance, um, to heavy
construction work on uh on our
roads.
And uh we've made a concerted
effort actually we've hired an
individual. His name is Matt
Cordova, and he's here behind me
whose purpose it is to visit
those patrols on a regular
basis.
And he has a few
responsibilities in those
discussions. One is talking
about how from a leadership and
communication and organizational
perspective can we make good
smart decisions that impact
employees who interact most with
our roadways, but 2 is capturing
and understanding what kind of
infrastructure needs that, um,
that they identify that will
help them get that job done, and
so we're working on a couple of
things employee engagement,
right, and morale, and then, of
course, giving them the tools
and resources that they need.
And so, um.
The, the things that we hear
that I've heard, you know, and I
want to kind of spotlight, not,
not shame, but spotlight a
couple communities, for example,
you know, you're driving over to
our portales patrol.
And you look at what the town of
Portales has for their roads
maintenance, right, uh,
department.
And you drive up further and you
get to ours, and these men and
women drive by that Portales
facility every single day and
wonder, wonder if uh our
building will ever look like
that.
I wonder if we'll ever get a 5
yard truck that looks like that.
I wonder if they're hiring.
And the same is true in Torrance
County. When you go to Torrance
County, you look at the facility
that they've put in their yard.
And you drive by there and
wonder, wonder if we'll ever
have a patrol that looks like
that. I'm wondering if our men
and women are looking to go over
there and there's a possibility
that those facilities and many
others that our employees
compare their working conditions
with are funded by capital
outlay.
And if that's the case, and
we're kind of shooting ourselves
in the foot because we present
opportunities for our state
employees to go work for
organizations that identify
with, whether it be bonding,
whether it be capital outlay,
whether it be.
Um, grant funded facilities and
organizations that can kind of
just the sense of pride that
they have when they walk into a
place that, uh, the toilets are
working, the running water is
something that they can drink
ice machines when they're out
there in District 1, 105. And so
the, the, the best part, the
silver lining is that these men
and women are never just sitting
in an office wondering why it's
so awful looking. They're out on
the roads on a regular basis,
but like Jerry said, when they
come back to do critical work,
repair.
On the vehicles, preparing them
for salt cinder distributions on
roads, getting the plows up and
running.
Um, their poles, their fencing
ready to be on the side of the
road.
They do struggle with the fact
that a lot of the facilities
that they are working out of are
falling apart. We can even
identify hazardous working
conditions for the HVAC system
in our maintenance shops isn't
creating the ventilation
necessary to make sure that
they're not breathing in fumes
from vehicles and so we do make
conscious decisions to
essentially say at the end of
every year, we're going to
invest 1015, 20 critical things,
right? But given where, you
know, given what we haven't seen
in Capital Latley, you know, we
come to you all with a
reasonable.
$31 million and you see that
even but we're also going to
target those. I'll just have
these gentlemen introduce
themselves quickly, what patrol
or patrols they work at an
to plug something in from our
out on outlets.
Work in the shop, it trips or
lights.
We have 4 different breaks
because in the past people have
went and just put stuff here and
there. We're always looking for
different things like that, you
know what I'm saying? It just be
nice to be able to.
Work in the winter time and our
10 yard like they explained with
our salt spreader on it, be able
to put it in the shop, close it
off.
We win buys get cold, wet, sick.
It'd just be nice to get a
little bit of money to help us
out improve that maybe extend
the.
Good morning guys. uh, thank you
for allowing me to be here. Uh,
my name is Stan Lucero. I'm the
supervisor with the Wagama
patrol out of District 4.
Uh,
My control consists of.
And employs 11, including
myself, um.
Our facility there in Wagon
Mountain is.
It's pretty rough. I mean, uh.
I've been the supervisor there
for 2 years.
I've been there at Wa on Patrol
for about 10.
Um,
Our roof
And the building is leaking
pretty bad and then uh.
It runs through the walls and
some of my uh.
In my rooms, the break room.
My office, uh, have a storage
room on the side.
Also, I had some contractors
come down to see.
They could do some.
Do have
I've been working on that for
about 3 years.
And uh it's hard to even get
contractors out there in my
area.
At that, they were also
concerned about the mold and
then.
They brought up about asbestos
in some of the some of the
flooring that we have in the
restroom that tested, but um,
our trucks do not fit in our
base. We have no ventilation
inside that shop.
Uh
It's already.
I think it's hot in there, we
have no, all we have is heat in
there and.
There are times in the winter,
at least once a year I have a
problem with those heaters, just
they can't keep up with the cold
out there. We have them running
all the time.
We can pull in those trucks,
can't turn off those heaters,
you're gonna, gonna freeze.
Um,
I got water running down, down
to the first.
In the break room.
Uh, dripping on top of some of
the outlets in there, so we have
them shut off and covered with.
A lot of people, they talk to
me.
My office
Tell us what a good job they
walk into my facility.
And they asked me how I operate
out of there.
So, I mean, it kind of messes
with the morale of my employees,
my morale, we, we help out
several patrols. We go. Are we
ever gonna get anything?
equipment we work, we work with
what we got. It's hard to do it.
The more.
We have uh at the wake we have.
Approximately 400 lane miles.
Uh, 3 trucks running at the
moment.
We'll do is what we got for now,
um.
Like I said, there's no air
conditioning.
And throughout the building, so
you're pretty hot in there.
Um, then to
And
I mean
Morning, my name is Jerry
Gonzalez. I'm the assistant at
the S is the water out there.
Uh, we go through a ton of
bottled water. It's.
We have one in Rotter, but it's
the software in the system, I
mean.
The smell of it. Come back to
the the yard after a hard day.
You want to wash your face a
little bit, you wash your hands
for lunch. And then the other
main concern is equipment also.
This year we have to pull, we
had to fight with the equipment
and equipment out of the auction
yard.
That better shape and running
than ours.
But I mean my real concern is in
the building it's up to it.
You got quite a bit of leaks in
the roof.
Insulation torn.
It's not quite as bad as this
guy's I feel for you, but ding
guys sorry uh.
Just another, another problem
having with, uh, we do as much
maintenance as we can to that my
favorite thing.
But me and my employees will.
Go to make uh due to the fact
that it's hard and then on top
of that.
Fix that building, but uh.
Another problem I'm having with
my open area feel nice, all that
stuff for.
They're pretty bad. We try to
keep the building as clean and
uh.
Kept up as possible, keep all
food put away put out bait.
You can get sick from.
Thank you guys.
That's it, Mr. Chairman, we'll
answer any questions you'll
have.
Thank you, Secretary for the
presentation, um.
That's just from the.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Secretary, for the
presentation. All the staff that
came, made the journey, um, we
completely understand a lot of
our facilities are in the same
condition.
Um, it's taken a lot to, um, get
the. Um, I think, um, as a
suggestion, uh, coming before
the committee instead of
comparing DOT to GS because GSD
only holdings. That's what we
receive in capital outlay.
But when you come from deals
funds for your, um, it's hard as
a committee to make the
comparison.
So I would suggest maybe not
comparing the building and
instead focus on.
Because if we look at the first
slide on me NMDOT by the
numbers.
Um,
Right now we're showing that the
budget estimate for FY 25 is
$1.8 billion.
But we're showing that we only
have 90 active projects totaling
$1.2 billion so it's like $600
million. What are we doing?
So, um,
Maybe some suggestions as
partnerships and what we can do
to help facilitate some of your
um work with the committee on
some uh creative ideas because
we absolutely want to support um
you and your construction
buildings.
Um, also too just want to remind
the committee that um, the
governor's executive order that
as far as the vehicles and the
fleet.
OK
Good morning. Thank you
Secretary. Thank you, Jerry. um,
thanks to the folks from the
districts that came out, um.
So
Sort of a a little bit of a
different tack on Anna's
question, um, what is the
agencies like internal
facilities management structure.
Thank you, Chairman.
I thank you so much. And so the
capacity is the uh secretary has
made the investments we've hired
again, he mentioned Matt
Cordoba.
Uh, we have a statewide
facilities director who oversees
the, the entire state of.
Big projects, uh, every, every
district also has the buildings
and grounds and so they average
about.
2 to 3 employees
per district uh to manage the
day to day, uh, we talked about
rodents, we talked about some
minor things that they try to do
at the local district level, um.
And then of course we with the
with the our our our our
employees from the general
office.
Uh, they work with the districts
to make sure that those projects
are being made. Capacity from a
funding perspective, um, to, to,
uh, just.
Say it, uh, we, we haven't
received capital funding uh as
deputy secretary, Silver
mentioned, we've had to use.
Road funds
And, and although we're talking
about a 1.8.
$1 billion dollar budget, you
know, um, one project Montgomery
Comanche is over $250 million.
Um, and so you, I think, I think
you're right, it's not a
comparison, but I also think
that, uh, the committee, uh, all
due respect and even our
policymakers, uh, don't, don't.
See those comparisons quite as
clearly, uh, that for every $1
that we do take out of our road
fund for these purposes, our
dollars that are out of those
communities that are outside of
projects when we talk about, I
say potholes because I think
that's the most relatable, but
when we're we're talking about
items that you can't see.
In McKinley County, bridges that
are from World War II that cars
might not see the cracks.
Or the structural uh uh
integrity that needs to be
addressed, um.
You know, we put that we have an
active uh roster of $1.2 billion
but we have.
$5 billion of needs $5 billion
worth of needs that we have to
manage, uh, year to year and so
there's not $600 million sitting
in uh DOT um bank account, uh,
not knowing what to do, it's
it's just it takes, it takes
time for products to go out to
design.
It takes time for those products
to be developed and that money
has to sit there until we can
actually put it out, let, let
that project and put those
dollars to work. We can't spend
it and then.
led a project in that $600
million is nowhere to be found.
So, so that's where we're
missing the mark, we would love
to work to explain our story a
little clearer, uh, because I
think some of our, our lawmakers
still believe that we get money.
Outside of road fund for our
vehicles we don't we get money
outside of our outside of our
road fund for facilities. We
don't. And, and so to say every
single one of those dollars that
we put towards those means is
coming off of your district and
your community.
That's where I think the
disconnect also exists as.
Thank you, um, for that, you
know, I think, um, your point is
well taken about the needs of
these facilities, and I think
also, um.
You know,
We understand the.
Difficult situation, the road
fund is in revenues versus costs
currently, um, at the same time,
you know, these conditions in
these facilities like predate
that.
For many, many years.
So partly I ask about the
internal capacity.
To manage facilities, um,
because, you know, if we're
thinking about putting new
investments in back.
And
Um,
You know, a strategy for.
Preventing.
Um, and so one thing on that
point, have you guys done like a
statewide facilities assessment
on all your buildings and um.
I know last year there was like
there were some energy
assessments done, but I'm
thinking more like, you know,
all.
Um,
So yeah, has that been done yet?
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so no.
Um, going, going to your point
about, you know, we don't get
here overnight, right?
Um, I think historically there
was a, a great big push uh to
support statewide, um.
Performance audits tied to escO
projects, right? And if you're
familiar with ESO projects,
which I believe you all are.
The limitations of what can be
done through those projects as a
measure of yielding cost
savings, right?
Doesn't include a lot of
fundamental infrastructure
upgrades, right, like brand new
toilets, interior building
renovations, you know, things
like that, addressing mold, uh,
um, and, and water issues.
And so I think the focus was how
do we use energy saving audits
statewide to identify potential
esco projects to invest in our
patrols.
And so it was, I think it's
really great because a lot of
those projects centralized on
the general office and the
district offices, but if I were
any of these men sitting here,
I'd be thinking to myself like.
This is the stuff I deal with,
and these guys just threw up
some solar panels to save money
over there in Albuquerque and
I'm thinking that's messed up,
right? And so what we're
considering doing because a lot
of DOTs are funded, um, the same
way across the nation is there
are a number of consultants that
can come in and conduct that 360
review of our infrastructure to
put together a capital master
plan that would address the most
critical items and, and that's
an investment that we're
prepared to make again.
understanding that only in the
last 3 years have we been going
through the process for the
purpose of presenting critical
priorities to the capital outlay
Committee, so that'll be a
critical next step. It isn't
that ECO projects aren't of
value, it's just that I guess I,
I fundamentally believe that um
these men and women should be
just as comfortable as I am in
my office in their patrols, like
it just makes sense and and if
that's going to take a different
form of contracting, then so be
it. We can't just go to whatever
is turnkey and.
What's turnkey about escco
projects is they do the audit,
they do the project management,
they spit out a number that says
this is why it's worth it to you
after a while, and we all feel
really warm and fuzzy about that
until we realized that, you
know, in order to get a toilet.
Or a bathroom, uh repaired, you
know, we're gonna have to spend
an extra $150,000 somewhere else
to pay for the restroom because
it doesn't yield cost saving
measures, right? And so we're,
we're trying to get a little bit
more grassroots.
Um, thank you for that,
secretary. You know, I would
definitely encourage you guys to
do a statewide facilities
condition assessment on all your
buildings, um, and I think
that'd be very beneficial for
this committee. Um, we've asked
some other agencies to do that
who have like just similarly
only in the last couple years.
I'm asking for capital LA, um,
workforce solutions is one
example, um, they were able to
get that done pretty quickly and
it's, I think, been very helpful
and forming the capital outlay
process going forward. Um, I
mean, obviously, like you don't
need to do that to know that
some of this stuff needs to be
done, but long term it would,
um.
You know, help us know like what
the overall need is and help
separate um.
So.
Um, one question on electric
vehicles. Thank you for the map,
very helpful.
Um, so just to clarify the
The blue icons on here that are
ARPA Capital Olay sites, are
these those that have already
been.
with those funds.
Uh, sure, uh, Kelly, yes, the,
the blue icons represent the um.
Almost $12 million that we made
and so there are, uh, we've had
two site hosts that were
renegotiating with, uh, so
there's two locations, uh, one.
In Des Moiness, uh, in another
in Hemes that we're looking at
the site host agreement fell
through,
uh, but there's, there's
charging infrastructure in Des
Moines with another contractor.
Um, and then the orange.
Hotspots represent the federal
program which are not installed.
20 of those have already been
awarded along I-25 I-40.
Um, I 10, then the other 2
process of reviewing proposals
is currently.
Madam, Madam Chair members, it
was a really smart strategy that
predates my understanding that
the federal funding would focus
on those alternative fuel
corridors and interstates.
That whatever funding came ahead
of that would focus on rural
parts of the state.
And I think that did a couple
boosted the likelihood that
charging infrastructure could
support small community
development.
The 2 is, again, we don't want
to create that scenario where
smaller communities see all
these charge stations up on
I-40, 25 and 10 and say why are
we being left out much like.
You know, esco projects at our
district, so.
It was good to show that um we
can support small rural
communities.
Um, as a priority knowing that
these larger corridors were
already going to be covered by.
Thank you, um.
And
Maybe some of these are wrapped
up in those ones you were just
talking about Jerry, but do you
guys have like a project
schedule you could give us for
the.
15 million received.
Last session and then if you
have uh.
Something similar for as well,
um, you could send it to Wesley.
And I can send you the uh chair
I can send that proposed the RFP
that went out, uh, those have
not been awarded.
Um,
And then my last question is,
um, with the patrol yards would
if there were money appropriated
for that, would it go directly
to DOT? I assume these are not
GSD projects so they could be,
um, what's the. Uh, Mr. Chair
members, I, I, I imagine that
would come directly to to DOT,
um, not to say that project
management support and oversight
from GST would, uh, would be an
issue, it'd be welcomed, um,
going back to your capacity
question.
Um, but typically, um, I don't
know what it did in the past,
but typically, um, we oversee
hundreds of millions of k we
just wish it would not flow
through and stay with us, but
we, we get a lot of capital at
the agency that flows.
Uh, Ty.
Thank you for your presentation
and also I want to thank the
gentlemen for coming down from
the patrol yards and presenting
to us today the patrol yards are
very much in need. I used to
work at DOT for many years. I've
seen those patrol yards and.
I mean,
Our patrolmen out there have
such a huge responsibility to
our state and these facilities
definitely need to be improved,
um, they have been let down in
the past. There needs to be a
master plan in place like Kelly
was saying facilities condition
it assessment, um, I know DOTs
come before our committee for 3
years, but this problem
definitely predates the 3 years
that you've come before our
committee to ask for Capitol.
These issues should have been
addressed. These men have been
let down.
And I wanna say something done
about that regardless of what
happens with the funding here.
This needs to be addressed.
So it's not something that can
take place any longer. It is not
acceptable.
Um, something as simple as
getting our presentation on time
to be included in our electronic
packet for this committee is not
something that can even be done,
so management at EOT needs to
get together and make sure that
we are getting these deadlines
met. This is the 2nd year in a
row that we've received a
paperless presentation. It's not
that big of a deal, but it's a
little bit upsetting because
those are the type of issues
that are leading to these men
being let down is just things
that are not being addressed,
things are not being done on
time, the master planning is
lacking, so I wanna see things
get done for these gentlemen
and.
I don't want these gentlemen to
be let down and you, um, deputy
secretary.
Good morning. Um, I'm gonna
start, uh, just with a
accommodation for the DOT, um,
I'm not an ordinary member of
this committee, but as somebody
who lives up north in a rural
community, um, uh, the
communications that you've been,
uh, uh, how do I say, rolling
out with some of the projects
for community members have been
really well received, so getting
the text messages, being able to
participate on Zoom calls, um,
uh, to understand what's
happening in the community is
really beneficial. Um, I for one
have a 77 year old mother who
felt very comforted knowing
what's gonna be the next steps
for her community, so I just
really wanna say that I thank
you for that and all the great
billboards, you know, we moved
New Mexico, it's being noticed,
um, and to, um, echo, uh, the
comments, uh, that, uh, my
colleague just made is, um, as
somebody who's not an ordinary
member, um, but who works at
higher ed we're also concerned
with the workforce and so I just
really want to acknowledge, uh,
Mr. Lujan, Mr. Lucero, Mr.
Gonzalez, and, and thank you,
show gratitude um for.
I mean, and sharing your stories
with us today, um, as I sit
here, you know, I'm hearing
about what happened in the past.
I'm hearing about we need to do
plans and assessments. I
understand that's the charge of
this committee, but that's in
the future, and I also
understand that you all are
facing another winter with open
bay doors with cold with
rodents, and so, um, also that
charge of I also hear that DOT,
you know, um, is, is doing a
lot, um, and so that piece of of
how we can work together, um, to
think about how we.
these issues because we know
that the spaces that we work in
reflect, you know, that
community spiritedness that I
would commend you for, um, but
also that it sounds like as a
state we need to work on and so,
um, I just really wanted to
acknowledge um the workers who
came in today and everybody
that. And um, Mr. Chair, just
the last couple of uh members
comments, you know, it's um.
You know, I kind of think back
to when I used to be a school
teacher, right?
And you, you know, a 24 kids,
4th graders, and they come in
every day and each of them has a
unique need, right? That you
wonder why isn't being met.
And it's because you realize
very quickly as of then getting
to know a lot of your parents is
that you have limited capacity
to do what other parents can and
cannot do.
And so the responsibility you
have is to make decisions,
right, about what's most
important and for us in the past
two years, and I think these
gentlemen back here can attest
to it. It's been compensation.
When I came into the DOT we were
creeping up on a 21% vacancy
rate on the heels of some of the
work that I did to raise the
minimum pay rate for all state
workers to $15 an hour, some of
these men and women were making
16 and $17 an hour, or please we
don't like to hire anybody for
less than 20 right now.
And why is that important to say
is because where do those pay
increases come from the same
fund that we're expected to pay
for. And so just 2 months ago on
recognizing that the area where
we were still hurting for um for
employees was among our
engineers and after doling out
the legislative pay increase
which comes from the state road
fund we added a 10% pay increase
to all of our engineers to
address critical vacancy rates
in our infrastructure division,
right?
I mean we had engineers that
were, you know, making $80,000
an hour after 15 years with the
agency. And so we are like, you
know, an organization of parents
who are trying to do what's
right, but we know that we can't
keep the general the traveling
public safe if there are no
workers at DOT.
And we made that a priority for
the last 2 years and we're
trying to mark, we're trying to
brand ourselves as the best
paying agency in state
government, we just can't put a
pin on the metrics to actually
do that.
But making sure that our men and
women feel that they can go home
and take care of their families
has been our critical priority
and to be sure, making sure that
they're safe there is is right
up there, but all of these
measures, right, come um from an
administration that is managing
an agency that gets zero
recurring general fund and zero
capital outlay dollars and
everything that we do from
office supplies to compensation,
including that that's
legislatively appropriated comes
directly out of the state road
fund.
And so it is a fine balance. I
respect, you know, the, the
honesty about, you know, uh, we
hear the stories too, uh, and
you're probably thinking, well,
why don't you go and fix them,
right? Because again, we're
shuffling a lot of priorities
from what the general public
wants to see on the roadways to
getting, making sure our
employees can support their
families, um, and, and making
sure they're all important to
us. We just get to a point where
we realize we can't afford.
Um, any other questions? I just
have a couple of, of, of
comments and statements, um.
I, I am, for one, I'm grateful
and thankful that you are coming
in front of our committee.
You share the stories, right?
We, um, we didn't know about
these, we didn't know, so, um,
without, you know, you coming
and presenting to us, we would
never know. Um, so I wanna, you
know, thank you for that.
Um,
One of my questions was on the
$15 million which we've already
answered, um, and so I, I'll
move on from that one, you did
mention Esco, um, projects, and
I think, um, I want to also
mention direct pay, um, you
know, you, your team has been
really good at getting us the
information we need to begin,
um, the, the prefile status and
the filing of our direct pay and
I don't wanna just, you know,
make sure that I shout out
Richard and Joaquin um from your
team that have been really
helpful in gathering some of
that information. Um, I think as
we continue to develop
these types of projects, um, I
think we can start thinking
about how we can.
You know, maybe look at adding
some of the things to these
projects that could help us get
some rebates for direct pay. Um,
obviously with lighting, you
know, adding solar to to help
with lighting, um, maybe even
possibly putting solar on some
of these buildings and patrol
yards to try to get us some
money back um to be able to
continue to to do some of these
projects, um, is something that
we probably need to talk about
going forward. Um,
so I think I'm looking forward
to more of those conversations
looking forward to seeing all
these projects come to fruition
so that we can continue.
You to get those rebates back
into the state.
Um, and then lastly, I and, and
um deputy secretary and I were
kind of talking about this
question.
Why, why aren't these, these
buildings under GST's purview,
um, I think these buildings may
be being under GSD's purview
might also help with this
situation. Um, maybe there's
some of the, the funds that they
receive could go towards these
um.
But you're not using the state
road fund. Um, so that's
something else that we could
probably talk about. I don't
wanna take up too much time here
discussing it, but those are
things that I think we can kind
of look at into the future to
see if that could be something
that could help with the
situation too, um, because as
you stated and as we've seen in
the pictures, there are lots of
needs out there, um, and on top
of these patrol yards these,
there's lots of other state
agency needs, lots of local
community needs, and so when
we're stuck with, you know, $1
billion of funding each year to
try to give to all these
communities. I just.
doesn't go as far as we would
hope and expect it to.
Um, so again, more conversations
and you can speak to it right
now if you want to. I just, I
know we're behind, so I'm trying
to, yeah, just too quick. I
think that's a great point when
we were doing direct pay my very
first question for all of you
that know me well inevitably
was, are we gonna get that money
back to the agencies, right,
because.
You know, you take, for example,
we're we're putting electric
vehicle charging infrastructure
in.
In urban communities getting
rebates from from utility like
PNM and then we're taking those
rebates to invest in communities
where co-ops aren't giving us
rebates and so we're kind of
using these resources the same
with direct pay. We spend a
significant amount of money that
we'll be eligible for for
federal rebates on direct pay
and that money will go into a a
bucket of money and doled out to
other agencies and that's OK
cause we we're we're all about
team ball. And so on that point
about team ball for us, we hope
that the obstacle.
In front of us isn't because
those buildings belong to 3
different letters.
And GSD like that shouldn't be
what's holding us from doing
what we need to do.
But if that obstacle can be uh
overcome more easily through
working with GST right on
grouping projects regionally to
support, you know, cost
reductions, you know, the
availability of materials, all
of these other things. I mean,
we would even work with the
local school district if we knew
that our construction parallel
to theirs would create
efficiencies right for
contractors to get out there and
do work, so we're open to
anything if, if, you know, we
need to put a different sign in
front of them to fix them.
Drop the sign off whenever you
want. It's really just, you
know, we all are one state
government, uh, we are
functioning like um.
Um, like do it as an enterprise
and, you know, we generate
revenue from road user fees.
It's your gas and your
registration fees for the most
part, but we know that not to
the extent when you go back,
right, as a as my responsibility
as a driver.
I mean, I'm living on fuel tax
and registration fees that were
put in place when I was like in
junior high, you know, and you
know, back when a cup of coffee
was 50 cents and now it's $4
except the cost of my fuel tax,
my registration fees hasn't
changed.
And when you make comparisons to
us in other states, we either
need to do one or two things. It
is find new revenues to support
what we're doing or increase the
existing ones, and both of those
will hit everyone in this room
and we just want to be mindful
that if we do that, it's
methodically and and the general
public gets what they deserve
from that investment.
Yeah, thank you for those
comments and um thank you for
the presentation. I, I hope, no,
no matter what happens, I hope
you continue to come um in front
of us so that you can continue
to request funding, um, and
hopefully, hopefully this is the
beginning. Thank you all very
much. Thank you um I know next
up is information technology.
So next up is Department of
Information. We are running
behind, so try to make the
presentation as brief as you can
and we'll try to make our
questions as quick as we can.
We sure will, thank you.
Well, good morning, chair and
members of the Capital LA
Bureau.
Committee, uh, I am anti anybody
does, the newly appointed
cabinet secretary for the
Department of Information
Technology?
It is a privilege to address you
today as we seek.
Your support for our mission.
Our core values service, trust,
innovation and collaboration
drive us to deliver impactful
results and foster strong
relationships with the state
agencies that we serve and
support.
As we pursue new funding.
Opportunities. I am committed to
upholding these values and eager
to continue the meaningful work.
That advances the delivery of
our state agency's core
missions.
I look forward to implementing
improvements that will enhance
our services and create progress
for all New Mexico state
agencies.
Our goal is to address all your
questions and concerns after our
presentation today, we welcome
any further inquiries and we
will make ourselves available at
your convenience.
I would like to introduce uh my
dedicated team who are subject
matter experts and crucial to
our mission.
It will help us achieve our
goals effectively.
We have 5 different project
requests today, uh, our first is
director of Public Safety
Michael Robacher. He will
present on the State of New New
Mexico P25 public radio system?
Director of IT Services Jason
Avedank.
Deputy director of IT, he will
present on John Sims' building
remodel in Las Vegas
Communications Bureau
Construction.
Chief of information security
officer Raja Sabaadam. He will
present on on the duet axis and
camera control surveillance
system.
And also the.
Sims Data Center environmental
upgrades.
And for further support, I have
Jason Johnson, who is my deputy
CIO and Lorenzo Ornales, who
heads up our network services
bureau and and facility teams
also have Jacqueline Lovato, our
executive assistant here.
Thank you for your time today. I
look forward to collaborating
with you and making a positive
impact to our state agency.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good morning. I am
Mike Rohrabacher. I'm the
director of public safety
communications for Do it.
And our first project to ask is
for the continuation of the New
Mexico DTRS public safety radio
system, a multi-year capital
outlay project which began in
2017.
The primary purpose of the
system is to provide statewide
public safety radio tribal and
local entities.
Providing a public safety system
which is on a unified platform
which all first responders can
share.
Uh, enhances coverage, enhances
interoperability or the agencies
to talk to each other on the
radio as well as reduces
duplication of uh infrastructure
sites and therefore reduces cost
overall.
On slide 3, you can see some of
our current statistics, uh, even
though there are many slides in
the presentation in the interest
of time I'm gonna try questions
that you have afterwards.
Currently there are over 50
independent state, federal,
local, and tribal entities
participating in the system,
system adoption has been really
great. That's up 10 from this
time last year and since um
within the past 6 months or so
we've actually been adding up as
many as 2 agencies per month on
the system, so that's, that's
really good.
57 infrastructure sites online
today, which produced 55%
geographic total statewide
coverage that's up 23 sites and
15% from last year, our ultimate
goal is 92% statewide geographic
coverage.
We also currently have 52 sites
and active construction and
implementation using uh funding
which was previously
appropriated.
At the end of that work, our
overall coverage will be 80%, so
we're getting much, much closer
to our total goal of 92% for
project completion.
The system is currently handling
over 55,000 radio calls per day.
That's up by 25,000 per day from
this time lapsing of the system,
the system is continuing to
provide high reliability and
interoperable public safety
communications to first
responders and actually as we're
meeting here today, the system
is being used in that fashion
and Fiesta where a balloon this
morning.
So currently the system is
demonstrating its ability to
link communications between
federal, local, and state
responders out there.
Just as it has with several
other incidents recently.
On slide 4, you can see a
graphical demonstration of
system adoption, which is
measured by call volume, which
you're seeing there is the
number of radio calls per month
over the past 4 calendar years,
the uh top blue line is this
calendar year, which of course
is not complete yet.
But given that we're already on
track to beat any previous call
records that we had with over
17.7 million calls being
processed so far.
Uh, so that is a great example
of adoption of the system and
how successful the system has
been for our state's first
responders slide 5 is a list of
all of our current subscriber
agencies which are on the
system. There's over 50 right
now and we're adding about 2 per
month.
On slide 6 we have our overall
estimated project budget.
The budget for the project has
now been raised to 190 million,
the original project estimate in
2016 was 150 million. The reason
for that change is that since
2016, all of our vendors for the
project have increased their
hardware and their services
costs. Some of them as much as
30%, but on average it's 20 to
25% increase for hardware and
services.
So that's the reason for the
increase.
The uh completion date of the
project of course is dependent
upon the funding and the funding
schedule, and we estimate that
the project will be completed 4
years after the last
appropriation is made slide 7 is
our financial summary so far to
date over 101,000 have been
appropriated to the project of
which 62 million have been
expended and then another 27
million encumbered.
Leaving 11.29 million really out
of that 11.29%, only 1.29 is
truly available because the most
recent appropriation of 10
million is tied up in a bond
item um for November. So that's,
that's funding that's not
available currently and then if
passed would have to go through
project certification committee
so we've been doing a really
good job, I think in um.
Expanding and encumbering the
funding, these numbers are about
a month old, actually we've um
expanded almost another 800,000
since then.
So overall we're numbering and
expanding it does take a deal of
time to expand this funding
because we're talking about
construction and civil work and
permitting archaeological,
environmental assessments, all
of those things take time.
Uh, so generally,
Within the life of the 4-year
appropriations, everything is
expanded by the end of the 4
years, but generally we don't
expand within the same year.
Slide 8 is a review of all of
our sources for the project that
we've received from FY19 to 25.
And slide 9 is our forecast by
fiscal year for completion of
the project, showing showing
both previous appropriations as
well as the ask that we will be
making today for FY 26 and then
assuming we would plan for FY
27.
Slide 10 is an overview of P25
project appropriation uses to
date.
These are all of the major
categories of expenditures which
have gone into the project and
uh the last several items which
are listed as pending their bond
items, so those are the uh the
planned uses for that 10 million
a request for FY 26.
Is 60 million.
Uh, in a 4 year appropriation to
make significant progress
towards.
And uh I'm not gonna read the
list of entire proposed uses
there but it goes through system
infrastructure primarily
services, radio sub subscriber
equipment maintenance of uh or
installation replacement of
power generation and HVAC
systems, everything that it
takes to support the public
safety, these 150 sites, soon to
be 170.
And uh we realize obviously this
is a very large ask 60 million,
but we feel that it will enable
us to make significant progress
and enter the home stretch.
Moving towards system
completion.
Slide 12 is our summary of
proposed uses for that 60
million should it be
appropriated.
And uh everything is broken down
in there. We do have a contract
project manager, um.
Which is our primary project
manager for the system for the
project and then based on the um
sheer amount of work and the.
The nature of the, the, the
largeness of the project we've
got so we need some project, um.
Support help there.
As far as contract labor to
duration. There's several other
slides um that are supplemental
information that may be of
interest to you, indicating
where our system coverage is
today, breakdown of our coverage
what we would do with that 60
million in a detailer and how
that would get us closer
statewide coverage.
So that's my presentation. I'm
happy to answer any questions
that you may have after our
other presentations.
And uh so I'll turn it over to
Jason Habit.
Thank you, Michael. Good
morning, uh, chair and committee
members. Nice to speak to you
this morning.
Um, I'm talking about the, uh,
John F. Sims, uh, building
remodel phase two.
So the Sims building hosts our
main data center and it's over
40 years old.
Built in 1976.
Um,
And there's a number of things
that need to be updated there.
The ask is for 5 million and
13.9 million has already been
provided for the previous
phases.
If you look at slides 1 and 2
provides an overview of the
issues that we're addressing
with the phase two remodel, and
I also want to mention that we
have been working hand in hand
with GSD on this in terms of
what's going to be required and
getting together the appropriate
quotes and estimates.
So, there's a number of issues
uh regarding safety, ADA
compliance that needs to be
addressed, uh, some of the, uh,
Fixtures are out of code. Uh,
there's some mechanical issues
we have to look at as well as
hazard abatement that has to be
done for some of the materials
that are in the building due to
its age.
Uh, we have to do some work on
the fire suppression system and
of course furniture and
electrical are called out there.
Uh, we did get in trouble with
the fire marshal, uh, over, uh,
the way we've Daisy changed some
electrical cords together there.
Um,
So if you look at uh slides or
slide number 4, it's kind of an
overview of a square footage,
numbers, uh, what we're looking
at doing spells out what the ask
is as well as a previous spent.
Uh, slides 5 and 6. those are
visuals, shows you the areas
that have been previously
upgraded in phase one and what
we're focusing on in phase two.
And then the last page is just
kind of an overview of the
projects throughout the phases
and what we have asked for and
what we've spent.
And uh happy to answer any
questions after we've done the
presentation right now I'm gonna
hand it over to our state chief
information security officer
Roger Sanbanan to talk about the
surveillance and security
systems in the building.
Thank you.
Thank you chair and remember.
Um, so I'm going to talk about
the do it access control and
cameras. Why is it important?
Department of Information
Technology Data Center is the
Sims building.
That's like
It includes 76.
To bring that
System up to par to meet IRS
audit requirements to meet HIPAA
requirements meet PCI
requirements, all this plays a
role.
Because they have evolved over
time, but our systems are not
evolved or.
Um, so, uh, and it also hosts a.
Michael Robacher's um.
Uh, public safety radio
communication. It holds
the voice and network teams uh
infrastructure in there too. So
that's the context. Now I'll get
into the presentation.
Um,
Uh
The new system that we are
proposing page number 3.
Um, it would support two data
centers since it's our primary
and we have a.
And it has multiple
communication rooms and radio
sites, all that needs to be
protected because the bottom
line is public safety. If our
network goes down, your agency.
Um, and if our public safety
communication towers go down?
And public safety goes down.
And uh I want to highlight one
thing with the.
We consider ourselves the last
mile of public safety
communication, period.
Right.
Policy, the executive policy may
say, oh, we will work on this,
but at the end of the day to get
the officer.
From wherever he or she is to
the as to happen, right?
And that happens based on his
radio service.
And that needs to be protected.
If not, you may call 911
intricately interwoven this and
um.
So other challenges are that
that is currently on the system
that is end of life and cannot
be supported anymore is uh it's
very manual time consuming
process to find a video footage
of who tried to.
A break into communication room
or the data, it's hard for us to
do that and uh the updating the
system has become very
exponentially expensive because
it's one outdated, uh, end of
life, nobody provides updates
and it's causing audit findings
for us.
Um,
And uh moving on to page number
4, so, uh, we are looking at a
hybrid system, um, that will be
available glass all video, audio
feed or security guards to
monitor our managers to be able
to.
Uh, view them, see what is
happening, any suspicious
activity around all these
locations and.
A pre preemptively address them
into an incident.
Um,
And it'll be using machine
learning and analytic tools in
terms of face and person of
interest recognition and
notification and all that at no
extra cost. And Pitch5 um is the
source.
Um, we requested 4 million and
out of the 4 million we were
given 1.5 million, and with that
1.5 million in FY 24 and 25, we
are addressing some of the basic
needs and then with the 2.5
million that is the request.
We will address the rest of the
items that I. Um, why is it
again, and this is a summary on
page 6. It's easy to um manage,
maintain, uh, it is smart and it
is scalable, so I don't need to
come to you to um scale even
more sites are brought in are
more apartment I don't need to
to scale. I just need to add the
cameras in and scale, and that
is the key aspect and it comes
with a 10 year warranty of um
the total.
Cost of ownership is
comparatively, I can say
comparatively much lower with
that, um, I would like to.
Um, answer the mic too.
Um,
OK.
Its inhabitant to discuss about
the last.
Good morning. The 2nd uh
Second thing I'm presenting on
here is the Las Vegas Radio
communications building
overview?
Uh, this is a, a site, it's
actually a DOT property at the
base of a radio tower and it's
an area that we keep manned and
uh.
We actually do uh work there on
radios uh for state vehicles.
Um, and, and state vehicles that
will become important later in
the presentation include massive
things like snow plows.
Um,
Which are worked on of course
when the weather's uh.
Usually not very pleasant.
Uh, slides, uh.
Slides 3 and 4 really kind of
give an overview of what some of
the needs are there and, and how
they're not being met with the
current building.
Um, it all really amounts to
space and hazards associated
with being in a building that's
not uh specific built uh for its
purpose.
Uh, slide 4 is an
Overview, uh, summary of uh what
the requested funds are.
Uh
And then we get to slide 5, and
this is an area where we can let
the pictures tell some of the
story.
Uh, if you look at the, uh, the
picture on the left there, uh,
you'll see the office area and
all of the equipment we have
jammed in there currently. Uh,
there's two people that sit and
you see there's a piece of a
door we're using to provide some
uh uh some protection or or.
Or a divider between some
equipment in there that's loud
and noisy and hot, uh, and the
folks that are working.
Over on the right, I want to
call your attention to the
battery bank there that's on the
left of the picture. So those
are all high voltage batteries,
um, which can be hazardous in
some instances and probably
shouldn't be uh in an office
location where people are
working.
Uh, slide 6 gives you some of
the exterior views of the
facility, uh, you'll actually
see how small it is down there
on the left, um, you got some
other elevations, um.
They're also kind of pointing
out you've got some trucks in
there for uh perspective on the
left we've provided all the
dimensions. I'm not gonna go
through all of them for uh.
Uh, for the sake of time, but
you can see it's pretty small.
Uh, slide 7, this is supposed to
be an electrical closet instead
it's just a rack with a bunch of
stuff stacked on it in front of
some electrical panels. Again,
another hazardous situation that
needs to be remediated.
Uh, slide 8, this is the uh the
garage Bay area and storage, uh,
which you'll see is pretty
small. Uh, it's not gonna be
able to accommodate anything
nearly as big as a snow plow or
some of the other equipment that
uh we're required to work on and
install the radios for.
Um,
And uh slide 9, just an example
of some of the equipment that we
need to support out of the area.
Uh, it's, uh, you know, it,
it's.
Quite hazardous, uh, in certain
conditions out there, uh, when
we might have to repair radios
to be doing that in the pouring
rain or the driving snow or the
wind, or in the summer, the
heat, uh, cause uh obviously
heat and uh.
Heat and air conditioning are an
issue at the building as well.
And that's all I'm gonna turn it
back over to uh Raja.
Thank you, Jason. Um.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee, uh, again to give
me a request. Uh, this is about
the environmental upgrade for
where I'll summarize it easier
up front so that we can get into
the details.
Um, the data center is fed by,
um.
Um, utility, power, and then for
standby we have.
Yeah, generator that is powered
out of diesel, alternate power,
community power goes down.
It is also supported by by a
bank of batteries or UPSs as we
call it.
For uninterruptible power
source.
So all this is end of life, and
here is why it is very important
to understand why we need to act
on it.
We have a large, you know.
Um, 8000 gallon diesel tank
under the ground.
And it has already been
inspected by Environment
Department and they said.
Get it out and fix it.
So you do not know what the
environmental damage is.
Typically these gas storage
tanks are diesel storage tanks
have 20 to 30 year life.
He already exceeded that.
And by the time this body
approves the funding, and we
start digging, take it out, do
the remediation, and put a new
one.
All the agencies, including us,
ourselves, still need to be on
power and be providing those
data center services.
So for that we need to also
update the battery bank that
gives 15-20 minutes of hour and
flipped.
And that is also end of life as
of January 25.
And because we are changing,
making all those changes.
We also update the.
Um, 48 DC distribution panels,
uh, powered to code.
And that is also in this
request. So those are 3 elements
that's what I'll quickly go
through.
Um,
We have reasons to believe it is
more than 32 years old, but
that's the best, um, you know,
supporting document I have to
show that it is more than, um,
you know, 32 years old, so
that's why we are putting it's
32 years old and um our proposal
is to put a.
Um, well, about the ground
diesel tanks so that it has much
longer shelf life, so to speak,
rather than the 2 of the ground.
And moving on to next page. Um,
sorry about the page number,
it's at the bottom and uh as I
indicated earlier, we are
updating the 4 300 kilowatt UPSs
to meet the needs, um, because
as of January 2025, they are end
of life and cannot be supported
any further.
Um, we are also gonna replace um
some of the capacitors.
Um, as the capacitor lifespan is
only 8 years, and the third item
that I initially discussed is uh
changing the DC power up and
life.
Uh, on page 5.
Um,
We have the scope of work and
you know what are these elements
and what are the tentative cast
or, uh, we worked with our
partners uh general services
department. Thank you again, um,
these sources, the information
of the dollar amount here that
is list GSD.
And uh
So, um,
To get your attention, they
estimated construction cost and
the total project budgets.
So with that, I think we are
here for all.
Question.
Thank you, thank you for the
presentation, and that's a lot
of information, so thank you for
keeping it as brief as you
could. Um, questions from the
committee. So, um, just a couple
things. One is, um, this is a,
a.
A great example of a partnership
between the facilities outside
of.
Do it are on DOT property, um,
there's kind of like a mixture.
and so we have a facilit to do
it with a lot of their project.
Um,
So I just want to point out that
this is a great example and
maybe some other project with
the previous um uh.
Presentation, maybe we'll look
at some.
Collaboration between all three
agencies so we can help support
you with your or a connected
building or something like that,
one of the ones that they were
talking about.
Um, might be something that we
can help.
All three of us together we are
here to collaborate, cooperate
anything that we need to do
because uh.
Um, you know, he arrived a
little bit early and we listened
to what everything was pretty
much on the same template as
what we have identified except
for the rodent piece if I looked
under the carpet or somewhere in
the nooks and pennies. I'm
pretty sure we'll find that
rodent as well.
So, uh, it is a it is a risk
management issue. Let me put it
that way. It is a purely a risk
management issue because, you
know, we are looking at, you
know, um a smaller if we don't
do that and something bad were
to happen, it is a large risk
management issue for general
services.
To fix it at the pay, right? You
know, either it be outdated
vehicles are not having um um
appropriate HVAC and these um
staff are working on large
equipment, which is unclean, by
the way, so we need to climb up
there to put the radio equipment
and then if there is a slip and
fall, all that leads to a larger
amount, larger so it it is more
of a common sense driven
preventative measure rather than
after.
I want to bring up, we are
looking at uh relocate.
Um, there is an appropriation to
move, uh, do it, but gonna be
moving them too and the
remediation is going to take a
little bit. Roughly 100
employees 140.
Plus, in a transition.
Yes, uh, so I would say not more
than 150, 12.
Um,
thank you, uh, you know, some so
when we go through that process
and for that period in time and
and the refurbishment is done.
Because that's a project that we
are talking about here for that
period in time.
I
Uh, so that is what. Any other
questions, uh, Kelly.
Um, thank you for the
presentation, um.
I'm the Las Vegas building, is
this unique or are there a bunch
of these around is not
definitely we have those uh.
There are 5 facilities in the
state that are remotely located.
Support public safety
communications, Las Vegas, Santa
Fe, Albuquerque, Las Cruces, and
Roswell.
Um, this is the one that is in
the most need of help, some of
the previous facilities were
already remodeled through the
help of GSD.
And uh, but this, this one is.
Um, and is the proposal to tear
down what's there and rebuild it
at the same site.
Um, or just to remodel what's
already there.
What's the kind of scope site?
So it doesn't have to be at the
tower.
Well, we still need to have the
tower there, but the facility,
the, the work location for those
personnel doesn't have to be at
the tower.
Um, and then on the Sims
building, maybe this is more a
question for Anna, but um.
A GSD statewide or Capitol
Buildings repair fund bill last
phase.
Um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Kelly,
so.
Um,
CBRF is um.
Our state
We do like
If there's an overrun or if
there's a shortfall on something
we.
Any other question? Thank you.
We
that
Uh, IT side of the capital
request for the last be no
implicately well thank you for
all you do. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Push the button it should turn
green, good morning, uh, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. It's great to be with
you today. Uh, my name is Bo
Beams. I, uh, serve as the CEO
of Minors Koufax Medical Center.
And uh I'm a native New Mexican
and I'm very grateful for that,
but I mean, they're more
grateful this time of year, it's
a beautiful time of the year and
it's a beautiful drive down this
morning, so.
Uh, with that, uh.
Um,
I think you all are aware it's
challenging times and health
care and especially in rural
healthcare, but uh I'd like to
report that MCMC is doing very
well.
In meeting its mission, uh,
serving minors, uh, travelers,
especially those up and down
I-25.
And all the residents of
northeastern New Mexico, we're
kind of a regional center up
there because there's a.
Not much uh in New Mexico that's
close to us, uh, the next
nearest hospital is 100 miles to
the south at Las Vegas and uh.
So we provide for a large
catchment area, um.
Little bit of background on our
facility in case you're not
aware, and I can go into more
depth if you have any questions,
but uh.
MCMC has been around since 1905,
so actually older than the
state.
Uh, our current facility, uh,
the new facility opened its
doors in 2007, so it's.
About 17 years old, uh, we have
celebrated 17th birthday in
November, so that's coming up
here pretty quickly.
And uh with that, you know, when
you get to about 1517, 20 years,
things start to fail. Things
start to break down. We have a
little bit of an aging plant
facility, uh, the structure
itself is in great health and
great repair, but uh some of the
mechanical components have
started to fail on us and we
experienced that uh over the
course of the last two years,
um, so I want to talk about that
a little bit, um.
In the need for some upgrade to
equipment, of course, when you
enter a new building, usually
you have new technology, new
equipment that comes with that
building, so 17 years ago, uh,
we purchased quite a bit of
equipment and uh but we're at
end of life, um, with quite a
bit of that equipment. So we'd
like we're taking a phased in
approach over the next, over the
past year, this year, next year
to kind of uh restart a
replacement plan for both
facility and equipment.
Uh, so we do appreciate the
support we've gotten over recent
years and hope we can count on
that support going forward, uh,
you know, the support from this
committee, uh, really is
instrumental in keeping us in
the red. The other money we get
through other sources, uh,
really goes for operations and
so we're really hoping that we
can have the capital support we
need from the general fund.
Um,
With that, I'll, I'll just.
Um,
Try to be brief and move into
our request, um, where MCMC is
requesting a modest general fund
support in the amount of $1.5
million for fiscal year 26.
Uh, our capital priorities are
number one, as I mentioned, the
mechanical, we have rooftop
units, there's 9 rooftop units
in our facility. These are big
units, the, the two units we
replaced most recently, uh,
they're as big as uh semi
trailers, uh, there are 55, 65
ton units in in the build lead
time on these is typically 24 to
30 months and uh so we had a
couple of those fail yeah last
year in in our key area.
Mid surgeon pharmacy and you
know, all these are temperature
controlled areas highly
regulated through OSHA and
Medicare conditions of
participation, all that sort of
thing, so, uh, we were able to
get those rooftop units
replaced, but we've had others
that have started to fail and uh
being up in a place like Raton,
the cost of repair is
inordinately high because the
travel, uh, the lack of
technology and.
Uh, local talent with the
technology and and uh technical
ability to work on these very
sophisticated complex unit, so.
Um,
With that, we are proposing that
our 1.5 million first and
foremost go to replace rooftop
units, what we call 3 and 5,
again, there are 9, these supply
our la uh area, which is again,
uh, needs to be temperature
controlled, uh, in, in your
laboratory, a very tight
controls, and then in our, uh,
rural health clinic.
Um,
And so, um, that's first and
foremost, uh, our request.
Uh, our second request is to
replace uh two what we call
plain film radiology units.
These are just plain x-rays.
They're the primary uh
diagnostic tool for our
emergency room, of course, and
for our clinic, uh, it's the uh.
Primary tool and the physician's
armamentarium, so to speak, and
so these are at 17.
Uh, years old and just by chance
this morning we got another
letter from Siemens, uh, our
current unit that says we're
that they once they get to a
certain point they send you a
very detailed end of uh support
ladder and we we just received
another one today on one of
those units by chance the
serendipitous, but uh I thought
I'd share that with you, so.
Again, a lot of them, uh, we, we
keep maintenance agreements on
these because it is costly when
you have to repair, replace
tubes or parts or that sort of
thing.
So, but a lot of times they once
they get to end of life, they
won't, they won't issue your
maintenance agreement anymore,
so.
Uh, service calls are expensive
parts are hard to come by if you
can find them, so.
Um, we feel like it's time to
replace her two X-ray units and
uh so that is a big part of our
request is uh as well.
Uh, in the to the total of about
700,000.
Uh, the third thing that we
really are requesting are uh an
upgrade to our vehicles. We are
up in northern New Mexico and
I'm sure all of you are familiar
with Raton Pass, right? If
you've ever been to Colorado and
it's, it can get pretty
slippery, pretty tricky, we get
uh that jet stream cuts right
through northeastern New Mexico
we get a little bit more
snowfall than they even get here
in Santa Fe, little cooler
climate, little weer weather, so
help us prepare for that
inclement weather, uh, we right
now we only have one older
I, um,
Pickup truck, um.
It's got over 200,000 miles,
it's more than 10 years. It does
have a blade on it.
But we really think it's time to
upgrade and have and we have two
facilities, we have the acute
care facility uh that is the new
facility 17 years old, then we
have the long-term care facility
which was again the facility
built in 1905 and restored in
the 90s to be our long term care
facility for minors, so we would
like to have one this is really
the.
The request of our plant
facilities manager to have one
for each uh facility, uh, with a
plow and lift system for both of
those. They also use these for
general maintenance, you know,
run into the local hardware
store to get construction
supplies, concrete, wood, paint,
whatever they're working on, uh,
so they're for general
maintenance, but also to help us
during inclement weather.
Uh, then they'd like, we have
one smaller unit, um, four
wheeler with a plow and lift and
then like to get another one so
we have one of those for each
facilities. The other real need
for vehicles is uh uh it's an
incredible facility, well
designed. I've worked in many
facilities throughout New
Mexico, probably at least.
7 or 8, when I was in a regional
role and it's a wonderful
facility, but the design on this
facility, and I don't know why
they left it out if it was a
budget issue or what, but they
did not put a laundry in the
main facility, so all, all of
our laundry is done over the
long term care facility and they
have to transport it back and
forth from long-term care over
to the main facility, which
isn't real efficient, but we
have a laundry van right now and
it's, it's again aging, uh, one
of our newer employees said it
looked like it'd been through
the demolition derby if you
remember the.
Those back in the day, uh, it's
in pretty, pretty bad repair. So
we, we really feel like it's
time to replace that in our
plant facilities, I mean, our
Lary and facility staff would
really like to have a new, new
van which uh is again not uh not
really uh a, a huge part of our
request, but it is a part of the
request. So with that our total
appropriation comes to a modest
$1.5 million for miners Koufax
Medical Center and um with that
again, I just want to thank you
for.
Your your prior support of this
facility, it's, I think you're
aware it's the only state
operated uh healthcare, not
healthcare facility, hospital in
New Mexico only only the only
state operated acute care
facility in New Mexico, uh, we
take great pride in what we do
and we want it to be as good or
better than any hospital in New
Mexico and so that is our goal
really, um.
Work for to be a high performing
quality organization.
And um
And serve all of New Mexicans
that come to us in their time of
need, so with that, I'll
conclude and uh stand for any
questions. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, thank you for the
presentation, uh, questions from
the committee.
Um, thank you for the
presentation just two quick
questions.
Um, briefly, could you tell us
what the status of your trust
fund is, which I understand
you're asking for general fund,
but which your appropriations
sometimes come out of.
Uh good question and uh
typically I'd bring my CFO with
me to, he'd have more detail
around that.
Uh, unfortunately, he's tied up
with finalizing our audit in our
Medicare cost report right now.
These are due kind of as we
speak so he wasn't able to join
me. Uh, I don't have the exact
balance on that, but we are
pretty much.
Tapped out in using uh the full
amount to sustain our operations
that what our big cost is really
is the long term care facility,
uh, it, it takes about.
$5 million to operate that
facility and if you're familiar
with it, uh you have any history
behind it? Anybody who qualifies
is a former minor in New Mexico
meets the Department of Labor
definition comes there and gets
their care at free. We have just
about 20% that our Medicaid, uh,
in that facility, so our cost of
operations about 50, uh, we get
about 1 million in revenue every
year. So we run that facility at
about a $40 loss. The other $4
million really goes to.
Sustain
Uh, our Q care facility
operations subsidize that with a
small OB unit, we have a small
surgical program we'd like to
keep those services intact.
There's no women's health
services up in that part of the
world where the smallest OB unit
in New Mexico, but we take pride
in being able to serve that
large geographic region up
there, so I don't have the
specifics around that right now.
I know, I think this year we're
planning to receive about $90
little less than 9 million, I
think it was 8.8.
8.9 and
Um, you know, we'll be touching
on that when we do our budget
appropriation, uh, presentation,
I think on the 23rd, uh, we'll
have more of that, but I'm sorry
I didn't bring the exact figure
with me today, but. That's OK.
Um, and then just it looks like
we don't have updates in CPMS on
your capital appropriations.
Your existing ones since last
year.
So, um,
You know, when we're looking at
new requests we look at progress
on existing requests and.
You only know what those are if
CPMS is updated, so.
Oh, I was not aware of that, uh,
I.
Surprised, I'm shocked, and we
will make that a priority, uh.
I just, uh, I have no.
No answer to that. I'm sorry
that uh but we will, we will
make sure that occurs. I know,
uh.
It's my understanding they went
to a new system, right? And uh
uh I've heard.
That there were no issues with
getting that information in
there so I'll make sure that
that happens and that that
typically is done on a quarterly
basis, is that right? OK, uh
thank you for making me aware of
that. I will.
And we, so we did, we just
switched to a new system and
then we switched back. So that's
what I, yeah, OK, I did hear
about that, but you know so.
Any other questions?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just,
I was wondering if you could
give us, uh if you could submit
something to Wesley so he could
give to the committee the
breakdown on all of the projects
that are rolling because, um,
it's a little bit confusing the
7.5 re or is it all rolling up
to just the
And let me just add to that real
quick. So in, in the ICIP
itself, it breaks it out by each
year for the next 5 years, so
you know, you just gave us a
list of what you wanted this
year. You have a list for next
year, the year after that,
because again, you're showing
1.5 million each year, so we're
anticipate that you have a list
of other projects that are
coming in the future. That's the
list that you would like to see.
OK, OK, and I'll submit that
directly.
And turning. On that point, the
ICAP is a bit confusing. So for
example, I heard vehicles in
your presentation, but there's
no you wouldn't be able to
purchase vehicles with the way
the law language is written
right now in your ICIP, um, it
would be helpful to have those
broken out instead of having
just one priority, maybe break
it out amongst 3 or 4
priorities, so you'd have one
for vehicles, one for your
equipment for the hospital,
another one for your building.
OK.
Uh, certainly not a problem we
uh we try to keep it somewhat
general because again we've
been, we never know what we're
gonna face tomorrow. I mean, uh,
these, a lot of these things
that have failed, you know, you
don't, you don't plan for them
to fail, right? And so.
Uh, running the hospital, it's,
it's very expensive, very
capital intensive. We tried to
not box ourselves in because we,
when I first got here 7.5 years
ago, we had done that and so we
needed the funds for one thing,
but they weren't available
because the way the the law was
written, so we try to be
walk a fine line there between
be specific enough and but being
general enough to if we needed
to repurpose it for another
need, let's say we needed.
allowed chemical uh chemistry
analyzer for the lab versus
X-ray that we could do that so
we usually we've in the past
we've been allowed to specify as
medical equipment and uh
facilities.
Uh, but that, but we have no
problem really narrowing that
down to
um what are still broad
categories but with a little
more specificity.
That'd be very helpful, thank
you. OK, great, thank you. Um,
have that done by next Friday,
and if you need assistance,
please contact me. OK, I sure
will. Yes.
Yes, we always, uh, it's, it's
always a pleasure to work with
you. On that note, um, I think
at the very least, um.
If, if you don't want to break
it out by project and ICIP
system, um, at least, you know,
update the language to include
vehicles, um I think that would
be that
that would be at least if if I
mean if you have the plans for
purchasing vehicles over the
next 5 years, you'll probably
want a separate one for
vehicles. I think that's kind of
where we're going with it, um,
but like you said, things pop
up, so um, it might not be best
for you to do it that way, but
at least make sure. Um.
OK.
Absolutely thank you. Any other
questions from the?
Right
Thank you.
With that blessings and thank
you very much for your service.
I appreciate you. Department of
Health. I was gonna make you
come back after lunch, but.
And for
Yeah.
They do have the smallest
request out of all the agencies.
OK
The floor is yours whenever
you're ready.
Thanks, um, members of the
committee, Patrick Allen,
secretary of the Department of
Health, I'm not going to do very
much talking with me George
Morgan, who's the acting
director of our facilities
division and Tim Shields, who
runs the behavioral Health
Institute, um, uh, where most of
the action in the request that
we have here is, but I did want
to just kind of give you a
little bit of a quick tee up uh
to all of what's here because
the numbers are big, um, and,
uh, and there are some, some
changes in them that you've
you've seen, most of which is at
the first couple of slides, uh,
just provide you a little bit
of.
Of of context for uh for the
agency we've done some
significant restructuring in the
Department of Health,
particularly with the loss of uh
uh authority. We've simplified
our structure to have a public
health division of facilities
division and then the supporting
divisions that do that work.
It's a little different than our
P codes, a little bit of a, a
little bit of a challenge, but
it's a more effective way for us
to think about the work that we
do also at the bottom of slide
2, then you see the the uh 7
facilities that we operate
called out. On the next slide,
we've kind of grouped those um
Um, uh, those facilities into
the into the lines of business
that our facilities operate and
that's, that's acute care uh
from a specialty standpoint. So
unlike Minors Colfax, we run,
uh, we don't run general acute
care hospitals we run two
specialty hospitals. We run
skilled and long-term care
facilities.
Um, um, we run the, the Los
Lunas community programs, which
are are care for um people with
developmental residential
services.
I just want to quickly highlight
that um the biggest piece of
this ask is our forensic
facility. I came uh to New
Mexico a couple of years ago
from a state where I was
responsible for running a 700
bed psychiatric hospital is part
of, part of my duties. It's
about a 10 year old facility,
uh, and uh and I can't emphasize
enough the first time that I
visited the forensic facility
here, how, um, there's no other
word than shocking and appalling
uh the facility is, um, uh,
yeah, it's uh it it it's not a
place that we should be.
Housing, let alone treating
people, uh, and the and the need
to be able to replace that
facility is, is beyond
overwhelming.
Good news is that despite the
fact that those they these
numbers are a little bit of a
moving target we've been able to
survey around other Western
states that are either in the
process of or have um
constructed similar facilities
and actually coming in below
that cost on a per bed.
Basis, so there's an element of
of these facilities cost about
what we're, what it looks like
we're projecting this facility
will cost. That's a big number.
Um, I, I don't wanna, I don't
wanna, you know, kind of
sugarcoat that at all, but it's
a big number that we got from a
human standpoint, let alone a
regulatory standpoint.
Other two things quickly to
touch on, um.
Intermediate care facility is
the facility that we, uh, where
we treat been accused of
committing crimes and so it's a
therapeutic and correctional
facility, um, uh, and, and the
proposal there is to is to build
a new fleet and then the state
lab is not a big piece of what's
here, but I do just wanna touch
on it because it's a piece that
we don't think about a lot, um,
as our state public health lab
is one of the best state public
health labs in the country,
having a state public health lab
means you have a building full
of really smart, really
expensive.
People running really expensive
equipment.
Um, and that equipment tends to
need to be replaced over time
and and when you replace it, you
can't do a little bit at a time
and over over time, you know,
your your piece of equipment is
now, now good to go. You got to
buy a giant piece of equipment
and it's expensive and you gotta
buy the whole thing and that's
what you'll see in.
Capital that we have there. So
with that I'm gonna go turn
things over to Mr. Morgan to get
into the guts of the
presentation.
Um, slide 5.
Um, I always like to give a
thank you to all of you for the
funds that have been
appropriated in support of the
Department of Health and as you
can see, the statewide funds
here, um, from fiscal year 18
through 24 we've invested just
about 40 million.
over 39 million into our
facility, so thank you for that.
Um, to accomplish those
projects.
Um, going on to slide 6.
Um, touching on some direct um
investments. These were direct
appropriations. We have the New
Mexico Scientific Laboratory,
um, that was a $2000 ask for the
breath alcohol testing
equipment. We've got 85%
expended there. We're wrapping
that up and that should be taken
care of shortly, um, public
health, we had a direct
appropriation for 910,000.
That's the uh equipment for the
mobile health units, emergency
response, that has been
completed and close
out?
Um, as secretary has touched on,
we have the forensics building,
um, at this point, we have
100103 million appropriated.
Um, the status there designs
completed, construction, that's
part of the or it is the change
in this entire presentation.
Um, and then the small homes,
another great um opportunity for
our veterans down in Vegas. We
have completed all 6 homes. We
are occupying 5 of the 6 homes
with uh 47 residents that are
currently.
Well thank you for that. That's.
And our veterans.
Um, slide 7.
Um, gives you an overview of the
capital funding we have received
and some of those balances you
can see there, um, obviously.
From 24, where we're at with
those forensics funds and some
of the other state one.
Our planning and prioritization
process hasn't changed. We've
been doing this for the last 8
years, um, you know, where we
all get together in a planning
process working with the 7
facilities working with the
department as a whole
understanding what their needs
are, understanding what we have
accomplished, and that's a
recurring process obviously
throughout the fiscal year.
Um, prioritization. I want to
touch on this. I mean, our
prioritization really focuses on
our patients, our residents, and
the certification needs um for
our facilities, all of our
facilities are certified and
ready.
Um,
Categories, um, typically.
We divide or we do divide up um
all four of.
Categories within the request.
Um, category one programmatic
health and safety, very focused
on that as I expressed category
2, that's relating to the
deferred infrastructure, the
capital renewal.
Um, category 3 are capital
planning, design and
construction, that's our new, as
you'll see with the forensics,
um, facility and in category 4,
as Secretary touched on the
critical equipment for the
scientific laboratory, um, and
then also other infrastructure
and.
I know do it was up before us,
but you know that do it and the
IT infrastructure is very
critical for our communications,
keeping our electronic health
record systems running and so on
and so forth.
Jumping into the request for 26
as you've requested the
priorities priority one, you'll
see there is, uh, I'm sorry, our
categories, our program and a
public.
Uh, the 2.3 deferred
infrastructure capital renewal,
capital planning and design
construction, that's where it's
new um presentation 65 million,
that is now 125 million. It's an
additional 6.
For the category 4 capital
equipment and uh instrumentation
or at 4.7 million.
A total request as secret
identified right at 149.7, the
priorities.
Party won our new forensics
building. Again, we've received
103 million bids have been
received.
And that has led to an increase
of subject.
32, our new intermediate care
facility, Secretary touched on
that, uh, 3.9 million and that
is for construction. We have
already done the programming.
We are working with GSD on the
design side of things, so this
would be for the FFNE and
construction.
B4 Deferred infrastructure
capital renewal 35 to 4.7 for
Getting into the specific
requests priority one, the new
forensics building. I'll just
leave it at that Secretary
touched on that need.
Um, and I'm sure you'll have
questions.
Priority, um.
Uh, slide 13, just to give you
an idea on the priority one on
the forensics design has been
completed.
Contractor's bids received in
August the contract.
We're looking at award, it's
still in procurement, um, we're
hoping to do that in October and
hoping for a groundbreaking.
Yes, just, just quickly back on
slide 12 for just a second
because the pictures don't do it
justice. I, I do, but I do hope
you take a look at the pictures
that you see things like.
Doors with bars like in the old
West movies and those stairs
lead to uh basically patient
treatment areas surrounded by
corrections like catwalks.
Um, that's the kind of an
environment that that we're
trying to uh trying to, you've
not been there um it's, it's a
sobering environment. Thanks.
Sorry. Oh, thank you.
Um, priority 2, our intermediate
care facility.
As I
Stated, we've uh looking at uh
programming, getting into
design, you'll see that the
request, and I apologize, does
include the design side of.
So we can get started there, um.
Secretary identified it's a
lease current leased facility.
It's a 4 bed facility. We're
hoping to be able to.
Have an appropriation, a
complete construction on the La
Unus campus where we have the
available property to construct
a new 6 bed facility.
Moving on to um.
Priority number 3.
And that's our programmatic
health and safety.
Again, these are things directly
related. You'll see some of the
pictures there, um, we're
looking to remodel those
pictures are from Sequoia,
looking to do some remodeling
there. We have the meadows, the
meadows we'd like to from an
infection control standpoint,
remove the carpet and install
the tile, and then at Fort Bair,
um, we've done completed a
couple con uh projects there,
which really is supporting the
residents there to come out into
the.
The main hallways, we've widened
those hallways, just completed
the sea wing, and it just makes
a complete difference for those
residents there and being able
to come out and take in the nice
sun from down, uh, continuing at
Fort Bayard.
Priority 4 deferred
infrastructure capital renewal.
Again, these are the things that
are reaching end of life, the
things that um we have large
repairs, um, and a BHA laundry
system upgrade that has been on
here for a while, but it's, it's
a large part of this ask.
A lot of work that needs to be
done there.
The vet's home are recreation
and education building remodels
upgrade the the staffing and the
support, training and education
there.
Los Lunas Burro building
upgrade, um, it's an old
building, HVAC.
Uh, upgrades, things of that
nature and then touching uh for
Bayard, we have the RTU units so
systematic replacement over.
Priority 5, capital equipment
instrumentation. This is where
we have the scientific
laboratory, which is the biggest
hit here, but again, all the
facilities have aging IT
infrastructure up at NMBHI and
thank you, we just completed the
fiber install project. Um, now
we're looking at updating,
upgrading, updating and
replacing the hardware.
Those servers that again serve
then our EHR and things of that
nature.
That's stand for. Thank you for
the presentation.
Um, questions from the
committee.
Ah, thank you for the
presentation, um.
A little bit of a moving target,
kind of an understatement on
this one.
Um, so.
The project doubled in cost
again. Can you guys, I mean, I
think, can you tell us a little
bit more?
Mr. Chairman, um, committee
member.
As well, um, Carswell, um.
So
Yes, we requested 60 million,
and that was the understanding
based on working with the
design, um, based on the bids
received.
And again, it's under
procurement.
Um, we are looking at
construction cost that has
increased that by an additional
60 million.
Now, what I'll add to that is we
know that.
We have worked with a design
firm from a value engineering
perspective, both
programmatically and also from a
construction standpoint.
We've taken that into account.
Um,
We're in negotiations to move
that project forward for a
two-phased approach.
Phase one incorporates the main
shell.
Incorporates a 10 bed unit.
The phase 2 portion is the 80
bit, which is the main
portations occupy for their
therapy and their services.
And what I will also add is that
um.
We want to move the project
forward.
And there has, based on the
estimate received.
When we're working with a design
firm.
Or the construction bid
received.
It's not one thing that stands
out.
If you look at the estimate and
go through the estimate, it's
understandably touching on
various aspects, whether it be
mechanical, electrical,
plumbing.
It's, it's across the we just
had to I had to obviously the
same question when the when the
numbers came out and and and
when we then looked at what
other states are paying for
similar facilities in the
current time period.
Question in my mind became not
so much why as it cost so much.
It's why was the because I think
that's really the problem is.
It's, it's not that the cost is
wildly out of line. It looks
like it's right down the middle
of the channel, if not even a
little low. I think the
challenge is we, we all relied
on that, on that, um,
engineering architecture
estimate, uh, and it appears to
have just been really grievously
off and that part is hard for us
to explain.
Um, what is the census right
now?
As of today, it is 7 and
so I, I appreciate that, you
know.
Possibility of phasing this, but
as we've talked about with you
guys before to like.
About the possibility of just
phasing the size of it overall
and how much that could affect
the cost.
Um, again, I, I understand where
you're coming from there on
wanting to build it bigger, but.
You know, I like we completely
agree with you with for the with
on the need to get out of make
this better, so.
Um,
You know, at, at the same time
it's.
Um,
Very challenging to build it at
this cost with all the date.
Um, so have.
Is there any possibility of sort
of phasing the build out?
Um, of the, I guess the capacity
of the facility overall, um, so
that, you know, you could sort
of start using it for the
current needs now and we could
expand later as needed at a
lower cost. Yeah, it's a great
question, and I think, I think
the challenge we could.
I think the challenges that
won't get you as much savings as
you would hope because you've
got, you know, the cost of a
place where some and then you
got the cost of all the things
that we do to.
Be that person to to treat that
person to provide activities for
that person, all the things that
go with it.
Um, and there's not a ton of
scalability and nor any real
ability to to phase that.
Once you've provided all of that
for 72 people, um, there,
there's not, uh, there's not a,
you can't like add to the size
of that for the remaining 20 so
you'll get some savings for the
20 but it's not gonna drive a
big.
A big bottom line change in the
number and then when you, when
you add to that the current
policy discussion, the
discussion the legislator,
legislature and the governor are
having around civil commitment
issues, um, uh, uh, people are
declining treatment, those kinds
of things, and the how that
dynamic works, I, I think moving
forward with just exactly the
bed capacity, the the the number
of beds we have now would be a
real challenge. Also, the uh the
last thing I'll say and then
I'll see if these guys. Um.
The census is 70 to the capacity
we're buying is not radically
different than the capacity that
we have now, so I think the the
last piece would be to really
get any of that savings, even if
it's small on the increment,
you'd actually have to reduce
capacity.
Um, did we get more than one
bid? Um, all right, well, I
think, um, you know, we don't
have to hash all this out, but
it'd probably be good if we met
again.
With Anna and Wesley and Charles
and Kelly and myself and.
Um, I think, you know, we'd want
to like see the comparable cost
from other options and.
Um, it would be.
I, I realized the timing of the
bidding and stuff like basically
coincided with this these
hearings, but um.
You know, the, the last time we
heard about a doubling of cost
increase was also in the hearing
and.
Um, I think given the importance
of this project and the.
As and the challenge of getting
it.
accomplished at this cost.
You know, we, we really need to
know about.
These things as they're
happening. I mean, we are, we
really are real close to exact
you're learning about it, not
very much differently than I.
Any other questions from the
committee?
Not on your request, but um
could you give us an update on,
um getting folks into the small
homes and staffing and training
there and how all that's going.
Yeah, so as Mr. Morgan
indicated, we are fully
occupying 5 of the 6 homes. One
home is not quite ready for
handover yet from the
contractor, we expect that
relatively shortly, um, uh, and
so we've got the appropriate
staffing to to manage that we're
now fully out of the old main
building.
Um, and so we're now sort of in
our configuration for where we
expect patients to be in the 6
new homes and in the uh in the
annex.
Um, uh, and we're continuing to
build census at the facility if
we haven't broken 100 residents
I'd go and we're
around the corner from doing
that and that's up from a post
from a pandemic glow of I think
about 37 patients as recently as
