Proven request, 70.
DPS headquarter renovation.
5 million and and uh Albuquerque
Metro facility request. What's
not reflected on here and, and
you mentioned it, uh, Mr. Chair,
is that our fleet request which
has typically been the case for
us is our state police fleet
request. We submit it as a
special and then uh we get
direction needed from DFA or the
governor's office to move it to
ICIP and so, uh, this year it it
it got moved and so after the
submission of this, this
PowerPoint which you have in
front of us, we have it as our
6th request, um, which, but it's
a fleet request of of 17.9
million.
It is a recurring cost for us
every year, but for whatever
reason and it goes, it floats
between specials or ICIP fleet
regularly. So with that I'll
just turn it over real quick for
just a quick historic on uh some
of the uh funding that we have
received the Troy Huer says
please. Thank you Secretary.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, what you've got
in front of you, um, is
representative or, or active
obligations and encumbrances.
Uh, this really just
demonstrates how proactive we
deliver the money that we've
received. And so what you can
see reflected and I won't go
through the numbers, um, but we
are on track to continue to
spend what we have requested.
Um, we've done a lot of great
things um with this funding, and
we continue to thank you Troy.
Um, so moving on to the next
page will be page number 4, but
it's our reality-based training
facility.
And our current facility, which
is really just a square range,
was built in the 60s and so the
only thing uh type stuff, and we
recognize that law enforcement
today that there are a lot more,
uh, you know, engaging a target.
We want to de-escalation
facility, the place where we can
uh really teach our police
officers the essential uh
decision making that's required
to be a police officer. So, uh
with this uh facility we hope to
have, uh, be able to introduce
into the training, uh, stress
management, tactical skills, and
you control them, and so we have
submitted this and support it
even.
By this committee and so I'll,
I'll, I'll let Troy kind of
speak to his secretary. So on
your first slide, um, just some
bullet points, we do have a
creation.
Which we are currently working
with on your 2nd slide, you're
gonna actually see a um real
concept drawing. Um we have
actually worked and procured um
design services for this
project, so we are fully
underwear, uh, fully underway on
this project. Um, and so what
we've discovered during this
construction process, uh, is
that we have some budget
shortfalls. Uh we weren't
completely aware, we did a
pretty so um accounting for a
project escalation, but during
the discovery of this project,
we we
realize that there is a lot more
infrastructure on that project
site, uh, that includes new
utilities that includes some
earthwork, um, some remedial
work, and so that $7 million
increase is reflective of that,
um, you know, sort of that
budget shortfall. Um, but just
to remind, you know, the members
here that we are, we are on our
way, we're making really good
progress on that project and
excited for its outcome.
Thank you. I'll move on to
priority 2, which is our state
aircraft, um.
It's gonna be a little detailed
here and I'll try to be brief
for the sake of time, but you
know, our aircraft is really a
statewide resource, uh, you
know, we do direct
reconnaissance for both local,
county, state, and our federal
partners surveillance, drug
interdiction, search and rescue,
uh, and we use it for command
and control for our major
operations. And so 5 years ago
when the decision was made on
the aircraft and and the
purchase of it and how to upfit
it, um, we threw everything at
it and at the end of the day,
the aircraft is very capable.
Uh, the challenge that.
We've learned is that um with
everything that's that's uh on
the aircraft in itself is that
it's also very heavy and we have
some challenges in the Mexico
that you.
Might not see in other states is
for one is we fly very high,
it's very hot here, and then
additionally we have an aircraft
that's very heavy and so we
thought that that particular
time, uh the agency did that
taking an air cushions, but that
was the solution. What we've
learned over 1600 hours of
flight time that because of
those conditions that it's again
flying
uh uh high altitude, hot and
heavy that we're seeing a lot of
wear on on the aircraft and so.
Um, we've seen a tremendous
amount of discrepancies or or
maintenance needs that's down in
the aircraft.
And so over the 1600 hours and
particularly over the last 3
years, uh, of a 1000 hour flight
time, we have found that 19
different maintenance
discrepancies, meaning the
lamination, cracks in the
aircraft, different things that
have required the aircraft to be
down on the ground.
And so, uh, April 7 is no longer
a reliable, uh.
Aircraft for for the state.
At the uh the way that it's
equipped for for the resources
that we want to provide the
state. So I'd kind of point you
to uh this, this one picture
here, it's a rescue flight from
uh some the Boy Scouts who was
about 1617 of them that we ended
up rescuing as you can see
there, uh, it shows kind of the
flight path and it's just
basically an A to B so it's one
to another.
You go to the next page, which
is a patrol flight from just
this last September 1 evening
and you can see how many left
turns this aircraft is, is, is
doing over the city of
Albuquerque, keeping up with the
demand of all of those and I'm
not a pilot you in layman terms
about this, but um all these
left turns on the aircraft puts
a tremendous amount of stress on
the air and so having one
aircraft, uh.
With the idea of that it can do
all is really not the case.
We're actually one of the few
states that only have one single
aircraft where we're trying to
do everything with.
A lot of agencies in other
states have a larger, then they
also have a patrol flight type
aircraft.
This is is really the basis for
our request.
Um, we recognize that it's
important for us to have this,
this, uh, resource of all the
missions uh that the state
requires as the state police and
we thought that one aircraft 5
years ago, um, the last thing I
would mention in that, uh, as a
result of all these
discrepancies, uh, the
maintenance has just run out on
this and in just this last year
alone, um, the, the, the, I'm
talking about the maintenance,
the, the warranty.
And so, uh, $800,000 almost
$1000 it's out of warranty now.
We're gonna start incurring
those costs if we want this
aircraft to be up in the air,
but at the end of the day,
really we're seeing one
discrepancy for every 53 hours
of flight time, which is just
insane amount of of repairs
that's placed on it so that's
that's the basis for our
request.
3. Thank you.
Party number 3 is our statewide
infrastructure improvements. Uh,
this holds a lot of weight, we
do this, uh, facilities
districtwide to support 12
districts.
And so $70 really is impactful
in order to address not only
deferred needs, but a lot of the
actors support the the comfort
and the environment of these
officers that are are protecting
our state.
And so what you'll see is um
from that first slide, the, the
active obligations and
encumbrances is our statewide
funding with the support of GSD
really impacted a lot of
projects statewide over the past
4 years, we have really
addressed deferred needs by
deferred needs, um, I'm speaking
to, you know, old roofs, old
HVAC package units, um, some of
our parking lot infrastructure.
And so now what we are primarily
focused on is really improving
the environment. We're going
through, we're assessing.
existing facilities to ensure
that they meet our operational
flow. We're we're maximizing the
efficiencies of these buildings
and so that's what we are really
prioritizing as we start.
Making our way through
individual districts.
Representative on a few of our
pictures, I think on the the
slide thereafter, um, there is
11 of the pictures of the far
left just as a representation is
our Edgewood district.
Um, it's hard to know that that
is a state police facility, um,
and we've got parking lot
infrastructures, um, a lot,
probably I would say about 70%
of our infrastructure part page,
um, it creates a slip hazard. We
have officers, um.
That have to frequently travel
these parking lots, and so we
just wanna make sure that we're
improving these uh from a safety
and security standpoint, um,
pictured on the far right of
that picture of that page, uh,
is our doorway to recruitment
and so this is at our um and
this is our face of our
recruitment department and we
are trying uh deeply to enhance
that obviously the metro
facility is going to be
impactful in doing that.
Um, but this is a good rhythm to
really meet the needs of state
police.
If I could just add to that, um,
you know, I, I traveled the
state and then when I do, I, I
try to stop in at the and I will
tell you they always got a great
attitude about it. Our offices
are awesome, um, but it
surprises me sometimes the
facilities that I see that are
labeled the Mexico State Police
stopped off in TRC and although
they did their best to upgrade
it and maintain it, it's it's a
home, it's a small casito's
office.
Uh, it's really surprising to
see, um, you know, the, the
sergeant's office is, is a small
the gym within that facility for
them to stay fit and work out is
uh a small bedroom with the leg
press machine literally forced
into the closet cause there's no
space. And so like I said, they
keep a great attitude about it,
but you know, I feel it's the
secret place to, to work out of
and also, you know, this is not
just a place where they work out
of we we bring.
There for for service uh that
the state police provides and
it's not necessarily
representative of what the
agency should be in my opinion.
Thank you Troy, you can
continue.
Thank you Secretary. We can move
on to priority number 4, which
is our headquarters renovation.
This is a continuation of an
active obligation that we have
currently. We received $300 for
a headquarters renovation, which
is currently underway. We have
fully obligated that. Um, it's
addressed the first two phases
um, of the priority projects for
our headquarters here in Santa
Fe. This additional request is
to address the recently moved
lab, a forensic lab.
That was located there at our
headquarters facility, um,
that's pictured in the page.
Hello
You hear me OK?
Pictured in the page below. Uh,
this is just representation of
of what we have currently. It's
really unusable space, we can't
um put or provide any of this is
usable administrative space for
our staff, and so this $40 would
go to directly address these
improvements we've currently um
are sitting on about 9000 square
foot of an old forensic lab
space, and we could desperately
use um that space for
administrative purposes.
Uh, every year we, we gain new
responsibility members. We have
standards and Training Council.
We need to regulate within DPS
and so we are really bursting at
the seams we have bandates
placed on DPS like we need to
house people inside of
headquarters rather than, you
know, look at lease space and
then that type of thing. Thank
you.
I think we can proceed to number
5, so we can.
Wrap this up and stand for
questions.
Priority number 5 is our
Albuquerque Metro project, as
I'm sure most of you are aware,
we have an active um
appropriation for $20 million
that's supporting this project.
Um, just last week we had a
pre-proposal meeting for design
services. We're fortunate enough
for the state to have made a
trade, the city of Albuquerque,
so we have the land, um, and are
able to proceed at this time,
what we um have learned through
um.
collaboration with facilities
management division, is that,
um.
The price per square foot is
just continuing to increase on
these new projects, and so
really to be proactive and
really to support.
The delivery of this project,
we're asking for the additional
10 million.
This is a large parcel. It sits
on 14 acres. We are
anticipating.
Um, over 40,000 square foot
facility, $20,000 appropriation,
um, potentially earmarks square
foot.
And so we would like to see this
additional increase really to
just support the um if if you
all remember, this is gonna be
consolidation of districts that
we have recognize some lease
cost savings right now, it's
estimated about 200 that we're
paying in those leases, so the
consolidation of these
districts, um, under one metro
facility.
Secretary, do you have anything
to add?
No, I just, you know, remind,
uh, the committee, Mr. Chair,
that, um, at the end of the day,
DPS provides service across the
entire state, you know, DPS
reality based training facility
as an example.
To be able to use those
facilities and same thing with
aircraft and sort of stead use
only at the end of the day we,
we,
I appreciate that, um, as I
mentioned, um, we, we know that
uh we have a lot of cost price
of fuel is up, you know,
vehicles cost more. We're doing
our best. I'll lead to that our
officers, uh, and then so uh we
really have reoccurring costs
every year and, and so, um,
currently, uh, that's 17.9
million60 of them, and then also
the governor has uh as well.
It is a challenge for state
police out in in.
None. Any questions from the
committee?
construction documents for that
facil to go ahead and.
Start the project even though
you don't have the second
tranche of funding.
Mr. Chair
Committee members, uh, your,
your question, so we're
currently at 65% design
documents and development. What
we have had advised the design.
This is a phased approach.
And so we constructively looked
at what would our current
appropriation.
And so we prioritized based on
this concept drawing.
What was considered
The most important. And so what
we are expecting from this.
From the architect is that they
will provide us a phase 2
permitted we were we would
secure additional funding. Um, a
lot of times in these bid
contracts we would put in to the
contract is bid alternates.
And so that's what we've advised
them is the alternates so that
we could accept them. of of
being able to expand it.
Uh, as funding sits, it's a
little. Going to the state
police aircraft, I wanted to ask
is.
A significant.
Um, there will be a significant
For for quick response versus
still having this existing
aircraft in play. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I
think it's a great question. So
currently what we've done is
started to assess like what can
we do without all the aircraft
and so a lot of components uh
expand the life of the aircraft
to arrive, so it'll be in
service for once we receive
funding for a new craft so it's
gonna take time for that to
build. And so there's gonna be a
period of time where that
aircraft um.
Potentially even with delay and
needed for a mission that would
need to be reduced some of these
discrepancies, and when the time
comes, uh, and if we do receive
funding we're requesting two
aircraft, one that do search and
rescue missions, you know they
can, that's a lighter, smaller
aircraft that can do flights uh.
New Mexico being a rural state
and and even even some counties
and supporting throughout the
state uh improvement requests
this morning and I'm no one
understands the facilities that
you have.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I wouldn't say that
there is a formal process in
place. I am that process, uh,
regularly to really identify and
prioritize myself, um, just
understanding production and so
it's helpful to understand, um,
and so what I do is I, and it is
almost a wish list, and by that,
you know, we're addressing is
not cooling our officers, that's
a priority that sets precedence
over, you know, lock set
upgrades and so um I'm, I'm
really tasked with that ensure
that we are.
Um
Keeping track came on to DPS.
What I did is we really
formulated and we said we're
gonna go across multiple
districts. We're gonna track
units because what we were
seeing is in the preventative
maintenance portion of it. And
so as we've gotten these new
It's staff at each of these
districts and so that's been
helping us because that's what
we saw is that we weren't doing
incidents from occurring. Some
you can't control, um, but
others we can, and so to to
speak to that is that's address
these needs in the future.
Is that preventative maintenance
mechanism to understand.
Recent are those cost testing?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we don't have
estimates for that particular 6
million which is currently
underway, that is to address our
law enforcement records bureau
from the design services. So
we're at both of those projects
for the headquarters, um, that
we've already secured funding
for. We are basing it off of
those costs. It's similar in
construction, uh we did um
anticipate there would be some
more remedial costs, uh,
considering it was a lab space,
and so that is why you have seen
the increase.
that at $750 150,000 dollars a
square foot for a new facility.
Uh, and so I'm just wondering
where you all received that
cough and if you can speak a
little bit to how that came
about.
Mr. Chair, members of Facilities
management division who were in
collaboration with really helps
sort of identify those costs.
Um, I can tell you just from
experience on our new District
one facility for state police
one for about $460 a square
foot. I think, you know, the
expectation here or the
anticipation is is that we're
gonna see um
some.
Some increasing costs, you know,
it's a generally it's a, it's an
administrative complex, um, but
what it will house is our
district district 5 state
police, um, that's currently off
of, off of Carlisle and so it's
not completely administrative,
it's also going to have a
dispatch center that's our call
center for communications and so
there are some detailed features
in there similar to the lab
space that we did see that, that
cost increase and so really to
answer your question, I think
it's, it's an, it's an
approximation, um, but that
isn't an app.
Approximation based on just DPS
understanding what other
projects they currently have on.
A.
Cool
Um,
Secretary, thank you.
Try
Um, OK, I have, um, and I'm
sorry, I just.
We're at just over 35%. We're
working through a change order
to continue. What sort of
current fun. I don't know that
it really free up any space per
se. It's just that typically of
doing square range drills,
that's what you're limited to,
and that's the gut field and so
having classroom curriculum and
then put that into an or, um,
and so really it's kind of use
the facility again for
de-escalation in a real world
scenario type of type situation
and so currently when you look
at all of the.
Agencies that we trained at the
LEA, but currently when you're
limited to the facilities that
are available.
You know, we would have to train
room entries, and there was no
facility built.
With the community have a good
relationship with them and we
would use homes under
construction in order to, to try
to do that, but you're still
limited to what you can do
inside those buildings because
someone's had the property
belongs to somebody.
And so a state ran facility, you
can uh.
We are on the inside of those
buildings and so it really is uh
the way law enforcement is going
and so currently we really don't
have any spaces in the LEA that
would duplicate that uh the
exception of one small we
currently have a um like a
simulator system of TV screen on
on a TV screen and that very
well could could move out there,
but.
Um, and, and so is that folded
into the tree.
Um, as the chair of members of
the committee.
As a result of being limited to
so many priorities it's
something that we still need, we
just can't
be glad to put it on there, but,
uh, to, to add to all
seriousness, that is still a
need that we have, we have an
old, an old training, uh, at our
LEA and Ultra driving track out
there they were gonna do the
dirt work. That's still very
much in need. It's just that,
um, you know, we only have.
You're, you know, the priorities
I think, you know, anything they
would do naturally and so we we
work with and so any situation
uh air support is required.
Eventually there's no
jurisdiction per se in in that
sense. It just really depends on
Absolutely really speak to that.
I think it is probably what
you're asking for. It really is
representative of how we, how
they fall off and then it shows
Secretary Troy, thank you so
much. Thank you very much. I
have 3 the training facility I
heard two numbers 65% done, 35%.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my apologies, we,
we have 3 active projects. One
is the reality-based training
facility, and then I've also got
two headquarters renovations.
The reality-based training
facility is 35% and our
headquarters reservation, um,
both are tracking at 65 65% were
design development, we're almost
at 100% CDs. So thank you for
that. Sorry for the
miscommunication, but thank you
for clarifying. Not a problem if
you could um.
In turn up I think till Friday.
Yeah, till next Friday, any, um,
indication that we request are
due by next Friday.
Um,
On the Metro project, um, one of
there's leases and some leases
are smaller. If I could get.
X are lies what the total would
be, um, that would be helpful to
me.
Just to have a general number
without knowing. Yeah, so the,
the impact that addresses it and
so currently, I mean, for every
year that we go without a metro
facility, we have a $270,000
fiscal. What I'm asking is how
long those leases are leases for
a year, there's leases for 10
years. I, I just need that, but
I, I'd be happy to send
something in, but we and so we
re-entered we were up for leader
uh landlords and so we need to,
does that answer your question,
sir.
And the last question I had is,
um.
Thank you for the pictures of
the facilities around, you've
seen it uptick in workers' comp.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, no, I, I can't speak
to that um.
Myself, just because they don't
report to me as an agency to
stand up a loss prevention,
address any of these issues that
may occur at our facilities, uh,
and that is actually one of our
priorities. I do a pretty just
to ensure that from a safety
standpoint we're addressing
them. I'm people that that enter
our facilities and it's, it's,
it's difficult to address some
of the, the carpet, uh, trip
hazards, right? And so that's
what our loss prevention.
Person will help facilitate and
assist us with with all of our
facilities that we maintain.
They'll use that resource, give
you detail.
This. Any other questions from
That space how much um.
So there are you you're
referencing our hero. I'm sorry,
it's the Albuquerque and other
state agency to utilize would be
available.
No, we have not for that
particular.
What we do have is to answer
your question, that is correct.
So the consolidation would be
for exact number we're sitting
on some decent square footage
for a facility, and so that
entire facility also considering
From a special appropriation to
ICIP.
I know that we were,
we did Silva has been completed.
So here and probably nod his
head. Perfect, thank you. Um,
and then final question, the
committee, we have not spent
last conference last week, week,
and so once we have those
proposals, um, then the
facilities management division
along with support of
department.
Um, have you guys?
Consider that more um, what, you
Facilities, uh, um, some of our
southern facilities like it's
in.
Partnered with architectural
Uh, really excited to see you
guys moving.
Um, just wanted to a lot
recently.
Um, for spending on these prior.
Um, and then.
I was that
What is that figure would offset
those needs that. Um,
and overall of how the capital
investments.
The last
Several years both from.
Any questions from the
committee?
Thank you for the presentation,
um.
Good to hear. Um, and this new
And that was trying to increase
the size of that water tank and
then the Columbus, um, it's
specifically just a village
projectonana County, this is.
Um, and then, um, my only other
question is on the, you know,
why these priorities, um.
Um, communities along the border
to present their priorities.
And bypass um was a priority for
the city of Damming because it's
something that they've.
Um, dealt with community. They
studied it in different ways and
for various reasons, um.
It's kind of stayed in a.
An ambiguous status and so the
the city of Damming and um a
next step and on and so the city
of Deming itself it forward and
I think make that decision so
the gas feasibility study.
It's, it continues to be an
issue, yeah.
Additionally, on the Mexico
sauce and so it's um.
and so as we see a lot of
activity in the Santa Teresa
area.
Running the gas line across the
Speak to who can own and process
so interested to hear, you know,
From New Mexico 11, the main
route would be along a city
street because right now the
trucks are going on city streets
and.
Yes
If that piece is missing, um.
Yeah, so essentially um size of
the development that they would
be evaluate um what types of
businesses are mentioned, you
know, the chilly season is, for
example, in the Columbus at the
size of maybe a production
facility tank.
You could still build something
with the existing water capacity
Um,
And so
You all to maybe just come up.
I just want to put you on the
hot seat.
I think they both have issues.
So I just wanted to introduce
them all cause I.
And um a planning bureau that
that's underneath this division.
So Scott with um Marian that
that we're gonna actually get
filled soon. I mentioned she's
the local entity ICIP, but we
will eventually hire us to come,
um, hopefully before the next I
see. Um, and again, the funding
navigation any projects on the
ICIP that you need funding, you
know, outside of this process,
um, or if they're not gonna have
to find other streams of
funding.
I just wanted to introduce them
so that everyone, everyone on
the committee knows about them
and I just wanted to say welcome
to all of you guys, um, you have
a lot of important work to do
and we're gonna accomplish and
help support you in getting
there. Um, congratulations,
Wesley, for before we move
forward with military affairs. I
know we're.
this is really nice to see and
projects.
Great.
Um, and then it, it is a
relationship, uh, sequencing so
that we'll
One year of federal funds. Best
case scenario when everything
our expectations be ones and
they start to be spent down and.
So far as like.
You know, are we gonna have
Facilities that kind of like
All right, so.
So it's like classroom versus.
OK.
Um, and.
Presentation good deceived.
Uh
at the same time it's as you're.
And then scheduling.
So there, uh, heavily.
Seeley,
um,
apparatus, um, and so that's
number 2.
Right, that was the last
