The the eighteen this morning.
Thank you Mr chairman thank.
Senator Padilla you wanna go and
having us this morning.
Morning Mr chairman.
Pat Woods.
District seven curry question
you counties.
three a good portion of Otero
Lincoln and Chavis counties glad
to be here this morning.
Thank you a I don't see anybody
else doing this by zoom yet.
and Senate finance and and have
some big agencies today and in
those members.
There's a lot their budget is
Representative Representative.
Morning committee members on
Kelly Klein with the legislative
finance committee were on HSD
code six six five department of
hitting for DFA this in the
Martinez as a very buttons more
who is the analyst for the O. H.
is in HSC at this time.
But that'll give a quick
fund recommendation was fifteen
point four million above the LFC
a significant portion of which
was in the public health
epidemiology response program
revenue above the executive in
the public health program I'm a
transfer from the early care and
education fund contingent on
enactment of legislation and
dollars for miscellaneous
adjustments in federal COVID
nineteen response funds.
With that I would like to have
the committee turn to page three
of your packet.
So if we could look at page
three of our general fund high
level packet this is general
fund revenue only for the
department of health does not
So the first program in general
fund is the public health
program and you'll see that is
lines one through line
seventeen.
And you'll notice that the LFC
can be found online eleven and
so you'll notice online Levin
that's you suicide prevention
funding the executive
recommendation put two point
earlier included one million
dollars from the early care and
education fund that's not shown
on this because that is a
different revenue source so the
actual difference between the
two recommendations is not two
R. line ten which is the
violence intervention program
this is what the LFC is closed
now it would make no that this
was not requested by the agency
but was recommended by both the
for this and the executive put
one point five million.
Other large differences you can
see our online for which the
executive recommendation put in
level is the epitome in response
program.
The LFC recommendation was a
sixteen percent general fund
increase still significant long
of the executive recommendation
was nearly fifty six percent
above the agency requests for
this line the HSD believe us
from million dollars one point
four million and the executive
recommendation put three point
million dollars recommended by
the executive recommendation.
In the next program laboratory
services the largest difference
was able to was not able to
really include this in their
analysis at the amount of the
executive funded at.
In facilities management program
automated medication dispensing
systems.
In which executive
recommendation put one point one
million I will note that the LFC
recommendation did at I have
over five hundred thousand
know about the facilities
management program outside of
the base operating budget in the
special recommendations LFC also
included four point eight
million dollars for a facilities
operations at the facility state
hospitals and some of the
actions that we recommended T.
O. H. a pursuit to improve those
environments in those facilities
Nine hundred and fifty four
thousand dollars online forty to
the Department ask for nine
hundred fifty four thousand to
hire on H. fact electrician
category or the department
contracts with different
operators to bring in those
person now built in also shows
that we could just move funds
from contractual services into
budget if the committee chose to
do so.
the next program DDS do
developmental disabilities point
program
On page ninety five we talked
about this a couple times in the
LFC this summer and we also took
it to a few other committees
cracked the spiral notebook each
ninety five.
financially due to remove all
people from the waiting list for
DSD waiver services into
services using the federal our
and it was the best
from agency and several other
executive agencies work really
close with us on this and so
this shows us that we can
general fund intact and still FY
twenty five and you can see that
online thirty seven on this
chart and so why bring this up
is that there technically is a
summer it does include what is
in the LFC recommendations so if
you do go low on DST it will not
affect this plan going forward
oversight program also known as
do a child by the program the
main difference between these
two recommendations is about
four hundred forty one thousand
LFC recommendation included two
dollars to to reduce the vacancy
rate and two hundred dollars for
an I. T. system.
The final major difference in
general fund revenue between the
two recommendations is online
requested by the agency and so
therefore it couldn't go through
the normal process of analysis.
And with that I will turn it
over to Cindy for any additional
comments.
I think you heard a little bit
of the theme in Kelly's
presentation on the executives
recommendation to really support
programs are definitely was a
concern about the vacancy rate
you know the budgeted vacancy
rate being rather high in many
of these divisions and so she
definitely took it upon herself
understanding the needs of many
of the divisions within
department of health and I think
you'll hear some more about that
from the secretary but but just
to recap some of those there
each of those divisions also
within definitely at the
scientific laboratory division
one point eight there to to
really help fund those positions
part of recognizing the needs of
the agency some other really
important priorities I'd like to
bring to your attention is
within the Public Health
Division there's two point four
in the executive being higher
than the request you know there
really was an attempt to you
know really bulk up and really
mentioned this but there's about
two million dollars of general
fund to replace some consumer
settlement fund that was used
last year in the facilities
management division so that's
and then also she touched on
that the DD Division and the
seventeen point nine million in
there in general fund that's two
components ten point four for
this edition all support for
personalities and DH shy and
that's about a million and so
again just kind of that
recurring theme among all the
We put him.
This went more quickly than
yesterday so I was just making a
is working give me a second
here.
You have to share my screen to
make this environment safe for
the middle of a huge outbreak
record number of
In my job in I remind everyone
that you should be getting your
booster I'm I'm assuming
everyone's vaccinated if you're
not vaccinated but I get that
that I think are more policy
related or philosophical or just
nuts and bolts things that we
a good job of sort of washing up
a philosophical difference in
our approach in reducing vacancy
rates because you know we've
lost a lot of people in the O.
or any new people to do those
new programs in there some
trial Sallee we want they've
been amazing partners I think
we've put together at least the
first part of a planned
refurbishment revitalize our
facilities you are cooperative
off that waiver routing federal
home based community services
funds it's a once in a while
that once in a moment almost a
once in a millennium opportunity
together and come up with a
solution.
For that so I just emphasizing
and public health got a twenty
percent turnover rate there and
you know really they've they're
the ones are out giving vaccines
are the ones out supporting
expand their responsibilities in
the programs you can see that
these deficits in charges of
employees exist all over the
state we think we can fill those
things already discussed and
violence some of our suicide
prevention will be there as well
and that we're hoping that we
can get additional support which
Division another one point five
epidemiology in response you
know the whole department is
public health and so sometimes
there's a notion that we think
we have a public health program
the state lab and and and other
resources and so I we're all
public health here I think we're
gonna end up with but two point
nine million short I just want
prevention calling state
government in the executive
branch to step forward with the
aggressive plan to ameliorate I
decided to answer ministries and
particularly for you you can see
almost two thirds of the funding
I devoted to you and in response
we're asking you for well
already mentioned you know in
New Mexico.
Suicide is the second leading
cause of death among teenagers
older teenagers one in five New
Mexico students actually engaged
suicide in the past year those
are very grim statistic we're
coming for the package we look
at all the literature all the
different approaches and I think
interventions all over the whole
state and so what that is why we
are asking for the additional
funding in response to the
is almost double the rate of
thirteen point nine hundred
thousand we have had that I've
and twenty deaths last year and
age groups here and so I we are
really wanting to step up really
wanting to address this issue
head on it is directly as was
reported out Dr dean says in the
believe is a top priority almost
every Legislature provided or
I've talked to I know I've
talked to many of you on this
committee feel it's a top
deal with suicidal ideation in
my patients sent and have to
deal with suicide unfortunately
not every year but many years
and it's a it's a extreme
we Fund us from the next one I
it was at.
One described the fact that
agency requests one point four
million actually the agency
originally came forward with our
thousand ice and now it needs to
state no it with it being one of
the top three because of that
opted by another two million for
the same reasons I'll just focus
everything and take care of
anything hi and neurosurgery
goal interventions for people
with head trauma very skilled
those in the state that's the
University of New Mexico it and
that it should there should be a
one here in this in this county
zero of those in the state level
three and do basic things
stabilize patients take care of
have four in the state basically
there to set up to stabilize
people and move them generally
to U. N. M. usually to a level
one transfer centre you can see
we're asking for is capital
funding it is.
Is designed to help program
startup is designed to help
those level three is that I
would love to see move to level
twos they can do more UNM has
the state on the on the bottom
left you can see the graph here
of are not of funding which was
about four point five million a
even increase the S. and the
LESC recommendation zero
increased we have seventeen
trauma centers is just as shown
on this map but one thing you
and that's a problem because New
Zealand
I in a trauma is actually higher
ranking because of that the
native American populations and
through Medicaid the fund is
trauma and that is not how this
works Medicaid does not have the
ability to pay for capital
expenses we can give money to
this is a really important need
in the state I urge you to
reconsider the LFC
recommendation I'm just.
in danger of losing our folks in
the scientific lab
The time we we set significantly
cases are they and so it's you
know that's that's not a unique
skill set to be able to be a
chemist and and testify in court
classification we really need
the full amount in the executive
racked to move these highly
qualified people off your better
range than making forty five
people we're experiencing a
backlog of cases review I and we
think it's important for the
department of health to support
this and you know I I an example
I'd like to give here is that
you know if I were general
contractor building a
subdivision of houses and I was
general contractor would not be
we go in and just give everyone
a seven percent across the board
raise if I were smart general
contractor may not I know we
have at least one on this
committee I was looking to see
that I can plumb rough and
finish from all those houses and
deliver them my customers that's
all the D. O. H. is doing here
and not another certainly I
would speak on behalf of every
state employee and supporting
a seven percent increase but at
the same time we have to be
we're not paying people what
they could easily make it out on
the open market and we're
actually paying them and someday
I mean these people got like a
just a little bit more about
that in a minute I I think we're
pretty open the what we heard
with LFC about adjusting the
with you on that Kelly and
others and would urge the
committee to support that thank
you for that today and then on
medication dispensing system we
do have a supplemental in as a
Installing in a major New Mexico
demand delivery system basically
twenty years ago or twenty years
behind the LFC facilities report
really asked us to consider
in the country I is without some
sort of automated medication
dispensing systems and that's
because it used to be in
nineteen ninety eight there's a
big report about.
automated medication dispensing
systems and reduce the rate of
medical errors by sixty or
seventy percent you know we are
patients most of whom are a fair
number of meds yes in a place
that automated medication system
I think with respect to our our
nursing homes and our other
we can get going immediately and
then I'm going funding to
maintain that and all of our
facilities so again I'm
passionate about this this is
the quality of care issue this
to the LFC on this one and also
on disabilities and this is a
complicated I bet we have over
than fifteen dollars an hour now
all of some of those folks are
at minimum wage and fifty that
increased to eleven fifty seven
percent increase will increase
thousand five hundred thirty six
dollars less per year annually
in those same people can make
working at the McDonald's down
the street into the consequences
earlier we're having trouble we
can't we can't actually run
facilities where we can't serve
meals and we're facing at
contractor analogy these are
folks are paying way below my
market and what they should be
paying again we need a
combination of those approaches
and just one more thing and I do
Scrase is going to get eleven
thousand and eighty three more
dollars per year and those folks
that are now up to twelve
dollars and thirty cents you
and that just.
Creases the disparity further in
salaries and I would be more
than happy I'll go on record
today is giving out my salary
of the these people to get them
up to fourteen dollars an hour
and maybe only four of these be
able to get him up to fifteen
dollars an hour so I would
seven percent increase and a
targeted wage increase or
critical positions and
particularly in this case
lowincome employees.
outlined in and executive rack
for more support for FTEs you
know we are doubling the number
of people on the DD waiver and I
think just common sense would
expand that program we are going
to need to expand the staff
right you know we have to
recruit new providers we have to
gonna have more work to do is to
expand the DD waiver thank you
for the two hundred thousand
ward
this part of our organization is
an incredible amount of work
they are one of only two
the H. I. type departments in
the country that works with CMS
have to do so I want to speak to
them today briefly and and
that's it so I think in summary
we're asking you members of that
really asking you to think about
whether a hybrid of the approach
of just across the board seven
percent increase with no all
changing vacancy rate if we can
point that we can compete and
keep those facilities open I'm I
think this is what SFC does is
what you're really good at and
health in our facilities with
both person and that medication
dispensing system at trauma in
the state
I didn't get averages introduce
smile diem again urges them all
to you recently they are
wonderful people who actually do
all the work I'm just the front
part in response to the findings
of a point that you've recently
issued thank you Mr chair for
this time.
appropriate time now to bring it
up so the first thing is is that
in the HSD recommendation from
LESC there is a rate increase
for providers and that effects
funding person the second thing
I'd like to also bring up which
you'll hear more about
ingredients presentation going
on later is what we call the
enhanced F. map or increased
usually get and we thought that
that might be changing with the
build back better planned and as
that has not passed Congress
right now we are hearing from
again for the matching right
from Medicaid facilities but
also in the developmental
disabilities program for every
quarter that we get that enhance
S. map means seven million
important note on federal fund
changes.
It is house bill two crosses
over this track but what happens
in and so we can kind of make
those adjustments before I
everybody kind of your question
short.
And to the point and if we need
to bring them back will bring
them back at some point Senator
you Mr secretary in the analysts
and presenters thank you Kelly
just two questions okay very
fast thank you this was very
enlightening and very helpful to
hear.
thousand dollars there I guess
I'm still trying to get my hand
right my my brain around you can
hear a lot about this I'm
assuming throughout this entire
session on salaries and and
my business I try to compensate
people so that they'll stay in
the can better better at their
jobs what is that nine hundred
thousand dollars do because I
guess is that going to enhance
appropriate for Cindy to answer
not me.
and retention and and trying to
keep people in again I was
saying earlier that you know the
longer I can keep folks in my
business the better it is they
produce higher results in better
quality etcetera what is that
Kelly could you help me with
that one I don't have your high
level just tell me which program
that is
Mr chairman committee that Cindy
that's in the public health
program that's a vacancy rate
positions using a vacancy rate
reduction without speaking for
the executive indeed yes correct
and so that you.
positions than they currently
have a funding for.
Yes Mr chair and it and if it
clarifies for the committee in
in your volume two and you're
on that page actual expenditures
for person in FY twenty one
which closed was forty nine
point three million of the LFC
recommendation is sixty two
Kelly and thank you Mr here I
believe so yeah I guess I'm just
trying to still figure out so we
don't have money in one area so
we need to add to add staff.
recommendation is saying we're
giving you some more general
fund money to fill more
positions that are currently
unfunded or vacant not at not
pointing us to volume two
showing that are operating
budget and our personal spending
ours are pretty over funded
compared to or actually spending
Right
Mr chair.
Tern also to the back of your
LFC packet there's a yes can
bottom of the page there's no
one numbers but it's all and and
the funded vacancy dollar so
dollars that already exist in
Mr chairman I guess the question
I have is with these dollars
would be best if we just took in
collapsed some of the the.
doesn't doesn't become in shock
that's a that's what I'm most
worried about because no matter
how much you try to fund the
existing positions for the
current salaries.
You just going to continue to
calculations we're gonna try to
have some some hearings and
really get a handle on it I'm on
every agency is they're all
going to come up here and
they're gonna say the same we
is really gonna have to dig into
this and we're gonna have to dig
into the session otherwise we
can still continue C. three
thousand vacancies in just this
pay band issues in finance
because that's the only way
we're going to fix the hiring
problems in New Mexico.
I appreciate that and so I think
I've heard enough on this one
thank you very much Mr chairman
these folks so full stop I'd
like to move on to something
else and then also start Mr
chairman on the large document
here there to large spiral
binder here and we were talking
well with if it's our money is
that for one year or how long
are we zeroing out the folks on
the DD wavering getting
everybody served.
Tell you want to answer that
our.
or all of your revenues coming
in for this now rose one through
ten our recurring revenues
General Fund federal Medicaid
match.
FY twenty four in FY twenty five
as those federal funds teeter
out technically we have to have
twenty five leading up to the
general fund need and Rowe
thirty seven you'll see the
general fund additional federal
fund needs will need to finish
this out in those fiscal years
million.
Not eighty one additional
million forty million.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Kelly so does that does anybody
fall off the waiver than for the
waiting list they just get rules
every year and people attrition
Office they leave.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Kelly for clarify ahead of the
question that thank you that's
all have.
same place right afternoon so
will kind of try to even short
and if we need to bring them
back I'll say it again will
bring them back there Steinborn
go ahead and then Senator Woods
really trying couple years and I
want to acknowledge that
So thank you for hanging in
there and and and doing good
work couple questions someone
asked Mr chairman we're hearing
what we're not talking as much
about are the lowest paid
employees and.
I want to speak to Department of
Health request to try to get
accommodate other agencies that
have come before us with that
being able to keep good people
on signing bonuses in these
kinds of things.
Supplemented with the seven
I think that's super important I
know that's a goal we're looking
at across state government and I
think it's the right thing to do
is we look at Hey bands and all
these things is making sure that
secretary the question because I
know that.
maybe there's been some concern
about vacancy rates Theresa
contractors secretary if we were
to find that fifteen dollar an
Senator Martin thanks for your
comments and thanks for that
question committed by that
question a little bit in to DO
with the governor to address
that issue.
Visibility thank you thank you
Mr chairman
LFC asked us to reduce that the
only way we think we do that is
to bring those direct service
providers out so thank you very
much on yes.
great job of with that work for
you in your in your agency if we
can if we get that I think some
of these wages crevices.
Staff.
In.
This
one about lowincome placed and
in general are competitive with
our salaries communities contact
hundreds I know the answer is
kind of interesting so so by not
paying our people little bit
more we're hiring contracts to
others who are probably paying
them more money ironically
contract right
finally I just want to ask about
some of the areas you
highlighted that we have we do
see a discrepancy with the LFC
and the the executive budget
How will that affect your
ability to be able to implement
those programs.
impact those programs would not
be able to prevent suicide
because remember that's really
where we're trying to move way
upstream in the process training
fit together with us as well and
so I'm.
We need to finding people to
colleagues I hope that we you
know we did again deep in this
agency this department and and
all these requests in these are
just really fundamental.
A life saving initiative some of
finally I just I'll just leave
you with this I know that I've
been reaching out to you all on.
Comment related needs.
ninety five level mass we're
seeing lots of other states now
start to provide those local
jurisdictions the federal
government yesterday Jeff
sometimes there's a lot of
counterfeit product out there so
there's a real need for
government to help make sure
that we're getting good product
in the right product out people
For us to do immediately is
quickly as possible for those
two New Mexicans so that we can
help upper hospitals helps lower
the death rate a little bit help
role for the state and so and
I'd like to like us as the
Legislature to consider that
funding at the outset so that we
can help with the public health
emergency that we're facing
the on that Mr secretary I know
COVID package of what's needed
right at this moment.
In in please don't answer it now
because I know something being
thought about now but I'd like
To kind of get some consensus on
how to spend and I can't think
of something more appropriate to
do then.
these public health measures so
because we got two more big
agencies and and I have Senator
Woods in center address on there
and live there and and so for
the next presentation we're
gonna stay within an hour time
move forward in and so.
Real quick Mr chair just two
questions.
One question has to do about
I really won't ask a question as
to why does make a statement.
The other statement is.
In the LFC budget.
Our matching.
For next year.
And the governor's executive.
Didn't include that.
Thanks for the question and I'm
not.
I I think what you're referring
to is our ring Medicaid back
center Woods so we we know the
answer that question your second
question is that in HSD question
to Mr dole secretary.
question I think is very briefly
with Mr chair with respect for
the committee's time in my
college at CYFD
actively hiring many people
during legislative fiscal year
twenty one but I'm going to ask
our finance people Shani perhaps
be interested in that Mr chair
we can send it to you or that
just directly members of the
committee.
Our air and on.
waiver for the extras on funding
that we receive federal funding
for
the DD wavered F. map right so
of the D. O. H. that was about.
Nine zero nine million dollars
are regarded not forty seven
million.
Mr chair that was a far superior
The chairman I do understand the
need for hi here so I'll be
short thank you Dr Scrase maybe
I could just ask a quick
approximately fifteen point four
million higher than the LFC in
general and so the the first
order than they can count on to
live okay
it is a fact was that discussed
in the governor's proposal here
when the races were recommended
because you mentioned Dr Scrase
so was that discussed with the
governor and I just kind of
wanted because it's still a
seven percent increase request
was actually the basis of our
budget request was we can
request an across the board
increase occurs that spot
legislative chart legislatures
purview and again on behalf of
all state employees at seven
new program automatic needs and
then very very specific target a
request the secretary got a
comical addressed in in
facilities for low paid
in in the state lab I barely
urgent need to raise salaries
for scientifically highly
trained place of our proposal
was very focused on areas of
right I think we just have to
figure out how to combine the
two do what's going to be best
for the people in New Mexico
thank you for that just quickly
Mr chairman secretary Scrase one
top echelon staff that everyone
gets a front of something like
this we have a pandemic places
in this extra requirements I
think there were approximately
lot of them get paid for affect
most of us don't I I'm just
wondering if in fact you know we
hours but we think they may just
say seventy thousand eighty
thousand a year whatever may be
the case but when they're
working on these extra hours and
they're not getting paid for it
they really come out with much
less we're really paying like
are forced to work around
because of the work once.
Mr chair and senator I registry
COVID I think what with the data
we presented in December was the
average facilities employee work
dietary I leisure that was an
average a good share of your age
and ways to get it over time but
many do not you're absolutely
right sixty eight extra ships in
contact tractors and pay them
fifty percent more and so I
think there's a better solution
yeah thank you thank you for
that and you're right it was
shipped not ours and we were
Very unfair overall we thank you
Mr chairman thank you Dr Scrase
staff.
Thank you and and all kind of
The support in administrative
services you did not ask for any
increases from LFC so want to
The other thing is on if you
look at your a level on fire and
safety the department and ask
for anything.
We increased your your programs
or are you didn't ask for any
program support when you met
with analyst you ask for any do
that's going to be the number
one question and then say we
didn't find it but there's no
ask then we can we can
do that.
hire in New Mexico on.
Inside your department and
what's the ratio.
to get down to a budget budget
vacancy rate of zero point six
four percent and that that's all
the the whole point of
government Mr chair and also
you know I started my role
officially on August first are
we there is a lot of frantic
activity to focus on the budget
think time is a factor here I
think legislators are always
planning out what they need in
our budgets in April like we
have to do and so it's a
so I think there's some timing
issues
and I think that LFC sometimes
drops things and we can ask for
we got of the executive budget
mean anybody on the screen here
and in my group well the other
editors State Land I asked them
if we had a major emergency
focus on the budget for the
Go ahead when you're ready
Representative an answer the
difference all ACA give you
address the question about that
categories of staff and how they
that's a little difficult to
answer but I can tell you that
thirty three percent of our
total vacancies are those lower
level direct air vacancies in
our facilities that's the ask
whole has approximately a
thousand vacancies right now
like I mentioned thirty three
percent of those are those low
level director staff that would
be impacted by the fifteen
dollars an hour I hope that
and how many how many people
applications are how many.
I forget postings you have for
those sixty seven percent of the
jobs you have out there.
the with over thirty years of
experience and they're out of
their at a little conversations
that means they're rate lower
than the rate that so from an HR
perspective we can't hire
equipment power so we do see
applicants people are still
wanting our jobs the problem is
is we can't pay them what the
pay band allows because we have
agency so again that kind of
wrap up thank you Mr secretary
will see back here and in just a
few minutes but we're gonna
really devolved into what's
happening this phone what
agencies are doing and what pay
bands a hiring and now we're
We have the CYFD secretary and
and we're going to limit this to
our presentation I know CYFD is
very heavy and will try to bring
agencies in and so kind of a
time frame kind for them not for
us but for them.
Madam secretary.
This is Barbara B. health and
good morning I just wanted to
make sure I wasn't missing
roll right into you.
Thank.
Thank you Sir Senator Rodriguez
somebody that's on the zoom can
you hear the LFC analyst.
Thank you Mr chairman I can't
Yeah I can hear now with that I
can this is there.
Okay well that doing my check
there keep my clothes thank you
for.
with us here today we have
secretary of the hill.
The secretary designate Vigil
with the children youth families
and then I believe Cynthia
narrative.
in our volume to this the
thicker book.
You'll see on page three thirty
five LFC is budget
Juvenile justice caseloads which
actually shows a downward trend.
Quite a bit of a downward trend
over time and then also the
Moving on into the
Well it's that you have in front
of you this is just to remind
you this is agency six ninety.
The executive recommendation for
general fund revenue grew about
twenty seven million or about
thirteen percent.
legislation.
LFC recommended seven point
three million more contractual
spending primarily to shift
funding from back and services
recommendation decreases fund
balance revenue from the
juvenile community.
Rec tions and juvenile continuum
grant funds.
adjustments so that they're a
little more competitive with do
you H. and other agencies and
and the private sector.
In the protective services
Partially replacing federal
revenue with general fund
revenue the LFC recommendation
decrease the other category and
increase the contractual
And the behavioral health
program.
Due to about seven point two
million in general fund
reversions in FY twenty one.
FY twenty two operating budget.
The LFC recommendation increase
contractual services category
five point seven million
primarily to support domestic
So the LFC recommendation for
the program would draw general
fund revenue to the program
about one point five percent
well the executive would grow at
about eighteen point two
percent.
recommended levels of personal
costs support a decrease in
vacancy rate.
I just wanted to flip over will
go up pretty quickly through the
recommendation column and then
for example on line to you'll
see the prior year OpBud.
Each item below that adds
The executive recommended about
three point two million.
to fill vacancies again this
program had about two point six
Person spending at this time.
Got moving on to line eight.
You'll see that domestic
violence basing crease the
the early childhood fund and
that's again contingent on
language.
line eleven I just wanted to
point out that's where the
justice facilities program not
too many differences in there I
just wanted to point out again
the the decrease in the
population in those facilities
you know.
Protective services I LFC online
twenty six LFC recommended more
in general fund revenue for
Forward to reduce vacancies.
Again because of reduced
caseloads in foster care there
is a little bit of money shifted
from those back and services to
the front and services for those
Just point out the executive
recommended
twelve point nine percent
increase and the LFC recommended
seven point one percent.
And with that Mr chair all of
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee hi my name is Mary
Beth transform this CYFD analyst
over at TFA and actually I think
for now I'll turn it over to the
secretary if that works for it
for the chair thank you very
much.
may as of Michael Reagan's for
what is up we do have a short
of discovery straightforward
slide presentation that
on the all the several people I
think that I I'm not sure I've
map my name is Barbara Vitela.
here this morning Mr chair and
members of the committee.
Of those CYFD our budget is
really of.
interventions for children and
teens and families who are the
most challenging
members of our public our
future on how this work is done.
We are the as you know the
agency that comes into our
Our role is to intervene when
appropriate to make
To to help families to reunite
drug use abuse Smith lacked that
we are called into action.
I'm before I go much further Mr
in New Mexico affecting children
and these are committed
employees that do this primarily
because it's a passion in their
the late night hours
that they are on the on to make.
Medical decisions on how to
serve.
how how many employees dedicated
employees we have working
throughout the state of New
Mexico and to really thank them
as their leader for their
We are comprised of primarily
the division's in in our agency
C. protective services which is
already.
fourteen thousand families over
fourteen thousand families in
fiscal year twenty twenty one
our second division is our
juvenile justice services
senses that are placed on
probation and in some instances
who fall under the
appropriations agreements for
six your facilities that we
operate we are currently
families or you in fiscal year
twenty twenty one third division
main aspect of our work is
behavioral health services and
families the termination what is
in their best interests how we
can support them get them on the
right track.
The program support box that you
have better access to legal
advice services legal guidance
if they have issues with our
with our department for in any
H. R. office is under program
support our agency office
administrative services division
are doing their work and doing
it well so program support is
quite large and supports the
New Mexicans and that is that of
the state of New Mexico
specifically children youth and
families department and Human
Services Division is subject to
individual you
against the state of New Mexico
was settled on March twenty six
twenty twenty and Kevin asked
Services must strengthen its
operations in order to provide a
more secretary of treatment of
improving the way that the
alright then.
Serves children and families it
requires qualitative and
quantitative data data to
Election was stated but to
ensuring that we are successful
that we are changing the way we
do our work in we are four main
that particular requirements a
requires training and focus on
the trauma families experience
the way we do business so that
we minimize the trauma of being
part of tribal the child welfare
system that we've minimized
welfare act we are committed to
To really strengthening and
that will be presented to you in
the number of netting some
Senator minute by virtue of the
US commitments to working hard
the gentleman just settlement
also requires us to work
better and more sensitive to
native children and to ensure
there there's a whole series of
things that we must do we must
invest in to comply with the
have an **** requirements with
requires us to place children
first and foremost either with
families and and in New Mexico
and to minimize the placement of
of treatment or yes this isn't
easy an office as an as some our
New Mexico which brings us to or
regardless of where they all and
then he and and risk assessment.
So there is a lot of work to be
done.
with the commitments that we
have on this to me so the next
slide.
Our budget and and maybe it's
those requirements of the Kevin
just
Madam our budget
As you can see was quite large
in FY twenty twenty as compared
to today
Early childhood education and
care department will carve out
of this but even with that
just to highlight.
As Eric mentioned the Executive
recommends fifteen.
To our obligations.
Next slide.
the.
These are some of the changes in
the in our budget that we
think it's important that we be
given the resources to enable us
to manage this department in
such a way that we can deliver
on our hands and that really
out our obligations but also
that we can pay our employees a
fair compensation to do this
work and as I said this is often
serving the public and families
and so I think it's really
important for us to recognize
that the money that we are
requesting resources that we are
air fare compensation for this
work next slide.
Of the.
and the legislative means in the
proposals that you've been
presented I'm again we would
urge you to these enable us to
I'm I'm going to ask if I may
yeah
For Michael to please explain
legislative finance committees
proposal and the executive's
proposal so Michael you want to
explain this particular slide.
here on the top and you can see
the general fund differences
that have been outlined by Eric
very best there's a four point
eight million dollar difference
in general fund I'm between two
have a we have a a difference
also there on the as Eric
indicated the LFC prioritizes
more on evidence based contracts
spending
transpire we know will not
transpire in FY twenty three
based on the amount of generals
that was recommended and this is
due to the matching component of
proportionately from a requested
amount the LFC left our our
federal request
where it was so if they with the
LFC would recommend that all of
the general fund we requested
during the operating budget
process before July we would
have a six million dollars
federal funds from our budget so
that's just an important
component of that and she
component of our request
and Executive recommendations to
support their and we are
grateful for that to kind of
help feels a lot of agencies our
workforce in protective services
the secretary of she would like
to add anything.
Thank you
thank you Michael Matt Mr chair
I believe there's a and by
presentation secretary thank
you.
Slide means.
This is our behavioral health
program.
money this is no funding we're
looking at for FY twenty three
and so again there's a four
point nine million dollar
difference in general fund
between the executive and LFC
we have several block grants
that we're ending or winding
down this fiscal year so they
would not be available be
utilized next year in FY twenty
in an on the expenditure side as
well and the executive
recommendation is an alignment
with our Senator funds that were
requested.
our juvenile justice program and
the request was sixty three
positions coming over to kind of
help meet our needs with the
cabinets deliverables I'm more
trauma responsive and just
and the LESC recommendation also
is
asking that the department find
Fifty in a multi systemic
connected for families that are
coming to come into contact with
our our agency and so the LFC
recommendation I think in years
past we have done that what the
this was a recommendation by the
LFC that is something that the
state had moved away from
probably over a decade ago and
therapy and M. S. T. multi
systemic therapy
the state moved away from doing
that sometime ago due to really
particular recommendation is not
something that I think that that
that that that are mentioned
should pursue at this time so I
This.
So we do provide
oversight of the work that
contract is provided to our
so we're not direct service
providers well.
And and also just to emphasize
that we have as that some of the
going back to oil need to really
augment our behavioral health
system of care and rather than
moving those positions over from
Just eliminated those positions
so I urge you to please
reconsider that recommendation
rather than them and putting
health services and so we can
build out are behavioral health
system here.
Next slide.
justice program differences on
side by side comparisons
the LFC and Executive
recommendations on both included
increases following preseason
General Fund
see that the fund balances kept
flat in the current year
executive cut that out
but the executive is also
proposing main page budget
executive recommendation the
aligns our contract categories
with our FY twenty one
expenditures for GCC Energy Jack
somebody with that in it's going
to really help us in FY twenty
three as we move forward and try
to get out of the COVID and then
be able to provide these
more thing is the LFC
recommendation again we're
trying to re align our FTE
within our department without
requesting no FTP and the LESC
recommendation actually but the
ninety three positions but
is it is an issue for us and we
would have to address at some
point but without I'll turn it
back over so.
Thank you Michael thank you Mr
program support differences and
you can see that we have a very
large difference in general fund
of the executive recommendation
is two point two million higher
funds should have been portion
of
as we do get that title forty
match and so we are anticipating
with the LFC recommendation that
we would have around one point
does not include an increase for
salaries and benefits this is
very challenging for us as a
secretary indicated we have a
lot of on instant programs
support our offices before
missing accountability our
with the LFC recommendation we
would have to maintain a vacancy
rate of around twenty percent
with a flat budget we have on
the executive did find some
so with that I will turn it back
over to Mr.
Thank you Michael Mr chair and
members of the committee this is
probably the hardest
Pardon our ability to execute
the system of care that he's
needing for an effective
requires talented people to be
on this work
I cannot function with you know
with with what I have in place
and I think it's pretty clear
we're based settlement agreement
enable me to have the the the
the resources necessary to hire.
Good people in the program
Project managers in place to
help fulfill these requirements
under have been asked but it's
also really and not some bolts
of the of the agency H. R. the
requirements under evidence I'm
that you not be done at our
current level or or glass and so
I really urge you to please
considering expanding our
you next slide please.
This
concludes the presentation okay
thank you.
Thank you and Eric you need
anything.
You have to keep it really
closer so everybody can hear it
yes Mr chairman I'd like to add
a couple things.
A number one if you were to flip
to the very last page in your
different sheets handout.
behavioral health services
there's currently forty vacant
positions you know which is you
know with forty vacant positions
it didn't make sense to increase
I want to also point out that if
you look at column and there
that's on the bottom section.
the department has about three
point six.
that's in the top side about
thirty nine FTE that they could
fill right now with current
funding.
And then the LFC rack would add
another item I wanted to point
out was on the federal funds
decrease that was that wasn't an
the department of themselves did
request those items that you're
talking about that we do that we
didn't decrease the federal
funds but we should have.
And with that Mr chair all go
ahead and pass it over for
further comments.
Or for questions so we just went
through that with with the O. H.
Agencies when they go to LFC
need to make the request.
And then not changing I mean if
they need additional money it's
got a state of constant hello as
We have plenty of money to try
to fix problems but when when
agencies change or don't request
topic everybody wants to talk
about especially in this
department and we are going to
bring you back because there is
a lot of questions but I know
you have to be on the a court
More about the hour mark so we
have one more agency and we may
see how far this goes and we'll
see where get Senator Padilla go
ahead thank you Mr chairman
thank you madam secretary so
may may roll over D. O. H. as.
They have to be a smart way.
HSD is going to have to be some
more news so let's just ask the
then we all will inform the
agency.
Mr chairman and and as you know
it's one of my major swim lanes
here in the legislature so
of us been talking about so in
my a accurate in saying and an
understanding or to paraphrase
the department and maybe LFC
originally was okay with giving
up some of the federal funds in
don't have to and I guess that's
going to be for the LFC.
Yes Mr chairman I don't I don't
think we're wanting to reduce
federal funds LFC recollection
increase the those other items
in there
and so the way we site is that
the with with those increases
the federal funds were going to
be maintained.
know a certain federal program
ands then they'll have to make a
reduction in that federal court
program.
You know and you know maybe this
we could have looked into a
little bit more but.
Honestly
you know right now we've got
more federal the state has more
federal funds than we've ever
flexibility to decrease during
our operating budget.
Thank Mr thing David had a
COVID.
I think they're too they can
also ask for Barth already if
because of the change.
Mr chair that's exactly right
and we get reimbursed for that
if it's anything related
federally.
But Mr chairman.
too much budget authority.
And then they could end up
overspending their budget
because of that.
However like I.
I hope that answers your
question Senator but what does
and so for the chairman of the
chairman can hear me right now.
Server did did the analyst
answer your question and and are
you you want secretary answer
that but I'm happy to hear from
the secretary but what I was
going to just mention Mr
Chairman so glad you're doing
this by the way we have this
Mr chair Senator Padilla just to
re iterate there are two aspects
to the federal funds that we
are either winding down coming
to an end and sober in here that
you see in one proposal is is
the other point is I believe
that there is we get our federal
reimbursement and it's largely
dependent on how much we
fund goes down should be
commensurate
Decline in the federal
reimbursement amount as well and
I believe that the
things it shouldn't be an issue
It should this being this way
just that's the way it works.
For the federal reimbursements
thank you Mr chair Senator thank
you Mr.
I add one thing I just I just
think it's.
Important to note that the
bottom line.
budget process when the when
they go to turn in their
operating budget and in the
spring.
Then also through the bar
process the budget adjustment
request process to just their
as a kind of a legislative house
bill two kind of issue and maybe
it's more of kind of a.
because I really would like to
see all that maybe figure this
one out and maybe have another
way of of explaining it to us
because I'm not a hundred I'm
not following it and percent but
could be my newness to the
that be great madam secretary
this one is is for you and this
might be around some of the
staffing numbers and and
budgetary items several years
ago I did ask for a full and
all the data and information
together but one thing that was
real critical that I wanted to
know was and I don't expect you
to have the state right now but
if I could get this that be
great is what is the social
because I can tell you that what
we pay for social work in the
state and in the state
government and the amount be at
the time
it was just you know it's
then if you can bump that up
against in a S. W. standards and
and if we can talk a little bit
about that I don't expect you to
have that right now madam
secretary but if you can please
work with your staff I'd like to
it's called section in the
office of the secretary.
And I will tell you that I feel
like I work part time for CYFD
because I feel like I'm the a
fantastic by the way outstanding
state employee there but it just
seems to me like we need some
additional staff in that area
because it takes awhile to get
back there's an awful lot of
research that has to happen
going into the next budget year
because I think you want to
think about maybe a little bit
more about how to better staff
that area.
Did you want to comment on those
first two and I just have one
more Mr chairman
K. loads of our Department R. an
aspect of an S. settlement that
we're actually working through
in determining how best to
measure so the answer to that is
is yes we will and are examining
really how we
monitor ourselves evaluate our
assessing our performance in our
how we are responding to
concerns raised by our
stakeholders and families and
on the constituent affairs I
just want to comment on that
just one last thing so a lot of
times the folks to contact me
madam secretary or the
individuals like the
grandparents that are helping to
foster the children I had a bill
ways to do that is this
independent office within the
department really helps them to
to to see the independent view
of the work that's happening
there and reassure them that
their loved one the child or
but when we passed the fostering
connections act which basically
of the support after the age of
eighteen we we got that on the
books in one year which was a
beautiful thing that happened
for our state we were able to to
answer that question for the
senator if I may Mister chair.
Hey good morning Mr chair
Senator Padilla members of the
funding has been utilized it is
actually a formula grants that
is provided by the federal
government that has been used
at.
kind of forty dollars with
within this last year in our
second year of implementation to
support our young people
transitioning into to a
maximizing you know the the the
dollars available to us for
these this particular population
I think I see this as a way to
reduce generational repeats or
having foster kids of their
having their kids taken away
from them and because they were
foster kids or whatever so this
is definitely one of those that
I think is going to really help
change the story for New Mexico
for let me go first.
Thank you in Senator Steinborn
go ahead and and we're gonna
roll over a over the next agency
because they have to be smart
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary good morning so good
to see you and are you in this
new role and sounds like you
rest your staff as well Senator
Padilla touched on some of the
questions I had Mr chair I just
have a few others
number one the numbers of
Thank you Senator it's nice to
see you Mr chair if I may
as you know we've decreased the
number of detention facilities
across the state I think that's
a direct result of the juvenile
particularly Bernalillo county
specifically has become a model
site nationally about really
trying to keep kids out of
to detain them and it really
kind of reflects going in the
system here at the back end as
well so I think one thing about
the front end of prevention work
that is so so critical and I
think the more we invested run
and the last we have at the back
end so I think that this is a
the system touching the system
getting over into the system and
we're seeing those numbers
decline and it's really a
commitment of a lot of folks
just locking kids up either at
the front end or back.
Thank you and it's interesting
from a budgetary standpoint and
I K. I don't want to over
simplify so forgive anybody who
and I think what it feels like
to me kind of based you know
some of the comments made by
Senator Padilla is for a long
I would like to see us build up
this budget I frankly in these
areas that you're talking about
that I think you kind of touched
on a high level which I would
love to learn more about I mean
can do better to prevent child
abuse to help kids in crisis
help on before the end up in a
path where they're sadly
incarcerated and and then you
Change outcomes and lives in the
it's just got to be one the most
important things we do for those
vulnerable kids out there and
honorable seniors I know you up
serve other vulnerable
started last year that I thought
was really cool that allowed
kids to tax in a new testing
program that allowed kids to
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I'm
gonna turn to my.
My team and maybe in
to mislead you so go ahead and
and Tamera I'm I'm to.
Verse well versed on on in so or
Mexico reach program was enacted
roughly a year ago and it is a
text service for youth in your
in children to reach out to us
either just through text or be
able to respond through are
differential response for
through an investigation in the
to us from young people I'm just
reaching out for help so thank
you for us it's been a great am
fun enough for me does staff
enough.
And you feel free to get back to
access on the what we're saying
are certainly very interested in
in doing that so would be happy
to get back to you on that thank
you very much just seems like it
and I guess that's something
that your agency.
Built with.
And just as far as the rights of
diabetes.
started talking with Secretary
Blalock about and then and then
you know he's not with us so.
Yes we can pick it up and I can
get this constituent involved in
new and innovative ideas on how
we can improve our system I
would be very interested in
sitting down with you for your
constituents and learning about
thank you to all your team for
working to.
Thank you pass the test on that
before you go to Senator
Rodriguez.
in that volume one this get your
book that you all have you can
look on page twenty seven.
And we have a the general fund
Some decreases in case rates
involve foster care and JJ.
But I I think the big story on
be not that are great for
children to front and services
to kind of prevent a lot of the
tragic things that that happen
Mr chairman and good morning.
Secretary Helen all your staff
that would just be you I just
have I have one simple question
discrepancy came from whether or
you misunderstood or not noted
or minute in a way that for half
been better whatever may be the
case it is what it is
look at budget adjustments or
supplementals or B. A. R. F.
already whatever we know the
issue is there are hand now and
now is our chance to fix that
we give the departments more to
do something of this magnitude.
sure that we can work towards
fifteen that hopefully this
session that is that Mr chairman
I just have a quick question and
for the sake of time secretary
In in the twenty twenty one and
so that's a lot of families the
only question I have is to work
closely with the department of
health and the department of
sure more coming.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Rodriguez thank you for your
question the answer is yes we
so yes the answer is we work
with them very very closely if
you don't mind I can ask of
Danielle Austin who is our
director of behavioral health
the work that that behavioral
health services that's for New
Mexico M..
families that have a substance
abuse issue I want to refer to
different areas a lot all and
annual yeah thank you Mr
chairman.
we're we're for CYFD we also are
the
I'll behavioral health and forty
for the entire state and so many
of the programs that you know
we're not providing direct
prevention supports I'm so we're
impacting those families we have
funding and we work with HSD M.
state including children and
families that are affected by
substance
Thank you Senator Rodriguez.
David I just on our LFC
spreadsheet on the high level
and we add another line for
agency requests.
didn't ask for and so we want to
kind and some of that confusion
of what the agency requests with
they didn't request maybe have
some of analysts go back over
make sure because I think this
fund rack you know and agencies
always want to use the easiest
settlement money so they always
wonder question more general
fund money and not use the
federal money because it
requires them to do a little
dollars before we use state
general fund dollars not only
for cost savings being as on the
matches are even higher but but
the federal dollars don't cost
our funds give us general fund
well the federal funds are there
for a reason and so if we use
federal funds first and then
general funds it gives the
agency more flexibility
are part of the equation help
the agency get where they want
to be and so if agencies want to
continue say don't use federal
funds those are our funds well I
First so madam secretary at I
appreciate your time we're
probably going to come back
again and I don't know full have
you have a really of HSD run
with everything that's happening
and so we want to make sure that
that we get you the employees
you need that the children get
the services they need
gonna try to spend that money
correctly and wisely and and so
that's our job as a legislature
and so.
Hey your time
may just ask who I'm and if if
if we and.
Sure.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
thank you Secretary I appreciate
it I just wanted to weigh in
this quick as possible there's a
couple of things that I think
request it was absolutely in
there I was about nine hundred
thousand dollars that they
requested so
obviously that can be discussed
later but I I just wanted to
just wanted to to make sure
clear so Mr chair with all with
all respect I think V. I. LESC
N. executive agencies agree that
proportionate amount of general
funds available for them so what
the agency is concerned about is
when there's an overage of
federal funds built in it
authority to decrease either
outside the operating budget
process or within it I do thank
you if I may just speaking for
myself I think it's important
confusion as to what is
available for them so just
wanted to put that out there as
to why I put a put a plea out to
get it right during session as
chair no and I agree with the
hundred for.
And but the ratios have to be
right and and that's why the LFC
analysts visit with agencies in
their budget request and see
between the time the agency
that's the ratios that we need
to have correct so we're funded
correct I want you agree center
share.
about another twenty four hours
where do we see that very point
in any of this data that we have
in front of us that shows the
ratio of what's being
accurately.
operating budget process every
agency submits our forms which
are the are the revenue
important to identify all the
different revenue sources and
the match the moment for the
on that maybe monthly quarterly.
Mr chair Senator Padilla yes
there is we do a quarterly claim
up seventy five but we identify
those by different every revenue
source on the R. what's that are
submitted with the budget
requests.
Thank you Mr chairman just as an
aside for me I guess I'd like to
see whatever's available maybe
we may have me back may not
having backed a so.
Have a good day.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee my
pleasure to present to you today
the other agency and then rolled
through it'll just get messy and
and so let's just break bill one
thirty we have on our our
calendar.
and just go straight through but
now that we kind of got Senate
finance set up for the session
and rolling give me a little bit
of breathing room.
So we'll.
forward we've already
rescheduled some some of the
agencies we're going to miss
some of the agencies would have
more questions on they're going
to come back
thirty and we'll go through CYFD
I mean the early childhood
sorry.
Senator Mimi as a if you if I
may Sir I you don't need you
at noon and so we're not gonna
we're not going to start and
then quit in this makes a mess
here okay that's fine we're good
with that at Preciado.
Thank you Mr secretary.
