My DFA counterpart Laurie.
The akka thank you.
so the Veterans Services
Department disseminates
information regarding laws
beneficial to veterans their
surviving spouses and dependent
children this is veterans and
their dependents on the
preparation initiation of claims
against the U. S. as a result of
military service and assist
veterans and their surviving
spouses and their children and
establishing the benefits and
privileges to which they're
entitled other departments point
a hundred eighty thousand
veterans statewide through
outreach services in the
department's nineteen field
offices and contractors who
serve rural women and native
American veterans we also
administer the military honors
program.
so for the budget
recommendations for FY twenty
four by both recommendations
increase general fund revenues
the executive recommendation was
four hundred and seventy two
point one thousand above the LFC
mostly for person of both
recommendations increase
personal the executive increase
was three hundred and thirty
seven thousand above the LFC to
reduce the fended vacancy rate
to seven percent.
The FY twenty three operating
budget had an estimated nine
hundred and thirty eight point
seven thousand for vacant
positions given the fall FY
eight fall twenty two funded
vacancy rate of nearly eighteen
percent the LFC recommendation
does not reduce the vacancy rate
but instead includes eighty six
point two thousand provide
targeted compensation increases
for Veterans Services officers
and finally the executive
recommendation was thirty five
point one thousand above the LFC
and contractual services for
transportation services and last
thing to notice agency took the
executive director for the state
agency yesterday and I'll turn
it over to Laurie thank you.
Chair Senators good afternoon
Micaela did a wonderful job
summarizing what happened
yesterday in the differences I
have nothing further to add so I
will pass it over to secretary
colonel can Tana.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee and
again my name is colonel Donna
can Tana I am the cabinet
secretary designate for
department of Veterans Services
and thank you so much for
allowing us to go first nothing
more precious than Senator
granddaughter first
granddaughter be born so I
really appreciate that
I just want to reflect on the
fact that we're celebrating
twenty years of being a
department will just twenty
years ago that this organization
serves as a commission so we're
going to build on those twenty
years of this practices the
foundation that was laid before
me before the with all the
previous administrations and
cabinet secretaries
I am honored to be here today
representing DDS and more
importantly the hundred and
eighty thousand veterans
throughout New Mexico as well as
all are nonprofit organizations
and key partners and
stakeholders if I could take a
minute and ask them to stand for
those veteran organizations are
with us today or whatever and
see if you can stand.
May be totally remiss if I
didn't knowledge and and
recognize the legislators that
have served as well so thank you
couldn't committee members that
are veterans on this committee
as well as the seven at large
the representative the
legislature I'd like to
introduce quickly and I I'll be
respectful of your time this
afternoon some of the staff that
we have before us on poster with
Diane
morning brown shoes or division
director for health care
coordination we have to reserves
Figueroa who is our women's
veteran coordinator we have a
map for all of those pin
shooting for robin Wilson and he
is one of our supervisors with
our veterans service our
officers and then the state
budget.
And on this side we have hello
Sir who is our chief financial
officer serving as our is the
acting director Lori good
terrace R. H. R. Representative
Madam and we have Gabby Sanchez
Santa who is our general counsel
okay.
I think president Abraham
Lincoln's Gettysburg address the
two hundred seventy two words
that he expressed and in
Gettysburg really defined why
we're here and I just want to
read real quickly you know let
us strive on to finish the work
we are in to care for him and I
will that now her who shall have
borne the battle and for his her
window and has her orphan and
that I think is the essence of
why we exist so I truly believe
that's the genesis on the next
slide is a.
Could be a better worded
definition of a veteran veteran
as a person wrote a blank check
made payable to the United
States of America for amount up
to and including their life.
I think that expresses it well.
Before I get into the funding I
just want to say that I often
suggest to folks.
Thank you support veterans is
more than presenting a flag in a
raise he's had a burial site And
headstone on veterans day
Memorial Day that is great that
is extremely important but if
you truly support veterans
support of their life when they
need the resources and the
support to help them get through
life so that's what I would ask
that you consider bottom line up
front or what I refer to as
bluff slide for cordially
request and respectfully your
thoughts and consideration and
supporting the executive budget
recommendations that was
supported by the house
appropriation of finance
committee as the budget analyst
recognize the major difference
resides in the salary and
benefits category as well as
thirty five thousand one hundred
and contractual services.
Is to say that.
We have already made huge gains
in recognizing compensation
equitable compensation for
veterans service officers so
we've already made those made
that a priority with this
operating budget for fiscal year
twenty three the funding we are
seeking is to ensure we can
continue that are for as well as
ensure we have one hundred
percent complementary of all our
positions as are troops in
Afghanistan I could tell you of
never would lead troops into
battle if we don't have our
forces aligned correctly if
you're not task organize you're
not going to succeed so I would
ask that we have the opportunity
to have all our support for
thirty five thousand gives us an
opportunity to expand our
transportation services and
we'll talk about those are
briefly.
In addition to the base budget
I just want to call to your
attention we are asking for
eight hundred thousand under
special appropriations to
include and support resources to
provide us an opportunity to
extend that veteran service
officers positions.
Staffing slide six please to say
that we have reduced that
vacancy rate of.
As of thirty September twenty
two it was roughly about
eighteen percent as of yesterday
were down to a little over nine
percent so priority has been to
fill those vacant positions with
priority going to and and with
the positions of veteran service
officers as well as all the
sports staff I think we all
remember management little one
you have to have the line in the
staff into for you have the line
you don't have the staff and
they're not gonna be successful
so we need to make sure that we
have our full complementary of
the staff.
Slide seven I would like to
direct you to what we refer to
as the rural support initiative.
Here's an opportunity for us to
really maximize our veterans
service officers currently where
we have field offices where we
have better service officers in
the state of New Mexico covers
about eighty two percent of our
veteran density so that leaves
us about eighteen percent that
don't have a designated person
the additional funding through
the executive budget as well as
the eight hundred thousand is
going to allow us to ensure that
we have the adequate resources
the outreach opportunities as
well as the staffing to ensure
we cover one hundred percent of
the state in regards to that I
want to proud to say that our
veterans service officers go
through a pretty tremendous
Cert cert program that is
acknowledged by the VA and it's
important that they be able to
capitalize on that opportunity
so that they can help veterans
I'm also pleased to say that the
impact through veteran service
officers in the state by helping
veterans brings in over nine
hundred and thirty million
dollars of revenue their
disability payments for pension
to the state of New Mexico how
are often also say that for
every veteran that is receiving
compensation.
Well deserve compensation from
the VA or the state they were
there about an average of a
hundred and sixty four dollars a
day were there counterparts that
have not received those benefits
earn a hundred dollars a day so
what does that suggested
suggests that if we can outreach
to the majority of our veterans
get them to be applied for
eligible benefits they're
entitled to we're gonna put him
in a much better position than
they're currently at.
Next slide transportation
services initiative.
I'm extremely pleased to say
that through partnerships with
New Mexico department of
transportation department of
aging long term services and
Indian Affairs Department as
well as other transit agencies
we're on the cusp of developing
a transportation network that's
comprehensive whole listed that
will allow for veterans military
service members military
families and others to learn
about the bill ability of a
local transportation system if
we have transportation assets in
rural areas it should not be the
only reduce to caring veterans
but I should be able to carry
active members family members
seniors and others in support on
in the connection with work
education health care not all
other vital services to date
what we currently have towards
that initiative is we received a
federal grant through the VA of
a hundred and twenty six
thousand dollars that supports
transportation services for
fifteen counties that is based
on a federal formula on the
density of the number of people
per county per mile I am
appreciative thank you thank the
legislature for in this fiscal
years operating budget we do
have fifty thousand designated
by the legislature to support
those transportation efforts I
do six ask cordially that we
recognize that in order to get a
hundred percent of our counties
covered we need to make sure we
have the resources to do that
you know beyond the fact that
all veterans share a commonality
is that nobody wants their
service to be.
Forgotten.
Not every veteran needs budget
for compensation not every
benefit veteran needs health
care whatever veteran doesn't
want to be forgotten their
service their dedication their
sacrifice in addition to that no
veterans ever wants to be in
turn buried without the highest
level of dignity and respect so
our honor guard program is
extremely important and I'm glad
to see some of the folks in the
order in audience or serve in
that capacity well it takes
resources to be able to do what
they do and I I just want to
call the the attention that we
have twenty seven active honor
guard of groups throughout New
Mexico that are doing this work
and more importantly at each
interment of a veteran every
veteran is eligible for three
functions if you will the first
is applied detail the second is
a rifle team and the third is a
bugler.
Performing taps that cost you
that is that requires resources
to be able to accommodate that
so the better we can accommodate
these organizations and provide
them training as well as
equipment and uniforms the
higher level of the.
Distinguish then that these
veterans can be interned with to
that I would definitely
encourage if you have not had
the opportunity to visit any of
our state cemeteries tremendous
job what a tremendous place to
be able to use B. as they were
final resting place for veterans
are heroes and their families we
have one of the major fire
Gallup for Staten the merchant
marine historic cemetery and we
are waiting on federal funding
for the final cemetery which
will be down in Carlsbad so we
are once we receive that funded
we will get to accomplishing
that Senator in as you see on
the last bullet on that slide
slide nine it's going to
services southeastern New Mexico
Lea County Eddy County Otero
Chavis Roosevelt counties in
approximately about fourteen
thousand for New Mexico veterans
will be service with that as
well as veterans from Texas.
Another key program for us as
women veterans initiative I
think we all recognize that we
are tremendously proud of our
women veterans that have served
in the service that represents
eleven percent of our total
veterans come if women veterans
that's one of the higher states
when it comes to that so kudos
to all the women that are served
of this tremendous country in
the state
funny provides us opportunities
to reach outreach and target
this population so that we
ensure we're providing the same
level of support and assistance
to our women veterans as all our
veterans.
An unfortunate everyday
seventeen veterans take their
life their suicide everyday
across this country seventeen
veterans commit suicide more
veterans have lost their life as
a result of suicide battle so I
I had you know I advocate that
we be conscientious ensuring
that we have outreach efforts
and resources to help veterans
now that they need not only when
we very on but also during their
lives so that we can help them
through these challenging times
I just want to call the your
attention to to federally funded
programs that exist within
department of veterans services
and that is our veteran business
outreach program this is where.
Sort of that maybe my daughter I
mean the granddaughters coming.
No no no we're good we're good
it was it wasn't but it may be
easy to say Hey where are you
So the the box is a great
tremendous program because it
allows not only for assistance
for veterans to start their own
economic businesses and things
of that nature but also serves
as a hiring mechanism so that we
can tie Veterans that want to
work with veterans that are
federally owned businesses so
that is a great connection in
addition to that as the veteran
education program and this is
where we go and we certify our
state universities to ensure
that the criteria meets the
federal guidelines so that they
can receive compensation and for
veterans that are going through
and getting their education I
can tell you I am recipient of
that I was successful in getting
the V. federal education
assistance program that paid me
to go to college the best
college in the state of New
Mexico New Mexico State
University and
So I had that opportunity to
graduate from that program but
the Mr chairman again thank you
so much for giving me the
opportunity to let you know real
briefly and succinctly what this
department does and I think in
reality we all recognize that it
takes more than a range on a
flank to score Veterans it takes
resources and it takes making
sure that we're doing everything
possible to work collectively
comprehensively with all the
nonprofit organizations with the
executive with the legislature
with the VA with local
governments with families to
address all of the tremendous
needs from our veterans and
their respective families so
what that's right stand for any
questions.
Shin from committee members to
keep in mind he's got a little
bit of a rush.
There what
my question is no.
What is the eight hundred.
Thousand four on section five of
the budget.
Mr Chairman Senator watts
data hundred thousand is is is a
special appropriation that would
allow us to.
Purchase all the pre right
pre requisite resources
marketing material equipment
vehicles to ensure that we can
support an adequate outreach
effort across the whole state
when you think about Harding
County and it has thirty four
veterans to it it's not
conducive or make any
efficiencies are effectiveness
to assign of this for accounting
with thirty four veterans but
those thirty four veterans
deserve to ensure that they have
adequate support and technical
assistance so we may need a
mobile unit to go out to forty
Harding County on schedule dates
this eight hundred thousand is
going to provide as those
resources to be able to
accomplish that.
So you're talking about some
kind of a a mobile unit that
would be part of it Mister
chairman Senator what's that
would be one component others
would be the marketing outreach
if folks don't know about the
service that's eligible then
they're not going to ask so we
go to market that we're gonna be
able to have the resources to
support that we gotta give
presentations we're gonna have
information briefings and things
of that nature so all that
requires resources earlier Mr
chair you were talking about.
Transportation.
And I'm assuming that
transportation to and from
medical.
Facilities and and that kind of
stuff and you said it was an out
reach between
aging.
trench DOT.
And one other agency.
So.
Hi this general service provide
the vehicles.
It is tell me a little and
quickly.
Tell me how this will be all
goes together sorry Mister chair
Mister chairman Senator Woods
appointment there because it's
very important of the two so the
initiative is the veterans
transportation and community
living initiative that is a key
partnerships with fellow sister
agencies that's a big
initiative.
But within the yes we have a
highly rural transportation
grant program today that's
funded with the federal grant of
a hundred twenty six thousand
fifty thousand from the special
appropriation this year's
operating budget that allows us
to contract with transportation
agencies throughout the state of
New Mexico that do exactly that
the people better and bring them
to and from their medical and
health authorities that's what
exists today what we want to
blossom to is this whole
initiative but it's a it's
through the discovery institute
conversations it's through
looking at resources looking at
organizations to be able to
detect to accomplish this
mission but Mr chair and and.
The.
The increase you have in your
budget really it does not
address the transportation for
it's just person.
Mr chairman Senator.
It's kind of a combination of
the the increase in our
executive budget will allow us
to use some additional
contractual dollars we talked
about the thirty five thousand
so give us some contractual
dollars for the service in
addition to that we need to make
sure that we have adequate
resources to be able to
accomplish the other parts of
the transportation the
communication the call center be
able to call to make the
appointments and all of the
support mechanism if you will.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and
congratulations Mr secretary
designate and I'm sure that
grand baby is going to be just
beautiful and looking for that
part of my life at some point
you know so regulations I
thought the report was excellent
I just wanted to ask about two
things there's and I have of.
The place over in southeast
Albuquerque that is going to be
a living establishment I just
want to ask you to you know
please continue to support that
can you give us just a very very
brief update on where that is
not have one other question
Mr chairman Senator for the I
think they may have been the
audience with us the veteran
integration center at one of
things I failed to mention is
that one of the needs that's out
there as well as an initiative
is housing.
No veteran should be homeless
and will recognize that and
they're at very stages of very
different levels of service
needs if you will but there is
has been tremendously successful
as an organization in securing
all of the brick and mortar
money if you will to build a new
center out in Albuquerque but
they are looking for is support
in regards to appropriations so
if we really want to support
veterans
you know here's an opportunity
to look at that in the house and
arena I will say that that
request is not in the executive
and it is not in the legislative
budget Representative request so
Mr chairman and and secretary
does with will that eventually
be something that you will come
forward with that is it if if I
to order a couple of times I've
been very active with that group
on the way in helping them to
get doors open and this and that
and and thankfully the action we
took today on the Senate floor I
can continue to help advocate
for them
I just you know if if if that
thing works out the way it was
it's it's been laid out it's
going to be huge I mean it's
going to be a big benefit on
homeless veterans issues and
stuff like that so I know we
want to get into the details
here but if you can maybe we can
talk about it offline that be
great and then Mr chairman and
and secretary dismissed full
stop another issue it just want
to compliment the work that's
done it like places like C. N.
M. and and a few of the other
offices that you have on on the
college campuses are also very
important because when folks are
coming back or we're trying to
do something else with their
lives having those additional
support and all the things that
go on in those offices seem to
be to route the to be really
supportive of those particular
students up do you see the your
office continuing to your
department continue to support
those Mr chairman Senator
Padilla absolutely you know the
best thing we can do in the I
guess maybe the best analogy
give is it's more important to
close the corral gate when
horses are still in the ground
forces with close the gate after
the horses of left so I suggest
that that if we can catch
veterans right with their
transition from active component
to their civilian life that is
the ideal time to get up in the
system and the best ways to do
that is in some of our
universities and colleges so
capitalize in New Mexico is in
the resources and partnerships
with our vet centers and being
able to ensure that we have
representation there I think is
extremely important right now I
was initiative with the VA that
we're going out to all of the
active component military
installations once a month and
as they have a program called
taps that interact with veterans
are military active folks are
transitioning out of active
service we want to be there with
the so that we can get them into
our system as well so absolutely
would that is in addition to
that we foresee really being
built upon and more importantly
maximized thank you Mr chairman
I'll just wrap up Mike.
It's one more time with
complementing that program one
thing that really touched me was
I know that the offices of those
those centers actually support
the kids of the vets also from
homework to getting them
additional food they may need
any number of other things I
think they were getting
backpacks forum tutoring that
it's really remarkable Mr
chairman so great job please
keep that up thank you Senator
Rodriguez.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon colonel content of
course our staff McKellen's my
staff member here
I just want to say thank you
truly I was happy to see that
you were appointed you did a
great job with DFA and I'm sure
that you're going to continue to
do a great job here I just have
a quick question
on the veterans home's interior
C. when will that be completed I
forgot to date we were working
on throughout the summer but
tell me a little bit briefly
because I know you have to go
Mister chairman Senator
Rodriguez excellent point I had
the opportunity to visit the
home Senator long been read
online as well as a secretary
designate from DO each of Mr
Allen and a couple of other
folks and it is progressing
really well I would have been
more of a give you dates but we
definitely can get that done for
you but I do know that it is
probably at least sixty seventy
percent completed and the move
in date is is relatively soon so
we look forward to that and if
you have not had the opportunity
to go down and visit it is a
tremendous for it's going to be
a tremendous facility and that's
going to be a tremendous benefit
for those veterans that are
gonna be able to utilize.
S. thank you thank you for that
and I do remember we did go in
the summer too with the LFC to
go visit and we realized how
much of a need there was there I
couldn't believe that that was
truly I'm gonna say it a
deplorable situation and I'm
happy to see that it's moving
that not only because it's
needed as a whole but because of
the ways design now is going to
be nice is gonna be like
cottages and you know nice
places for veterans there so
thank you Mr chairman and I hope
I think it's at the end of this
year that is going to be
completed that I could be wrong
I just wanted to compartment and
I want to just finalizes Mr
chairman by saying that I looked
at your presentation and your
words that you quoted here the
description of a veteran and I
was deeply moved by that
If I can say it I think I
memorized it is a glance where
it says that part is a veteran
as a person who wrote a blank
check paid to the United States
of America
up to for an amount up to and
including.
Their life this this pretty
pretty profound I think if we
can leave here today just
thinking that and thankful in
our heart we can do more for
veterans thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you I'm just a quick
comment.
Main like and we may not like
right.
The United presheaf going to
steamroll Gallup fried a new
line the congressional medal of
honor patriotic conversation
right about making one of this
the best state agencies I want
you to go back and figure out
exactly what you need what you
need to do to make changing the
veteran to provide the best
services that we can find and
make this the number one
veterans department the United
States and brings back a number
of Senate finance and would help
to get that done I think you're
a great secretary
you're well respected and I
think you accomplish a lot of
things and if we help you
council's goals it is very
important to everyone on this
committee and we do that do that
so we're gonna have that
sometime after house bill two
crosses make sure you bring the
quest that.
What what exact so you can ask
for it's what you and your
veterans decide that you need
that you can get services done
and helpful and I know the
numbers will look like but don't
be afraid to shock us because
those places where we should put
money right and there's places
where we should put money in a
these are the people that we
need to help someone to do that
for me and.
And that well can make
commitment to.
The Gresham of water water the
tree and.
And we'll get that done.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee again thank you so
much for your support and
recognition of the importance of
us continuing to support and
live the dream of president
Lincoln and surface those
veterans that are born of battle
and the oceans and.
So that have a great day we
should daughter's new grand baby
healthy and quick quick
recoveries thank you thank you
to your staff also many in the
audience sitting here who do a
lot of the work could do without
you.
And then go to the EMNRD.
Yeah wait let us I'm sorry let's
get Senate bill nine my didn't
seem there in the room okay.
So we do have a substitute bill.
All of the that.
You want to introduce a bill you
want to do the office of.
Since we get a copy.
Many copy the substitute.
Nibert.
If you
do not.
What.
Two hundred.
We're trying to do some
committee work etcetera sure you
are.
We need to yes.
We need to make the motion so we
can.
On the line.
In the past on Senate finance
committees of the line.
Second.
The motion and secretary
Cornwell.
Is anybody objection to the
motion any of.
Yes for discussion of the two.
Yeah yes.
The objections right good and
you introduce a substitute can
we get a copy I told you that.
We could have in front of me now
she slept with it under your
pillow
But
two minutes all of the members
to.
Re ready Mr are waiting on you
okay thank you Mr Mr two years
ago started a process I think I
try to get a twenty million
dollar set up for twenty five
million dollars set up in the
budget and we would use rural
revenues off of that fund to try
to fund some conservation
projects around the state by the
time the session came around the
meeting with the staff we
managed to get that down to
around two million dollars in
the budget of thinking that that
be just to expense fund reviews
at all and then we had a special
session a few months later that
went away so we've been trying
and we've tried every year since
in some form or fashion put
together conservation fund
because we have a lot of needs
around the state I passed around
a little brochure that show some
of the federal funding and we're
missing out on and it's millions
of dollars some of those federal
dollar funds are matching it to
two and three and four once and
some even more so in all aspects
of conservation from wildlife to
so in order erosion Forster you
name it all of our conservation
agencies need dollars and
they're missing out literally on
tens of millions of dollars of
federal federal money that we
could use for the betterment of
New Mexico with the advent of
the recent fires we've had
around the state it's even more
critical we have wildlife issues
we have a solar water issues
flooding
on and on and on you know the
problems all of you do you
different in each corner of the
state that we all have serious
issues or conservation so we put
together Fund we're trying to
get to a significant amount of
money put together so that we
can use primarily we get to fund
set up one where we'd be
basically an endowment we reduce
the revenues off of that the
other been expense fund that we
could take dollars out of to
meet immediate needs.
And in general that's the
overview of the concept of the
bill we'll get into the details
all defer to my co sponsor
senator Wirth and he can make a
few opening comments.
Thank you Mr chair members
New Mexico is currently the only
western state that does not have
a dedicated land and water
conservation fund are that's
what this bill does the timing
is critical given what we're
seeing with.
While for wildfires floods
drought climate change this
would create a sustainable
funding stream once it's fully
implemented and I think the
point the senator Neville makes
about the potential for federal
match is huge
once the their sustainable
funding coming in these dollars
can be leveraged significantly
and that's what the bill does
it's critical to the that we're
not creating new programs here
the funding stream is spelled
out in the in the in the sub and
are explain exactly what the sub
doesn't just a second but these
are existing programs through
state agencies I'll tell you one
that I helped pass the forest
and watershed restoration act
was something Representative
bandy and I of finally got done
after number of years trying to
get that done the challenges
been we just don't have
recurring dollars in the fund
and so the structure of of this
bill is to create as senator
Neville said to funds one is a
prominent Fund and then there's
a second fund that
we hope will have fifty million
dollars in it that will be so.
Years twelve and a half million
dollars for four years well we
build up the permanent fund Mr
chair I want to give you credit
for really putting the whole
concept of these funds into play
and using nonrecurring dollars
to create something sustainable
if we could get three hundred
million dollars into this
permanent fund and you spin off
five percent you're looking at
twelve and up to fifteen million
dollars a year in recurring
dollars without all of these
agencies coming back for for new
dollars on each budget cycle
the substitute basically
stripped the appropriation
amount there was a specific
dollar amount obviously that's
to be determined so strict that
out and then it just
incorporated the changes that
were made into in the Senate
conservation committee there
were a couple of amendments
regarding.
When the trigger works on the
permanent fund to start just
distributing money it brought up
to a hundred million dollars
when it starts to spin off and
we can explain the specifics of
that there also was a change to
the department of cultural
affairs just exactly the program
that that would run through and
all we do is clean up those
those amendments into this and
that strip the appropriation
seven half off of bill it's
clean when it comes down to the
floor so again that's what the
bill does and tapi to.
The answer any questions.
Thank you we'll go to the
audience real quick let me go to
June first since may crash may
not crashed with many many
people have in some four.
No one so do we have one for two
against we're gonna go to the
audience.
Only have two people for and and
the other was the check the box
I guess we'll just the Jared
Stork.
From Los me a project.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is that it
is is that I am I am with the
familiar project with any of
deck is a center for
transformation we we.
I find with you as a week to
activate them on climate crisis
issues I am here to the defined
support over the line growing up
in the south side of Santa Fe it
wasn't easy for me in my
feelings left at the altar
because even though we are
sentiment but one thing I never
had the experience of course
most we have expected it wasn't
so I doing this to me a project
where I was able to truly
discover the others that always
state has to offer.
Working with us and we are
project I see the struggle I
heard reflect on thank you that
we work with with that what we
have done this and we are in a
large pot alright thanks to the
other equity fund.
We have been able to
successfully being life changing
other experiences to ponder so
but we do The New Mexico while
also providing leadership
opportunities the other equity
fund has allowed us to be able
to implement various programs
like a summer of the program we
we we activated thirty five you
the authors and we have a
hundred percent attainment.
I would committees deserve to
have opportunities to engage
with the others with
organizations like the city of
project and many others
currently being funded by the
other.
With the secretary of the last
two other recreation I just for
our community's well being but
also for you to be able to
experience first time where we
need to protect the natural
ecosystem of our state.
Members of the committee
considers supporting the land of
enchantment Medicine fund thank
you thank you guard Jon
Crenshaw.
Thank you Mr chairman you want
to come up to the Mike and
stating.
Come up to the Mike in setting.
As we're on the web down people
want to know you are.
Staff writer okay
Thank you I'm very honored to be
here I will keep it very brief
John prince on president of the
board of the New Mexico wildlife
federation we are now in our
hundred tenth year of speaking
up for New Mexico sportsmen and
women in the conservation
community of the wildlife
federation very much supports
this bill we would very much
like to see if funded multi
generational far into the future
we just as previous speaker
who's become grandfather some
will and I have a hard for us to
keep that child mind and and her
religious children money to.
Are you I just learned a new
word here a couple years ago
that I wish I'd never heard
call her medication and all of
the things that senator Wirth
just mention here shortly before
as a direct product of that it's
happening in New Mexico has been
happening we're living it and I
have for several decades we
perhaps didn't recognize it I
didn't perform of.
But it will continue and that is
absolutely a.
Guaranteed.
With the threat public land
private land domestic livestock
well I.
Forest desert all the way
everything and it's coming it's
here and it won't go away and I
would really encourage this
committee and this legislature
to really pass something that's
going to be meaningful and again
multiple generational thank you
very much for your time thank
you anybody in opposition.
Come up to like we have to.
Hello chairman committee members
my name is Brandon going on with
the New Mexico cattle growers
we're standing in opposition of
this bill until we can try to
come to an agreement we would
like to have the land
acquisition completely taken out
of this but we are understanding
and we would like to see it a if
there is any land acquisition
that it is kept to a cap of
fifty acres and we would also
like to have annual reporting
for any of the recipients of the
funds R. as in this bill that is
designated on what they're going
to be using these funds for and
we ask the at the end of each
year that they give a detailed
report on what they have spent
the money on to the legislative
finance committee that way they
can be held accountable to the
money the funds that they have
received and as you heard the
reason why we want the land
acquisition out of it is a lot
of them the government match
funds that come into this with
the if one of the funds gets two
million dollars or two point
seven million dollars multiply
that times for now you've got a
pretty large amount of money to
be able to purchase land that is
the reason why we are standing
in opposition thank you.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name's Taylor
Reagan's on behalf of New Mexico
Wilders and to stand opposed to
us nine the same reasons
previously stated our biggest
concerns are the use of
appropriated funds for land
acquisition and the lack of
accountability for fund usage of
the bills into is funding for on
the ground conservation efforts
and a framework for
accountability for fund usage
only strengthens that intent I I
myself am a rancher's daughter
and every decision that I've
made thus far in life has been
so that I can return to our
family ranch under this piece of
legislation when the team when
the time arises and
circumstances allow me to
purchase more property to expand
my family's legacy there will be
no way that I myself could
compete with government agencies
backed with large funding thank
you.
Thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
Not
hasn't amendment.
So as.
Chair of the amendment.
Senate finance committee.
Then it's number one percent
financing substances that
centralized.
For this.
My sent items purchased.
This this.
Because in my land.
Right.
Discussion on the amendment.
But get them to go to you.
Senator develops under.
Mr.
Chairman we understand and.
To some degree we we sympathize
with concept however we're
dealing with a great deal of a
various groups and so forth
we're trying to minimize the
amendments and the changes to
the bill keep it simple so from
that standpoint we keep it to
everyone of state it's an
unfriendly amendment and then a
mischief I could just add I
think the challenges that.
You can see here that Senator
Neville and I don't agree on
every issue on this bill and I
think the the the group that's
come together don't agree on all
issues but what they've agreed
on is that the version of the
bill that's in front of us and
so what we don't want to start
moving down a direction to
assist one of the groups that's
out there that I can assure you
there's going to be some more
amendments that you might not
like Senator share maybe you've
got some warm and see what so so
again I just want to reiterate.
This is taking an immense effort
and I give us you know sent out
on a credit for sticking with
this but we're we're kind of a I
think we found the sweet spot in
terms of.
The majority of folks that have
worked on this
have kind of realized let's not
start opening up a bunch of
statutes and putting language in
remember there's a whole string
axe here that the our existing
statute and this debate we're
gonna have over private
acquisition Senator would set up
and up St Philip's bills to use
gross receipts tax to address
that it's one that's relevant
but again I just think.
Bring it in here will mean.
We're gonna end up having other
amendments coming in we've kind
of made the agreement to just
keep this as it is and and
trying to access it it might it
Mr chairman there are other
statutes for you do with real
estate if you know we had an
incident a few years ago about a
purchase a piece of property or
much restriction point right
next door to the capital here
that got one of our legislators
in a great deal of problems
because he had to bring it to
the legislature so if that need
that section needs to be tweaked
can manage that's a whole
different section of the law
than what this is and we think
that's the appropriate place to
deal with.
Any other questions on the
Senator Padilla on the
amendment.
Thank you of Mr chair and I
guess this would be for the
sponsor of the amendment.
Please listen yes.
Thank you Mr so that is the
amendment here just no land
acquisition at all.
So based on what you're trying
to accomplish here so Mr chair
Senator if you go to the very
last sentence sentences
distributions made pursuant to
this section shall not be used
for the purposes of eminent
domain I added for work which is
apparently very complicated for
some or to purchase land.
So it can't be used for shall
not be used for the purposes of
eminent domain or to purchase
land so in this case then Mr
chairman zero land acquisition
is with her.
Yes okay just just making sure
with with these particular funds
which with these funds yes so so
Mr chairman and and I guess the
sponsors of the of the bill are
you if this is an important.
And.
What you're proposing here
doesn't stop you from coming
back for another legislator
legislators two years now twenty
two years and are coming back
and adding some sort of a of a
provision on on the acquisition
piece is that right that's
correct.
Okay.
The other questions on the
amendment Sir what.
As share with us.
Senator.
The state.
Do we now.
Out of the state of New Mexico.
Mr chair Senator I can't tell
you the exact number for about
forty to fifty percent public
land statewide leading to
spilling forced.
However the number without a
recall as well I just have a
look at that appears.
Mr chair there's forty three
percent State Land I mean
private land.
And then we have all these other
categories
can you describe what we use Mr
chair what we use state trust
land for.
Mr chair Senator and what I mean
by that the managed by the state
land commissioner.
Mr senators it's it's very slow
it's everything from
commercial purposes next to the
city limits of Albuquerque all
the way up to
ranch land you're part of the
state in my part of the state so
act very soon a great deal costs
all over the place there's a
everything and like great deal
of in the southeast corner is
oil and gas development sites
and so forth so there there's no
simple answer to that because
it's just about everything that
you can use land for the state
is being done on state lands
and.
Is it's manage for what.
For the profit for schools
profit for go to insurers
primarily for school are fit for
the beneficiaries.
Do you anticipate the land
purchases done with this bill to
be done for a reason.
Mr chairman so Senator I don't
anticipate to be for there to be
any significant land purchases
all I talked with the agencies
there's not any particular
interest at this time to use
those dollars of the secretary
seconded to use these dollars
for land purchases of but I
guess it would be permissible.
Things change but no into the
problems of conservation issues
anyway buying land is not a
priority.
And and that's another one of my
issues Mr chair.
Is the land that is being.
Purchased a lot of times
through.
Federal monies with state match
which.
Is the theory behind this bill
is to get federal monies in
state match.
And they're being pretty poorly
managed at the present time
under the theory that the best
thing to manage is to do
nothing.
Let it become L. naturel so to
speak.
So.
I have a huge amount of problems
with that
so my constituents have you is
not a problem when they are a
neighbor to that land in the
tumbleweeds Mexico from up.
And I know that I've talked to
the game and fish about this Mr
chair and and they tell me
they're going to get right on
it.
So.
I'm assuming that they will.
But we don't manage we've we've
bought a a.
Big ranch.
Was that man Rodman money the L.
R..
And that L. bar ranch
Is just fits the category of
habitat.
That's what.
Tippmann Rodman money is for
it's two to.
Thank habitat for wildlife.
And when we did we took about.
Fourteen thousand dollars.
From the local property tax.
I know that that's not bill and
I'm not going to stress in any
further.
But the funny thing about that
bill yesterday when I presented
it Mr chair.
Was the the the the questioners
made the statement that the
state can afford this expense a
property tax for ever.
In the county.
For loss of that property tax
for a.
It's a double it's an accounting
system and balance.
And all of a sudden we take
revenue away from one side and
expect the other side to keep
function.
So Mr chair those are my
comments thank you.
Senator Rodriguez and resource
center for the thank you Mr
chairman good afternoon senator
Wirth Centerville staff thank
you for your work you know I
Senator Wirth Senator share help
me understand this because I'm
looking at it as it is now and
it really wouldn't this just
limit the ability even to
purchase for example easement
and easement is a piece of land
if the state needs an easement
for example to proceed with
what's that we have land and
water conservation because this
bill is about land land and
water conservation but yet we're
restricting what they can't with
the state cannot cannot purchase
with these funds and I'm
wondering is it says there's no
land to be purchased no eminent
domain we understand the
condemnation up but and that's
reasonable but no purchase of
any land even though the state
may find it necessary to
purchase something the
attorney's meant I just thought
of that one thing I'm sure there
are others it seems quite
limiting in that we're here we
are trying to establish a fund
that I believe will go a long
way.
And we mention a couple of ways
at least one is that we are
looking at doing very in depth
analysis on the project's
current projects that we have
that haven't been completed
water projects infrastructure
projects land projects they're
not funded adequately and it's
not only with federal funds just
capital outlay whatever it may
be there's so many as we know
billions literally out there
waiting to be used and in
capital and we were looking at
hopefully find estimate projects
by which we can complete the
funding with and this may even
come to that eight to help us do
something like that also and I
guess those may have some quote
land the words land and water in
those projects and
It's quite limiting to keep the
state from purchasing any form
of land that's Mr chairman.
Senator Centerville or somebody
can somebody help me here is
that what you see will again
Mister chairman Senator the the
intent of this is not to
purchase land the intent of this
is to conservation projects I
agree there could be a condition
where you need to water
diversion or of something on
that order the to that's.
Typically could be built on
private lands but and.
Thank you so that would be.
Right limiting to the state but
also one last thing Mr chairman
is that I noticed that out most
most but several of these the
matching funds from the feds
would very the requirement
varies and so if we don't have a
sustainable form of funding
available when in fact we do get
a requirement that's been our
problem that's why there's so
many projects out there sitting
there uncompleted because we
can't finish of this range
readily available to complete a
lot of these projects and have
this matching funds that we need
that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you if you want
to so Mister chair secretary
secretary to.
Thank you senator.
Certainly they said that that
the intent of this wasn't by
land full of the intense not the
by lanes and let's not by land I
think that's pretty simple but
the concern is I know from from
the many in the ad community is
that it will lead to that it
will lead to large purchases of
land and.
In that's their concern.
their concern is that we're
going to take.
Ranches.
Internment wilderness where
there is no real conservation
going on out there it would burn
it down you know we sit in this
room we complain that we burn
down something else because we
didn't manage it.
Senator Woods manages his farm
and ranch.
So does every other farmer and
rancher out there.
We know that land is been
purchased.
And then it just sits there all
natural.
In burns.
And so that's that's really what
we're trying to get out here to
make sure that we're not further
destroying the habitat of New
Mexico because when you don't
take care of it it parks.
So that's the purpose in in if
the if the purpose of this bill
is not violent.
With putting it on my list.
Mr chairman thank you I just
want to.
yes and and like I said perhaps
the intent is not to buy land
but the limitation should be
there in the event the need
arises to purchase even an
easement or something that we
need at the state level I guess
that's the only thing that I was
thinking of thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
really this is probably for the
sponsors of the bill based on
what's here in the amendment
what is the likelihood I who is
there an outlook maybe one have
one here experts or whatever on
on any purchases what what they
look like Is there any sort of
sense at this juncture based on
what we know today what those
purchases might look like I'll
defer to my experts to where did
introduce extra Probst is here
right on the ocean as we
approach the number she is she
will in light this on real
estate.
Thank you senator I think that.
Yes
so the their ten programs under
this bill only the game and fish
programs would enable any
purchase of land all the other
programs to other things like
trails and for spending and and
river stewardship and things
like that
you've given this does not have
any projects that they are
intending to use money on at
this time under this act you as
the senators and said it is
really it can complicate things
further if you start taking away
pieces of underlying statute in
this bill in all we're trying to
do is create for funding for
these programs that have had
lengthy funding over over time
so just a lot of unintended
consequences can flow from
limiting things in this bill
associate with other statutes.
Thank you Mr chairman I thought
that's what what you might say
so I do have other questions on
the actual bill but I think
that's all for now thank you.
Anymore questions on them and
Sierra.
Thank you to the sponsors of the
bill are bringing this forward I
think the concern here is if
there are any any opposition is
if there is any true hidden
intentions of the bill because
the reality is if you read
through these existing programs
they do really good work and so
I think what people are
concerned about is that there is
a hidden intention in here to
purchase land and and I was
listening while I agree with
some of the points that Senator
Rodriguez made I wonder if it
just it just kept immediately
considering it unfriendly
seems to speak verifier validate
their concerns that perhaps the
hidden intention is to is to
acquire more private property
with the Sanchez perhaps
consider
a cap either by dollar amount or
acreage that would still allow
the purchase of any necessary
easements or trail head someone
mentioned that to me when when
we're reviewing the bill that
there may be you know the need
to purchase land would be that
the trail head or something
passionate just about the whole
expenses what would the bill
Sanchez.
Hi to meet everybody in the
middle put these these concerns
and I say this because last year
in front of the legislative
finance committee we were
talking about the acquisition of
private lands you specifically
secretary mention the department
of game and fish later went
ahead and purchased the of our
ranch
you know kind of skirted around
it today we hear of the abrupt
resignation of dean are to
letter from the game commission
that came the commission is once
again in shambles and so at
least people nervous because
there's not leadership there of
of that specific entity is there
anyway we could put language in
there that would put everyone's
concerns to it to rest looking
to you the Mr chair Senator is
that we have the gentleman's
agreement between us so we're
going to keep the bill is intact
as it is at this point in time
if the committee chooses to
amended and do that then so be
it that we're not going to say
that that's a good thing I have
directly asked the agencies if
they want to buy land and
they've all assured me they do
not.
That's not legal I understand
but I've been assured by the
agencies are not intending to
purchase land including gamefish
just immediately before the
meeting thank you I and senator
you know our concerns is that we
were so you were told that last
year and has not what ended up
happening right after we had
that conversation I'm I'm
saddened that there's kind of a
division in this bill because
the reality is is this can do
more food work on the ground and
that but what the heck up here
is a valid concern and and I
hope that we can kind of find
some middle ground to to address
it so thank you Mr chair thank
you any other questions on this
amended.
I'll make some comments going
over some other equipment coming
on the other.
You can.
What more.
Alright thank you.
But Canadian.
Two thousand.
Of the finance committee says to
for nine.
You're going to move on the part
Mr chairman you're going to move
on the amendment is not the bill
yes on your amendment to this
bill thank you.
Second by Senator Woods.
Senator Campos no.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Do you know.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez no.
Senator Munoz no.
It is a respected that.
COVID sixty four bit somebody's
there.
We have another Mr Miller.
Before I before I move this can
I can I move that the both the
anything but sixty four.
So said.
Mr chair I I move yet another
amendment the Senate finance
committee substitute Senate bill
nine.
What.
Thank you for discussion.
Senator sure to explain the
amendment so this one goes to
the heart of the counties
and what it does is it adds a
another section.
At the very end so would be the
last.
Any lands that is.
Any landed this purchase using
distribution made pursuant to
this section shall not be exempt
from taxation.
Begin of Mr chair one of the
things that that we've talked
about in and look at if you
take.
A thousand acres of ranch land
or ten thousand acres of ranch
land or a hundred thousand acres
of ranchland off the county
rules.
You've done serious damage to
the county's if you take one
power plant often it's only
twenty five acres you've done
serious damage to the county.
So you know we we do things all
the time in here that have these
unintended consequences to local
governments.
And so in this particular case
just trying to protect local
government you take that much
land out of the out of their
property tax base you've you've
taken that much out of their of
school for of bonding capacity
you've taken that much out of.
Everything else of the county
does.
So.
Thank you Senator co sponsor for
the bad guys routine this is
routine hours
on once a black cat what's.
We have an interesting
conversation about since Center
woods bill all over again
and I do think that one of the
things you know if we ever are
in that situation where there's
dollars being used to purchase.
Private land it's kind of a
window to set aside some money
to to address this issue of the
of the compensation maybe
there's a way to earmark some
some revenue stream to make that
happen but again I just think
that this for the same reasons
that I've been stated again goes
outside of what what's being
done with this bill and it's a
discussion that certainly has
been happening and needs to
continue to happen but again I
just don't think we at this
point consider this friendly.
Question.
Mr chair once again I move
finance committee substitute
for.
Senate finance committee I move
Senate.
Amendment number one to Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill nine.
The second is my sister second
by Senator Diamond we call
earth.
Anybody making that up there
with the.
Go both to.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Yes I'd like to explain.
Senator Rodriguez no senator
Munoz no.
There was explaining success.
It amazes me that no county
commissioner ever comes in to
just we do this when they know
that this is land taken off
their property rules it's just
amazing I was just guest today
whether the the association of
counties was in favor of this
and I just assumed that they
would.
Say hello yeah we want that
money but they weren't there so
thank you for allowing me to
explain.
There was in case you haven't
noticed the counties ability to
raise taxes.
They do a pretty handily would
really.
And we're back on the subject to
build solutions.
What what.
I have quite a pile here Mister.
So I move we get this right this
time amendment number one.
The Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill nine.
Ninety seconds I can't.
so Mr chair this one this one at
another.
Last sentence to it
distributions made pursuant to
this section shall not be used
for project with an estimated
cost of more than one million
dollars without approval of
approval of the legislature and
so what we're really trying to
get out here the let me back up
I I love the idea of this bill
I'm not opposed to this bill.
Well I might be if we don't fix
it but.
But the concept is a good idea
of something that that I've
talked to senator Wirth about
four wins since nineteen sixty
two so much
So.
It's not that I'm trying to
break the bill I'm trying to
make it so that the unintended
consequences that I that I see
are addressed we don't need the
unintended consequences if we
can avoid those.
I think this is useful so in
this case all right spend money
do you think of all those things
that I think are valuable.
But if they're going to buy the
bar ranch for some of the ranch
we ought to make some decisions
about that as opposed to
somebody from game and fish so
that's what this that's what
this ammendment all about.
Will you were the good out of
that and that will be the bit
getting I don't know if million
dollars is an adequate number
not.
Range can cost many millions of
dollars yes so that but I think
that I think that's a good point
I think it's needs to be
addressed in a different section
of law we have some agencies
that have to come to the
legislature to purchase real
estate we have some agencies
that don't I think we need to
make it consistent I don't think
this is the right place to do it
and the for that reason I that's
my personal objection to that I
think the the concept is good
but I think this isn't the place
to do the those kind of
amendments so are considered
unfriendly.
Questions on the amendment.
Federal.
Okay believe that the
legislature Mr chair would give
up their ability to.
At least and look at a land
purchase.
Ten million dollar range yeah it
may not be a big place but the
million dollars guys real money.
Why wouldn't you just
legislators what that knowledge.
Where.
Mr chair I'm getting too
emotional.
I will.
Will pass to center was
Valentine's day is coming up
Senator Wirth you just wonder
how not just going to say the
way this is workers ten
different statutes of this bill
this would apply to every
project under the statute for
trying to fend of forest the
cost more than million dollars
were on hold until we come back
for legislative session and then
again I just think this.
Those statutes all have specific
provisions about how dollars get
spent under them I get where the
game and fish piece but that's
one of ten statutes in this bill
in terms of dollars that come
out and this says shall not be
used for a project.
So I don't think we I don't
think we want to be coming back
to approve.
A river cleanup project for.
A project that's doing education
in the woods or expanding a for
frankly we we need we need the
experts doing that so that's
another reason to oppose this
this one.
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr chairman and of course
as we continue to deal if you
will with the provided private
event of these type of things
forward let's say for example
with the game protection fund
with the
the commission itself as we deal
with this we do have experts
that deal directly with it in
over a period of time we do find
out
when there will be land
acquisition or development if
you will of the cities that
definitely will enhance not only
the environment but
fish hatcheries and of course
fencing and other things as we
deal with it so my question to
the to the bill Sanchez
with your acute
knowledge in terms of
legislative process do we find
for the most part that projects
are brought before the
legislature whether it be to
advise us of the probation that
are going to be spent and then
also as we deal with it in many
cases legislative approval is
sought so maybe we can have a
little discussion around that so
if the public better understands
the fact that we do share if you
will in this responsibility of
an accountability of how we
purchase purchase land Mister
Mister chairman Senator you make
a good point I think of relative
to projects and so forth those
are considered as part of the
budget process and there is
oversight the legislature
through that LFC that through
the summer and.
The legislature and so forth so
I don't think there's a problem
with the oversight is forced
projects and so forth when
purchasing is variable depends
on the agency.
The troops of storage the
agencies in the various
environmental groups and I
groups and so forth that we
brought in on this process.
Trying to build a bill that
meets all the needs and as of
Senator Diamond said there's
some truth in that sheet of
paper of passed around there are
some tremendous projects on
there that we can get them
matching funds to three four to
one and we wanted to do that for
the benefit of the environmental
issues in the conservation
issues and need to address.
So so Mister chairman I may as
we we move forward and that
leads to the point this is about
conservation this isn't about
purchasing land and then just
kind of letting the weeds grow
this is a definitely part of how
we're going to maintain if you
will
the environment and and a better
state as we do move forward but
I I I still hope that we're able
to elaborate a little bit more
in terms of all of the
circumstances I know years ago
as we dealt with
with eagle nest and we've dealt
with some of the other projects
across the state and and the
bottom line is we are made aware
of it there are processes but
along with that when we do talk
about conservation of our public
lands they're not just left
there and even though we do talk
about if you will the burn scars
the wildfires floods those kind
of things that occur
those are those are natural
disasters and sometimes of
course is so we might say
they're human cost and as we
move forward we're going to do.
to become resilient and deal
with that but
explain a little bit more to
then I'll stop after this
what would be a a special
circumstance where there would
be this accountability of land
acquisition in the use of
resources that are that are
state or federal dollars to in
order to do this.
Mr Chairman center I'm not an
expert maybe the secretary can.
Similar processes were.
Mr chair Senator compass so all
the underlying statutes have
different procedures for how how
projects are selected conducted
at center so for example for
EMNRD first in watershed
restoration Act four they
oversee those projects selection
process and your order fees
happened and then we actually do
Representative we are required
to report to the legislature on
all of the projects on an annual
basis that are selected under
that and I think that's the case
for some of the other programs
as well here's so the so they
all have been you know duly
enacted by this body vetted step
away that you that made sense to
the legislature in terms of
overstate and what we're trying
to do with this bill today is
simply provide stable funding on
an annual basis going into the
future for all of these really
great programs that you've seen
that to pass and the in the past
so so if I maybe just Mr
chairman there is an
accountability process for every
purchase and that's the point
I'm trying to get thank you very
much Mr chairman thank you any
other questions on the amendment
third I Mr chairman and and Mr
chair Senator chair I think the
intent of this was to cap your
land purchases and million
dollars but I would have to echo
what senator Wirth says that's
not really what the amendment
here says for project and I
would say that once we start
getting on the ground million
dollars can go pretty fast but I
understand the intent I think
you're all this conversation
were casting a shadow on really
good projects that are sitting
here the only entity on here
with the ability to purchase
plans would be game and fish I
see that they're here in the
audience when there is finally a
quorum with the commission I
think we can just take a message
back that some legislators have
some great concern with the
acquisition of land and I think
that point was made here today I
hate this cast a shadow over
really good projects they're
also listed on the sheet but
thank you Mr chair thank you you
know I I agree that the members
has issued orders that point
that but the issue were not seen
is is if somebody in Moore
county that's experience of
fire.
Right and has to go buy another
piece of land in the state wants
that piece of land this next to
river now that private persons
competing against a state right
who do you think's gonna would.
I mean a majority of New Mexico
is owned by the big landowners
from the rural mail part to to
the U. you bar I mean a billion
dollars worth of ranches and we
talk about our small ranchers in
New Mexico and we want to keep
them whole given opportunity
right.
Should think about that should
think about the kids that are
graduated from NMSU getting
eight degrees dental science or
whatever it is and that live all
right you're gonna buy rent some
from their dad or they're buying
to the riches and then they got
to compete with government money
you know nobody you can't win
against government.
And that opportunity should
exist in this ammendment when I
had it correct I would vote for
the amendment right because I
believe you have to give
everybody the opportunity you
can't just wipe out an entire
class of people and say we want
that land in our use of we have
places on the end of this we
personally don't right if they
came in and and we wanted to buy
the neighbors and they the the
state says no we want that for
an easement.
There's no way we can help it.
They have deeper pockets to the
legislature we have deeper
pockets and they'd.
That's unfair I think and I
think you guys really need to
think about how we put a cap on
this I remember the for because
you don't want to limit.
What people's opportunities are
New Mexico especially our local
people right.
My dad was on the game and fish
when they did the big Bollywood
all of the big buys invite big
rage is right.
The great places to have a great
place the fish we should have
places like that New Mexico we
missed out on by Vermelho park
right thank you they they don't
like the the purchase but the L.
bar is only for New Mexico
hunters access at all Taylor we
did that a while back we did
send out the adjustments on
outfitter tags right and it made
to happen but but don't knock
out a group of people that
compete against government to
try to make their life rage is
bigger
or have to move off because they
come in and say we're gonna
condemn this piece of land
because we someone back to the
V. LA they want more land for
the VLA the federal government
can do that that would allow
them that that's unfair the
little guys New Mexico I think
you need a cap of some sort of.
But Sir would you suddenly want
to come back to New Mexico.
If you have a billion dollars a
hundred million dollars or fifty
million dollars or ten million
dollars he's not going to buy
something they really wants that
eligibility right and I think we
need to do figure that out this
bill of but Senator Campos so
thank you very much Mr chairman
and you're bringing to light
some of the past experiences
that we had where it was
considered to be too much to
purchase some of these
properties but at the same time
the other issue is maybe we can
invite the land commissioner for
some of our future discussions
because when we start talking
about land leases and
opportunities I know that for if
you will the the small rancher
or those individuals who really
just want to get a start there's
some great opportunities that
are out there so I think more
exposure to the education into
the opportunities that we do
have is going to be an important
part and so you are you bring up
a very valid point and I
appreciate that thank you Mr
chairman.
I mean that's that's critical
for me right in and how we help
New Mexicans and not just say
hello we're going to use eminent
domain and we're gonna take
money but there's good purpose
and that purpose is and and we
need all have our eyes on that
as a legislature it is a state
of but if the minimum been
drafted right we have been all
right so.
So Mr chair
make a comment before withdrawal
the amendment the COVID the that
I think the message I'm trying
to get through to you.
I love the concept I love
everything about the bill except
it doesn't have the safety the
safety rails.
And I can see what we the where
this thing Spence dramatically
out of control.
And that scares me everything
the it is it truly of Senator
Wirth that I have had these
discussions for a long time.
I love the concept the whole
idea of having a trust fund to
do something is exactly what
I've been talking about for this
the money this year so on all
kinds of levels.
I think this is a great bill.
But without guardrails I am
concerned.
I offered some guardrails this
last one night and.
Use the wrong language but.
I would hope that you would
consider guardrails before comes
to the floor.
So for all you all out there can
figure out the guardrails.
Can I will enthusiastically
supported.
Because.
The whole concept is great.
What a great idea with the best
of intentions.
Does not necessarily make good
law.
So we've got to just consider
those guardrails great idea best
of intentions what could
possibly go wrong.
Probably a lot so I with with
that I would call this
ammendment thank you we're back
on the substitutes are.
Back on the subject to bill
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So obviously I care a lot about
conservation and so I like
ninety nine percent of what is
in the bill.
There is a huge problem though
in the one area this bill that
we all need to talk about and
it's such an easy fix.
And I know that most people are
women talked about benefits in
their fight with.
And so I'm hoping we can make
the fix Mr chair and all all all
all total is going on here.
You know and maybe people don't
know when it was kind of things
and impressive to learn that New
Mexico right among the top five
of all states for biodiversity
John though that top five for
plant species top five for bird
species.
Just incredible.
But we have some very outdated
wildlife statutes and
Many spaces are not managed at
all and as we know the priority
is really given to game species
is given to species that you can
hot and all wildlife
department's procellariids
weather is set up to to manage
those species and as we learn
more about ecology and climate
change we try to modernize and
brought the mission to make them
true wildlife management
agencies and this is what course
we continue to try to do in New
Mexico two great resistance
You know this bill.
The I think everybody believed
that as far as the funding is
going to go to game and fish is
actually gonna be for
conservation.
And four species of greatest
conservation need everybody
believe that who was involved in
the drafting the bill I was
personally told by the director
phone call that that was their
language it was recommended but
that's not the language it ended
up in the bill I don't know how
that happened
But just to just to be clear you
know the bill fund page I and I
don't know we have some but on
page five it says for game and
fish the money will go for the
protection and propagation of
game and fish.
Game and fish are very specific
legal words found throughout our
statutes and in common meeting
of the use of the word.
We have game species in law we
have about twenty some odd of
them forgive me if my numbers
wrong but for all species that
can be hunting whole listing if
you go to the game game
department website they defined
game species.
We.
So that's the commonly used word
and.
Some of said oh no that can mean
anything but yet this is just
what we're authorizing but in
fact it it can't I mean this is
came to seize fish species of
fish species but we have in the
state in New Mexico I think over
five hundred species what they
call species of conservation
need S. T. C. and every state
has to a wildlife action plan to
the federal government to define
or threatened species in order
to get federal funds we have
over five hundred threatened
species because again very
diverse and that includes
endangered species they're not
game species at all and so the
problem of the flaw in this bill
for the game and fish is that
the only we call this a
conservation bill but we only
allow money to be used for game
species that component and fish
and we don't include non game
species and so the fix if we so
we preclude the funding of
threatened species with this
bill of endangered species of
species that are needed to
support came spaces in a so.
The change that we talked about
just adding the were non game
species to list Mr chair so it
would be for game fish and non
game species so that it would
just include everything
and.
And originally I know that
people talked about they were
just looking at like threatened
species now it includes game
species as well so I'm not
proposing taking that out but I
would like to add non game
species so that includes
everything and that's I think
the intent everybody who was
involved in the drafting the
bill I that's what I was and I
understand from people who were
consulted on Mr chair that
nobody has any problems with
that.
So.
So that's you know and I have an
amendment the problem is is that
we have just a so it's a real
easy amendment I can verbalize
it because I don't know we're
gonna have a set up
I can read this check as a
committee after proposals
amendment first and then okay so
colleagues I just propose on
page five.
That.
After the word came that we take
out toward the end so it's a
game com office COVID and then
we add the word and non game
species.
Hold on one second Sir.
I'm sorry page five line twenty
five.
We're tracking amendment just
make sure.
Some read again.
No I have to move it to the
substitute bill.
And at.
This amendment to Senate bill
nine the Senate finance
committee substitute.
On page one twenty five eighty
five.
Have a second on the amendment.
Can I get a second.
This for discussion purposes
what you're doing and a second
for discussion.
Thanks.
So you may remember the no the.
Understand that language and in
the sponsored initiative this
bosses a chance to respond Mr
we've we've been discussing this
often on last couple days and
over defer to the secretary to
explain our position on that and
we were point we considered
unfriendly amendments and before
you do that I'm talking one
actually gaming fish to.
Since they're in the room.
Mr chair and senator this is
this is from game and fish but
I'm sure that the that the
director of the glad to to back
me up on this on we don't think
that the amendment is needed to
certainly understand centers and
chair Senator Steinborn desire
that this be for all wildlife in
New Mexico not just game and
fish but the the protection and
propagation of game and fish
language in the bill as a
reference to seventeen dash one
dash one and MSA that
establishes purpose and policy
of the department and the
commission chapter seventeen
encompasses wide ranging
authority for the department to
conserve the array of wildlife
species in New Mexico from and
vivians to Hoxton lawless
Funds distributed from the
legacy fund would be distributed
to the game protection fund
which pays for conservation
actions pursuant to chapter
seventeen.
New Mexico for all wildlife
species so basically the legal
mumbo jumbo is that you think
it's covered it's just and the
amendment is unnecessary at this
time thank you Mr chair.
That
game fish you want to come up.
Also known as possible as.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think the secretary
summarized very well we believe
that the language incomes is all
of the activities that are
allowed under chapter seventeen
and that those activities
include management and act on
non game species.
Thank you question systemic Mr
chair at that's just but I
respectfully disagree I propose
when I talked that's appropriate
to the game to the game
protection fund because the game
protection fund does have
broader statutory that's what's
so bizarre about this language
that we're not appropriating
into the game protection and the
council for the inner again
somewhere to answer about it'll
flow quicker if we do it this
way but if we did it to the game
protection fund than they would
have broad latitude that would
be a solution except to Senator
more work from questions from
committee members on the
amendment and then if you want
to go to your closing then you
can go to closing the questions
on the amendment as we do that.
Thank you Senator Steinborn went
close on the amendment.
Absolutely Mr chair so it's just
you know this notion that we can
amended bill that Senate second
committee that's this important
for a group or room for
conservationists and
Administration amendment care
about wildlife conservation
this is such an easy fix to make
to make it clear I'm just
flabbergasted that we're not
doing it and I'm gonna keep
talking about until we fix it or
we don't but
I just think this is just not
not get and so.
So what's to stop with that Mr
thank you very much.
I move to pass someone and.
We have a we have a
motion for you passed a second.
The second amendment dies for
lack of a second.
We're back on the substitute
bill Senator you done with your
question.
Yes I don't give them a.
Thank you any other questions
separately if there was that for
you to have a list all with.
No you raise your hand first
well yes but I was going to make
a move a motion but but alas
questions if you'd like Mr
Chairman so can you talk to us a
little bit Mr chairman about
like what are some of the
projects that would come out of
the the fund the funds will be
available at the distribution
excuse me Mister chairman
Senator of yes Rhonda sheet that
gives you quite a few surface
projects are concept to look at
that it looks like
you're gonna go one.
It doesn't necessarily identify
specific projects we give you
the concept of what to.
Of what we might be wanting to
see the money spent on a concert
if you go to healthy cells Act
conservation stewardship
emergency watershed protection
programs regional conservation
parks partnerships under EMNRD
you can go up to the top of the
page forced three legacy joint
chiefs landscape restoration.
Two pages of projects that these
and and the federal match
numbers are on the right side it
shows you what we are giving up
potentially if we.
Just had dollars in the
indicated that we could put
forward to try to do some of
these things thank you Mr
chairman.
It is it's it's it's really
impressive what this will wind
up generating for New Mexico in
in a really good way so on on
the first page I think this is
the first page I don't know the
one that says state fire
assistance well with the fires
that we've been experiencing all
over New Mexico we had an Action
obviously on the Senate floor
today on the her permits cap
canyon what about the fires in
southern New Mexico the this
with with this be at all
something that might be helpful
to those areas for the work that
they're gonna have to do the
work and on their fires
undoubtedly so because there's
the different types of projects
than what would be.
When we're dealing with the for
service in there prescribed burn
situation that's a different
legal situation over yet so so
they may be different but the
same concept would be doing so
with counsel here if you could
probably highlight is for more
those if you want to hear what I
think Mr chairman that's good I
just wanted to point that out
because I think that's a huge
benefit right out of the gate
with something that you're
proposing here so that this is a
debate that we've had in this
committee about the fires in
southern New Mexico I'm just
glad that that's a project that
would be with would benefit the
international benefit here in
the state from these types of
funds thank you Mr chair Senator
Woods.
Sure Senator will direct
question.
When is it possible to manage
the native species habitat than
the free range our.
Of course.
Issue.
I can answer that question I'm
not an expert on that but if we
have somebody.
No the question a lot of experts
in the audience thank you
Senator Campos.
I thank you Mr chairman just
very quickly as we continue if
you well to finalize part of the
debate and then offer the vote.
With the bill and we take a look
at the various issues so whether
it be a watershed forest
restoration act culture
elimination of the importance of
the invasive and noxious plants
Wetlands the whole issue is that
this does become if you will
very strong environmental bill
and so it definitely does
address the issues when we talk
about our our native species and
so as we we move forward I just
want to thank the sponsors and
the others to the advocates that
continue to deal with this piece
of legislation I really believe
this is a step in the right
direction to help us in so many
ways to improve our environment
so thank you very much Mr chair
for allowing me to make those
those final comments thank you.
This to me also questions I do
have some questions in in there
on page five in in line thirteen
to sixteen where some of these
grant programs and some of these
not grant programs.
Each agency has a different
former leader for formula in
some of our requests and some
are not requests for I want to
make it very clear because we're
trying to get stuff done right
sometimes.
Youth groups go do it and do it
through a grant to the city of
the counties or whatever they go
out and do that I don't know why
river restoration why that isn't
in there.
So Madam out I think it's four
yield the secretary well this is
this is the neko sheeted balance
that I think was incredibly
difficult to reach exactly which
programs are going to be part of
this what the percentages are
what they are used for soft
regarding the specifics of why
this one as a grant another
doesn't steal the secretary she
has an answer to.
Mr chair it has to do with all
the underlying statutes are set
up once again you know if they
were set up as grant put
programs like the help economic
development departments outdoor
recreation division does the
trails plus grant program that's
a grant program set up in
statute so they're going to
continue to give grants with the
funding that flows through this
bill if enacted you know for as
I mentioned the program the
EMNRD under far the for similar
service duration act out the
conferment process and folks
would apply and then be selected
and that that's how that process
works so it just depends on how
the underlying statute is we
didn't make any selections for
this bill or make any changes
for this bill I just and and and
secretary but.
In the end I see the thanks
secretary sent out there but
surely in the egg Department in
some of those those funds if the
they need grant money to do
operational or tested so I I
mean.
They're working that you know
you know this is a kind of a
copy of what we got over there
and get I think government
should all be operation
completely around specialist
program right and the
availability of the flexibility
for us to move entirely
throughout the year especially
with forest fires or floods or
damages getting the ability to
get money out is is key in my
thinking for more on for.
And making an operational but
also you know there's certain
places that you know if this is
negotiated deal right.
I think that.
Some of the eight kids right.
They do Representative force
restoration they may do is a
class of me to something they
need grant money at I just think
we treat everybody kind equally
for going to do that so we don't
lock things up to wealth and
wanted to go do that for
frustration and they could got
three grades in college but we
don't have enough money to pay
for their hotels state two or
three days and do that and if
they had a grant they could do
that in that's my thinking
behind that is why are we not
putting grant programs in there
especially is in targeted areas
that we really want them you
know to go do or whoever to go
through or climb the hills and
Johnny Appleseed pick the seas
off the trees for reforestation
and and but if if we can get a
college group to do that and we
can provide them with the grant
program to do that
Sixpence or whatever it is I
think that's really key for me
and operational structure has
built in support of on here you
guys COVID Mr chair.
Legislative chairman of.
Absolutely agree with you the
issue is is that we are
operating we were able to pull
this together is existing
statutes if there's an existing
statute that does what you're
asking then we don't have any
problem if there is a one and I
don't know one way or the other
if there is a one that we do
have problems we didn't want to
invent reinvent the wheel so we
used directed the dollars in
this bill to existing programs
and if those provisions are K.
pop possible to do what you want
to do then that there's there's
no reason we couldn't but I
don't know one of the top of my
head with any of those things
are available or not.
Secretary do you have any grant
center with quite a large is
going out I think that what
you're discussing are the
buckets under your own bill and
again which are new programs
that will be available year
round the same kind of funding
but you know I would note that
with the the twenty two and a
half percent of the money here
distributed to University New
Mexico State University
department of ag.
The the the purpose here are
specific noxious weed management
act healthy soil Act insulin
water conservation district act
and I think.
This again is the the beauty of
this is that it it just hasn't
opened up.
Any of those acts and once you
do that then all of a sudden.
You know that that kind of the
groups that come together to do
this will change and and I just
remind you that work you know
this the first four years of
this assuming we get you know
fifty million in the fund that
can be spent it's twelve and a
half million dollars a year.
You know run the percentages out
you know we're we're getting
down to not huge numbers here
hopefully we can change that
down down the road but I just
think that the this whole
concept of of having year round.
Money available for grants and
and when we're not here in this
is goes right back to centre
would still cost about US
appropriating it's an
interesting one I mean is it
up for me who's who's making
that call and where does it come
from and I think this we're
exists in the in the statutes
that's where you're seeing the
grant language you know we're
doesn't exist in the statutes
and this is how it's been
negotiated along those lines.
No that's always good in
negotiate specially about the
size a landing in sales in the
unification with some we can
negotiate with others in the
still causes me heartburn over
how to handle that
but I I he told me not to renew
FOR that I read this one in in
the hope you read the FIR
because this I see made some
comments on the revenue stream
and now it's going to go out of
how we gonna handle that.
Changes that deficiency that for
our so I'm told Mr chair is
addressed in the substitute so
it's been it's been addresses
may be able to counsel Mr flute
Mr chair doing future on the
general counsel EMNRD yeah we
spoke to the state investment
council after receiving yes I.
are FIR and maybe changes
responsive to their request and
I can.
We.
Of those out quickly if the
committee would like.
No no I I just want to know yes
yes we are we're told not to eat
F. are slated.
On in this case I read the FIR
and we fixed it.
That's a different bills yet.
So I think this it's really good
but that one point is going to
work.
That somebody is going to
compete against government the
purchase of a piece of land and
they go back to the L. more but
they'll boards been traded you
know more than Pokemon cards.
Back and forth and bought and
sold I know only five or six
times that's been by the soul
that help or since some of those
issues are mute but to give an
opportunity or not to give an
opportunity for make somebody
compete against the state
government for a piece of land
and get out priced or even
trying to use eminent domain to
get river access for do it
revert easements comes really
big issue.
Well here do you guys think we
can get something committed to
to figure that out of that
portion of the bill.
Well Mister chair let me say one
thing that that again we keep
glossing over you know the
eminent domain issue was
something everyone agreed to and
we took it out so that was a
change was made in Senate
conservation that was a specific
amendment that did address that
exact issue you know we've had
lots of conversations about this
this other issue I think the
challenges you've got nine out
of ten statutes here have
nothing in them about any
acquisition is one kind of tweak
in the game and fish statute and
I think you know Centerville's
right that's a discussion that
could happen it's just whether
happens within this bill and
that's that's the the challenge
and kind of where we are.
And and to go to that point
center there's a balance right
would you rather have someone
come in and in I don't know what
they pay for the U. bar I'm
guessing two hundred thirty
million dollars for that range I
would rather have that range of
state trust in can be better off
to have more New Mexico usually
there's a balance I I.
There's certain things that we
should keep in and we should do
if we have the opportunity
otherwise we don't give people
live here pay taxes here
Representative the opportunities
that land Arizona has the most
public land I think in the
nation right maybe not more the
last but I think it's pretty
close and a lot of publicly in
Arizona but don't want to lock
up opportunities for people in
the.
We may have to Senator.
Have to look at a few amendments
and and we may just run a bill
to take that out of the game and
fish's head but I don't want to
handcuff them because I do
believe there's certain places
where we we have an opportunity
to buy stuff and make it better
for everyone Rio Grande trail
easements to get people in the
river certain places a private
property rights pretty much
washed down the river we have
hundreds come on us and we're
liable for what happens if we
don't even know they're there.
I just I Mr chair that you have
just articulated exactly why
it's so challenging to put an
amendment like this it's a
bright line because the fact of
the matter is you know for
different reasons different
people feel differently about
you know use of land of how it
works and so that's.
Kind of again you you
highlighted exactly what the
challenges here and and and that
and that's why again it is it is
somewhat unique to sit here and
say you know we've kind of
reached this agreement about
trying to hold the bill the way
it is but I think you can see
that when you put on a bright
line in those folks who feel.
This way are gonna say we're
taking away my chance to have
that opportunity to enjoy this
land and it just that's the
challenge here if if if everyone
got on the same page as they did
with eminent domain.
Different story but I just I
don't think there's complete
consensus and you could not of
articulated that better.
So couple thank you Mr Chairman
just to go back to any or
comments and there are resources
out there and programs that have
been developed the youth
conservation corps we continue
to put money in there it's not
fully utilized our communities
to go and hire these young
people to train them to prepare
Matthew will to deal with our
our natural environment so I
just bring that up that those
pieces are already existing and
as we move forward this is going
to be an important component
that definitely fits that that
puzzle that we're trying to go
and complete thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Senator ensure at night can you
talk to will look for the
sign and I'm trying to gaming
fission statute change.
Serevi you thank you Mr chairman
yeah I was just listening and
thinking about this whole thing
and I guess you know like
anything else sometimes we
undertake something this big and
I have to commend you for that
Sir renewable and senator Wirth
everyone for working on this
it's not easy to get a consensus
especially when you have so many
stakeholders at the table and so
on I know because I've been here
a good while so I I had to make
decisions like these but when
you look at the whole
I think it's a good bill I think
it's a way to just to establish
this fund like anything else we
may find that all we may have
left this out that maybe we can
work on for later or we didn't
think of this that perhaps we
can tweak and fix you know we
find that in a lot of pieces of
legislation but nothing
precludes us from coming back
and doing that we do try our
best to get capture everything
that we can sometimes is just
not there in in not possible so
I think the sooner we start off
with this legacy fund for a land
and water conservation efforts
the the better off we're going
to be so that's all leave it at
that did someone refer to pass
and if not I will Senator
Padilla.
You were going to move Senator
right it wasn't sure thank you
Mr chair I move that do pass on
Senate finance committee such
two percent of the month.
A second.
Motion and second we call.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond no.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Do you yes.
Senator share reluctantly no.
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Munoz yes.
Sixty three nothing change after
the last four votes.
Members let me let me just
caution you I mean I I don't
think we could fix that statute
in this bill right I think I got
that handled but wait mean
center sure will bring bring in
a bill to kind of capture that I
don't wanna leave anybody have
that opportunity I really glad
you took my idea under the and
the really not mine but Dawn
Iglesias and how we make
government operational all year
round to to keep that funding
and keep it moving it's going to
be highly important with this
amount of money that we can make
structural changes throughout
New Mexico is we move forward so
I appreciate that we can.
We're gonna quit at five thirty
no matter what Senator Rodriguez
I guess.
Just continue to hear on okay
where does it go.
Representative.
There you want to take another
seat you're up.
So we.
Thirty.
Right.
You know get more so Mister
given maybe ten minutes.
We won't even.
About ten minutes.
That's right presentations.
I think there are requirements
can.
So just so you know we're gonna
have some up we're gonna quit in
an hour right and so we may not
get some agencies maybe we'll
get to to you Environment
Department is a big one
long term aging awhile but we're
gonna try but let's see what
happens but we're we're gonna
have a hard stop at five thirty
so so you so you know.
We get out the company the
veterans secretaries of followed
by for that that's very
important to family is so four
and I got to go do a bill of the
community center from exposure.
Thank you thank you very much
we'll just try and make it as
quick as possible and move on so
with to see I'd like to see if
we can get we've got one two
three four five six six
departments ready to go here a
self we can trying to get this
done that would be great we will
listen to them thank you we can
proceed all right thank you
madam chair my name is Scott
Sanchez on the LFC analysts for
natural resources with me today
is a and energy mineral natural
resources department secretaries
are approx and to her right is
my counterpart from the
department of finance and
administration Mr branch that is
in requests seventy five point
three million dollar or ninety
three point seven percent
increase over there total FY
twenty three operating budget
and a hundred and twenty six
percent increase over FY twenty
two actual expenditures this
included general fund increase
of ten point eight million or
thirty seven percent in the
request the LFC recommendation
increases the agency's overall
budget by sixty seven point four
million dollars or eighty three
point nine percent well the
executive budget increases the
agency's budget by sixty seven
point nine million or eighty
four point five percent a large
portion of the overall increase
in both recommendations is made
up of federal funds projected to
increase significantly in state
parks will conservation and
state forestry to the
infrastructure investment jobs
act well both budget
recommendations supported
portions of the agency's
expansion requests the LFC
recommendation included to hire
general fund revenue in state
forestry where is the executive
recommendation included higher
general fund revenue in state
parks and with that I'll hand it
to my counterpart Mr branch of
this.
Thank you.
I'm sure of nothing at okay
thank you very much Serret
cabinet secretary.
You madam chair members of the
committee heard presentation in
front of you it might solve my
slides my name is our process
and the secretary of energy
minerals and natural resources
department is the first slide
the expected growth EMNRD is
significant but a lot of that
growth is.
Revenue.
The DFA of recommendation of the
governor's budget support six
seven total FTEs agency wide LFC
supports a total of thirty FTEs
agency wide.
On slide two can see EMNRD's
objective in FY twenty four is
to build capacity in support of
the five goals it's to fight
fire and natural resource
protection industry oversight
for oil and gas and mining
improving visitors experiences
and state parks solar and green
building tax credit
certifications for New Mexicans
and program support which is the
heart of the agency the proposed
budget accounts for a huge
influx of federal dollars
associated with recent federal
legislation
I I'd say in the irate.
On slide three I wanted to
address for the committee that
something that often raises a
lot of questions were and that's
reversions from the agency
EMNRD's rivers and consists of
several balances that are not
part of the agency's H. B. two
section four appropriation
reversion the only person that
was part of our operating budget
that was subject to reversion
was the seven hundred eighty one
thousand two hundred fifty six
dollars that's the only part
that we had authority to spend
the other pieces that look like
reversions I work penalties
collected by the oil
conservation division and
deposited in the general fund
which is on budgeted reversion
that money was never ours as
well as emergency fire and
disaster funding that's how the
state gets reimbursed from
firefighting expenses out and
there's a reimbursement from the
federal government from other
states and local governments and
that is ten million eight
hundred eighty seven thousand
nine hundred twelve dollars and
our passes those back through to
the general fund.
On slide four the state forestry
DFA of budget supports to hot
shot crews and ten ten FTEs for
fire resource management and
post fire response and this
funding for expansions is
supported by general fund and
federal funds the LFC.
Supports one hot shot crew and
six FTEs for fire management and
our ability to fight fires was
for you can never is as big of a
deal as it was the summer and
our tragic wildfire season and
we we learned from that we need
to increase our initial attack
capacity with seasonal fire
engine bosses at each district
and hot shot crews which are
elite well trained crews are
provide the career ladder within
our staffing an additional
capacity to fight fires during
fire season when they're not
fighting fires in New Mexico we
can send them out of state and
we get paid by other states for
them to fight fires there and
when they're not fighting fires
anywhere then they can help us
with things like for spending in
other projects around the state
that help prevent fires so it's
a very good investment we also
want to with the the forestry
budget and FY twenty four
enhance local firefighter
training and support around the
state and we are looking to also
increase our opponents fire
water said recovery efforts
which is incredibly important as
we've seen in the wake of the
hermits calf and other fires
that we see around the state
this this year.
Moving to slide.
Slide five the oil conservation
division in January of twenty
twenty two the University of New
Mexicos one the University of
New Mexico issued a report
finding that production has
doubled in the last few years
but that OCD staffing has not
kept up creating backlogs and so
the executive recommendation
would create ten additional FTE
ease across the division to try
to improve our capacity there
and also to increase state funds
there's a lot of federal funding
increase for OCD as well a lot
of that is the twenty five
million dollars that we're
receiving from the department of
the interior to plug orphaned
and abandoned wells the that
funding is totally a pass
through to to contractors that
we have on price agreement for
the state we don't keep any of
that for administrative costs
but we do need the the budget
authority suspended.
the LFC.
Recommendation unfortunately
does not support any expansion
the FTEs further oil
conservation division and and
and
and have the the comparable
funding associated with it.
I would note that the we had a
record level of production again
in September of twenty twenty
two and the low funding and
staffing levels have led to some
backlogs it's increase from over
seventy five hundred at the end
of FY twenty two to fourteen
thousand four hundred and forty
permits and applications today
we're we're we're behind.
Moving to slide six and the
state parks division in state
parks our aim is really simple
it's to increase staffing in the
parks we did not seek additional
FTE ease were just seeking
funding to hire the positions
that have been authorized in the
past so and also in in this
inflationary environment is
becoming more expensive to
operate the park so we're
sticking increases there for for
the the costs of of operating
the parks.
Hi slide seven the energy
conservation and management
division are are are targeted
expansion here that both
recommendations support is to
add to FTEs that would be
federally funded in the tax
credit bureau to better keep up
with the sustainable buildings
and the solar market development
tax credit applications that
have been coming in they were
expanded significantly by the
legislature last year without
providing additional staffing to
EMNRD so we're trying to keep up
and fell behind of thousands of
applications that we are
touching and and certifying and
we want to do a good job with
that for citizens and we want to
respond to phone calls timely
and emails and in this
additional staffing would help
us do that.
On slide eight I want to note
that we have one special
appropriation request for the
agency and this is to provide
matching requirements.
Almost seventeen million dollars
in federal infrastructure funds
and the executive support of the
full appropriation we would need
across the four programs you see
listed on the slide LFC
supporter to million dollars so
we would leave probably forty
five million dollars on the
table and some programs we
wouldn't even be able to to
pursue at all if that number's
not bumped out so we're asking
I'm asking you to about that
special one time appropriation
off by five eight hundred
thirteen dollars.
On slide nine the mining and
minerals division and these are
pretty similar recommendations
with the exception of the
executive budget supports to
additional FTE ease for us to
comply with the water data act
that was passed by this body a
few years ago and then finally
madam chair on slide ten program
support that's the heart of the
agencies of the lawyers the
financial staff and policy staff
to keep everything going and
those are recommendations we're
we're pretty close to each other
for program support and with
that madam chair and stand for
questions thank you thank you
very much that was fast thank
you thanks a lot we did hear you
and we do have your nice handout
so nice to extend appreciate
your work okay any questions
from the committee okay I we've
got Senator Campos first and
then we've got Senator share and
Senator Diamond.
Think of did what's thank you
senator thank you very much
madam chair and course members
of the committee and to the
presenters I really appreciate
the work that continues to go on
through EMNRD and a few things
we're talking about the
vacancies across the board in
your indicating what you like to
do is to go ahead and have the
resources to go ahead and fill
those those positions how much
are you are you talking about
when it comes to the
vacancies that you would like to
fill.
Thank you madam chair and
senator Campos so what we've
done a lot of really good work
across all of the dozens and
filling our our vacancies for
example on the oil conservation
division were bumping right up
against we have a ten percent on
funded vacancy rate in OCD and
you've filled positions to get
really close to that and
similarly in state parks where
we had a lot of product they can
see as we really reduced our our
numbers there as well and and
had some rapid fires in parts of
the state that we had Mr looking
south eastern part of the state
so I think we're we're making
progress there with the
executive branch friends you
have the number for for the
state park your.
Aiming for.
I.
Currently madam chair and
senator let me just respond by
saying that
And I know that the numbers you
have in front of you it stops
out from LFC maybe from a little
while ago but the numbers that
we pulled coming into this
hearing we have
If an unfunded vacancy of ten
positions in forestry thirty
three positions in parks which
include seasonals.
And the seasonal the calculated
in a funny way so one one FC
goes a long way on seasonal
thirty seven parks without
seasonal
ten in OCD for and program
support so those are the number
of positions were holding open
because we don't have the budget
authority to hire.
I I really appreciate that so
within that that gives us an
idea and if you would please
Leave that information at some
point with us as we consider if
you will the general
appropriations act as we we move
forward to see if there is that
possibility to continue to go
and fill those those FTEs
release provide the the funds so
that you can continue to to fill
those positions.
The the second issue regarding
our our state parks and twenty
five percent of the parks are in
northeastern New Mexico as we
deal with it and and there is a
serious concerns and of course
part of this is been going to be
capital outlay but with with the
improvements themselves
with with capital even though I
didn't see that here as you move
forward do you have a list of
those priorities in terms of are
you going to be addressing the
state park needs as we move
forward.
Thank you chairman and senator
Campos we do and we do have
capital outlay requests for
state parks as we do every year
for water and wastewater
infrastructure as well as I
believe for vehicles
and we and that is in addition
to the very generous twenty
million dollar one time are but
for the reason that you
appropriate to state parks and
I'm proud to say we're we spent
about six million dollars of
that to date we have several
years to spend it so it goes out
now that making progress their
own parks all over the state and
and so we do have a list of
maintenance backlog for the
parts that happy to share with
you about how this ranking
priority around the state but
certainly we when you're in the
parks business you're in the
water wastewater Business and
those things need constant
maintenance and madam chair if I
may that really brings up the
other point is we deal
particularly with a place like a
story late we're dealing with
that's our drinking water source
so we do have some agricultural
issues we have the issue with
the dam itself and only using
this as an example and then of
course the the rock wall so as
we go forward if with the runoff
and water does continue to go
ahead and fill the lake itself
we're gonna have some some more
serious issues that we need to
deal with and it and it brings
up the other issue with
reforestation as we decide where
we're going to set up if you
will the reforestation projects
so that we can truly deal with
this and I believe the low our
story lake in that area that
would be a prime location I've
already sent the word to New
Mexico's.
U. N. M. into New Mexico
highlands that I hope that that
would be one of the
considerations
yes modest part of that but as
we deal with this this is
something definitely that we
need to implement as soon as
possible because that definitely
is going to be a long term issue
as we as we deal with that so so
that kind of talks a little bit
about the parts the the other
issue overall in terms of the
legacy Fund state parks some of
the other funds that we
continued to address and and to
to deal with
overall do you consider the
EMNRD request at this point
going along with the executive
recommendation does that.
A keep up with the needs that
you have overall with the
department are we continuously
falling behind because this last
year there's about three million
dollars in reversions across
state government and what I'm
getting to is that if you don't
have the employees the expertise
the education if we have the
issues within our various
departments what's what's the
strategic plan in order for us
to go ahead and keep up with
how at some point we'll find
ourselves leveling off so that
we're meeting the needs that
that the state has particularly
through the EMNRD programs.
The chairman Senator appreciate
that very much is always a
balancing act
And not revert back and so we
are we're grateful for that
twenty million dollars that
really helps with the backlog I
think we try to right size our
capital requests every year for
the parks and based on what we
think we can spend the
additional runaway with with
staffing on that we're sticking
this year for staffing in state
parks and you know that only
only helps us to make sure that
we can can be on top of
everything from maintenance to
welcoming visitors to
interpretation
so if you we we do try to ask
for what we need it and not not
too much more not too much less.
So so madam chair and as we move
forward just a we talk about
Tennessee and of course there
their involvement in their
interest or dealing with
technologies move forward how do
you incorporate that within your
various departments that that
you oversee and part of that all
as well as going to be with the
elephant Butte with you'd lake
with all these others it's it's
an enormous task but at the same
time if if we do find a way to
educate and to get more people
involved in what and deals with
I really believe that that's
going to be intraparty of
improving our overall
environment and the services
that people are looking for with
the great outdoors so with that
madam chair I just to want to
thank you for the ongoing work
and please know that all
continue to to to work on some
of these issues alongside you in
the departments so that that we
can improve if you will our our
overall approach to to enter
thank you thank you I'm sorry Mr
Chairman sorry sure school with
no problem thank you senator
Senator Campos Senator share.
Thank you madam chair.
To move too far down the line
now for making people so.
A madam secretary I'm looking at
the healthy forest park here.
And I see that both the
executive and the LESC
recommendations are will
significant increase thirty one
percent.
Second in forty four for the
LFC.
and I believe we've talked about
this before but.
For me healthy forced people
will pay us to take care the
forced to we will allow them to
go in there
And so as opposed to our hot
shot crews cleared forced.
Of.
It is a guy who's jumped out of
many airplanes syncing to me to
drop jump out of an airplane
into a fire but.
They want to be crazy let me do
it.
But but I would in in I don't
know how to do it everybody gets
upset about it but truly if we
allow logging in our in our
forests a we would have to by
force which would mean we have
affordable housing.
E. we would have income to the
state in the form of severance
tax of some kind.
and and I just think that's a
better way to take care for
forced now just like oil and gas
or anything else we can have
rules that you know these kind
of trees you cut down these kind
you can't the so many have to
leave in the state for third
lever out there could be yes on
this particular.
area we need seventy trees break
over here we need forty trees
per acre whatever of.
And so I just I just want to
keep it a rating that that we
have a way to clean our forests.
And make some revenue for the
state and make affordable
housing.
All at the same time if we just
get out of our own way and allow
it with the proper rules.
And.
I just wanted to state that so
again I'm trying to be all
humble in love with you today.
Thank you for.
You too.
Senator sorry had to step out
for just a moment all righty
thank you very much for Senator
Diamond do an excellent have
Senator Woods did you have some
senator your doctor telling me
something no I just apologize
madam chair I was calling Mr
chair madam chair and I didn't
realize stepped out thank you
thank sorry thank you okay there
we go Senator Diamond thank you
madam chairman thank you
Secretary for spending your
afternoon with us I'm sure it
seems like a long day but we do
appreciate your time here today
I'd like to focus in on state
parks for just a moment I'm here
looks like state parks received
twenty million dollars and are
but federal funding but you've
only spent four point eight
million are we on track to spend
that remaining fifteen and if so
where we put in the dollars.
Madam chair is yes I we actually
I that number is a little bit
old when when it was pulled over
more like six million dollars
today of what's been spent on
the R. five funds we have
several years to do it they're
being spread across the US and
you do it I don't have the exact
number of the top of my head I'm
sure the state parks director
does he's here but it's it's you
know maybe a dozen parks around
the state so it's going to a
number of geographies around the
state and parks around the state
and projects where we had had
backlog in a lot of that work
right now has been planning and
this could.
Airing for the construction
phase and then we'll really
start spending dollars we get
into those construction phases
around state okay good I'd like
to see madam chairman those
dollars to return the ground
quite quickly it makes us
nervous always missing a bunch
of money that's not getting
spent and and to that point I
want to talk specifically about
elephant Butte state park it is
one of the it may be the largest
revenue grossing state park if
I'm not mistaken and receives a
disproportionate amount of
investments back into it the
infrastructure isn't just poor
but it's embarrassing for New
Mexico on any given holiday
weekend that house is over a
hundred thousand people the park
has not been maintained well for
for a number of years now and so
I'd like to work with you on
getting funds as quickly as we
can you too elephant you what
what makes me a little nervous
isn't here for state parks
division your specifically
requesting a number of dollars
to provide vacancies but I don't
see anything in here to address
part facilities maintenance and
repairs what are you investing
in this upcoming year and in
this budget to to maintain to
prepare and to rebuild critical
infrastructure state parks.
Madam chair Senator Diamond so
that any any repairs and and
infrastructure work with come
through our capital budget so we
we present separately on capital
and and and and and and don't
typically included in this
presentation but I'm happy to do
that going forward just to make
sure you see it all in one place
we do have separate capital
outlay appropriations for state
parks including for what waste
water infrastructure projects
and and I I I knew that some of
our footballers are going to
elephant Butte lake state park
at a sizeable amount so I'm glad
to get you the details on that
offline as well if we could
madam chair would you email us
the capital projects that are
included in this presentation
could you also email us a list
of your state parks the dollar
amount in revenue that is
generated annually from each
state park and beside it the
dollar amount that is invested
back into the park so a list of
money stand and monies out for
each state park so we could
review that as well.
Senator Diamond just for what
it's worth on page fifteen of
your packets there is a
visitation revenue comparison it
does not have the money out but
it should have the information.
Visitation and a list of all the
state parks as well as their
attendance numbers.
That's great thank you thank you
of C. has provided some of it
here follow up with the
secretary offline for for
further information on that but
that is extremely helpful thank
you with that if you could email
us and
Your capital projects as well so
we can see where the money is
getting spent on I am more than
welcome happy to grab a shovel I
live right there at the lake and
help get this done but we have
got to start seeing some
activity there in the late to
invest in the state parks thank
you again for your time and I'll
follow up throughout the year to
make sure we get it dollars on
the ground.
Thank you senator Simon we have
center what's your next.
If we get in on thank you for
the opportunity and madam
secretary of that just a couple
of questions have you bought any
more private land since you've
added to the the sugar land I
think it's and that the name of
that park there but more is it
not sugar.
You're talking about K. Madam
chair Senator the good thing
about coding.
Please.
No no Mr chair madam madam chair
Senator we don't we don't buy a
lot of land that we we did
receive appropriation to support
that last year but it's really
only when it's directed by the
legislature that we acquire land
and it's it only for state park
that's only division where we
yeah
But if you haven't purchased in
more land since that Madam chair
Senator now okay.
I would really like to know
something more about your
special appropriation one time
appropriation year forty one no
one here your preventative added
to enhance the reliance of the
elector.
Read.
if you could send me whatever
information that you could send
me on that and with that up how
many electrical engineers are on
your staff.
Madam chair Senator Woods I
don't know the exact number off
the top of my head but we do
have electrical it we do have
engineers I'm cert engineers in
the energy conservation and
management program there part of
the team that among other things
reduce energy savings
performance contracts as well as
solar market development tax
credit applications yeah and and
that's what I no I figured you
would have to have some kind of.
Engineering.
It's T..
To certify.
The the many solar projects that
you have and and and to know
when those can be.
You know certified the used for
the tax credit.
But I was wondering about the
utility engineers on this.
And then miss madam chair
Senator at you know I don't
think that this this formula
grant would necessarily expand
staffing for that it would
probably be
At any about dot let me follow
up with you all the details okay
right of the seven seven alone
to.
Of the ask about our is I will
was that we get into the lecture
with
I just find that very
interesting deal right there
because it's kind of cross deal.
to me with the.
Kind of PRC tap work and that
kind of stuff so that's kind of
what.
I was looking at and I'm sure
center I mean it is it is
something that supports
congressional goals on
demonstrating improvements in
energy resilience mitigating
climate risk investing in a
modernized great infrastructure
investing in clean energy and
decarbonisation solutions and
creating jobs good.
Those are the sort of objectives
of the program and I agree with
you a hundred percent the more
renewable we put on the grid
there's it puts stress on
different parts of it and and
all that has to be mapped out
on how that works so.
That's probably what you're
talking about trying to use some
that for and it's how much.
And again let's don't get into
any further
this is not I don't have to know
all that ever answers right now.
Madam chair I'm gonna quit you
thank you very much for the
opportunity to just for this
moment I hope not.
Thank you thank you senator all
right we're gonna have to move
on.
So of note here that thank you
we're gonna have to move on
because we're trying to have a
hard stop if we cannot know how
we're going to do this by five
thirty I don't think it's going
to be possible but we're going
to do our best so I don't have
any further questions but we
heard your nice presentation and
your requests for the in the
difference that you were under
funded and so I want to thank
you for all your hard work and
we will take all that into
consideration as we move on
thank you so I can counties
there are thank you for allowing
me to do that Secretary probes.
Always be Sierra thank you and
thank you to our staff and I
think that's all we have for on
this department so all right we
can move on to something else
now we're gonna go on to the
state engineers office and we're
trying here that one and then
we'll see how far we can get
today so HSD five fifty.
And if we have some hand out
that would be great.
We can move quickly.
Thank you yes you can proceed
let's get started so we can keep
going chair again my name is
Scott Sanchez on the LFC
analysts for natural resources
seated with me today is state
engineer Mike Hammond and to his
right my count program the FAA
Mr branch of is moving quickly
the office of the state
engineers overall budget request
included an increase of three
point six million dollars or
eight point three percent over
FY twenty three the LFC
recommendation included a budget
of forty four point nine million
dollars or a four point four
percent cent increase where is
the executive recommendation
total forty four point seven
million or three point nine
percent over FY twenty three.
The LFC recommendation targets
seven hundred and thirty five
thousand dollars for vacancy
rate reduction target pay raise
was not included in the
executive recommendation
additionally the LFC
recommendation reduce
expenditures in the improvement
of the Rio Grande fund are
replacing two hundred thousand
dollars a fund balance revenues
with general fund bring you into
the next.
The state or.
the just to finish up I'm sorry
madam chair the HSD submitted
nine expense request costing
three point six million dollars
the LFC recommendations
supported six of those were
total of one point two million
still the executive
recommendation included an
additional five hundred thousand
dollars for several under
partially funded expansions in
the LFC recommendation.
Thank you thank you for that
synopsis okay.
Engineer you can see how are you
thank you madam chair members of
the committee yesterday
celebrated my one year
anniversary of and your state
engineer.
This is the first time I called
budgeting process with both the
house and Senate the finance
committee so I appreciate the
opportunity I also agree that
gained a greater appreciation
for you all as as a volunteer
citizen legislators are working
so hard as you do try to all of
the various needs Mexico and I
know waters just one part of it
but it's a very important part
is we both talked before and I
wanted to
the kind of go through a
presentation but I'm gonna be
very brief on it
my experience with the building
and so the HSD is that we've of
of of great stuff we have a
great mission and we have a lot
of challenges and you all have
heard a lot about the so you
don't need a believer in one of
them as I have laid out on on on
the presentation but I did want
to highlight one we the Mr Rolf
Schmidt Petersen using the our
search director of the
Interstate Stream Commission
attended
a special master hearing on on
Monday
in the cedar rapids Iowa with
with the federal judge appointed
by the Supreme Court to hear the
case and that was our final
hearing on the consent decree
that the three states of offered
forward to help settle the case
so we should hear in a month or
two from him on his ruling as to
whether he's going to recommend
the consent decree to go to the
supreme court for their
consideration or not and if not
then we're we're back at the
education table with the United
States and others so so I just
wanted to share that the the
hearing went very well I think
New Mexico's position very
nicely it of due to the
investments that you all of made
in the process and greater use
great to us of of of the
experts.
to help us please the state our
case and also or or internal
team is been absolutely great
and then moving forward so I
think we're we're sitting pretty
good in that regard so that's
the only one to highlight the
rest of them of one of Russia's
most of our agency work but
let's just jump into the.
Questions at hand so I ask you
to to go to slide six if you if
you don't mind to just talk
about the R. J. can see status
program
We have made the right amount of
progress in the last year of
showing recruiting and filling
in retaining of staff well we
have a great HR group and they
work very hard we reduced our
vacancy rate that down around
sixteen percent from a high of
twenty two of the four.
And the we certainly are
continuing to work on it we have
twenty one vacancies are you
know actions in process we have
seven of funded vacancies and
and roughly thirty one the we
have no budget for so the the
request that we made for use
that things in the in the both
the agency and the executive
request would would still fit
within our total that the
allowance
So moving on to page nine wanted
to just talk about our budget
planning considerations that we
work with with the executive
basically it's scale over a five
year period because we we've
been wanting than talking with
director Avid and others the.
The active team we've we've been
wanting to look at because of
the.
The opportunities with federal
funding for dollars a B. I. L.
M. I. R. A. dollars all that
stuff that they're that they're
available for the next five to
seven years so what we've put
together is is projections in
our special request through the
executive for that sort of
horizon we realize the problems
and and budgeting and stuff but
we wanted to make you aware of
that that's our our our view
were taken the the longer view
of from our perspective both in
our staffing requests going
forward as well as some of the
other things that we learn
through the water infrastructure
task force recommendations by
that group to really focus in on
investing in human capacity good
sound science water planning the
protecting watersheds and
aquifers as well as planning for
the needed infrastructure going
forward
We have several other things and
and and consideration there but
shift right to slide ten.
where you can see of the agency
requests
the executive request and the
LFC foundation
for overall staffing we we
submitted a bare bones request
to help us prepare for the lower
Rio Grande outcome of the
litigation of come we still need
to move forward in the search we
saving that region from in a
water resource management
context you know there's over
pumping we know we have the
issues there to plan for growth
so there's no reason why we
can't just get ahead of the
curve so we requested that the
you know some staffing for that
both in are water resource
allocation program and the
Interstate Stream Commission of
I total FTEs for that purpose we
also requested to have to use
for cannabis impacts we have to
process a lot of extra
permitting applications that are
quite detailed actually because
the they're trying to convert a
service right to the ground
water and you know there's a lot
of different things going on in
that in that new industries if
you will that impacts of the
agency in that regard to over
three hundred thirty specific to
the cannabis applications adding
to the workload
but the the consecutive of
funded some of those positions
of the Energy a couple other
positions we requested
of it and also in the providing
a deputy secretary of COVID
and also the LFC recommendation
funded through dedicated capital
project management unit staff
that we believers very important
to fully capped capitalize on
federal grant opportunities and
other programs that are coming
forth but if we get a funded so.
Significantly with our our
special requests so so those are
the differences of the here and
the the purposes that we of
wanted to express with you today
so.
you'd move to slide eleven that
discusses the executive request
of for specials we we have LFC
recommendations that we we I
think are are are great under
the circumstances for.
Like I said these are five year
outlook funding request both
were granted in order to.
It's giving six million and
twenty five million risk for
those two from the rural C.
request is it is a really good
down payments.
I just like to say that for the
it's to document the support by
the legislature and the
executive for the allergy
settlement dollars is very
critical in order for us to
demonstrate to the department of
justice to the lower Rio Grande
water users
to text that New Mexico is
absolutely serious to address
the the the settlement needs in
the region would be important no
matter what the funding levels
are for the first couple years
being able to demonstrate a
commitment to the settlement
process is highly critical for
for the resolution of the case
in a long time in the long term
so I appreciate wanted to share
that with you Google or is it
just wanted to highlight that
the LESC did not address we have
a lot of the increased interest
in Colorado River compact
matters there's a lot of the
Goshen issues going on because
of the shortage on the Colorado
River that could lead to some
needs for litigation support for
the state we had four million
dollar request in the executive
to that some recognition in the
LESC of yield a request with the
appropriate as well as items for
you know our our building is
going to be Representative has
to do for the new executive
building so we're gonna need you
know someplace to occupy the as
early as next year
and and then another spot of
interest to us of of that wasn't
addressed is in the water
planning arena there's a there's
a bill the proposed through the
by Senator Stefanics
Representative the to restart
the regional water planning
process through the.
quarter of the regional water
security planning that the the
was was dropped.
This week.
We we we would just need
somewhere you know some funding
in their of the one point five
to two million dollars range
whether it exactly request to
six million dollars.
And then there's the for arpa
categories
the the executive request one is
is that
construction needs the the the
Nichols them just upstream from
here in the Senate they worship
needs a new spillway that's
that's a fifty million dollars
million center of the power they
could could be reconstructed
others shovel ready projects so
but but also our dam safety
offices identified seventy one
specific them problems across
the state with the the top ten
would need somewhere in the
neighborhood of one hundred
million dollars to address those
deficiencies and make them safe
again with new standards of of
that are being implemented in
the dam safety world and then
there's another group of art the
dollars for drinking water
stormwater wastewater Committee.
The we were chair of with the
NMED
to try to effectuate some
improvement in our
infrastructure for for rural
communities and so those those
are the main items in the.
specials she we also have I see
I do request the we're quite
pleased with in terms of the
health of State.
Press
One in particular is the
Laurentian aquifers stated it
would be fun we requested fifty
million over a five year period
with the first helpful
requesting ten million for one
year the LFC said well we better
make a good down payment there
to demonstrate commitment and so
thirty million was placed there
there's a few other smaller
things in there that we could
certainly benefit from the
funded but I'll leave it at that
and I searched certainly
appreciate the opportunity to
the to respond to any questions.
Thank you very much.
Share any comments about the
committee we have Senator
Hemphill thank you madam chair
good to see my thanks for being
here can you go into a little
bit of explanation just so we
have it on the record about the
three hundred thousand that I'm
requesting from the unit fund to
be directed to your department
and how that's going to be
utilized thank you madam chair
Senator Hemphill.
Those ones are
are are are are designed to help
us address the the needs of to
complies sensually with the
house bill two hundred that that
the the replace the the entity
of the water planning and city
in the southwest region that was
suspended
so now we've we need to the
prepared the local governments
of the two of us to meet the the
front end
of the requirements of the water
transport to get to the projects
and and and they recommended
state to the Interstate Stream
Commission for final approval
funding so so your your bill
would allow for those funds to
go to the local governments to
help them through the because
primarily I believe to help them
get prepared a similar to the
the grant regional Grant County
regional system of the work
they're doing their the the
mission in the arm to get over
the hump there and get some of
their P. yours done and kind of
fit into the the the water
transport process worship them
approved and then on to
On to this the Interstate Stream
Commission thank thank you madam
chair thank you Mike for that
explanation are do you
anticipate there being any
statutory changes required in
order to find that three hundred
thousand out of the unit fund to
is it it's going to go to DFA
and then to you or how exactly.
the there's a.
There's a budget Terry.
Press the The New Mexico unit
fund a line item for Interstate
Stream Commission to actually
the us the opportunity to
transfer those funds to NMFA to
get their prepared to have this
the ability to address the funds
cut the other the the
applications coming in from the
local governments that you're
funding will help.
Airforce so the to the two
together will work well together
is moving.
Excellent madam chair and Mike
are there are you going to be
creating a different application
process specifically for access
to the unit funds were are are
those local communities still
going to have to complete the
application process for the
water trust board chair Senator
Hemphill that we've we've got a
the the criteria already been
put together by the industry
Stream Commission and that
should be shared with the the
water trust board and it's it's
not anymore owners the typical
water transport application
process the but by getting it
done on the front and the let
the eyes see approval process
much more streamlined.
And madam chair what the
timeline to anticipate us being
able to get those funds out to
the community.
we we certainly madam chair we
certainly hope to to.
Get a lot of the the the
groundwork done and ready to
roll of this early as this fall
that that's what are.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Mike Senator thank you very
much Senator and Mike for that
anyone else Senator Woods just
one quick question madam chair
on the.
We've got quite a bit of your
capitalist to this for them
rehabilitation and thank you
You receive seventy seven
million are for fun for them
three validation and.
You've only spent about eight
point one million.
And you also spent eight million
and the middle Rio Grande
following.
Fifty thousand on a state gives.
So you got.
Well it says ninety of them.
Ninety three million in capital
outlay fund received by the
agencies for eighteen FY
eighteen to FY twenty two.
About seventy one percent has
been expanded so it seems like
we're not getting the money out
the door.
As fast as we should have you
got any comments on that.
Madam chair Senator Woods the.
You know we've we've got some
capacity issues that the as far
as that goes but also I think of
a lot of it has to do with some
of the local governments work
with the the the the the delay
because when of the pandemic
per hundred I think we're we're
now kind of getting the the the
moving forward so and and we
were able to hire a couple more
stuff and usually Stream
Commission for the second
program so those those are
things that are starting to see
the light of day as far as those
those impacts the previous years
but I'm new in that regard so
that those of particular funding
mechanisms of of of previous
years of a hundred percent clear
on myself at this point but
that's the the twenty
explanation in terms of of where
we're at well it just it just
the fact that.
You know you're asking for more
money for some of the it sounds
like the same type projects that
some of this money could be
available for.
But I'm sure you've got it all
figured out somewhere or someone
in your office has got it
figured out but I just wanted to
bring that fact of life that it
looks like there's quite a bit
of money that's not being spent
yet and I'm sure it may be
encumbered and still set then of
all waiting to be put out there
the the particular dams in the
dams in particular madam chair
when I first came into the
legislature we had a list of
those damn.
And and critical critical you
know on and.
It is dancing McCormick in much
progress on those are they not.
They haven't moved up the
priority list I guess I might
say madam chair so.
Are we looking to do that
sometime in the near future move
those.
Critical dams those critical
diversions those critical you
know like the Santa Cruz.
Yeah.
Chair of center would.
We're we're a regulatory agency
in that regard we have or that
safety group that does the
monitoring inspections said the
recommendations to the dam
owners and we try to coordinate
with if we get and and sometimes
we get appropriations that are
directed to our agency but we
don't have the project
management stuff so we we we
divert our regulatory staff to
do those were those jobs and we
we still get a we got ten
million last year and we've got
one project to the partner down
down and the end of the we've
we've worked on to through the
statewide down funds but I think
we really need to rethink how
we're organized and stuff so
that we have project managers
that can get the money out the
door working with the dam owners
that's the critical piece right
there so of if if if the funding
to the that Senator compasses
Bill as top one ninety five is
talking about hasn't overhead
pieces that for us to staff up
that way and and give priority
to them and that's what I'm a
little worried about on the last
bill we heard.
That we're trying to push a
whole lot of money.
And yet.
Are we a regulatory agency are
we a construction agency how do
we do that how do we push that
money out the door many needs
but by huge amount of problem to
get from a to B. and I know I'm
talking to the choir probably
just for that madam chair that's
all I have thank you very much
thank you senator thank you for
the your responses I now I feel
bad that we have to be so rushed
but I'm way past my the five
thirty at deadline that they
said so let me just say thank
you one final but I don't have
anyone else on the list but let
me just say that you said many
in very important things that we
have an important job and you do
a great job thank you for your
work but there's one thing that
I did notice throughout over the
years is that seed money for
settlements for example or just
seed money in general to be able
to leverage federal funds for
different programs and different
money it doesn't make any sense
to me how and why we would not
provide matching funds to be
able to get more funds from the
federal government for all these
programs that we so direly
needed projects so thank you on
the settlements you brought that
up and how important it is for
us to show the commitment that
we have in there in in not only
the commitment that our intent
to continue these programs and
projects and and making the best
that we can together as a team
if we if we can to let the
federal government to let the
federal can't talk the federal
government think that they're
the only ones out there it's
only one part one person not a
partnership if it works the same
way it does it just fall through
the cracks so together I think
we can do a lot thank you so
much for that and I'm gonna have
to move on to the next agenda
item but we will take your
request into consideration we
have your hand outs and the LFC
staff thanks much Madam welcome
thank you for staff to I'm gonna
move on at work this is what
we're gonna do for everyone I
you all have been waiting so.
All along in the audience and
that's an awful feeling so let
we've got these department of
environment Indian Affairs
Department work for solutions
Department HSD a long term
Services Department still we're
going to do we're going to
continue with the way the order
of the agenda is and we're going
to proceed I'm gonna go over the
five thirty into it and do the
environment department but for
others that have been sitting
here a long time I don't want to
sit any longer we're going to
have to move you up for another
day and so the Indian Affairs
Department work for solutions
and aging a long term services
thank you for your patience we
will reschedule you nothing else
is has nine to do with you it
just has to do with the time you
thank you and we're going to
proceed with the the department
of environment thank you because
I know you've got your full
thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Scott
Sanchez on the LFC analysts for
natural resources I'm here with
secretary James came from the
Department environment and run
Chavis from department of
finance administration
overall the LFC recommendation
for the environment department
represents a three point one
percent increase over FY twenty
three the executive
recommendation represents a two
point eight percent increase
over the prior year LFC
recommends general fund increase
of two million dollars or ten
percent over the FY twenty three
budget the executive
recommendation increases general
fund by one point six million
dollars or seven point eight
percent.
The LFC recommendation includes
four hundred and fifty five
thousand dollars over the
executive recommendation for
vacancy rate reduction
contractual costs as well as
efforts for recruitment and
retention the LFC recommendation
funds high priorities in line
with the LFC guidelines such as
recruitment retention three
classification of existing FTE
to meet more urgent needs in the
water protection and resource
protection program interpretant
quickly though and that offsets
Brian if you have anything that
mention a thing that thank you
Brian R. I. secretary can be
good to see you thank you for
your patience in waiting as long
as you have an additional pre
work no where is madam chair
happy to be here happy to if
there are presentation rather
quickly I feel like I've talked
to many of you about our budget
and our our concerns have been
very vocal about themselves of
move it fairly quickly madam
chair for those who might be
following at home or in the
audience our budget fact sheet
which I'll be walking through is
on our website so people can can
see what we're looking at it's a
four page fax sheet and again
I'll hit the highlights and and
finish up for questions as
quickly as possible and I'll
introduce staff is if we have to
answer some questions but my
deputy cabinet secretary of
administration Daniel Gilliam is
right there
So madam chair of the members of
the committee page one of our
fact sheet is really a lot about
our agency our our mission and
values a little bit about where
we stand as an agency given that
the historic sort of under
funding of the environment
department and how we have not
kept up with the while the
budget has increased in spending
has increased as a state we've
sort of been left behind not
sort of we have been left behind
and then madam chair and members
on the right hand side is a as a
message to you
from me on what we're hoping to
accomplish this crap coming
fiscal year and let me just say
this one thing to you you can
read that letter but but really
what what I'd like to say to you
is.
With a very little impact to the
our general fund we can have a
profound outcome within the
environment department two point
six million dollars if I were to
hand that to you and say I would
I would like this two point six
million dollars to go towards in
using our federal grants rather
than bricks and mortar would
like leases I would rather use
that in Silver City I would
rather use the had in Dona ana
county I would rather use that
up in the northwest part of the
state for air water waste
programs that's what what I'm
asking for let me use my grants
as intended as instead of as
instead of procuring space
and I can explain that even
further it when we get to
questions
on page two madam chair members
of the committee I think what's
at stake I know many of you know
us as regulators good or bad but
we are an agency that has a pass
through agency for millions of
dollars of federal funds even
before the infrastructure and
inflation reduction act past now
we have a tsunami of money
coming to my department bush you
madam chair
thank you we have a a tsunami of
of money coming in from the
federal government and now we're
going to be able to administer
even more money into the
communities provided we have the
architecture and infrastructure
to do that and it's not the same
old architecture and
infrastructure that we want we
want to be more nimble more
quick I heard Senator Campos
talk to EMNRD about are we
modernizing yes that's what we
want to do in FY twenty four to
get that money out the door
On the bottom of page two is our
recommendation on how to fix the
LFC recommendation to bring it
up to what the environment
department needs and then on
page three is our special
appropriations we are asking for
a lot of money in special
appropriations one time money
thirty two million dollars for
four million dollars of that
would be exactly to improve our
operations and again this is in
an exercise in bureaucracy this
is adopting like Microsoft
products that can really help us
in real time when you say I need
your account balance on a
hundred twenty five revenue
sources I can say let me look at
my phone and I'll tell to you
I can't do that today are we
have to run excel spreadsheets
and pieces of paper it's arduous
So there's four million dollars
in there for that and then
everything else in here is is
specific purpose specific money
to focus on different aspects of
our environmental programs I
want highly all of these for you
and and maybe a highly one for
you there's there's there's non
there's contaminated sites
throughout the state of New
Mexico that we don't have a way
to to clean them up they're not
super fun programs I can't get
federal dollars Superfund sites
it can get federal dollars for
them but doesn't mean they don't
pose a risk and in fact madam
chair used particularly asked me
over the years about corrective
action fund which we used to
clean up gasoline leaking
gasoline tanks
back in the in the in years ago
when the department was cut the
legislature authorized us to
speak to take thirty percent
away from cleaning up gasoline
tanks and we put that into now
groundwater abatement programs
and other things so madam chair
at the irony here is that we've
been so under funded that we are
no longer preventing gasoline
from getting into our
groundwater were okay with just
paying for its cleanup I don't
find that the right way to do
business in the state so again
we want to some of the specials
go towards fixing those problems
and then finally on page four
madam chair again I'm going to
this rather quickly hope you
don't hold that against me
maybe maybe it's quite the
opposite actually the madam
chair on page four I wanted to
just paint a picture of what
it's like to work at the
Environment Department if you
were in our air quality bureau
and asked to do inspections of
the university would take you
six and a half years to do it if
we were asked that you know
basically our staff and their
workload is unsustainable for
the for what they're tasked to
do
and if we were making would.
It's it's maybe that one way on
them so personally but we're not
making widgets we're doing
things that people join our
department because of its
mission that's why they're there
But you can look down madam
chair members the committee at
at at you know I don't believe
we have to inspect every single
air quality source you know
every year but knowing that it
would take a six and a half
years to get there is is just
not good good government in my
opinion
and madam chair one other thing
that I highly they wish I could
speak to Senator Diamond about
this in a connect with our our
construction programs bureau she
knows and many of you now what
this C. nami of federal money
coming into the state what are
my goals to administer it and
your communities as quickly as
possible we're already each
engineer is a hundred twenty six
projects in that that is not
only capital and I'm sorry that
is not only the the federal
funds coming in before those
federal the federal way of of of
funding came in that's capital
outlay as well so we're managing
capital outlay I wish we could
take ten percent off capital
outlay and and use it to
administer this program but
everyone of these engineers
that's managing these programs
for these projects is paid for
by the corrective action fund in
other words this is another
group that we're taking money
away from cleaning up of
petroleum storage tanks to pay
for the salaries of these
individuals because we don't get
any money for it otherwise
And then madam chair members of
the committee there's the
employee exit interview
information and one of the top
three items is people are
frustrated when they leave over
proper compensation in the the
volume of work that they have to
do in other words there crashed
by it by the day to day work in
our department and I'll share
this factoid with you and then I
will wrap up that we went
through and looked at how many
unfunded mandates are on the
table right now like if we look
at all the bills and all our FY
ours that are growing to this
session right now that would
amount to six point three
million dollars in new work for
my department.
and then if we were to add like
the four percent raise because
of the way the calculation is
done it would actually cost
another two point five million
so all in all even though we're
asking for two point six million
in general fund increase we're
going to be in that negative
coming out of the session as of
as of the way I see the
landscape right now.
All is not lost our vacancy rate
has fallen and I think that's
because we are now shepherding
we have a pilot project from G.
from DFA and and CPO we're
processing all our own HR
actions were the only agency
doing this we have a waiver from
them or a delegation from them
in the time that we've had that
we're now processing instead of
about six hundred personnel
actions a year we're processing
year to date two thousand two
hundred sixty two so we're three
and a half times more efficient
on the H. R. process that's
bringing down our vacancy rate
and also we're doing really
innovative recruitment and
retention ideas where we're
trying to make sure that we
don't have a lack of continuity
so if you are an employee with
us and you said I'm going to
retire in twelve months or six
months we give you an increase
for those last twelve six to
twelve months the idea here is
let's in San.
Giving notice and and give
people more money before they
walk out the door because that
allows us to plan and fill
positions so we just don't lose
operational knowledge and
there's other incentives
happening in the department but
madam chair with that I'm
finished my presentation and I
really do appreciate you all
staying and hearing from us
today thank you.
Yes that's the least we can do
this or here for unfortunately
we had to be a little more
rushed than it would if it was
earlier but let me say thank you
and then I'm gonna go to
committee members say truly I
have seen your work and and I
have not seen the many hours so
that you're there you're there
like late in the evening
weekends holidays all the time
on the call it's a lot I I can
share with the weekend hi no
yeah I would believe you because
I have to talk to us situations
there late at you're always
there and they always respond
and I really appreciate that but
I'm gonna defer to members of
the committee before we go on
it's too late Senator share.
Madam chair without a given at
least a million dollars just so
he could teach everybody else
how to give us something instead
of four hundred and thirty pages
of slide.
I move that thank you very much.
Thank you.
Did you wanna respond chair just
thank you I appreciate that
sorry thank you there's time
thank you madam chair where you
know I like to give out a voice
up here because sometimes we
just focus on negative things
secretary thank you for all your
hard work for you and your team
outstanding to the person really
meeting the challenges of New
Mexico and no matter how
Underfunded you maybe in some
areas you don't you don't shy
away from trying to deal with
the challenges I really
appreciate that yes refreshing
and your great public servant a
and I just you know I always
like to say that that that our
funding for the environment is
nothing other than a reflection
of the state we want to live in
you know the the air that we
breathe the the land the water
and so so that's really about
our state in investing and and
and.
They with all the also I hope
that we will maximally fund you
and all of your needs because we
all win when we do so but thank
you all for your work we
appreciate it thank.
And we all know if you are truly
at the group here and the person
constantly energizing us and
moving this forward to protect
land water environment and so on
this game and fish and game
officiated yes we heard that
very loud and clear you thank
you so much Senator Senator
Hemphill thank you madam chair
thank you Secretary for being a
model agency and really being a
example of great leadership in
the state of New Mexico and I
know that you've done incredible
work in spite of your limited
budget can you just briefly talk
about some of the impacts that
you've had to how how does your
limited budget really affect the
way that you're able to be truly
respond to situations across New
Mexico thank you madam chair and
thank you senator the you know.
It's it's tough because I have
so many examples and so many
programs that I could highly
but.
You know I'm trying to think of
I'm gonna give you a different
example the cannabis industry is
expecting to get permits from
our department by April we don't
have the funding in order to
give them their permits by April
so we maybe we I don't know this
for sure but we may wind up
issuing no action assurances
meaning it's not your fault you
don't have a permit so we that
me protracted there is them
getting a permit the food
industry be it retail or per
manufacturing the FDA's told us
you're not implementing your
grant dollars properly and we
want to go you know if you don't
start doing second inspections
once you find a problem.
Your job you're in jeopardy of
doing that even more macro is
that the the air quality in
different parts of the state
including southeastern New
Mexico has has hit a vehicle
where the ozone levels are now
so high that EPA is going to
come in this year and and
basically say you need a brand
new permitting regime and why is
that I will offer that is
because we don't have the
inspectors to go out and ensure
compliance we don't even have
the staff to go out and and help
the industry and educate them on
some of the smaller operators on
what they need to do so we're he
and I gave the example of of how
are using corrective action fund
for things other than.
Corrective
We can address them or do we
administered federal funds for
communities who are looking for
wastewater projects
the end I could go on about P. I
just I could go on about many
other aspects of our I mean just
recently the in someone part the
Camino Riel landfill we have the
private sector saying I know you
don't have the funding to issue
to do the permit review what if
we pay for the permit review
the department of energy's
giving us five million dollars
to a year to.
Watch the department of energy
so the list goes on and on I am
not at it I don't want to come
across is that we think it's
hopeless we don't when we were
there every day doing what we
need to do but those are the
types of things that that we're
struggling with on a day to day
basis and frankly speaks well
I'll leave it there thank you
madam chair thank you Secretary
for giving that brief
explanation and I I also want to
thank you for your
responsiveness to the
environmental situations that
occurred in my district and I I
hope we can fully funded you so
you can help continue to do the
good work that you do but we all
benefit when we have safe water
and the you're you're able to
provide the assistance with
whether it's dealing with soil
or water other environmental
issues so
We support you thank you for
doing the work you do thank you
madam chair.
Thank you very much I don't have
anyone else on my list but again
thank you know we heard your
very moving but true request
with respect to the corrective
action fund my goodness is going
to go down to zero if you don't
do something about this and and
you still can't even if you put
it down to zero you still could
prevent any further damage
because you're barely keeping
that were at that and so that
and the fact that you can't
issue permits in staff you know
for the cannabis that we
ourselves pass that that
improved and initiated and
continued with that with that
venture and now we can't proceed
to do it that makes sense so
with that and several other
things in here we will keep
these with us and I know that we
are going to consider all of
your requests to get.
Thank you members you're welcome
thank you yeah thanks to your
