Committee introduced the bill.
He's gonna I think they're going
to hand it out right now.
Senator sharing them.
Want to grab and explain your
building.
Yes, sir.
Um, Mr Chair and Committee
members after discussions and
trying to work out some issues.
Not only with the committee but
with the oil conservation
division director. We have
amended the bill and you have it
in your committee sub
To address several concerns that
were raised.
Number one. The original bill
took, um, had a provision
regarding federal funds and the
plugging of wells on federal
lands.
We took that out because that's
a separate program in the OECD
wanted that omitted from
The text of this bill. So we did
that. The second thing that the
OC D.
Requested is that they would
like to have sufficient funds
carried over from year to year
and director. Uh
If you shared that $80 million
would be a sufficient amount to
keep in this fund and revert any
amounts over that amount from
year to year. I believe we
talked about yesterday. The fact
that
This fund was established in
1959.
It's a tax on production, and it
was to be earmarked for
reclamation and plugging
liability over the years. That
fund has just been going to the
General fund. And then there's
been a lot of comments that the
oil and gas companies are not,
uh
Are leaving it on the taxpayers
back to plug the wells and
reclaim the the surface.
Yeah, and we recognize that
there are
Okay?
Very minority number of
companies that have, uh
Entered into problems and have
been unable to fulfill their
obligation to plug wells. But
that's what this fund was set
for, so we're trying to earmark.
A portion just a portion
Would be $60 million a year.
To go to the plugging and
reclamation fund for use in
plugging oil and gas wells and
reclaiming the surface of those
operators who are no longer
financially viable or for
whatever reason, no longer
exists to engage in those
activities.
The planned, uh
Last or this year's generating
about 115,000,060 million. If
this were law would would be
earmarked for the O. C. D to
utilize and expend, uh, that
money? Uh, $5 million a month
to reclaim and to plug Wells.
Mr Hughes believes that
That is a sufficient amount that
O C d can ultimately, uh, get up
to? He testified that there's
1700 orphaned wells on fee and
state lands that this would be
applicable to right now that
will give him sufficient, Uh,
monies to take care of that over
the course of the next few
years.
And of course, this would be
continuing from from this point
forward, and that's basically
the terms of the bill. My
expert Mr Matt Thompson, may
have something else to add. But
we're here for any further
questions that you may have Mr.
Chair I moved. Do not pass on
the original, uh and a substance
in a dupe.
You passed for discussion
purposes on this committee
substitute second.
Nice.
Shares questions from committee
members having seen passing out
Do you want to go over this
stuff for me?
Um, Mr Chair. Mr Thompson can go
over this salient points of the
sub, In addition to what I've
always said chairman members, um
So the bulk of the bill is is
again the distribution of the
funds. There also is some
cleanup of a some fee provisions
and also of a gas capture
provision that has been added
understand Can you explain the
gas capture language has been at
and what that means. Chairman
members? Yes, it was an
executive order from the
governor in 2019.
The promulgated rules for the
For methane way methane waste
and those pre ozone precursor in
this codifies that
Can you tell me where in the
bill that languages
And the substitute.
Yeah, on lines.
Questions.
Section four chairman member
Section four
Which is what page
Page 615.
Mr Chair and senator that would
codify the methane rules.
This time. One. Well, thank you,
Mr Chair. It would be great if
if the deputy secretary, we're
here to be able to speak to
Their position on this, but are
you kind of testing that they
support this? That this was all
language? Did they want to have
this natural gas capture
language that this was
happening?
Mr Chair and and Senator
Steinberg.
The director is in support of
the committee sub. He's seen it
and I believe he is fully, uh,
supportive of this provision, as
well as the $80 million story
over and the, uh
Utilization of the $60 million
per year as
Dedication to the plugging and
reclamation by the O. C. D of
orphaned wells.
I needed to study this language.
Mr Chair
had a question.
Thanks, Chair and thank you,
senator. And thank you to the co
presenter there. So when was the
last time that the fund was
Actually there? The accounting
of money is going into this fun
rooms last time that was
changed.
Or updated or revised. Anybody
know Mr Chair and Senator, we
believe 1978 was the last time
that it got changed where more
or less goes into the General
fund instead of its chairman.
Anything else go into this fund
other than what you're
describing here.
In the legislation of other any
other
Money's or or mechanisms to put
money here.
I
Mr Chair and and Senator. I
don't believe so but also
recognize that the reason we
took the federal part out is
that there are federal money is
going into the fun that are
ministered separately. Okay, so
that was my question going into
a fund? Maybe not this fun but
going into a fund.
For O C D. So then chair So then
this will be up to the 80
million will be general fund
money to meet that that 80
million
Yeah, well, and it needs to be
in the house built to, but it's
$5 million a month that they
would be able to appropriate the
Legislature struggles control
over that, But it's 60 million a
year.
And as that fund builds up, then
up to $80 million would be
carried over. It won't happen
the first year because hip hop
be there, but, um, we realize
that there may be money left
over at the end of the year, and
we'd like to build up a fund up
to $80 million.
And chair. If you look at the F
I R, then
That's the revenue side. What's
expended on an annual basis,
then?
Had you arrive at the 80
million.
Mr.
Yeah.
Mr Chair, Senator, Um
The expenditures from the wreck
funder of function of what's
been appropriated to the O C, D
N H B to so many years. It's
been about 3 million bucks this
year. That's been 16. So it
depends on what's what's
appropriated. Um, I worked with
the sponsor, um, to come up with
the $80 million in sort of two
bases. There are about $50
Million currently in the wreck
fund.
Which is money paid under the
current tax by operators, so we
wanted to preserve that amount.
And then we added $30 million on
top, which would be roughly half
of the $60 million that would
come in
Um, to the fund annually under
the proposed amendment.
Thank you, madam. Chair and and
and senator and secretary acting
secretary. So what does this
cost? Then? We're how do we?
What does all this say? Um, um
Mr Chair of representative. It's
actually a
Proposed reallocation of attacks
that's already been paid, Um ah,
in terms of longer term
Costs and sort of orphan. Well,
activities. From what I know
right now. I can forecast out
about $400 Million in lab in
liabilities associated with the
wells that I know about, Um,
additional orphan wells will be
created in the future. Um
Not all of them, but some
percentage of them. Um and we
are. We forecast those of
somewhere between
200 million to north of 800
million, depending on the
scenario is you look at and
those are relatively
conservative.
So then, I guess now back to Mr
Chairman and Senator, So I guess
I'm just why would we just cap
Why would we have a $80 Million
cap there? Then Why wouldn't we
just do a percentage of what we
know based on historical and
what what we think is going to
happen with production and all
kinds of why wouldn't we just
set it as a percentage of
everything that we do?
Um, because then you're gonna
have to come back. You're going
to be underwater again. At some
point, I'm assuming
It's uh so, Mr Chair, Senator,
um
There's a balance here in terms
of
Cruz in the amount of work that
the OECD can do in any given
year in terms of locking them in
and because the proceeds from
this are a tax are a portion of
attacks placed on production. Um
there's some certainty that you
would have these revenue
streams, um, kind of coming in
rather than having it sort of
pile up and at least as
currently structured the wreck
fund.
Is not an interest bearing
account or an interest bearing
fund so stacking large sums in
there may or may not be the most
advisable. Okay. All right.
Thank you. Chair and thanks for
your responses. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I have a couple of
questions of on this.
Really, for any of you.
This money is used to plug
Wells.
On just state lands.
Stayed in the lands, Private
lands and state lands, not
federal land.
Okay. And what? What are the I
mean? I know that we keep money
in here for the for liability
purposes, is it
Necessarily Mr Chair. Is it
dangerous to plug wells or their
accidents that are often
associated with any of this?
Uh, Mr Chair? Um and Senator,
um, I had a plugging rig outside
Carlsbad Light on fire because
of a burp of methane that
occurred. I mean, it's dangerous
that you would associated having
a work over Reagan site. I have
another orphan. Well, that's
spraying a fountain of produced
water outside of Jao. Um, as we
sit here and talk
Right now, that's going to
require some challenging work to
bring it under control. Those
are probably the exceptions.
Most of our plugging work is
relatively straightforward and
follow standard procedures but
working with an oil well has
inherent risks, and you see that
both in the drilling and
development and and in the
plugging side, which is why we
used experienced crews to do the
work.
Okay. Thank you. Well, I'll
speak on those experience
Cruise, Mr Chair and of this
money when we talk about
reclamation, will this fund also
pay for all necessarily all
necessary? Reclamation is there
to make the site is
As before. Correct the same way
you
Reclamation or my reclaiming
mind, right? It's just
Um uh,
Mr Chair, senator Money from the
fund Does Globe does go to
reclamation costs for the site?
The those are the most
unpredictable um and potentially
costly relative to the cost of
plugging a well, which is much
more straightforward.
Mr Chair. Thank you.
And and that does seem, but that
they can't be costly. You've
talked several times you've been
here about
The bad apples. We agree that
there's bad apples and all
industries.
What? What happens when we find
out that the bad apples,
especially in an industry that's
painted to be so ugly and dirty
and without any respect for
environmental or
Public safety concerns and you
find out that the baddest apple
of them all this last fall
happened to be asked the state
themselves and an explosion in
Public safety concerns and you
find out that the baddest apple
of them all this last fall
happened to be asked the state
themselves and an explosion and
Carlsbad in which the O C D
contractor cut locks trespassed
on public private property
Without the owner's notice.
There's a gigantic explosion
right that.
That
Thank gosh doesn't kill anyone.
I mean, this is pretty well
known that happened his fall.
And there's communications. It's
been shared back and forth.
We're saying who's responsible
for the reclamation? How of that
site?
There really hasn't been an
answer from the state. I mean,
I'm assuming that this
particular
Accident that happened at at
fault of the state is going to
be reclaimed with this state
money to is that correct? Mr.
Chair? Senator, I need to
correct a couple of things 10 C
D is legally allowed to access
any well in the state.
On state or fee or even federal
lands without prior approval. If
we need to get out there, uh
So so, just to set that up. The
accident that happened was not
the result of any
Uh, misapplication of protocols
and process the orphan well with
down hall, integrity, issues
burped methane, um, and caused a
fire on the rig site.
Thankfully, the crew was able to
evacuate local first responders
were able to, um, take care of
the fire. No one was harmed and
we are in the process of
continuing the reclamation work.
Um on the site and have been in
contact with the landowner about
next steps and other pieces. We
had to pause that work. So that
an insurance, uh, review could
occur for the for the plugging
contractors, But all protocols
were followed in the OECD has
very clear authority to access
any well site in the state of
New Mexico.
On relatively short notice to
address uh, unacceptable
conditions. There it is, Mr
Chair. I think the concern is
the public safety concern. For
example, photographs of the site
have a number of equipment in
vehicles that were burnt to a
crisp and it was not known to
OCD. How many human lives were
around at the time, So I think
the safety the public safety
component of going in there was
their greatest concern of who
was around that huge.
Explosion that was felt all the
way into the city. It was a very
large explosion. I think that it
was a personal safety of public
safety concern for not notifying
people. You know they could get
out. But my specific question is
we have a responsibility to
reach to reclaim that to admit
responsibility for this
accident, just as we would want
any of the other bad apples.
I'm just clarifying this money
will go to reclaim sites that
even the state is responsible
for damaging correct.
Uh, Mr Chair Senator again. I'll
clarify There were a number of
fires in Carlsbad in the last
year at various sites, including
one is you're driving in on the
North side that was at an
operator site and out. Um yes,
The state will continue its
reclamation work at this site
now that now that it has
initiated it
And this to be clear. Mr.
Chairman, does this funding go
to that reclamation site? Even
when it's
The state is responsible, and I
assume that we're probably
likely on incidences like this
have to add more than the 17
that we have in risk management
when we continue to get lawsuits
like this, But but is does this
money reclaimed those sites?
Um, Mr Chair Senator that
there's no lawsuit associated
with it, and the work was being
undertaken with state
reclamation fund dollars that
was appropriated to us in FY 20
for the Legislature added $16
million, and we are using that
money to reclaim that site.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Chairman, in
an email As recent as yesterday,
There has been zero
communication with the specifics
of what reclamation of that
site, so I would I would like to
follow up on the specifics of
that, but it's very dangerous to
come here. And when we're
talking about the only bad
apples that are happening in
this oil and industry, oil and
gas industry that we need to
protect the state and and our
citizens from our just producers
is incorrect. And so there are
guardrails and guard lines. And
even when the state was the bad
apple, we incident that we need
to be made sure that we are
making
Or are
Landowners and those
constituents in the area whole
as well. When the responsibility
falls on us. This is a very
clear failure on our part, so
I'm just going to follow through
to make sure that the
reclamation of this private
property
Is done and that we are we hold
ourselves responsible and follow
through just like we would make
any oil and gas industry. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, so
assistant Secretary.
Designate. Whatever you are good
to have you here, so I can you
explain this natural gas
capture?
Language, have you?
Seen that? Are you in support of
it?
This kind of question one.
Yeah, uh,
Mr Chair, Senator. This is the
first time I've seen this
language in the committee sub.
It looks to be, uh, potentially
And earlier version of language
that we had in, um ah each be
133, but may not reflect the
exact latest language that was
in the House Judiciary Committee
sub for that measure, but I've
not had an opportunity to
compare it side by side.
Thank you, Mr. We haven't either
in a probably others haven't um
I guess. Generally, I want to
ask this question. I think we
should get it right. I will say
that.
Do you want to comment on that?
Go ahead.
Chairman members. It is the
version from the House Energy
Natural Resources Committee that
passed out it is from an earlier
that passed out of House energy
that's correct.
Thank you, Mr Chair and has
there been an advancement in
that language Since then. I
mean,
When we say it's an earlier
version has there been an
evolution of that language?
That should be in this
Um, uh, Mr Chair and senator
that language in the
The administration and the
sponsor work to update that
update that language in a
committee sub that was presented
to the House Judiciary
Committee based on some
concerns and some additional
work by stakeholders over the
weekend, But in between those
two committee hearings
So we can't miss chair Senator.
So that is not the this
language.
Of the house of that when you
say the sponsor you mean a house
sponsor of the bill.
The House bill.
Mr Chair and and Senator, I'm
not aware of anything over on
the house side, So we just got
that from or Mr Thompson got
that language from
The bill and I don't know what's
happened since that date. So
what we put in here was much
earlier version apparently.
I guess I guess I'm just
wondering
Why it's here. And if it's here
because the administration
wanted it here. That's the
intent, and probably people
should be talking to each other,
and we should be adopting maybe
the latest language from the
House.
I mean, what are your thoughts
on that director
Secretary Secretary Duggan
Dylan. You want to answer that
center, but
Um
Um, Mr Chair. Uh, Senator, the
administration would be in
support of the latest language
in the House committee sub I
would like to defer to the
sponsor of this measure in the
committee sub for his
perspective on it.
Yeah. Mr. Charron, Senator. Um,
we have always been concerned
with the regulatory process and
we felt that important.
We're going to have it. Let's
get that part in the statute and
and so we were willing to do
that. You know, I don't like the
methane rule to begin with.
We're going to have it. Let's
put it here, and that's what we
decided. So, uh
Chairman.
Senator. Are you then supportive
of adopting the latest language
from the administration for that
section.
Um, Mr Sharon Center. I'd have
to look at absolutely fair
enough. Um
Well, well.
Let's try. I don't know what
your intentions are all this
bill today, but
You know?
It's good to get it right.
Also are you? Are you planning
on us Voting on this today, Mr
Chairman.
I'm sorry. Are you planning on
this voting on this today? And
we don't know that because
yesterday or whenever we heard
it was just kind of information
Can we also allow public
comment?
If we haven't done so already,
okay?
I don't know that I don't
remember. I don't. I don't think
that we did. All right. Well, uh
Dylan. I love you, You know?
Look at this, because I'd love
to hear your opinion on if you
support this or not, And in
fairness, you need to really
look at it real quick.
Yep. So, if you're prepared to
answer that question now, or do
you need a minute? Um, Mr Chair,
Senator, I was able to text with
my team. Um, And as Mr Thompson
identified, this was from that
this was language from the
henrik sub. Which is why I
recognized it. The
administration would be in
support of language in Section
five of the House Judiciary
Committee sub
Aside from that you support the
rest of the bill.
Um,
substitute? Yeah. Um, Mr Chair.
uh, Representative of Senator.
Sorry. Uh,
The other addition to the
committee sub in Section three,
appears to be a verbatim. Ah, uh
Component of and I'm gonna
forget the section number of HB
um 133, which would increase
OECD's fees, um, and then enable
the division starting in 2727 to
adjust
Those fees by CP I, as opposed
to having to come back to the
Legislature since that is
verbatim from the latest
Version of House Bill 133. We
would
Be. It's important that
additional question, Mr Chair.
Um what does the bill go? Does
it go to another committee
before it goes to the Senate
floor?
It's gonna write
a shin came out of Senate
conversation.
Conservation.
I guess I guess I would just
want to know. I mean, and you
You have to see it. That's fair,
but I would hope that, um, since
we're gonna vote on this today
that, um you would bring a floor
amendment to align that language
on that natural gas because I
mean, I share the goal.
obviously of of that, and I
think that's really positive If
that's for
How to find out. But let's want
to get the language rights, Mr
Chair and Senator, My expert
tells me that, uh, that we would
be amenable to that language.
I've not seen it, but I'd be
amenable to have enough floor
sub to do exactly that
Amendment. Probably, But okay, I
appreciate it and then again to
the public comment on this bill.
Senator Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Senator, Um
So what happens to the lines
leading to those wells?
What happens, Mr Chair and what
happens to the what blinds
leading to the wells. The
pipelines generally, uh, the
pipelines are subsurface and
they remain.
In place. I don't know of many
locations where they bring up,
Uh, big pipelines. Uh and and
there are pipelines crossing
various places. But the O. C D
director may have another
responding. Um, Mr Chair,
Senator, I would agree with that
as to subsurface. Ah.
Uh,
Larger pipelines. There are a
fair number of lay flat lines.
Those are the black pipes that
you see moving produced water,
Another product from site to
site. Um, when we initiate sort
of reclamation projects, One
thing we're looking about is how
to go about reclaiming those
polyvinyl lay flat lines which
are on the surface, Mr Chairman
or one more part.
So we'll several years back. We
passed a law at all.
For functional obsolete
pipelines.
Does that still exist? And the
purpose of that was to relax,
though attacks
I'll have Mr Thompson.
Chairman. Senator, I believe it
does, But I would need to
research that and get back to
you to make absolutely sure so I
will get back to you on that
one.
Very well. Thank you.
Thank you. What's the will the
committee
But while we have done we have
to pass the sub
And then we have a substitute
building would go back to cut
public comment and then back on
the bill.
Yes, we did.
No.
Okay, We're gonna go to public
comment. Any man in June.
Okay, three or four in the
audience.
No, you haven't seen the sub.
But
Nobody in
No comment.
On the substitute.
Have emotion in a second.
Ocean was
Wait. We substitute the bill, so
the motion is to sub finish the
substitution.
On the substitute.
Companies that money on my mind
still running. Is that correct?
So, Mr Chair? Yes, Senator
Sherry is correct. If we need to
have write that out, just to
make sure that it's fine.
Senator share made the motion
second by center Bert
Because her home
Senator Bert Senator Bert Boats?
Yes, Senator accomplished
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley. Senator Brantley
votes. Yes, Senator Gonzales,
Senator Gonzalez votes? Yes,
Senator Hemphill, Senator
Hemphill votes? Yes, Senator.
Pay via Yes. Padilla votes. Yes,
Senator. Sure. Senator. Share
votes. Yes, Senator Stein, born
Yes, Senator Stein. Born votes.
Yes, Senator Woods, Senator
Woods Boats? Yes. Vice Chair.
Rodriguez? Yes. Rodriguez votes.
Yes, Chair. Munoz. Yes.
Ceremonials votes. Yes, we have
a do pass 11 to 0 that was
close.
Thank you. Sorry for the delay,
Mint.
Uh, just so we're going to get
caught up here real quickly
yesterday.
Senator Cervantes messed up our
staffer.
And 141 got in the nodule in the
module.
It got on our agenda haven't
passed the house and so we had
to pull it back in the house. He
read it out on the floor. It's
back in the module, so we're
putting on on today.
Representative Oscar When we
Hill Senator want this? That's
exactly what I said per verb for
letter made him per comma.
That's like I said on the floor
today, we in the Senate
Judiciary Committee used verbs
and letters and things that are
evidently alien to this
committee, at least in your
chairmanship student level.
Yeah, Uh, Committee members. Hi.
I'm join.
By my colleagues in the house is
going to introduce that or who's
going to introduce it was gonna
be the lead speaker.
Good morning, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. We can
both speak. It's the same exact
mirror Bill.
Yes, Miss Sherman, You've heard
this building represented.
Yeah. You heard the bill. You
passed the bill. This is
judicial salaries.
Unless you all want to spend
more time questions from up. Let
me go to the audience. Anybody
in support
Nobody. Anybody on zoom in
support or against
anybody in the audience against
questions from committee
members understand? Born Thank
you already watched you explain
to us or sponsors. You know why
we're doing this? What the
current salary is and the
justification for the bill
was chairman again. This is the
same bill that we heard before.
You know, there were a lot of
questions from the center. Same
word at the time.
Past the committee, so
We have difficulty attracting
attorneys to the bench who have
the years of experience that
we'd like to have The principal
reason for that is salaries that
are paid for the judiciary are
not competitive with federal
salads and the federal bench.
And they're not competitive with
private sector.
Salaries. I've always tried to
illustrate this best by pointing
out that when there's a vacancy
on the federal bench will have
40 50 60 applicants when we have
a vacancy on the state bench, we
might have one or do
Sorry. So, Mr Chair, senator
representing okay, so I thought
this was a different like we
were setting it for the Supreme
Court because of the title of
the bill. This is the same exact
value put on before us. Okay? Mr
Chairman, Senator Stein born. I
saw that. Yeah, in the headline.
It says changing salaries for
Supreme Court justices. It's
true. I didn't catch that. Until
this morning. Actually, I don't
know if it's a drafting error,
but it does indeed say in the
headlines, Supreme Court
justice, but the bill affects
all levels of the judiciary
except for Majesty.
Traits. Thank you. Yeah, and
that's what threw me off.
Okay, Same bill. Thanks. That's
all I have.
Thanks, Senator Woods.
Did you want the list to or you
waving at me, too?
Hmm. I've got the same objection
as I had on the house floor on
the Senate floor and up the
House board Senate floor that
there's nothing in this bill
that
Helps us bring up or short or
very long caseload that we need
to bring in faster to give.
People are equal right to
justice as quickly as possible.
so I will be voting. No.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Senator. I appreciate your
comments on the Senate floor. We
had a pretty extensive debate
instead of Florida have a pretty
good feeling that the concerns
you expressed and of other
senators were heard by the
judiciary.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
sponsors and since we're having
a version of Groundhog Day here,
I'm still very concerned that we
don't set this at the base of
what is it? The federal
magistrate? Er I'm just gonna be
right back here again Sponsors
again in a couple of years, and
we're going to be like, Oh,
gosh, Why can't we get folks to
want to go? Can you help me feel
any better today? So, Mr
Chairman, Senator, you asked the
same question when I was here
before I'll give you 20 calling
it a day, Senator. Your your
approach is the better approach
is the approach that I've had
last night. We just go forward
that way.
Um, the governor is vetoed the
bill twice. We're trying to
thread a needle and hopefully
find a way the governor will
sign this bill.
Well, since we were having
ground heights that I get on the
record on it. Thanks. You said
he looked like a groundhog.
Senator Gonzalez, Did you have a
question?
No, I don't know a question. I'm
ready for a motion, Senator
Rodriguez. You know what I Mr
Chairman. I don't want to
prolong this anymore other than
again, as I said before. Thank
you for finally bringing this
before us. Hopefully this time
we'll have some luck and it'll
get passed and signed and get
our judges and district judges
and Supreme Court judges where
they should be at salary. So
thank you, Senator and thank
senators again. I don't mean to
monopolize the panel here. I
have good support from my house
sponsor, and this is really her
bill to jump. It's just that she
hasn't
At the opportunity being before
you before, So a lot of this is
a repeat of our prior hearing.
She doesn't have the advantage
of knowing that. All right.
Thank you very much.
Representative. Thank you. Mr
Chairman and Senator. We
Can't let perfect be the enemy
of the good in this situation,
So thank you Don't think we're
gonna let the executive
determine what the Legislature
months to
Hey, staff and employees and
then
Have a disagreement over a
Rolling and then have the
executive branch to say.
Who's going to do what and how
we're going to do what I mean.
We are our own body.
The judicial branch is another
branch of government.
Which we hopefully
Paying people better. They'll
have better performance.
Throughout the system.
Let me spell performance for you
already. So censorship Qantas
knows I don't know how to spell
I mean, we do have
Pro Tim judges.
Yeah.
Are called in because other
judges are not hearing cases.
Did you ever find out the number
of cases?
You already know the answer to
my question, so number of cases
in the appellate court that are
are outstanding.
Mr Chair. I actually have a
whole set of documents. I wanted
to give you but this went so
fast. I didn't bring him today.
Uh, 270 in the court of Appeals
is the number
270 cases for 10 judges correct
That is correct. And you're
right. We're using protests to
try to help the court of
Appeals move faster and reduce
that number because we don't
find that number to be a good
one.
I mean, that's less than 10
cases per judge.
Thank you. Mm. 27 cases per
judge. You. You You gave us a
hard time about not
understanding words and verbs on
the floor. But you were so proud
of your numbers and your maths
and confused man. You just
really called you a groundhog.
Yeah, but you just did yourself
squarely. 170, divided by 10
senator is more than 10.
So I I do think they need a
better performance in the
appellate court. I mean, it's
some cases do you take longer
times?
But that amount of cases for
that amount of judges is very
costly.
And you can't tell me 10 judges
can't get in the room.
One or two days a weekend coming
to devil
back where we started.
I love you. You know, it's
Friday afternoon. Over here in
this committee, huh? I'm sure
there's been no Yeah, I'm sure
you all haven't started. Happy
hour. Happy hour, yet you're all
very, very happy. I mean,
there's gotta be some
efficiencies. Gotta created more
money. We paid better people,
the better performance. We
should have right?
This court system should start.
If we're going to pay for two
get better performance and
better people than
That's what needs to happen.
I mean, that's and then you have
to be cautious Tail is, you know
when you get rid of fees and
fines, and it's a revenue
generating stream
And you want to come back and
say we can't collect them. You
want to have general fun?
Well get ready because the
Legislature gets appropriate all
the general fund.
Sometimes we'll have it and
sometimes we won't
And so it's It's hard to
maneuver that that's my last
comment. Senator Gonzalez past
Accomplish second, Mr. Chairman,
call the roll.
Yes. No, it's not amended.
Or there's a minute 141 Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee. There was one small
amendment made back in the House
side so that it mirrored exactly
the Senate bill time clocks.
Senator Compost 141 as amended.
Gonna do pass motion when you
call the roll.
Senator Bert
Senator Bert Yes, Senator. Bert
Boats? Yes, Senator
Accomplished. Yes votes. Yes,
Senator Bradley, Senator
Brantley votes. Yes, Senator
Gonzalez, Senator Gonzalez
votes? Yes, Center. Hemphill,
Senator Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator Padilla? Yes, yes.
Votes? Yes.
Senator Scherer. Senator share
votes. Yes, Senator Stein born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Brooke Woods boots, No
vice chair. Rodriguez Rodriguez
votes Yes, chairman on one
second. Did you have some
confusion at the table there
before we just checking? Yes.
Votes? Yes. You have a do past
10 to 1 house? Yeah, See ya.
Groundhog Day.
Mr Chairman.
I just want to who is senator
Compost?
That's what TV is just said,
Where that's what the TV just
said.
Um, so the geo bonds, I think
it's still wrapping up. So so
people know. Tomorrow we may
have a rack up for health bill
to tomorrow, Grove.
They spent all day yesterday in
my office and
Doing grow.
So we'll probably may hair rack
up of house Bill two tomorrow so
we can get it on its final way.
We do have the capital outlay
projects, which were talking
with things like about the Riaz
and the severance tax
distribution and enemy free
housing projects tomorrow, so
depending on how late we go on
the floor tonight,
We have nine o'clock.
And if we go late, we're
probably gonna come in about 10
or 11.
and you're saying we are
