This.
Okay.
Senator one of the student then
at first have a motion would
move a thank you Senate finance
committee.
To send a message to percent
bill for for discussion purposes
okay sec Sen Ron Griggs a second
that motion and the the one talk
about the face of essentially Mr
chairman I appreciate the the
committee compare that to the
committee coming with this.
The districts the appropriation
and if you take a look at the
record that was put together for
the food initiatives
Senate finance committee
scenario document that your
staff and me for gave us
someone's committees will
Money for just five million PED
funding in the recurring area
online eleven we have fifteen
million member could
nonrecurring I did ask Adrian of
yours the chief of staff to will
we'll be moving line eleven to
the recurring section any said
we would be doing that the only
other question I had Mr
chairman.
The only other question I had is
when the bill came over of sort
when the HB two came over from
the house that was seven point
five million already allocated
and then I see the additional
fifteen here so it doesn't so
what I'm looking at the rack up
his twenty million it should be
twenty two point five million.
you're looking at the F. I. R.
I'm looking at the document that
your staff again but but the the
chief of staff well I we don't
have that in front of us right
now so I know that he gave you a
rack up and I know that will
we're gonna work through the
sisters twenty million in twenty
one million in capital of the
rack of with the move rounds
about twenty million I think
we've had conversations with
executive when they really need
to get in the first year so
we're still having those
conversations up stairs and what
really works in the first year
with that amount of money so.
we'll talk about the dollars a
little bit later.
Any objection to the amendment.
I see none you have an amended
bill.
I do want to talk about Senate
Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee being a
member of the committee I
appreciate you guys allowing me
to do this when this morning
first.
So Senator the Education
Committee seventy two percent of
before we did introduce this
bill as a follow on to my bill
from two thousand seventeen the
hunger free student of the
rights we took the language of
what we're attempting to
accomplish here and our amending
the hunger free student all
rights good or not going to call
the healthy hungry healthy.
US hunger free student all right
excuse me Mr Chairman so this
language will sit in that act
and essentially what it does is
it provides funding to the
school districts to provide free
breakfast and free lunch for
every student in New Mexico that
are participating in the
national school lunch program if
the district or the particular
school or specialty school or
charter schools or private
schools or what have you if they
want to participate in the they
can opt in but they do need to
participate in the national
school lunch program that's
essentially what what happens
there
We are looking at anywhere from
twenty and hoping to get as
close to thirty million as
possible Mr chairman in in
funding for the first year so
that districts can take that
money and fill in the gaps with
the breakfast after the bell the
copay and also just simply
providing a free breakfast or
lunch for every student New
Mexico
we did it added that the with
the substitute in the Senate
Education Committee which took
the implementation timeline to
two years so you'll have the
money originally in the first
year to shore everything up and
possibly do some additional
equipment for kitchens and may
need to be adding you know have
additional equipment added to
them
and then we come back in a
second here to right size the
funding whatever that may be and
then in the third year you would
see proper funding based on
trends and things of that nature
not every child goes to school
meets the free lunch I think we
all recognize that and so over
time which you'll see just like
we do today school district food
service directors or or a
cafeteria directors and and
whatever their title maybe in
their district
they will right size their
budgets based on the actual
number of meals that are needed
so let's just say that you know
as as an average of five out of
everyone hundred kids ago to put
our our schools in New Mexico
they bring their own lunch they
do their own whatever plan they
have for lunch they don't choose
to eat the lunch at the school
well that's per or the breakfast
it's perfectly fine over time
those districts will re adjust
exactly what they're needing in
terms of funding for this
program so that's essentially
what the bill does
you know we thought let's take
it a step further and push
really hard for healthy lunches
rather than just putting a lunch
on the table for breakfast on
the table and I think what
you're gonna find over time is
we built into this legislation
where districts have the ability
to create partnerships with
local farmers and ranchers here
in New Mexico so that they can
buy healthier options for the
for the for the food services
that they provide so that's
essentially what the legislation
does
I have Mike.
sponsor here I I invited I was
very excited to invite Senator
Leo how to me point spends a lot
of time on issues like this just
like I do you know that hunger
free student bill of rights many
of the members here voted on
that bill and help me get that
done seventeen it's going all
over the world I think I've
given I'm not kidding you Mr
chairman about four thousand
interviews discussions or
whatever I'm working with thirty
seven different legislatures
across the country so far to get
that that built into their state
legislatures well other states
as well and I couldn't think of
a better partner to have on this
so I invited him to join us and
I'd like him to say a few words
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I come from very
humble beginnings and so I
myself was the recipient of free
breakfast free lunch from K.
through twelve and so that was a
warm meal that I knew that I
would have to start off my
school day and a warm meal at
lunch which is why this bill
means so much to me this bill
means even more to me because my
mom is a retired public school
cook and so the story she told
of students that have it even
worse off than we did she ensure
to add a little bit more food
onto their trays because she
knew that sometimes that much
will be the last meal of the day
if you fast forward past my
education through Espanola
public schools I became a school
teacher in the land what would
happen in the land of what I
witnessed a sometimes students
with packed their pockets with
drum sticks of chicken that were
left another straight to take
home so they could have
something to eat at night that's
the reality of child hunger in
New Mexico is real and so it's
one that I want to address one
that I faced first hand as a
student in public schools and
one that I witnessed as a school
teacher in public schools which
is why stand in support of this
bill and was happy to join
Senator Padilla and the governor
with this legislation thank you
Mr chair thank you go to the
audience just to work for my
experts here as well a little
this could to the audience and
and rules on the bills can make
any comments one
we're gonna go in support in the
audience.
Let's can I get for five how
many people we have on soon.
The.
Let's get four five from the
audience this young man right
here that looks like the school
lunch is there anybody any other
kids in the district that are
from the school that consume
free lunches consume lunches
there's not you can get two or
three or four more lack of line
behind them going to come for
just get for people lined up
don't be shy and then where he
have an email anybody in the
last couple days.
Tell us what your favorite
lunches at school.
my favorite lunch one night at
school is the either the chicken
strips or as some.
Sandwiches there's no.
There's some good lunches but
most of the time there's not
really any good lunches so maybe
if this bill is passed then
we'll be able to have better
lodges that are fresher that
tastes better that is overall
more enjoyable see if you could
pick your for lunches for the
week or five for the week what
would they be.
You can strip.
And.
I'd say maybe some salad would
be good for a few weeks because
so it is healthy at it's going
to have some healthy options for
school lunches.
What else and they came a long
way so we're doing this for you
so you should be the one talking
to us we don't need those other
people behind you.
We.
They're the ones that make
they're the ones that make you
go to school.
Thank you again for so quick my
name's I don't know and I'm a
fifth grader and the son posted
elementary school what city
Albuquerque New Mexico came up
earlier drive the trains one.
You too far right to train this
morning no Sir hydro with my mom
and my parents and my little
sister what else would you like
to tell us about lunches and in
breakfasts and their classmates
would tell you to say.
You should have said this to
them you should send that to
the.
I don't know what to say but I
really think we should pass the
bill.
And that can have a motion.
I'll second the motion
inspection.
Thank you for coming
to mobilisation I'm not mom I am
going to be too though thank you
for everything you do in the
community school coordinator of
east side house settlement to
school along with but to the
network and Kendall here we
wrote a hundred and sixty
letters to local representative
this is an elementary school and
the at their advocating for
healthy more males in our school
and fresh foods we believe this
goes beyond what we're doing as
well because we're talking about
kids academics one thing that I
noticed as a coordinator is that
kids a lot of kids are not
eating their foods and it's very
important to have fresh and
healthy food for them and then
we could send them to school
with breakfast and lunch and
then most likely they'll have
better academic that they have
good nutrition foods and also
supporting our local farmers I'm
creating more jobs but will
timidly for our students here so
they could have access to fresh
and healthy foods because we
believe it's very very important
for kids to have access to that
so thank you.
Anybody else.
Lives in my district and I'm
very proud of them if we give
them one more hindered.
If any of you think you can out
talk to
go right ahead because all
you're gonna do is make us talk
more and more more so about a
hundred with a tough act to
follow thank you at cherry creek
and yeah and thank you for the
sponsor for bringing this to the
table I'm commemorating as and I
represent the Human Services
department of the state of New
Mexico and we are in full
support of this bill well as it
is one more tactic and strategy
for us to be able to improve
food insecurity among youth in
New Mexico or one in five
children remain hungry at the
end of every day so again thank
you for bringing this bill
forward and we are in full
support of this bill.
Is there any other kids in the
room that that are here I want
to make sure we get to them.
If
been here every day you have a.
Hell the I just quickly my
name's on Santa I'm a senior us
about high school this year and
with this bill public school
district I just want to say on
Mr chairman to committee members
thanks so much for opportunistic
on behalf of as before I support
and long with peers and students
in my school I see every day
since I want to come in they
don't have a I have a phone home
or family life where they have
necessarily meals ready
available and they can go home
every day so not only is this
mail gonna find to niche
nutria's and helping us it's
going to really set kids up and
composed performance throughout
the day and their own spirits so
thank you and I just sent some
support for just before what was
your favorite school lunch of hi
my fiscal instrument options.
We think those are healthy.
Doctors with the side of celery.
Senator Corman.
That's just questions exactly
grow season there your whole
food groups.
Thank you Mr chairman can I just
say this young man was also
elected governor of the National
spend Institute program this
past summer in our
legislature's.
Holder you.
That probe.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
The superintendent of Santa Fe
public schools but also
representing the superintendents
association and New Mexico
coalition of educational leaders
we all stand in full support of
this bill also want to thank the
sponsors for caring this bill
and also the committee for
joining us and having lunch at
one of our schools as a young
student mentioned you guys ate
salad fresh vegetables so we
look at expanding a partnership
local growers two percent of our
meals come from local growers so
we continue to try to expand
upon that again we stand in full
support we do know that students
learn better on full stomachs
also this is the opportunity for
students to participate in
healthy males and sometimes
these are the only males that
they are able to access during
the school day so again one
instead of full support thank
you all and thank you for the
visit thank you we'll take one
more maybe two more and that's
it Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for having
us today my name is down about
forty and I Representative New
Mexico apple seed I want to
start off by saying we fully
support this bill I want to
think Senator how many of
Senator Padilla I cannot Chavis
and the governor's office for
putting together at one of the
most comprehensive plans that we
have seen in a long time I want
to make sure that we are
everyone understands how hard
everyone has worked up on this
bill before we ever got here
that PED with the governor's
office how to leverage a lot of
federal funding that is making
it possible today this will also
of the many mill debt that is
played schools and and families
for years so I want to stand
behind this bill in full support
and think everybody has done
such hard work on this thank you
we're gonna take one more we
have three people on zoom they
may come in at.
He's been in the yeah we're
gonna try to get to this because
we got a bunch of work to do
maybe like to the floor so thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is a lease yet
Chavis oversee the food court
program for New Mexico we
partner with eight different
districts and community based
organizations across the state
to provide food and garden
education for students we
brought this year over a hundred
and fifty students up to the
legislature in support of this
bill throughout our work across
the nation in the past ten years
food court has seen how
important a healthy locally
sourced culturally relevant mail
is to students and we're highly
in support of this bill please
pass just before thank you so
much.
We have three people on tumor
gonna take one and for a minute
one minute.
Mr Kirk bridges with the threat
at advocacy ad hoc.
Our students which this
mackenzie fees on their yes.
What's the teacher's name.
The teachers.
Have a story there.
Thanks for.
Church Frazier.
The person from the.
There Kurt.
Yes I'm here Mr.
A good morning Mr committees
current record the Director
Lutheran advocacy agency to
New Mexico within advocacy also
expressed the position of New
Mexico Congress of churches in
the press and I think we
enthusiastically support SP four
is communities of faith we're
committed to ending hunger in
New Mexico we believe that no
child should ever go hungry as a
state we have the resources to
ensure that this never happens
our state's budget is a
reflection of the values that we
hold and we ask that eliminating
hunger and food insecurity
evalue that we prioritize we ask
for a new system one with no
paperwork no meal that no stigma
one is equitable and one that
feeds our children healthy meals
we don't require that students
pay for their education why
should be very different in case
you're wondering my favorite
school meal was always self very
state Mr chair members the we
urge your support for SD fifty
watts SB port thank you.
Thank you question from
committee members.
In the short and sweet seven
eight Senator.
Chair real quickly Senator can
you tell me that which cost of a
meal at a high school.
The average cost Mr chairman and
senator I believe is a dollar
ninety six sovereign.
And can you also tell me Mr
chair and and senator.
How much food is thrown away.
Asked school.
Mr chairman and senator that
does very from you know district
to district I think that the
component that we have in the
legislation for healthier
options is going to reduce that
and in a big way and so I think
you're gonna see the habit the
habits of
Of what students are gonna like
or not like this is going to
change because the options is a
good thing to have in front of
them are going to be a little
more nutritious and and
interesting for the child you
have an the third question Mr
chair you have a of piece of
your legislation here tell back
shared tables can you elaborate
on chair tables Mister chair and
senator thank you Mr chairman
cinnamon asked my expert Kendall
Chavis with office on issues the
food initiatives a director
there if you can comment on
that.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator woods so I
share table is a common practice
you see all over the country it
is in essence a strategy to make
sure less food is going in the
trash so it really is just a
table that's placed in the
cafeteria for kids to put food
back on the table as they're
leaving allowable foods things
that are packaged already things
like milk and cheese steak or
fruit warns that has yield on it
or something that can be washed
and sanitized those the
allowable foods are directed by
the environment department as
well as the national school
program rules so that's a share
table is really a share table to
put food back on the table that
will then go to students that
need it later in the day.
Okay.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
And senator Representative
welcome
question about the healthy food
issue for the word help is
written throughout the bill the
food standard part is actually
we were we've got some
definitions in here for process.
Mentally processed food products
value added but I don't see
those actual words in the bill
itself I see the work healthy
and I just want to point out to
me where we put the teeth in the
healthy part of the bill.
Mr Chairman in that Senator so
the other definitions with which
you referenced help the
districts to determine what
either to do or not to do so
that's one one way that that
help I don't see if you can
pointed out to me in the bill
Senator I just keep looking
through it and I the one section
that says they may they may
choose to buy locally sourced
products but I don't see any
other reference to health
standards so there is a term on
page four starting line seven on
unprocessed and middle minimally
processed products that helps
them to determine what is on
process for minimally so that
reduces the amount of the
healthier food if you will and
then we also have funding to
through the through the bill
this is again for the
relationship with the local
farmers and ranchers to by the
locally sourced options to make
a integrate into their meal
programs and I'm also going to
ask the foods finishes directly
and if I can thank you could I
think we have a definition from
process and mentally I just
don't see that actual
terminology used elsewhere in
the bill that directs and
actually purchase.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee Senator Steinborn
so those will that unprocessed
and minimally processed
definitions correspond with
section of.
for section four which is for
New Mexico grown foods as the
titles incentivize New Mexico
but it's online nine section for
that is an additional two
million that we have in our
budget and nonrecurring funds as
an act for schools and districts
that want to purchase additional
New Mexico product the
unprocessed and minimally
processed are just definitions
to to drive really what
districts are buying we don't
then by all cheese as an example
are all processed meat we really
want the money produce and fruit
so that's the that's where that
terminology is used in this bill
and then Senator cyber Mr chair
do you have a question about how
we define healthy meals as well
as I hear that question Mr chair
just on that last point so once
again even in section four and
forgive it may be here I just
don't see where we even use the
word on process and then only
process.
The on the definition.
there we go no I see it on page
on the screen so use the money
percent to the section so it is
a grant Fund that is not a
requirement for the whole
program.
Would that be correct so you
have to apply to the grant funds
two million dollars to even have
that requirement that it be.
processed food or whatever that
being accurate read on that Mr
Chairman center that would and
we also use other terms in the
legislation as well six line for
a high quality meals so those
these terms high quality meals
are at the top of page six so a
lot of these terms are already
in the food service program and
the rules that are established
for the food service dollars
that districts receive this
references and tracks back to
those
we didn't want to specifically
Yes it is microscopic on some of
these details you want these
districts to have the ability to
make decisions obviously we want
them to determine if they're
going to apply to that fund how
much of it they're going to
apply for and and what they're
going to use it for all that but
they have to use it for
obviously the healthier options
thank you.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn so I
also like to direct your
attention seven lines twenty two
twenty four
so when we you know that the
healthy meal component of this
initiative is really important
it's really important to the
governor very important I think
many of the members here we know
that milk quality is lacking in
some of our schools across the
state across the country and so
we have made it very clear that
we see universal school meals
were saying healthy universal
school meals and we're going to
determine what that means to
rule this spring no later than
July one will work with local
communities and districts to
determine what that means we
know from what is the governor's
vision I think what we share
with many of the members here
we're talking about scratch
cooked meals were talking about
mills that are locally sourced
we're talking about meals are on
a hundred has a chance to advise
what's being served on the menu
and not really being statewide
so there will be an expectation
or you know a hope that New
Mexico products will be of a
requirement for all districts so
we know that not every district
in by local based on where they
are in the state.
Right and thank you for that Mr
Chairman on page seven line
twenty one that says may include
those things it's not a
requirement Mr Chairman but some
sources so Mister chair I just I
just want to make sure you know
if I know the healthy part is
important and and it's written
throughout the bill and it's
part of the title evidence what
we all ask for and
anyway I just.
I just want to insure it's just
not limited to occur up grant
program that is in fact a
requirement baked into
everywhere granted with the
flexibility that needs to be
there.
so thanks amazing shells and
grant programs you're saying
it's but built in a role but
it's not really written here as
a kind of continuing requirement
for everyone so it's just I
could be wrong and it could be
covered elsewhere I just I think
this is a very important section
we don't want just maze and
grant programs if they apply we
want this baked into this new
program right because we're
giving all this money and let's
make this part of the systematic
improvement so so so Mister
chairman Senator the other
reason for the may in some of
the sections is some of these
districts are incredibly tiny
and some of them are they're
gonna have to and we're giving
them two years to implement the
program this legislation so
they're gonna have to work
through the Kinks of getting
that help your food to the there
might not be somebody locally
the gross whatever but we want
to encourage them to work with
New Mexico growers New Mexico
farmers ranchers etcetera so
we've got to give them a little
bit of flexibility is the
program comes up and and as they
figure out what we're expecting
of the.
Right thank you Mr and I just
want to say one final thing
which is.
Purchasing from Los.
Farmers and ranchers is great
but being a healthy nutritional
meal or those can be two
separate concepts so we
shouldn't put those two things
together that you know just
because you're buying from a
local rancher whatever that that
healthy male this that's great
that's using locally sourced
things it's fresher that's
wonderful on the health thing is
kind of a nutritional thing so
anyway I've spoken my peace Mr
chair and and the some will
continue to work on.
And then Senator Burt.
Thank you senators for bringing
this forward I'm I'm a huge
supporter of this I think I have
two daughters and public school
that eat after every day of my
entire district my entire Senate
district including the girls
schools have been on free meals
for years and never had to pay
and I love it because I think at
that age anything that that
unites kids you know school age
kids we shouldn't we shouldn't
anything we shouldn't have to
it's to set their differentiate
I also for the first time when I
when I involved my kids in
public school saw just how many
kids go hungry every single day
we'll tell you I was
disappointed that a lot of the
public schools that share table
was shut down during the COVID
and some of them have still not
opened and all of those sack
lunches and and practices were
being thrown away under under
COVID rules still which is such
a disappointment I I have a
little bit of the same concerns
the Senator Steinborn addressed
with the may include may include
purchases of New Mexico food may
be healthy and I'll tell you
this might and and you've
Senator Padilla has seen some of
the school meals that I get text
to me for my school districts
that are unacceptable this is a
hot dog and mashed potatoes and
that's it they can't have
seconds a fifteen year old high
school athlete is supposed to
eat this is all they have
options and if they want to
salad options the salad is
sunflower seeds in the Baca
cheeses crackers these are free
meals and it's taken me two
years I've had for years as a
state senator to the school
district he still continues to
push back saying that their
meeting USDA standards will not
improve milk quality and they're
free so it's not just enough to
offer free meals it's not
healthy components because these
kids aren't these are not
nutritious meals and are
certainly not filling out kids
it's still such a disappointment
to me and what I'm worried about
is I have one of those school
districts that pushes back and
just like just like you're
pointing out if you give on
a may and they're not
necessarily violating a law
they're not going to.
Of the school quality lunches so
how do I how do I help.
Help make this bill where this
is unacceptable and are now
breaking state state law because
my opinion are not making you
meeting you just yet standards.
Mr chairman and and senator I
think you're absolutely right I
think that's what we're
attempting to do here brings a
lot of attention to what you're
trying to solve I think it also
begins the the the process of re
designing and the the rules that
have been promulgated for these
programs your feedback are at
the end of the entire
legislature making a statement
like this with this type of
legislation I think is going to
be very helpful
did you want to come into the
yeah I think the Senate Mr chair
Senator so I Senator Diamond I
would if you dry your attention
to page six lines fourteen and
then line twenty three in on so
we are fully aware Senator that
your situation happens
unfortunately across the state
we have districts who are maybe
meeting USD requirements but
that's not enough to say that
that mills nourishing for that
child so we we knew that going
into this program so we did
build in basically two levels of
reimbursement so if it district
chooses not to meet the new
requirements that we will
probably get this spring we
would love to work with this
body on that if you're
interested they will be
essentially getting of a much
lower reimbursement and and and
exhausting that higher revenue
resource and so they're they're
gonna be choosing one and really
it's this carrot stick approach
so we did build that into this
in the governor felt very
strongly about that that if
we're investing thirty million
there has to be way to pull that
funding back at the district is
not performing so the I just
wanted to we are leave a lot
open to open to rule I would
like to work with you guys over
the summer I'm sure that any
senators for who are are facing
problems with the school
district just isn't meeting
standards but to be part of that
discussion so again I applaud
these efforts and I and I
support it you know Mister
chairman Senator with a one year
implementation we thought no
we've got to get into years to
get this right get this up so
thank you and the work but.
The number.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for recognizing me.
I didn't stand up that was a
good thing
This first the
you know we were talking over
here I I think very interesting
thing to as kids go through the
line or some parody do this to
have the right the meals and
maybe figure out
you know which ones they like
best and which and and then of
course there you can allow for
pizza and peace all the time but
you know I I think that maybe
that would be a kind of the
funds very interesting
experiment just to see what the
kids are thanking and I met kids
in different parts of the state
and have different priorities
which is kind of cool Mr
Chairman I just.
I I I support this bill would
look for it I think it's great I
never want to see.
Any kid.
Certainly New Mexico okay go
hungry.
But I think we also need to
realize.
The root problems here.
So.
I'm just hoping that as much
effort in Ms as we put into for
meals for these kids that will
look into.
Ways to create more jobs better
jobs.
Give the people.
The proper training to train
those jobs and better
themselves.
And
Anything I pray that someone on
the line we will get back to
bringing the family unit back
together.
Where.
Both parents in the house are
able to find their influences.
So that those children will not
only be able to eat good meals.
But.
They will be able to
Break the cycle of needing free
meals.
And through the process become.
More productive services.
And then that of course applies
to the their kids and that just
multiplies from there on out so.
That would be my wish today that
we.
We we pray that the the core
problem with this is getting the
family right in getting the core
family back together thank you
Mr thank you Mr chairman thank
you the same person.
A couple of thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much to
the sponsors for bringing this
forward it so it's very
important to us within our
schools and over the years as
I've dealt particularly with our
cafeterias our food service
people
a lot of changes that occurred
and that we continue to ensure
that our young people are given
if you will the home baked foods
that are very nutritious along
with the fruits and vegetables
and I I just wanted to make a
a common in terms of so many
people have really worked over
the years I know Senator Woods
you've been very much involved
hemorrhoid you've been very much
involved and how we've been
advocating to bring food to
schools and so there are a lot
of plans that are out there
there's a lot of on on going
need if you will but how are we
really going to get so many of
our young people that maybe go
to the local fast food
restaurants or service areas
during their break
to get away from school and
that's what they're enjoying how
do we really get them to enjoy
if you will the cafeteria mail
meals and I I go back to that
because for a long period of
time there's a statement that
goes along with it particularly
in the larger areas if you eat
in the cafeteria your honor free
and reduced the plan or there is
that other stigma of where
you don't have the resources to
afford if you will going out to
eat with your friends at some of
the fast food places have you
all discuss that and and and how
can we better if you will of
promote how we're going to get
more young people to eat in the
cafeterias it works well for the
for the elementary level but
once we start getting into
middle school level in the high
school level I do see a big sea
change and it's up to us then to
help to bring back these young
people to our cafeteria so with
that Mr chair maybe the Sanchez
can respond and help me with
that as.
Well thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator I I struggled with
that very issue also you know is
this a good idea should we truly
do this we're gonna lead the
nation on on this on this move
to to provide universal free
breakfast and lunch I think what
you wind up happening and you
hit the nail right on the head.
It seems to me like as we
integrate and build in more
healthier options the earlier on
for the younger kiddos they're
going to want that rather than
so they're gonna be conditioned
to want the healthier option
because at a younger age they
will have been eating the gonna
be conditioning healthier foods
so therefore they're probably
gonna be more likely to want
healthier as they go on that'll
take a while to take a
generation or two I think it's
also
you know the high school level
sometimes and that's why brought
the bill in two thousand
seventeen on the on the to
remove shaming from our lunch
rooms and and that again that
still has has done very well for
students but also other parts of
the country and and departs the
role because I think sometimes
kids are just embarrassed in a
lot of ways
you know you heard center how to
be a story the reason I brought
that bill in two thousand
seventeen is if I wanted my
lunch we were so poor my sisters
and I would grow up in foster
homes thankful that I was the
youngest so they took me in but
we literally had the claim that
lunch from top to bottom there's
nothing wrong with working for
for your lunch and working for
whatever there's nothing wrong
with that but all of that stigma
I think causes a lot of hopeful
other social emotional issues I
I Mr chairman Sir I'm with you
want to remove every barrier
that's keeping a child from
sitting down and being a child
interacting with their peer
group laughing telling stories
about what happened you know
whatever at the lunch table and
that sort of becomes like many
of our families that's the
community community gathering
place if you will
you know there there are other
options on the school grounds
like food trucks and things of
that nature but I think that the
earliest opportunity to to bring
the healthier options will be
lifelong.
In the ways of living and I
think heroes will be but I mean
you know I'm I'm just I'm just
I'm significantly overweight
I'll just use that term I think
a lot of it has to do with the
fact that we just ate whatever
we could when we were kids
that's all we have we make sure
that one of us worked in a
restaurant because that we we
ate pizza for a year or whatever
but that just wasn't healthy but
if you start off early on with
fruits vegetables scratch cooked
meats and things of that nature
then that's probably what I
would have wanted to have now no
I still enjoy eating pizza and
stuff so and I I know Senator
has another comment as well but
that's appreciate your comments
Mr chairman of course of the
center for the thank you very
much for that because that's
going to be the initiative are
there resources built into this
so that we do have a few will
the promotional piece tied into
this so that we do eliminate
that stigma where cafeteria food
is not where you want to eat the
whole issue as we move forward
how we gonna let people know at
an early age as you indicated
you're the fruits and vegetables
here they are the the the the
protein these are the things
that we're going to go and serve
but as we get into the high
school level that it's still
going to go and be kosher is
still going to be popular it's
going to be essential that they
eat in the cafeteria and I know
that senator how do also wishes
to to comment on this and so I
just try and that additional
COVID to to see if with this
discussion that it is promoted
because once the rules rules are
out once the the resources are
available we definitely want to
ensure regardless of where the
school is that the cafeteria and
then there's going to be the
other there's going to be the
expansion we're going to go and
possibly have to go and set up
of several shifts to make sure
that the kids of our of our
institutions are are you in the
cafeteria figure sculpture from
me every go Mister chairman
Senator just of my experience as
an educator students leave
campus and we think they're
eating but they're not the truth
is there in Paris to say maybe
they are approved for free lunch
or breakfast by opening this up
for every student.
Mr Chairman there is no label
tied that everybody will stay in
that school community and eat
together with no one being
ashamed of whether or not they
are part of the free breakfast
free lunch this assume that
everybody has a seat at the
table and that's why I believe
this bill will work thank you Mr
chairman and anything else that
this in December thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
just quickly I know time is
going by I don't have a whole
lot more to say other than that
which you have said and what you
were doing both sponsors.
Werner's office everyone is
support says at all.
Thank you for doing such hard
workers such a great costs and
we can't do any different but to
make sure that our kids are
fully fat that they comfortably
healthy foods and free not
having to worry whether they
have a few pennies to make up
the additional seventy five
cents or whatever it may be so I
don't know anything else Mr
chairman thank you and if no one
else to some of a do pass Mr him
but I have few questions first
do senators do we get off the
notion that we're gonna freezes
food and pack it up and sent
home on Friday with everyone.
Yes.
And then.
In my school district I believe
we have a contract shop for
whatever to that delivers school
lunches every day how's that can
be handled in in certain schools
where there's no cooks to cook
these meals and are they gonna
allow for additional money for
contracting or have how's that
going to be handled in order to
get that food there and in in
the Scarrow in same reserve
right you're gonna have to have
a cook in the kitchen.
To do that in does anybody know
if those schools currently have
cooks and and they are they
there for breakfast or they just
show up for lunch and it is
additional FTE ours included in
the thirty million dollar cost.
Yes Mr chairman really give you
a little more detail here
Mr chair members of the
committee said to your question
we did a survey that pet did a
survey back in late fall to all
of the US the school food
authorities the districts and
schools to ask them how they
felt about this so we did get a
response from preserve and the
second level Republican Rehoboth
all waste we need this that was
the the general consensus of a
government what every single
respondent
and there were comments in here
that the revenues will help them
hire more people invest in
equipment by her quality food
offset rising food costs that
are making them eat costs on
other you know either decreasing
the mill quality serving less
food whatever so I just want to
flag that for you and and as a
base our school food authorities
are entitled to use the revenues
however they see fit with
thepercent excuse me we did
determine that the bill so it
could be used for additional
contracts could be used for
labor could use for training
could be used for food costs and
it was another reason we went
with the two year implementation
rather than a one year and and
but they have to do and say in
New Mexico model we probably
have one person in in there's
one school.
And so you're probably gonna
have to have an additional FTE
additional FTE time for meal
prep for for those kids in and
that's built into this bill
because once you come back and
say oh we we missed the FTEs
when we have a discussion
It is so the thirty million so
I'm glad you made that point Mr
chairman this this is why we
really need to focus on getting
finding whatever we have to get
that thirty million put together
for the for the annual operating
costs and.
You have a two year
implementation so it'll take two
years and as we move along we'll
see with the what the twenty one
million and in in equipment cost
looks like in who's gonna who's
gonna have to use that first
because that'll tell us what
we're going to be lacking on the
backside because if you have to
hire if that you have to rebuild
those kitchens or at a freezer
and fridge for some of that
stuff then that'll tell us how
much you're gonna serving in the
total amount usually gonna need
with a two year information
we know we'd like to fund things
correctly but these are one of
the things that we think we got
the right number of what we
don't know for sure and that may
be a big question in everybody's
gonna guess on this I know role
with the I did get in most
trouble when I went there I went
there junior.
in just a quick one time alone
yet Mr Starr that you can get in
that way end up washing dishes
for about two days.
As a private prisons two months
Mr chair pardon us two days as a
private Christian school but I
remember going to school and and
we stepped take our lunch money
and sister Rosita at a Catholic
school missed part of money in a
bandaid box but if you're out of
line and school sister Rosetta
could pitch for the Yankees and
you definitely get hit with that
metal banding box and be lined
up but I I I do agree with laws
especially in in my district
with high poverty rate which we
already have free lunches
everywhere in McKinley county
right so that's one County
that's probably not going to
need any money to do that
because required to do that if
you bring up food quality we
don't live anywhere in that part
of the world where there's large
tomato growers are large lettuce
growers or any of that so it's
all going to be produce that has
to be brought in
and handle that way.
If we get the beef inspection
stuff done the session that will
help with with beef and and and
other foods and in schools
So I I think it's a good thing I
think.
We just need to make sure that
we treat every created equally
and I think Senator Campos it
right you know the stigma that's
been there for a long and the
labeling and we're good at
labeling the legislature we
label ourselves to label other
legislators and and then we set
up and talk about not labeling
people and and we damn sure do
it right here in the school
building as as we as we do it as
good as anybody can do it and
and maybe create stigma so maybe
we'll learn from that a little
bit in this legislature that
that just labeling a person
labeling the kid is not right.
I do agree with senator our meal
about kids being embarrassed for
for free lunches and meals right
because they all want to be
normal that want to be with
their group and and and when one
person goes off because I get a
free or reduced lunch I don't
have to pay for lunch the it's
an embarrassment to him so I
hope it helps help kids learn
that you know you to free lunch
is nothing wrong with that and
McDonald's gave away free
chicken McNuggets I don't think
anybody in this room and not go
to McDonald's for free chicken
McNuggets late in the.
Senator.
And so but that's what we do and
and so I hope that goes away in
my needed bill campaign about.
As a matter where you get your
food system the need healthy
food and you get a good meal
with that we have a motion
services your mini me have any
contact
okay.
All of these my mini me but he's
only under the on the comments.
He's gonna make some motions for
some stuff so.
No comments before we close.
I don't really have that much
things to say but I do have one
thing to say.
Please pass the bill.
Would love to have fresh food at
schools I know I would love it.
Good on one second right there
well the do pass motion we have
a second second by Senator
Campos
When you call the roll.
Senator Burt.
She's from checking Senator
Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yeah.
For better results is excused
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share to see Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz.
Regulation Senator you have a do
passed by a vote of ten to zero.
Thank you Mr chairman members
thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla
Senator M. me hard work then of
course.
The Indian snacks.
The attention of
As we get Alejandro's teachers.
Senator Rodriguez made a motion
second by Senator.
Senator Steinborn you can do
center students bill.
Senator Stewart.
She's talking about somebody
else.
We're going to so we know we're
gonna try to do Senator in those
bills because expert witness is
leaving or something someone.
In a few minutes and then we got
to get to some of these agencies
so we may just roll over these
other bills.
Presentation Senator Lopez to
Senator so Senator Steinborn go
ahead but we may roll over some
these other bills because we got
to get some agents just up there
committee Senate bill three
twenty nine appropriates two
hundred thousand to the New
Mexico to providing a technology
for the purpose of paying the
cost of the bureau of geology
thing annual water later what
annual water leaders annual
water workshop and I will tell
you Mr chair this is something
in a long time and it's really
great teaches people about water
ecology get some outside.
built partnerships so it's good
program been around a long time.
Then for questions.
Russian from committee members
Senator Woods.
Last year Mr chair and senator
last year this was done through
a private source that sources
brought up we don't have it no
more.
Sooner this is done through New
Mexico tech yes but it was fun
at New Mexico tech at a sponsor
for this.
The phone burn of.
Mr chair Senator I I don't know
okay Senator operates bill but I
do know it says here is funded
through the general fund so.
We're trying to fund it.
Mr chair they're fun they're
they're trying to fund this
through the the general fund and
supportive of that it is the
fact that once in a while
there are organizations that
want to.
Promote.
The theory is that of water
usage water.
Of education and we should take
advantage of those when we can
get it I have no further
questions Mr chair thank you any
other questions from committee
members can have a motion so
Mister chairman in a motion by
Senator amp Bill second by
Senator Campos
we have a quorum
any objection to the motion.
I guess could total some three
six seven eight eight zero.
Eight zero session you're
listening your expert witness
has to catch a flight.
We're going to send a bill for
seventy four you do have
amendment right are you an
amendment strict appropriation
on Senate bill for seventy four
some of Mr chairman of the
motion for
Motion to adopt amendment for
next discussion purposes I'll
second that Senator Shendo the
amendment districts
appropriation any objection to
the to the amended bill
amendment amendment see none of.
What was the last.
Appropriation does not
appropriation of four seventy
four seventy four I think it's
another one yeah I'm just it's
just so strict to to say
sections of the in.
I have something down on a
different shift so it's on your
bill but I guess let's go over
the let's more on.
The amendment Senator do you
want.
Senator do you want to read them
and it in the closing the margin
State.
That the amendment that's a then
we have twenty eight point one
is that correct.
The right yes I know the show
yes you do Sir.
Thirty one min ago amendment
this month so this amendment to
this bill I'm sorry on my list
it had struck the appropriation
and so I'm sorry I apologize for
that I didn't have the men met
in front of me so the amendment
As the emergency clause to the
bill correct page one line
fourteen so we're on correct and
I guess that's the start from
the beginning.
I move that we accept the
amendment as corrected here for
discussion purposes I'll second
that Senator the amendment
struck as emergency clause to
the bill.
Correct any questions on the
amendment.
See none can have a motion on
them and some of Mister John
motion from Senator Campos
second from Senator Padilla.
Any objection to the amendment
amended bill center you want to
explain the bill to us thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee of.
Senate Bill of.
Four seventy four addresses and
equity that was created by the
legislature in twenty twenty one
the legislature changed how the
in lieu of tax payments pills
were distributed to school
districts but counties or
municipalities that issue in
additional revenue bond for
renewable projects prior to two
twenty one The law required that
the bill payments be distributed
hundred percent of the school
district in which the project
was to Representative located
the twenty twenty one low
changed of requests by counting
Center financial visor fill
required to fill payments be
divided equally between all
districts located in account
or municipality issue the R. B.
for the renewable energy
projects.
One size fits all approach of
the twenty twenty one of the not
create an equitable solution for
splitting up the payments so
what the Senate though of four
seventy four amend C. additional
revenue act and County disproven
up on to distribute the required
bill payments based on a three
pronged approach that considers
the location of the project the
area of the the school district
in the county or municipality
the student Roman each school
district in the county or
municipality the changes in
Senate bill four seventy four
would not affect any other fees
issue prior to the twenty twenty
three those payments will
continue to be distributed as
they are currently being
distributed so that basically is
is the bill we've talked about
the amendment and so forth so at
this time I like to turn it over
to the John Broome who was a
superintendent of will schedule
a municipal schools of the head
over to see if the school.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
as Senator Shendo indicated this
bill does basically three things
first of all it clarifies the
mails to be included in the
calculation to determine how
much money is distributed to the
to the school districts
specifically it clarifies that
all the mills imposed by the
school districts within the
county or minute municipality
will be included in the
calculation of the average mills
imposed by the school district
there are five waves ways the
school districts can impose
mills the operational half
millimeter the SB nine two mill
levy the H. B. thirty three ten
melody the educational
technology levy and that debt
service military current
language can be interpreted to
include or exclude the
technology mills and the public
school building improvement act
mills it could result in
different interpretations across
the counties
and this bill will ensure that
there is a consistent
interpretation across the state
secondly the bill sets forth a
more equitable formula for
distributing the portion of the
funds to the school districts as
was indicated regardless of
where this where the project is
within the county the school a
footprint within the county the
size of the footprint or the
number of students the law
requires an equal distribution
of the bill payment
while the law was intended to
create a more equitable
distribution than the pre twenty
twenty one distribution which
only required bills to be paid
to the school district for the
project was located and actually
creates an equal but less
equitable distribution for
example in him is valley you can
look at the attachment to the F.
I. R. the second page of the
attachment has a chart and if we
take a look at him as valley
you'll see that prior to twenty
twenty one Hey miss valley would
have received an entire pill
project the entire bill for the
project being located in their
district which would have
generated thirty six thousand.
Eight hundred dollars for that
school district as a result the
aim is valley received only
seven thousand three hundred and
sixty dollars for the bill
payment of setting an equal
amount to other school districts
within income parable Tax base
such as APS.
In the case of quite County the
current law takes thirty three
and a third percent of the tax
revenue
generated in Harding County in
one very small district and
sends it to a school located in
Gwinnett county who has a much
more significant tax base due to
a lake that increases the
assessed valuation which
increases their bonding capacity
in capital projects for
improvement opportunities for
their school districts this
results in an outside school
district outside of the county
receiving thirty three and a
third percent of a tax payment
for which the footprint of that
school district in the county
representative about four
percent this creates a a
significant inequity and the
service only about six students
in that school district.
So the one asset the Harding
County has to generate
additional dollars for improving
our school is our land if we
take that away and give it to
other school districts and
municipalities without a
mechanism for those school
districts sharing with their tax
bases it seems very inequitable.
Okay I am This is a similar
moving on rapidly
Interesting that we understand
the issues so we propose that to
we allocate it based on what is
in the in the bill that is
before you and at this point I
will stand for questions let's
go to the audience anybody in
support.
we're just gonna take your
comments nobody's on zoom we
know that
I know we were pushed for time
because we got to get caught up
on some budget issues
circumference you have a
question just for a quick Mr Mr
chair so with emergency clause
this goes into effect how does
it affect the way bills is going
to be distributed.
At explicitly we put the
emergency we added the emergency
clause to be consistent with the
twenty twenty one language that
was in that bill because what it
does is it removes the
opportunity for the the
complication of IRB's that are
approved from January to July
following under this so it would
only implicated it would only
bring into effect those counties
that pass and I are require be
following the governor's
signature thank you Mr chairman
so any other questions Senator
Steinborn.
we has anybody here opposed to
the bill.
well I guess you meditate public
that it be helpful I'm glad you
caught me on that we're gonna
have the two people that are
support will take to people that
are opposed
want to come up.
Thank you for that cat Senator
okay.
I am good morning thank you for
hearing this and maybe he'll I
am the school board president
was going to also have the
luxury of also being the mayor
of Moscow.
As you know it is really small.
Efeturi the cafeteria because
while school so I have a lot
invested in this.
And the.
You know talking with other
schools do mornings Corona von
mount near him as well and
they're all in support of this
there superintendents are
But as you know with a small
school district just like most
got a you know we're seventy
five miles from the nearest
McDonald's for two hours from
the nearest Walmart so school is
not just a school in a small
town it is the lifeblood of the
town so the funding for schools
so critical for us.
So that's why this bill is so
important to us to make sure
that we can fund our school like
twenty two.
You.
Mr chairman ladies and gentleman
of the committee had James ray
of Harding County I'd like to
speak in support of this Senate
bill four seventy four as has
been pointed out by Mrs Brune as
well as a Mr BL our land is our
greatest resource in Harding
County extremely rural
I find the current law that is
in places quite to unbalanced
for the school district in which
the project is is currently
placed and to speak in support
of the amendments to bill for
seventy four thank you
what take two in opposition I
just remember every morning on
ABC taxation without
representation played on every
cartoon early in the morning so.
Sprinkle.
Mr chairman members step up to
the Mike in the same name that
way Mr chairman members of the
committee I am the Torrance
County manager my name is Janice
Perella I stand in opposition to
this bill Torrance County was
one of those worked very closely
with Representative small in
passing the legislation that
they're amending today we also
work very closely with leader
Townsend when it came to how we
came about the distribution of
what we use as far as the mill
levies and we were trying our
best to be as equitable as
possible and we can maybe this
is a.
Cut of how we ended up using the
mill levies because we use
something that included.
Of every mill levy that was
utilized by every school
district so some of the other
ones like the technology is not
in every one of the mill levies
for every school district in
them we try to get as close as
we could to a forty forty one
percent going to the school
districts because that is how
it's split up whenever you do
the mill levies for every tax
property tax bill that goes out
there's about forty one percent
that goes to the schools so
we're trying to be as close to
that calculation as we could
in regards to how this affects
Torrance County the reason that
we're pushing so hard on this
the last time that we visited
this in twenty twenty one was
because we knew that there was
an upcoming wind project that
was coming into the county where
was being built in funding
corona school districts we don't
have any Torrance County
students in those districts and
so we were trying to get as much
of an impact or making is
equitable if it project is in
Torrance County we wanted to go
toward Torrance County students
for there to be the biggest
benefit to our students and so
that was the whole basis behind
how it was calculated
so now we're looking at this and
if you go fifty percent into the
district where it's being built
in Torrance County for an
upcoming project that's already
been starting the negotiations
on it's going to be in fun and
Kronig in thank you split that
fifty percent what that does is
takes I believe the calculation
if I understand correctly would
be
fifty six percent of the school
distributions would be going
outside of Torrance County it
would not it be any benefit to
our residents that our students
actually tens schools so I'm so
Torrance County speaking in
opposition to this bill we
appreciate the
efforts in this I understand
everybody wants equitable.
and I haven't looked at all the
other counties and districts are
concerned has been mainly
Torrance County in this so I do
appreciate that I believe that
we have an amendment this can be
proposed that could help with
this as well but thank you
chairman members of the
committee for your consideration
thank you rob about one minute
quickly I know her quick talker.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm the
guy who started this whole mess
back in two thousand two with
Representative don would occur
so don't the the truth though to
me thank the reality is that we
started in two thousand two this
spans with was producing the
phone sorry Representative sorry
Robert both first American
financial adviser
The the little law was designed
to let basically the City of
Deming.
Do an industrial revenue bond
for a gas powered.
Generation thing those
unemployed but two hundred
people and put a bunch of new
kids in the Deming school
districts we thought that the
school district should have a
bite at the apple that's what
the original language it fast
forward to two thousand fifteen
two thousand twenty law of
unintended consequences strikes.
The location of the power
generation facilities wind
turbine solar's.
In the distribution of Pilz was
exclusively up to where ever the
school district boundaries were
written it had nothing to do
with the impact of the school
districts.
It was just random luck if you
put it over here and with the
bond school district the Corona
school district they got the
money even though the impact was
Espanola or excuse me a stance
he Moriarty mountain there.
The project was to do of the the
bill in two thousand twenty one
was to say let's do something
equitable.
If there's five school districts
in Torrance County all five of
the schools will get twenty
percent of the payment with
taxes on a three and a half
billion dollar transaction which
was done.
All the schools got a big bite
of that apple.
We for example we just did a a
four hundred twenty million
dollars worth of the industrial
revenue bonds for solar in Dona
ana county.
Three school districts had gaps
in the Los crucis split equally.
They supported the industrial
revenue bonds that were being
done down Dona Ana County
because they were getting money
that they would never have
gotten.
Give me a reverse in two
thousand.
Five hundred eighty million
dollar industrial revenue bond
bond for solar farm was done on
the hickory a reservation.
Twenty miles from does it.
A hundred percent of the pilot
payments.
Went to the heinous mountain
school district because that's
where the school district
boundary for credit.
It had nothing to do with the
impact it had nothing to do with
benefits.
So that's how the twenty twenty
to twenty twenty one legislation
came for what I would recommend
I don't.
If you would make one change in
this bill I would love this
bill.
I would go from opposing to
supporting at a hundred percent
and it's an easy one it will not
affect municipalities so great
until do what they want to do
with their local fuels and keep
all the money most Carroll could
work with their local
municipality and keep a hundred
percent the money in their
school district.
Yesterday emails were sent out.
Telling school districts that
they were going to get an equal
share under the fifty percent
yes and.
The problem is the language
doesn't do that.
If you made one simple change to
this bill.
One simple change if you go to
page six.
One sixteen and seventeen.
Like a school teacher Mr for
about the.
Go to page six one sixteen
seventeen if you delete such
words in which the project is
located.
Then you get rid of the vagaries
of where the school district
lines are drawn.
Then everybody shares equally in
that portion of then the then
that I'll I like the enrollment
component I like the other GIS
thing I think is a little tricky
but whatever.
With that Mr chairman senators.
Thank you.
That districts the bill we get.
questions from committee
members.
Well I think since I think thank
you Mr I mean it trying to
understand it and the.
I'm just curious Senator Stewart
the bills come from who who
crafted the bill would echo the.
The bill was created and
consultation with some other
superintendents that we're
struggling with this issue some
of which from the county that
he's talking about some of which
from
All the multiple school
districts who have projects that
are in the area so if I if I
could ask you to just put it on
this and see if I we understand
the concept is we have a lot of
explanation and we get lost
absolute in that I are peas in
a.
Basically at genesis is this.
Is this kind of sharing at
sharing the help money from a
project.
In what is now under law a wider
distribution.
Not exactly sure how but a wider
distribution to exclusively to.
The county where it's located
the school districts within the
county and the county
proportionately based on the
amount of the school district
that is within that county so if
the school district
representative only excuse me Mr
chairman members of the
committee if the school district
representative perhaps only four
percent of the county and the
rest of the ninety percent of
the school district lies without
without the county they're not
receiving a lion's share of a
taxes generated in a neighboring
county.
Is that all based upon that.
Hundred percent of the of the
asset is located in that county
actually it it is it is based on
the fact that if the hundred
percent of the asset is located
in that county then for in that
school district specifically
than that school districts would
receive the first fifty percent
of the bill payment the next
forty percent would be
distributed equally as mentioned
to to help alleviate this
problem and give some of it out
to the other school district
proportionately how they lie in
the county that helps address
the issues of the capital
expenditures that may create a
problem and some other school
districts when I talk about the
students that go from that that
are out that are implicated in
this from a perspective of the
version of students in a
specific area the school
generates the the SCG his help
support schools with any extra
students that are coming into
that area I would welcome that
piece to come into my schedule
so that we could benefit from
extra students so what this does
is this takes the opportunity
for a school district like most
care of or lack Hey miss valley
and keeps what their asset is
with their act with their
assessed at valued asset might
be within their school district
allows them to keep that but
still share forty percent of it
with other districts that have a
footprint in the county and
membership to school districts
that could have maybe a smaller
school district but have more
students they would receive the
lion's share of that portion.
Mr chairman of of just want to
know we're talking to him as
well simple Mr purple mention
Amos mountain Hey miss mount is
of a separate district Hey miss
valley this also separate
district so if you look at the
example in FY are we're the
project that was created of
under this law.
Previously under the previous
law thirty six thousand eight
hundred would have gone to a
misspelled the school district.
Right now when we're talking
about equity only seven thousand
three hundred and sixty is going
up occur keep public school that
has the least amount of
geographic presence in Santa Fe
County is getting the same
amount.
That's where the in equity
lines.
If you look at this if you fell
projected for him as well as
school district is going to lose
over a half a million dollars.
Over the next.
The current law.
Valley is made up of primarily
ninety two percent of the
students as to the color
Hispanic and they'd American
kids.
They have the least amount of
tax base so we'll talk about
equity listicle the let's take a
look in deeper at what that
means it's an equity and that's
what we're trying to fix here.
Thank you.
Any other questions.
So everybody should dig for gold
in their school districts.
I only have one school district
my entire cap.
Of what okay the other thing to
secretary for we've get faster
question sorry just want to make
sure that the I did get also a a
letter last night from the
superintendent of Donna put daca
of the monitor of the supports
this season Torrance County.
Mr chair I think we're.
Chasin around okay.
The the.
The question is school district
lines.
And each one of us knows the
school districts were formed and
I don't know how the hell they
were formed but they were carved
up some way way back in the day
and and.
There's not changing we don't
change of school district I.
And there's also a lot of in
equities in school district
life.
In my part of the world there's
a a physical impairment that
runs through that world and we
call it a caprock we call it a
up
through four hundred foot drop
there the school bus you really
shouldn't run up and down every
day.
Especially during the winter
time.
But if the school district line
of St home goes they have to run
up and down that cap broke data
to come schools kids in the
district of central.
Now.
Is that in inequity that that is
that a safety deal they don't
matter they were carved out
years ago so the school district
line.
There is that Matt county lines
whatsoever.
If we were smart we would
probably NATO and the county so
that they would be outside of
the county.
It just so happens that the one
wind project that was put in my
part of the world was in the
Texaco integrated school
districts.
And the at that time both of
those school districts
negotiated on these are beeps
and they were issued.
Through municipalities now the
county at that time didn't get
anything from our pre you're
talking about the county manager
Halid.
Because he didn't have any money
for the infrastructure that he
had built now it's different
there's a County our B. that
they deal with.
So Mr chair.
We're we're complicating this a
lot more than we should be
complicated I believe it should
be.
Wherever the land is.
And I'm supportive of bills
aware of your land is way over
the the school district is is
where that should be no
different than Albuquerque cut
public school having a lot more
property taxes taking collect
within Albuquerque to support
their school.
Intel was built with our beef.
So should of Intel our bees all
that money be spread out to
everybody assume and that's
incentive all County I could be
wrong if that wasn't Sandoval
County.
Several school districts in
Sandoval county should we spread
that out.
So how are these are not issues
out in the country you.
Your body in her nose at Arby's
function.
There's a way to to fund that
project it's a economic
development deal to finance
projects.
And now we'll use no to do
transmission lines that go
across several counties.
In each one of those counties
I've got a different school
district good for more may not
have a different school district
and.
So.
To me.
We're talking counties we're
talking school districts.
We should be concentrating on
the school district that this
bill deals with that does not
match county line.
At all if you so.
Mr chair of out of I know you're
very we need to get something
done here I'm going to yield to
you and.
As for the pass off.
Thank you senator for yielding
to me.
Other than ever and somebody's
in the deal to the chair.
Conversation.
Yeah I mean this is this is a
little different I mean it it's
I only have one school district
my County right but when it
crosses county lines right
that's the big issue is where
does the money go I think
Senator Woods it's something
that's very important is we're
giving our our B. for
transmission how we can engage
that right how many school
districts that as that line
gonna cross in New Mexico and
who's going to get it I mean.
Senator this go to judiciary or
any what it comes from and where
it went to the Senate tax more
Canadian than than here.
Senator Wirth have any comments
about no we did it everybody
voted unanimously for and Senate
tax.
Of living Senator Kernan and
senator Brendon in fact I think
senator Brent wanted to amend it
to go back to the old law.
Would be much more simpler.
What do Senator Woods talking
about I mean it's you know we're
we're trying to do this I DO
creating equity we're creating
more in equity.
In fact I think the previous low
as the Senator Woods mention the
school board even wait in.
Not a totally out.
So now it's just
feel.
So to me it's so there was a lot
of things that I think we were
really we under sure all of us
vote on this one question I was
going to play out but it's right
in our face right now and I
think senator prince Services go
back to the old law hello
immersive.
Motion from.
A motion for a new path second
by center was
let's call the roll.
We're not going to any more
bills are gonna hear agencies
and get caught up we're gonna
stay here long off the floor
because we do got to get.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share maybe.
Yes.
Dennis to maybe.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes there are many of
us yes.
They're very attentive ear
Center Burt was to explain as
well yeah I just
live in a joke anymore in that
day it had a big impact we lost
millions of dollars for years
years years years and we kind of
got that corrected and I think
we're on the right path here and
I just want to support the bill
but I'm not sure the formulas
right yet I think what's and
what's brought up I have a line
drawn and
in in the application of the
peasantry of mentioned there you
had some concerns some areas I
like she for the work on this
maybe not in the session but as
we go down the road to see if we
the the supplement I think some
of the folks from the that yes I
had some valid points to I hope
that we can continue working on
this and that because of what
we're truly looking for equity
I'm not sure we hit the mark
with this but I think we're in
the right direction thank you
Mr.
thank you center thank you HSD
next.
Thank you.
For members.
I have a good day good thank
you.
Going to Tucson yeah.
It probably
difficult for me to really you
know they say those things we
could.
Your next thing is the service
so he ran.
Comeback of the
move to reconsider the list.
It's
really together so there's a
close runner this weekend into I
I'm almost sure that.
There's you had about.
After that comment before.
RubyAnn unistar order that thank
you really know what the house
did and thank you Mr termination
of the packet in funny this is
agency code six thirty the Human
Services Department I'm RubyAnn
Esquibel with the legislative
finance committee we have with
the acting secretary Kerry
economy hell and Nicole internet
yes yes with that human DFA
budget division and I'm just
gonna go real quickly over the
phone with and then turn it over
so basically this is the change
you already heard this budget
for this is what happened at the
end of the house appropriations
and finance committee the took
the LFC recommendation is based
they updated all of the Medicaid
line item on the high level
which is in your packet based on
the January production for the
for the Medicaid program they
added five million in general
fund revenue to increase the
hospital rate increases they
added one million dollars for
rural and hospital supplemental
our contract payments for
underserved areas that if five
hundred thousand to the rate
increase for that role primary
care for the federally qualified
health centers they added an
additional some additional
revenue ten million from cap
counties part of Medicaid funded
three million for safety that
careful
they also removed twenty four
million from the health care
affordability fund and just let
that fit in the fund over there
and they moved that remaining
twenty ten point three million
there was thirty four point
three million in H. cap
healthcare affordability fund
they moved the ten point
remaining ten point three
million to the back of the bill
to a recurring special
appropriation to support
Medicaid.
At this living consultation and
compromise with the office of
the superintendent of insurance
they also added fourteen million
in fund balance from the tobacco
settlement program fund the
executive had recommended using
a full twenty two million in
those nonrecurring so the HSD
kind of split the difference
somewhat fourteen million this
language was added in the bullet
here about basically
ensuring that.
Fighters with that then we're
doing all the right increases
within the other bank loan
through the funding to providers
that's what that language is
getting to and then the last
bullet five hundred thousand was
added for Medicaid behavioral
health residential crisis
management transition services
seven hundred thousand in
general fund was added and
support division to help with
the and winding of all the
Medicaid clients a million
seventy six was added to the
child support enforcement
division for their request and
lastly hundred thousand was
added to local behavioral health
collaborative and this is part
of what you all year round the
health council than the local
planning efforts so those are
the changes Mr chairman with
that do you have anything that
okay really thank good morning
Mr chair members of the
committee just really quick on
behalf of the executive of
course I am contending for more
about this morning I do have a
couple of points on behalf of
the executive and that includes
the agencies just needs
additional support for admin and
this is in the areas of federal
grant manager grant monitoring
and optimization of federal
regulation compliances and
successfully dealing with rob
fraud waste and abuse and staff
recruitment and retention within
the agency this is really quick
and then I'll turn it over to
the cabinet secretaries thank
you I'm sector we don't have a
lot of time so there's going to
be a presentation issues with
language and.
Understood Mr chair and members
of the committee I will I will
be quick I know I have a
thirteen page slide deck but I
am just really on three points
today I'm I would like to thank
you all for the chance to come
back today and I know how tired
you are so I really do
appreciate that I also want to
recognize the leadership of the
legislative and the partnership
in collaboration our budget is
actually very good and that is
really due to
the agency has canals leadership
and director director Avid at
the LFC I'm so we it really does
reflect a lot of collaboration
so let's start just briefly and
I promise to be brief on slide
six so there you know House Bill
to really does meet the needs of
lower income New Mexicans we
feel it's very strong the
critical funding shortages were
addressed for child support and
income support some changes made
to support behavioral health and
that really brings us to a place
in the budget where we know we
can continue providing those
critical services that we need
to provide for New Mexico the
remaining three issues focus on
Medicaid and program support
specifically if if you can go to
the next slide which is slide
seven I just want to point out
there are two numbers that we
feel you we want to highlight
today the current language in
house bill two takes provider
reimbursement to
hundred and twenty percent of
Medicare for primary care
maternal child health and
behavioral health and a hundred
percent of Medicare for other
providers we're really excited
to see such a strong alignment
between the executive and the
legislative to invest so heavily
in our provider network we know
that they've been struggling
this will make a huge difference
for them but there is language
in house bill two that
specifically excludes our
ability to fund fully funded the
rates because of an exclusion
request related to federally
required non Medicaid medical
costs those costs include gross
receipts tax and premium tax
which we.
Have to build into the rates
cannot exclude those from the
range and so right now those are
specifically excluded in house
bill two so in order to achieve
what we believe is the federally
required standard we need an
additional eleven point five
million for providers an
additional four point seven
million for facilities that's a
total of sixteen point four
million Mr chair and members of
the committee if those rates are
fully funded HSD could be in a
position of having to reallocate
the rate increases to less than
a hundred percent of Medicare
for some providers which would
ultimately have a negative
impact on our work force here in
New Mexico.
if you go to slide eight just
very quickly I wanted to
highlight the efficiency in our
per member per month cost an
agency is in a very good job in
controlling Medicaid cost growth
even while covering the most
vulnerable New Mexicans in
almost all of the long term care
in New Mexico in particular I
just want to point out that are
permanent overall costs have
only increased by eleven percent
since FY fifteen and the
Medicaid expansion population
that was added under the
affordable Care Act in two
thousand fourteen is actually
less expensive today and when it
started so Mister chair in our
last year you did ask us to
point out our efficiencies I
just want it like that.
I'm on slide nine this is just a
real high level overview to sort
of reiterate the point that we
are required to make sure our
rates to our managed care
organizations are actuarially
sound which means that they have
to include those required taxes
assessments and reasonable
administrative costs
and I've been asked how much of
that goes to MCO profit as they
do want to clarify that only two
cents per dollar goes to and see
a profit the rest that ninety
eight percent is really going to
services a tax.
Okay so that is our Medicaid I
a request on slide eleven I
wanted to just highlight that
use of
early childhood trust funds in
the amount of twelve million to
fund Medicaid and rate increases
for behavioral health and
ten point three million from the
health care affordability
provide to also replace general
fund for the Medicaid program
it's our position the executive
position that these funds are
paying for important programs
and initiatives like pre K. in
child care assistance and
insurance affordability programs
for New Mexicans that are not on
Medicaid we know these
initiatives are important to all
of you because those funds were
created in statute redirecting
these funds to HSD it risks cuts
to those programs and with the
unwinding that we're heading
into for Medicaid you can see in
the map on the right other
percent decrease by county of
New Mexicans who are going to
lose Medicaid and those people
are going to need those
affordability programs that are
available because of that health
care affordability fund so our
recommendation is to add eleven
point five million in general
fund for the medical assistance
program and an additional almost
five hundred thousand for the
behavioral health rate increases
and ten point three million
million in general fund for the
medical Medicaid program to
replace the use of those funds
and use general fund and start.
And lastly Mister chair and
members of the committee on
slide twelve I just wanted to
point out that HSD still needs
funding for program support and
in an amount of just over a
million dollars
agencies program support budget
is less than half a percent of
our total budget and you can see
in the chart on the right there
that while we have seen our
program both budget grew by
almost five billion dollars
since two thousand thirteen or
admin budget has actually
reduced or stayed stagnant and
then cut actually I'm just I'm
simply asking to provide the
necessary administrative costs
we need to make sure that we can
optimize federal funding ensure
compliance with federal
regulations are prevent fraud
waste and abuse and recruit and
hire staff that we can meet our
budgeted vacancy rate and I will
point out the HSD has one of the
smallest administrative budgets
of all the agencies here in New
Mexico.
Mr chair members of the
committee just a couple of of
additional points one is that
the snap emergency allotments
ended yesterday that is a
reduction in food benefits that
New Mexicans will be receiving
we talked about that last time
but every dollar of of
expenditure in the snap program
generates two dollars here in
New Mexico's economy so there is
going to be there's going to be
head to New Mexico economy as a
result of those Emergency
allotments going away and
finally just a reminder about
our renew New Mexico campaign as
we head into the appointee that
is starting to Medicaid and one
is actually starting this month
and so your constituents are
gonna see those turquoise
envelopes go out and anything we
we can do to partner with you to
make sure that we do that
correctly and get the word out
about how they can stay on a
budget that they're still
eligible I would be happy to
partner with you and with that
Mr chair of fashion.
Thank you.
Eight billion dollar budget
remember that members we move
forward and how they can create
flexibility within a billion
dollars on the additional quests
questions from Senator Hemphill
thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your presentation I'm I
don't see anything specifically
to.
Recruit and retain health care
providers in rural communities I
know that my son for example has
many many specialist we've lost
a lot of specialists in rural
New Mexico I would love to see
an increase in provider rate
specifically for rural for
physicians who are choosing to
serve in rural communities like
a hundred and twenty percent I
don't know if that's something
that you would support Mr chair
Senator Hemphill yes we support
that those initiatives are
funded and so we actually have
alignment between the
legislative and executive to
they're just really focus on
gaps but yes those are those are
fully funded we have a strategic
plan for workforce development
that's really focused on we have
some initiatives in our upcoming
eleven fifteen waiver that are
really focused on rural
providers as well I'm so you
know I feel like there's there's
really no gap in those are those
are fully addressed.
Thank you Mr thank you.
thank you Mr chair Senator
Hemphill I also want to mention
that health for us was the
health professional loan
repayment program at higher
education department we would
love to get in contact with you
just so you can bridge that gap
so thank you.
Thank you let's go over some
more out of center what's inside
there too.
Yes this group quickly Mr chair.
Your reversions may be a pretty
small percentage but it.
According to my book at sixty
six million dollars.
So can we do within your agency
you're asking for some increases
here.
It looks to me there's adequate
money there maybe maybe make
some of our.
equipment there hello after the
budget is is passed out here now
do you have to wait till the end
of the year to make those bar
just minutes parking you do that
early in the year if you don't
think that you're adequately
funded are you have to wait
until that fund.
Line item goes down before you
can make that.
And I'm advocating because Mr
chair it's about planning it is
what it's about I understand
that you're what can you expect
to do because we're talking
about hired if the person
contractors whatever long term
to for to do these services so.
You understand my question my
query here is.
We're going to give you an
increase but you reverted.
And I don't understand.
Why you're asking for more I
guess.
Mr chair Senator Woods all all
interim then with your
permission Sir chair of
homeowners CFO currently grant
to fill in where I might not be
able to answer the question
fully however at you know yes we
we do have to wait that's part
of it we also are limited it's
my understanding by statute and
we're not able to move dollars
between programs we are not as
nimble there I think one of
those reversions are typically
due to fluctuations in Medicaid
enrollment for example but I you
know let.
You Mr chair with your
permission Instagram sort of
speak to that in more detail.
The.
Excuse me chair Senator
and members of the committee I
just want to point out that the
reversion that you're noticing
there most of that is for the
Medicaid program but that is a
reflection for fiscal year
twenty.
For that provision and that's
due to the idea in our that's
the run out of the Medicaid
program over the net over the
last two years of so that really
is reflective of the FY twenty
budget that was it used based on
the I do not.
Jewish church.
So what happened on twenty one.
In FY twenty one we still have a
ninety in our that a cruel is
still in play those at we have
two years.
From the from the from when it's
appropriated to us that's the
run that period for for Medicaid
so twenty one we still have an
ID and are still open that will
not expire until the end of this
fiscal year and you're not gonna
have any re versions at all on
twenty one at this point I eight
I don't have that information
for you but find out what that
balance currently looks like to
let you know with that that Mr
chair that would be good to know
how much they're expected revert
again and.
I may not know all there is to
know about.
Answer to that.
Mr chairman I think we
definitely will have reversions
a lot of the reversion to tide
are tied to IBM areas this
Graham said but also associated
with how much additional federal
money we're pulling in with that
declared public health emergency
we're going to be pulling in
those additional amounts through
FY twenty one and and well
actually through this calendar
year all these years so does
affect the amount so we'll see
some of that probably reverting
and then to answer your question
Mister chairman Senator was on
the B. A. R. the budget
adjustment
they can do budget adjustments
throughout the year and to give
you with an idea of the
magnitude because there's a lot
of money as you fat in this
department
in FY twenty
twenty two within the income
support division alone there
were there would be a ours to
move out of personal services
the budget six million dollars
from PS in the building into
contractual services and a
person so that's just one set of
being ours most of the B. A. R.
as in this agency here to bring
in federal funds but they
definitely do move around and
adjust their budget as needed so
I wanted to say that my last
point Mr chairman around
flexibility for the agency most
of the Medicaid program is the
one line item so you see in the
budget in the other class
category there is over a billion
dollars a general fund revenue
and all the federal so all of
it's in my mind I'm so that also
gives them flexibility to adjust
as necessary Mr chair members of
the committee I do want to
clarify this and because I don't
think we have the flexibility to
crossover programs so when House
Bill to specifically says that
the Medicaid budget is acts we
cannot transfer that money over
to the income support division
or to the child support
enforcement division four
program support I so it is our
position that we actually do
have B. A. R. flexibility within
the program side to move things
around Fund you know contract
for Medicaid for example with
Medicaid river.
In dollars but we cannot do that
across programs and that's why
we're really asking for
sufficient supportive programs.
Over the last that that federal
monies could just be transferred
ever damn direction you you've
got to have the.
Be an audit compliance of state
but the the question of god is
how many of your funds are
reverted every year is a hundred
percent of any fund.
That you have reverted so
there's there's some that are
reverted.
And as long as you have those
funds in that program.
They are.
Well.
I can say this because we just
discussed this the some can be
transferred about Barnes some
can't so.
You know it would be easier for
us if they were just all
reverted and then we could re
issue for you to where you
needed a.
How about that.
Chairman yes and and members of
the committee is and Senator
Woods let me just say that.
We would think and we would like
that we would be able to have
the flexibility when we see a
larger version for given fiscal
year when we have a need we are
coming to you for money however
we are not able to do that any
of those monies per DFA.
Of rules that we that we can
take money from the current from
a prior fiscal year and act and
that that into the current year
that has to be reverted up so we
do send that back.
To DFA which goes back into the
to the state Kaufer by which
then you guys can you all have
the ability to to make the
decisions of how you want that
to be we dispersed but what I'm
getting at there are some these
funds that are non reverting
that you keep.
Yes Sir we do have some non
reverting fund that's that's my
only point.
That that you know.
I know you're trying to manage
you've got a huge huge agency
you're trying to manage I
understand that completely and
you know we're arguing about
payment to start state it's not
the next may in New but in your
overall scope of your agency.
It's it's pretty small amounts
so.
Yes that's what I'm getting at
it.
Seems to me that we could do
something.
The mother asked the.
That's those guys of their makes
decisions.
Thank you very much.
The.
I don't have a list with anyone
else was here and also.
I thank you madam chair and the
secretary welcome
first question kind of jumps off
the page is the snap that losing
the staff budget.
Sir you are you telling us that
basically starting right now are
very soon we have New Mexicans
who were required to rely on
food supporter about to have a
reduction in benefits.
Madam chair Senator Steinborn
yes there's a there was a
federal program that started as
part of the pandemic we're of
people who have been receiving
for the bout about three years
additional food support almost a
hundred percent of our a snap
recipients are about to lose
those additional federal budget
and it's about thirty percent
those from an average amount of
what the loss will be and so we
are working really hard to
mitigate that impact and want
that that you've seen is that a
set of a governor's bills and
some other bills that support
would provide some additional
food support for New Mexicans
but that is a federal program
that is that is ended as of
yesterday actually.
One of the will be the
consequence if those funds are
right reply yes or provided by
the state will be the
consequence to the recipients
Mr chair Senator Steinborn the
they're losing those benefits
and those those are not going to
be replenished by the state it's
about I believe the number and
that our income support division
director of commemorative can
correct me if I'm wrong but I
believe the number would be
about thirty three million in
general fund permit on yes yeah
so what I'm wondering is what it
what are the actual benefits the
receive from the snap program
that lets it has gonna affect
their lives Mr chair of sorry
madam chair us Senator Steinborn
they will be losing about a
third of their benefits there
may be a slight in here about
that but they will still receive
their original snap benefits
that they're eligible for so
that the regular snap benefit
continues and sorry there's not
a slide in there I can get you
that information Mister chair
it's about I'm sorry madam chair
senator it's about thirty
percent of their budget their
food budget.
This Martinez can speak to that
for the yeah sure
Mr chair and Senator Steinborn
the impact is more to it than
just to just families this also
affects how grocers associations
are purchasing their food and
and how much of the cycle in
which their purchasing food and
so that is a pretty significant
impact as well as well as to the
economy so on average with the
emergency benefit an average
case or household receiving snap
food assistance receives a
budget was worth receiving a
benefit benefit about five
hundred thirty six dollars every
month for their family and
that's one hundred percent
purchasing power that benefit on
average is going down to three
hundred seventy five dollars so
that's about a hundred sixty one
dollar difference on average
every month per household and
it's about eighty three dollars
negative difference per
individual this this reduction
in benefit this loss of that's
correct this changed in December
of twenty twenty two with the
consolidated appropriations act
at the federal level that
separated the public health
emergency from some other
flexibilities waivers and
additional payment the states
were thank you so much and so
that Mr chair on madam secretary
are we requesting money in a sub
are supplemental appropriations
to fill this gap this year.
Yes so Mr chair us center there
if there are some additional
food programs that are on offer
they're not going to blow up the
entire impact of this and you
know so you've heard of food
bill earlier around at healthy
meals for kids there are quite a
few food bills we are also going
to have a senior supplement that
will be in effect we've actually
put together some proposals
around some additional food
budget we are working at the
federal level to make some
suggestions with the two
thousand twenty three farm bill
in circulation under Congress as
well for some additional if you
want to speak for that I'm just
gonna say Mr chairman the food
initiatives there's multiple
ones that are part of the food
initiatives coming out of the
health it's over twenty million
and then we'll see what happens
here in the Senate so there's
quite a bit of multiple problems
addressing it.
So just big picture again if
there if there is a demonstrated
shortfall based upon the need
based upon if we don't get this
funding paper only the budget
that we think is really that are
really important for needed to
alleviate hunger and their other
additions that would be good
enough so that we could help
boost up the supplemental
funding level
but if it's being funded in
other ways for me let's
aggregate it the other thing I
just wanted to say for you have
such a you know we're in a
timely fashion we're we just
have so much information coming
at us honestly it's challenging
the process at all it's really
helpful to us if for everybody
if you you can advocate kind of
the differences let's drill down
bottom line it on one page click
here of the key things we needed
advocate for I can be really
helpful because otherwise we're
waiting for trying to listen for
that and just be real helpful
and I would love to know just
coming out of this if you did
give it to us on a one pager
like here the the things that we
think you need to be beef up in
house bill two that be really
helpful for we know what those
are those are provider rate
increases other questions
sixteen million and five hundred
thousand there's two issues that
we're still working on I think
we've come to agreement on the
sixteen million that we're not
going to include the cost for
the M. sicos to do that and that
the provider rate increases are
I think correct me if I'm wrong
ten million or six million that
we need to fix with the provider
rate increases are your focus on
some good stuff Mr chairman and
madam secretary if you don't
mind that the that be helpful
for the rest of us with that
**** Mr chair Senator we do have
a one pager I've been walking
around with it every which way I
can not only have the staff I
will bring back your chairman
Senator the the budget Donna
will put put your staff put
together that great little but
we've actually sat and
reconciled all of those in that
in that little book she put
together thank you.
This this so Mister madam
secretary I know we had the him
seal of procurement.
When we when we gonna release
the rest of it I mean aren't
there.
More specific numbers out there
not just a total scoring sheets
for example.
Mr chair Senator if if you're
asking me to timeline for re
releasing the procurement yes
what I can tell you is that we
are on boarding a Medicaid
expert by contract to the of
those being run through I think
the ink is almost right on that
contract that individual is
going to assess the procurement
design and make recommendations
for next steps where we need to
address some of the concerns and
we will have those
recommendations in the next five
days.
Three to five or thirty forty
five days forty five days left
we will go on.
You could select right now.
Mr chair weren't they already in
an unselected.
I believe center that's what
happened I think the R. peas one
out I think the former secretary
did make the selections the five
top providers I think and then
for some reason they were
rejected and we're now back to
the RFP process but if we could
get the scoring I think that the
legislature may have that
authority
You look at the R. F. peas and
say there's a top five providers
You have to look at some
statutes and state Senator Ortiz
to make a selection since
elections were already qualified
in our of P. the top five.
Wirth we're.
Given where they were taken and
then projected and then brought
back and so that be an
interesting process for the
legislature to look at I think
our staff paying attention in
the back we have some statutory
attorneys and constitutional
turning that workforce we could
look at that question in the
legislature have the authority
if an RFP is rejected by some to
selected providers that
reflected in the RFP process and
So that would be a good question
for us to answer so you know why
why was this number and why not
have three years me why why we
come back to I'm just saying I
because I think I heard I I
don't know if there's three I
don't know if there is to of
there was a.
Okay well Mister chair I think
you know knowing what those
scoring sheets look like I think
that would be a.
May be useful to us while we're
still here in legislature
instead of after we're way gone
I think Donna somebody's paying
attention or exchange somebody
in our staff so the bill will
start.
Milling around prices are done
in the next ten minutes to see
what the statutory law is on our
of peas and and how that
selection process is done and
that the legislature does have
the constitutional authority to
select those are P. providers
and.
Sen Ron Griggs thank you Mr
chairman in on that point before
I I had a just a quick question
because I know time is of the
essence here but on that point
in I came into the legislature
twenty years ago we didn't have
MCO slide please back then and
of course things yes the
department was smaller and so on
but the needs were always great
they just become greater and I
guess one of the questions that
I always asked not we understand
it's not simple to make a change
this big it would impact of
humongous number of areas but I
always wonder when we went into
this do have NCOs manage as they
do for health care but we just
you know I wonder why we can't
just go back and start looking
not an immediate transition I
understand it would be hard but
at least hard looking at how it
would behoove the state to run
it ourselves the Human Services
Department instead of hiring
people to come in under contract
you know many of them are not
from here many of them are as we
know from out of state or
contractors or what whatever may
be and I'm not saying they're
not qualified I'm just saying
that we have qualified people
here in New Mexico to that can
come in and fill positions to
administer these programs we pay
millions and millions as we know
I'm preaching to the choir for
these NCOs to manage our hiring
needs that we have here when we
haven't even looked at the
possibility of transitioning out
of some kind of maybe system
where it would make it to not
just huge you know the impact
for everyone but I've always
just wondered about that and and
I I'm gonna leave that again
because I think there's
something to be said for that
there's no reason why our
departments can on their own do
this if we plan it correctly and
mitigate the impacts as I said
but thank you so much and then
Mister chairman I just have a
quick question because of time
Kerry thank you for stepping up
like this and can I think.
To our staff on health care
providers and there's been one
of my concerns farmers rural
healthcare clinics because we
know they've always missed out
on signing I noticed here that
is all we have are we have ruby
maybe you can tell me is a
million dollars for this
hospital supplemental contracts
for underserved areas is that
for all it says here five
hundred thousand so it's even
less for rural primary care
that FQHCs what we call Mr
chairman and Mr chair Senator
Rodriguez the amount that was
in.
The LFC with the million to
raise the rates for the the risk
because the FQHCs and then they
got an additional five hundred
thousand in the house
appropriations and finance
committee and I think that what
you're referencing is there ask
isn't like another five hundred
thousand to get to two million I
see okay so this will get it to
to won't get it together the
impasses that one point five
million.
Okay I see are I would just need
to look at that because we know
that not only during the COVID
but these are areas very under
served as this even mention here
that just don't get funded and
that's where they need the most
really there's just no services
thank you so much Mr chairman
thank you ruby thank you me ask
why we went to four inch heels
instead of always had three.
I did we expand that for an
additional cost to the state
instead of just sticking with
the.
You may not know care you may
know.
Mr chair we we have three MCOCA
so we have three we have Blue
Cross blue shield Presbyterian
in western sky so we actually
have three that number has
fluctuated over the years based
on the results of procurements
in the past and as you know
we've had different delivery
systems we had separate and CIOS
for managed care for behavioral
health over the years we had
separate ones for a long term
care so it's just it's you know
there's there's typically have
been three there was at one time
there were four but that that's
been quite a few years ago and I
think in the last procurement it
was evident there was a very
clear during demarcation around
the scores around the three that
were selected in the last
procurement which was in two
thousand nineteen and then two
thousand inmates require is
calling for for why the
expansion because that's an
additional cost us right by
maybe a hundred million dollars
who knows is in your department
what MCO overhead costs are
that's a hundred million dollar
cost in health care and and why
why is it proposes for now what
is that me and you know that.
Mr chair us when.
I think it was the the current
procurement that was just
terminated had an evaluation
report that was based on the
recommendations of the committee
but as you know that that that
has been canceled there were
there was a recommendation that
report tab for and see us but
but is you know since been
terminated so if you got still a
question that will be resolved
in the next procurement.
I think Mr chairman why your the
confusion is that there were
five that had applied and I that
were scored and then the
recommendation that was
overturned was for the for.
Turn for the formation
researcher the recommendation
for for was overturned so what
is
it yes it was canceled the term
at the the procurement was
canceled was not an overturning
of the procurement just really
want to be clear about the
terminology we're using their it
was canceled and so there was a
recommendation there were five
overall bits there were four
that were recommended by that
evaluation committee subsequent
to that there were concerns
around the scores and the TIRS
the it was the decision was made
to cancel or terminate that
procurement so in that scoring
was a termination was the I were
to highlight the three that
we're gonna be selected were too
high what was the reason for the
termination.
Mr chair I can't speak in detail
about the details of the scoring
we will get you the evaluation
report that you're asking for
there were concerns expressed
about low scores in certain
critical areas almost across the
board on all bidders in certain
key areas that are very
important to the Medicaid
program and that raise concerns
about the design of the earth P.
and some of the deliverables and
the R. F. P. I think it's the
obligation of the executive when
your about to award contracts
that are worth billions of
dollars that you make sure those
NCOs can deliver services that
are required for Medicaid and
that's really where it stands
today food we're gonna re issue
it to make sure that we.
On board the very best centers
for New Mexico.
So I I guess we'll have to see
the screen and she's but the the
problem becomes when you have
only five bidders and and
getting contracts we know about
that I know that goes right you
try to be right you don't try to
leave money on the line but
you'll try to over expand money
and so can they come back
increase those costs on insurers
can they come to the Department
health center there was a low
scoring something and they knew
that was a priority and they
knew how they scored how you
scored to the sheet can they
come back and say Hey well we
miss this in the R. R. P. and
that is are a P. have allow them
to come back for additional
money in that.
In that category Mr chair
members of the committee
That that's what we're being
very very careful about this
because we are about to report
care and we don't want to reveal
sort of across the board or give
any hints to offers in terms of
how they need to improve they
really need to come bring their
a game with their responses and
I think that's our position they
can't increase costs in fact you
know the rates are set based on
actuarial soundness and so the
rates are establishments on
what's in the Medicaid benefit
package and what it costs to run
that benefit package and so
there's you don't know they
can't comment and increase their
costs to the state so if they
were low and being section why
wasn't that one just thrown out
said okay well the next one to
move to is the next time just
want to the next cost and one of
one or two instead of saying
we're killing the whole thing
and come back in between the
opening you would look at state
okay here's one awardee and
here's one when you come back in
our opinion center right you
guys need to tie your numbers to
second and third.
Why why do we just say everybody
start over again Mr chair I
think we did consider other
options this was considered to
be the option that allowed the
greatest reassurance that we
could really make sure that we
get the best.
This qualified vendors Senator
Rodriguez thank you Mr chairman
of serious of all I'm trying to
visualize here what is the total
number of that we pay for out of
state for NCOs that we hire all
these contracts together for
managed care what is the total I
don't want to use I. three
hundred eighty five million or
something back then but I don't
know different ones Mr chair
it's a much higher and now
about.
Eighty percent of the Medicaid
population is in managed care
and so it's about when the state
I'm gonna have to turn to our
CFO here but I think really and
it's about it about it almost
decide the billion about nine
hundred and thirty child
million.
The federal yeah so it's eight
billion dollars madam chair
eight billion Mr chair probably
close to eight billion dollars
in benefits and I remember when
we first started it was the
total I think maybe it excluded
some of them when I got the
number but I remember item
number three hundred eighty five
million a back then we thought
oh my gosh this is too much and
because our revenues were so
small that and now eight billion
that's that's a lot you know but
I understand the services
provided a crucial but like I
said we probably need to start
looking at the transition at
least to see how and whether it
will be a palette now the
palatable but benefit of the New
Mexico and the people we serve
so anyway I'll leave that Mr
Chairman thank thank you.
We look forward to seeing.
Where somebody a billion dollar
contract to.
Department of Health.
Well because from the start.
I
Going to department heads.
You know what.
I did advise Center work that we
need to stay late and committees
off the floor.
Somebody needs to leave we're
just hearing agencies we're not
going back and.
LA that's.
Very quick Mr Chairman so on
your packets on page two and
three is the high level for you
can see the executive the LFC in
the agency recommendation which
is adopted the LFC
recommendation in total it was
twenty five twenty million above
the twenty three operating
budget HFC recommended
significant increases for the
apartment including ten point
two million for the DD waiver
rate increase four million for
facilities one point eight
million for medication assisted
treatment two million for an
alcohol misuse grants program to
local governments HFC also
recommended a three million
dollar transfer from ECECD
revenues for school based health
centers and one point nine
million in non recurring also
for school based health centers
and with that I'll turn it over
to DFA for an additional comment
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I will touch on a
few points
the first is for the school
based health centers where
requesting about five point
eight there's like Kelly had
mentioned there was about three
million from the early education
trust fund and about one point
five in a special for start up
costs we also request a need to
cover the gap for substance
misuse or alcohol program there
is.
The amount of three million
currently and funded and state
drug importation needs of a
hundred twenty thousand to help
lower prescription drug costs
for consumers and then marketing
to support the executive
recommendation of five hundred
thousand and eighty point five
special that includes my
comments on behalf the executive
and I'll just turn it over to
the agency thank you Hey thank
you so much madam chair members
of the committee Mr chair sorry
members of the committee and
thank you so much for having us
today and really grateful for
another opportunity to address
the committee really please that
the executive and the House
Appropriations finance committee
recommendations are pretty close
that takes a lot of work and we
really just want to stress that
our mission is really to to
support a healthy and safe place
to live in New Mexico and really
improve health outcomes for New
Mexicans also what we just
really want to highlight is that
our state fiscal twenty twenty
four budget request includes
increased funding for important
public health of prevention
programs and services as well as
improvements for administrative
infrastructure that's in this
two pager that we have here and
we just actually just want to
highlight the top four kind of
reckon of things that we're
concerned about on this the top
line is a school based health
centers as well New Mexico is a
short it's just state you know
the version there aren't a lot
of us primary care physicians
the that we're leaving a lot lot
of us leaving the state and so
funding at five point eight
million will really support
those seventeen additional
schools in in communities
throughout our state here for
new schoolbased health centers
or expansion of services to
really increase access to
primary care and behavioral
health care services for
children in these critical
access areas are school based
health centers provide some of
the only access to.
Well health care for children
and I have been a school based
health center provider myself in
some of the schools have been
going on of course for like
twenty five years still so being
able to have this base five
point eight million recurring
sustainable funding will be
really really important to our
schools especially our children
to be able to access care and
the state
okay and then the other one is a
substance misuse one we just
wanted to share that view also
be working on funding to
actually increase access to a
screening and programs are
effective for preventing alcohol
misuse we have the highest
alcohol related deaths in the
country so we really want to
address that on the third one
that we really want to highlight
is on your second pages number
five hospital Medicaid increase
transfers to HSD thank you know
our trauma centers in the state
we have a lot of trauma in New
Mexico the really struggling to
maintain staff and getting
supplies this money is actually
it's it should be one point five
million here the one point five
million would be transferred to
HSD would result in a total of
six million in federal funds and
a total of seven point five
million so who doesn't want that
extra money to actually really
help us to to retain staff in
rural hospitals to continue
education from our communities
and paramedics at the scene that
we have a the reduction in those
groups and then outreach and
things like stop the bleed kits
and things to help trauma
patients so that would be that
one and then the the next one
under special print edition
requests that's number one under
homeless medical teams that
would be additional four million
dollars in the special and that
would allow us to actually
support the people experiencing
homelessness in New Mexico with
Google teams throughout the
state to address primary care
behavioral health harm reduction
and and accessing Medicaid.
On those are the top things that
we would like to highlight today
thank you center complex thank
you very much Mr chairman and I
really appreciate the the
additional not only support but
the emphasis in terms of the
school based health clinics
those are gonna be very
important to us as we move
forward
between that and then also
talking a little bit about the
substance abuse with the opioid
resources that are available
through the AG are those dollars
tied in in anyway as we move
forward to provide these
particular services that you
that you're aware of thank you
Mr chairman.
Mr chair yes Senator so three
point five million from the
opioid funds is dedicated to the
O. H. to work on both medication
assisted treatments in general
and then one million of that is
dedicated for tribal areas to
receive more
Matt services.
Mr Chairman going back then to
the school based health clinics
and over the years we've plans
particularly in some of the
smaller communities as an
example and Caepio to hopefully
initiate one of the school based
health clinics but with the
resources that you're seeking
the and I know the news all the
resources what what what are
your thoughts in terms of the
the minimal amount in additional
resources to expand the school
based health clinics that you
need is this is this the the
bare minimum or what what what
are your thoughts on that thank
you Mr chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee and Senator Campos so
the five point eight million is
the minimum we need to expand to
the seventeen schools throughout
the state that includes areas
such as Albuquerque Espanola
farming ten Las Vegas Moriarty
there's just a whole series of
seventeen schools that would
like to expand to and that we
don't find all of the funding we
find the right you know we
provide the initial funding for
the planning and starting up of
the clinic and then their
building was and help with the
rest of the planet but in order
to have this five point eight
million on going that would help
with the sustainability so that
if we just had the one point
five million just for the
planning the special you know
then we would not be able to
continue with these clinics on
afterwards so it Mr chairman
over the years as I've worked to
not only plan but implement many
of these these health clinics
the other issue becomes do you
have the capacity to help the
school districts to grow and to
develop these so these
particular school based health
clinics and.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Campos yes we
do on the part of this will be
actually increasing our staffing
to be able to support these
communities and the clinics and
help them to you know have the
support the training the
navigation that they need in
order to continue and be
sustainable thank you very much
Mr chairman so I just fully
support the schoolbased health
centers so expansion of course
the substance misuse resources
to continue to grow and build
our of recovery centers as we
move forward thank you Mr chair
thank you I don't see anybody
else center of race thank you Mr
and I'll be quick thank you for
your presentation but I just had
a question on the school based
health centers I notice that on
this first page Kelly the three
million transfer is from the
early childhood trust fund
revenue which would be recurring
that than the one point five
this nonrecurring and I guess
two things for me it is one that
I had heard that perhaps you
know this may not be the best
distribution of bump into
schoolbased health centers that
we need to have a different form
of funding because apparently
the early childhood trust fund
it wouldn't it would not fit
within that because the fund is
intended for a different purpose
and the governor may end up
vetoing this amount which leaves
a school based health centers
was zero have you discussed that
are are we in.
Where are we on it Kelly any
idea I just want to make sure
they don't come out with zero if
its veto and then also that the
non recurring they need to have
recurring dollars to school
based health centers are ongoing
that for one year tell me yes Mr
chair so that the two separate
things on this a nonrecurring
initially you had been looked at
for some of the
vehicle purchases for like giant
buses for school based health
center so that rural communities
co chair and that that was
really kind of the intent is on
that nonrecurring so they could.
Right you don't need recurring
to purchase those vehicles but
they're very expensive
but obviously the agency would
have privy of of how they want
to use that nonrecurring with
that was the intent behind that
secondly as it comes to the
early childhood education fund
we did have a discussion a
robust discussion and Senate
education yesterday about the
uses of those revenues to the
Human Services department in the
department of health you know
the LFC and HFC have the
understanding it was a robust
discussion all summer with the
LFC that there was additional
children services throughout the
state that serve children
revenues that should go to
children that were necessarily
located at the early care and
education department because
they don't hold every single
service that serves children in
that single department and so
both the LFC and HFC discussed
that those were proper uses of
that fund to transfer for
children supports programs.
Okay I think it's something we
probably need to circle back and
and discuss what I don't want is
just made however we do it is
great but we want to make sure
that whatever we do we do it in
a way that's going to stick
because the schoolbased has with
these health centers will be
left with nothing I hear that
there's some seventeen of them
that are plans to develop and
build and so on and we don't
want those left there on the
ground thank you all right
that's all I have Mister
chairman Senator.
The Mr chair on the.
Each of the nine eleven.
insist Revenue replacement for
family planning support what
revenue are replacing replacing
the.
Okay Mr chair members of the
committee and Senator share so
received reproductive health
funds we originally got a
certain amount every year from
the federal government however
this past year we have a
production in the funding for
the family planning methods from
the federal government and as a
result we were short that amount
that your that your addressing
we just need that to actually
find the family planning methods
of what we do and support this.
madam secretary.
And what.
What are family planning methods
that will pay for so the federal
government pays for.
Oral contraceptives to the
pills.
And so those are the three
methods that we give out as well
as con.
Mr chair.
Because this is now state money
instead of federal money.
We use it for anything different
than what you just said.
Mr chair
Members of the committee and
senator Sherrod no we will not
use it for anything different
than what.
Which is replacing the federal.
On that point really does that
money go to like my wife had the
grads program which is all the
young girls have babies and and
all that so is that money
funneled to the three PT
program to help them Mr chair
that funding is not for that
that specific funding for the
medications that we the oracle
of family planning methods we
have other we have other funds
that do that program Senator
Steinborn Mr chair and.
Good morning question on the
school based health centers just
for my education tell you maybe
the best answer this but do we
additional H. cost share with
schools to fund school based
health centers is that other
funded.
Is that all the O. H. so Mr
chairman of the committee the
best way we should be funding
school based health centers it
is to give some start up funds
to get the physicians trained in
the in the room operational and
then most of those services
should then be billed either to
Medicaid or to private health
insurance is so in that
mechanism it should be a cost
sharing for the actual service
delivery it's hard to stand at
this clinics without some type
of state initial support but so
Mister are they all.
contracts with private or
nonprofit providers who are in
schools is that what they are
the employees of the school
district Mr chair chair at
prefer the agency I I believe
it's mostly contracts but I
don't.
okay yes Mr chair Senator
science Steinborn do you want to
answer that question
aria.
Your name Arial I am I am the
policy director at U. H. thank
you for the question Senator
Steinborn so the the department
supplements the funding that's
required by about forty percent
and then the school based health
centers actually an arrangement
between either an FQHC or just
some kind of other provider that
that the school gets into a
relationship and contract with
so the department of health is
sort of ancillary to that
relationship we have a model we
subsidize but we are kind of
removed from that arrangement in
most ways.
Mr chair when we're point of
this committee should also
consider in the future is to
make sure that for these clinics
to be actually really usable for
the community they need to be
open year round and not
necessarily just during the
school hours and that's
something we should look in the
future so that they can be a
real community benefit.
And you know Mr chair we have in
Dona ana county I guess I was
talking about earlier I got a
call during the session but the
problem where property the
pandemic we have one provider
David archer that was in for
schools and and doing New Mexico
they had staff there and now
they have one roaming person
apparently you have to make an
appointment is not really is
desirable for maybe it's
helpful.
So well this is all really good
to know I am.
Yes I too want to make sure I
think this is super important
with what we're learning about
kids in the mental health crisis
going on with kids right now and
we talk about kids not having
meals and that's so important
and we're thinking big order
putting up big ideas are
aspirational I think this is
also on that level frankly for
the mental health and bullying
and we talk about school
shootings I mean these are like
first responders these are I
mean this anyway super helpful
but it feels to me like we're I
don't know if they're having a
fight for funding that really we
should be prioritizing at a
higher level.
So that's why I'm asking these
questions and also want to
elevate this issue because I
hope we can come together to
make that a priority you know
similar to other issues that
we're doing like hunger which
should be the highest priority
but.
And so thanks for helping with
that the other question I would
ask is is this bill the rural
health fund.
You know I asked the question of
it to use that fund to help
start up school based health
centers and I feel like I got
kind of different answers what
what's your answer to that hello
here Department.
It is a quandary.
if it's a private provider in
rural area and they're suffering
losses I mean it seems like they
they fit all the secretary I do
agree that that language that
bill has to do with hospitals on
to that might be the limit to
know does it okay so I'm just
not into because I don't know.
Mexico and.
This microphone array.
question Senator Steinborn
toward I'd love to mend okay.
so my understanding is that if
the funding that's a going to be
available to two hundred million
right so I was proposes that
it's only twenty million now
house bill two that is so it can
be theoretically could be
received from something like a
school based health center
because you're talking about
medical entities that are in
partnership in providing these
clinics and their run very often
by FQHCs and it doesn't just
apply to new construction I
think it's also really focused
on providing services so any
increase of services would also
be eligible as my understanding
right on and I think Miss chair
the the problem with maybe the
school based health centers if
the funded and writing ways
that's the complicating factor
to where they may fall out
eligibility with that program so
I don't think we should.
Which pass the Buck on that
either and say well there we go
we we got that covered well not
really so anyway I just hope
that we make this a priority
funding for this appreciate the
O. H. being here today thank.
center would Center Burton gonna
wrap this up we're gonna try to
do our PSBs so they start voting
on the floor we're gonna leave
pretty quickly so Center woods.
My question has to do with line
fifty three.
In this budget.
And.
I've had some people question if
that was.
No money to for the provider
services and that the the waiver
so can you.
Add to that question for me yes
Mr chair and members place so
so the providers for duty
waivers actually on lines forty
one through fifty six the line
fifty three is for licensing
oversight which is a different
program also some you might hear
called DA try and that's really
for their internal employees to
have some oversight of that
provider network not necessarily
the directs certain the that's
all funding direct services that
do we were.
Okay.
Well back to my original
question.
I'm do you assume that this is
adequate funding for.
All those what we put on the do
the less than now are we
servicing those people.
Mr chair members of the
committee so there is a very
robust financial plan for super
allocation and most of that bill
to back fill the federal
revenues the drive federal
revenue allocations that we got
is going to be we're going to
discuss that and the next
legislative session because it's
not gonna hit this fiscal year
we have sufficient funding for
this fiscal year to serve those
of persons coming into the
program there's a start up time
the money for DD in this
recommendation is for a provider
rate increase.
Okay center this is not the
total budget for DD waivers this
is the this is the increased to
PED waivers just so you know a
total.
Senator Burt thank you Mr
Chairman just a quick question
Territorians and Harding do not
have school based health centers
why.
Why did they not why do they not
so I'd like I said every every
community.
I'm sorry Mr chair and.
I think the community makes
their own.
Thanks to kind of build up the
school based health centers and
so those counties if we can work
with them more we would love to
help them develop their school
based health centers but it's
part of a plan that they develop
a plan and then I don't know
aria.
Mr chair and senator Byrd so
it's really up to the school
itself to apply for this through
the O. H. and some of them
actually should not all school
based health centers are
supported by DO age some school
districts and schools choose to
actually go outside of the D. O.
H. network and I and go straight
into a contract with the medical
provider could be a university
an FQHC it could be at lots of
different types of arrangements
that they might go into that is
not going to touch on what do
you H. does so if you have a
school in these particular
counties it would be important
for to get sort of take their
temperature see if they're
interested in doing that again
what we're trying to do also is
provide flexibility at the local
level in the D. O. H. model to
support them in the ways that
they see fit for their use
communities there so but please
let us know it we get the
interest from the school that's
how it starts okay so
superintendent with the key to
that call would be the one okay
thank you Mr chairman thank you
thank you we're gonna get into
let me just question Kelly do do
we can this three thousand
dollars from ECECD's child trust
fund where are we have we tested
that language with an attorney
and statutorily and LFC.
Mr chair and so we did have our
internal a.
Lawyers at all to look and see
it felt fine the medicine that
it was legal
it was a similar thing happened
last year in the governor did
veto appropriations to other
agencies.
So it's legal but there's what
is the HSD filling on this Mr
chair we believe that because of
the history of it being vetoed
in the past that of five point
eight million dollar allocation
of base funding would be more
sustainable and better for our
children.
For so then we would need to
increase the I think there's a
bill out there to increase the
deductions out of the trust fund
we can reduce those into an
offset to some other thing and
switch that money around so when
that bill gets here we'll
probably looking at early be
increased early childhood trust
fund and move this around a
little bit the you know School
boasts Health quit Senators I
think they're really good but
the but the problem is that
everybody has a man everybody
wants one right.
for us in which specially in
rural New Mexico right Raymond
there's no doctors of that is
school based health clinic
students can go there can the
student get a sports physical at
one of these yes Mr chair thank
you because it during this the
summer you see all the football
players players at the local let
doctor in there getting all
other sports physicals already
goes down to the locker room it
doesn't but they could do these
at the school for.
Yeah we used to do them and now
when I was schoolbased health
doctor thank thank you for your
presentation and we're gonna do
supplemental are doing P..
PSP's.
Eight six seven five three oh
nine.
Just remember if they if they
call us their voting we're.
They're out there like greased
lightning.
Thank you Mr chairman that's
what I just very brief.
Mr chairman members my name is
Connor Jorgensen in the LFC
analyst for higher ed.
You're being handed out a packet
right now that should include a
cover page letter
one summary sheet and then a big
should that details all the R.
P. S. P.'s so after the hearing
last Friday of the committee
requested that.
Additional R. P. S. P.'s that
additional scrutiny be placed on
our PSBs the committee came up
with a couple of guidelines
essentially they were that
all our PSBs of two hundred
thousand dollars or below
regardless of function should be
rolled into I. Angie it capped.
Medical and behavioral health
PSP's out.
if they were expansion otherwise
it rolled them in.
It also excluded all the
qualified government agencies
from inclusion into the I and
she.
Additionally the institutions
could provide any sort of
justification for Y. and R. P.
S. P. should be excluded from
the consolidation effort the
upshot was that eighty five are
PSP's
We're rolled up into I. Angie
that was done based on the
feedback received by Senate
finance committee staff from the
institutions that totaled out to
twenty point eight million
dollars moved from the.
R. P. S. P. lines up into I NG
seven take a look at this one
page table that's what that's
showing you is the high level
view of the impact of moving
those eighty five R. P. S. P.'s
up into I. Angie and then the.
Detail of what individual R. P.
S. P.'s are affected is here and
you can see that
The impact of the over under
so for example University of New
Mexico take a look at line two
in C. six point eight million
dollar increase that corresponds
to all of the reductions in our
PSP's starting at line thirteen.
Mr chairman that's the overview
of the pack in front of you.
and I just want to Mr chair
members of the committee
Point out that on the right hand
column of the spreadsheet that
is where all of the provided
justifications that were sent
over to us from all the
institutions are to show which
one of the programs were not
moved into I. N. G. so those are
their justifications there.
Mr chair members of the
committee I will kind of go over
a couple of points while you're
reading the material I would
like to provide you with some
brief background for I've PSP's.
Their research and public
service projects calmly known as
RBS reviewed each year in the
interim and preparation of the
higher education department's
budget recommendations the
committee is comprised of
members from the higher
education department the
department of finance and
administration the higher
education and LFC.
The committee the committee
excuse me as responsible for
reviewing performance measures
and outcomes for the R. P. S. P.
line items as far as those line
items that are listed as
categorical within this proposal
we kept the funds in the section
categorical I line items
includes athletics educational
pipeline initiative on
educational television and radio
the executive agrees with the
guidance provided by a Senate
finance committee for the our
PSBs in regards to rolling small
R. P. S. P. items into I in need
to streamline the higher
education budget in general
however another consideration
that we request as including all
designated centers of excellence
in our PSBs to allow for the
executive and the R. P. S. P.
committee to continue monitoring
performance measures and
outcomes for each center and
special special can.
Specialty excuse me we must also
be cognisant of student services
that are in line items in our
PSBs sometimes there are
statutory obligations associated
with their funding such as all
central at the university of New
Mexico or federal matching fund
requirements we should also look
at keeping pilot projects in our
PSP's and additionally there are
agricultural line items at NMSU
that should continue to pass
through our PSBs to be
administered to the department
of agriculture and act science
centers lastly the higher
education department will be
reviewing sustainable funding
measures and higher education in
the interim focused on the I. N.
G. and there will also be other
components as well for our PSBs
I think you for your time and I
turn it back over to you Mr
chair.
Thank you.
Questions from committee members
I believe we have all the
universities in the room and so
let's Senator Steinborn you want
to have someone in the thank you
Mr and so I guess I just have a
question for my education so.
It's interesting first of all
the the decision process about
which ones are educational and
which ones are not get folded
dies G..
You can look at the less and you
can make a case that a lot of
them are aspect of education.
So that's just kind of
interesting to me but.
But a question for you is when
we roll it into when we roll and
and I NG.
Is that start officer base
budget for the coming year or is
that really funding the kids
jeopardize.
By doing this.
Mr chairman and Senator
Steinborn so the way the the way
to finance the financial aspect
of this works right now is that
the money is just.
The money moves up there are no
cuts.
the issue with actually
eliminating the R. P. S. P. line
item itself.
Was that once that happens
that funding is now at the
discretion of the institution
that receives the funding.
So my question though again
thank you for that is does that
start now for this year with
there's gonna be no cast because
it's can be folded into the the
number is.
Or potentially is but moving
forward if that becomes part of
their Judy is that.
It does that number start offer
LFC purposes built into their
base I and she graduated.
Or that school board today to
they get subtracted that number
when they start off next time.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn.
Typically we would think of
these as all recurring
expenditures they're all section
for items so.
They would be considered
recurring subject of course to
any changes to the budget
guidelines as issued by the LFC
during the interim.
At so I mean that's just a
concern you know if our maybe it
doesn't need to be a concern at
all but then the other thing I
wonder is just.
You know have all the University
signed off on the decisions made
here as far as to which ones
should be educational and which
ones not which ones.
Mr chairman and senator all of
the responses that you're seeing
on the detail sheep came from
the institutions to LFC and and
SFC staff and work compiled on
this list right okay for federal
helpful thanks.
In addition.
Quickly here so we're gonna move
a bunch of these two I NG I like
that what are they going to come
back to us next year and each
one of us Hey I need another two
hundred thousand dollars for
whatever we just moved to I.
Angie.
As well that would be
counterproductive.
Is there any way to stop that
would make that same.
Mr chair and senator
I don't know that we have a good
answer for what's going to be in
the next budget request of the
of the agencies for twenty five
so Mister chair the reason all
of those university president
throughout the goods are just
surviving top good because we're
going to get a new two hundred
thousand dollars next year.
Because we don't have a way to
say no because we want even over
seven of.
Well.
Campos Mr chairman district
quick as is there any way to at
least have one or two of the
institutions make a few remarks
in terms of this this innovative
process that has been developed
Senator Campos I agree and and
I'm just gonna look I'm looking
I just transportation so like
they want to cut the Roughriders
student support services
Representative went on to come
up and explain to this are they
here today.
I did did they give that to did
they give that to some their
scoring the reason for cuts in
which the changes that they said
that they find it somewhere else
well let's move on to different
Senator Campos.
We're gonna have to go to the
floor.
