Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is Adrian Vila. I am your
chief of staff, and today, I'm
gonna give you a brief overview
of the behavioral health
package, which comprises 3
different bills, Senate bills
12, and 3.
And then, um, after I finish,
Uh, Eric Cheer from the LFC will
provide you with an analysis on
basically the behavior health
gaps and needs throughout the
state.
And then we'll conclude our
behavioral health discussion
today, uh, with the presentation
from Clovis, to give you an
example of the local work that's
going on in behavioral health.
So hopefully these 3
presentations can provide all of
you the necessary background uh
as we move forward in addressing
behavioral health uh within the
state. So
have
a PowerPoint that just looks
just like this. It's also on the
TV screens and you also should
have copies of Senate bills 12,
and 3. Please note Senate Bill 3
was amended by Spack.
And you should have that
amendment as well.
So if we go to slide 2,
You can kind of see there's 3
different bills, right? So
Senate Bill 1 is the Behavioral
Health Trust Fund.
Senate Bill 2 is the um public
health and safety initiatives,
which is basically a funding
bill, and then Senate Bill 3 is
the behavioral health reform and
Investment Act, and that's what
we're calling the guardrails,
right? So within this
presentation, it's color coded
to make things easy for you. Um,
and one of the things to keep in
mind is even though the bills
were introduced as Senate bills
123, the way you should read
them should be 321.
All right? Uh, that'll provide a
lot more context and help you
understand them a lot easier. So
Senate Bill 1 serves as your
sustainability. So if we're
looking at into the future, how
do we make
Any investment that the state
makes sustainable. So creating a
trust addresses that issue.
The Senate Bill 2 looks at the
investments. What's our down
payment? How are we going to set
up this system and get the ball
rolling. And then lastly, Senate
Bill 3 is your guardrails. How
do you make sure that things are
done right and there's
accountability and um
involvement from all
stakeholders. So if we go to
slide 3, I'm going to start off
with Cen bill 3.
Which are guard rails.
And, um, actually, let's go to
slide 4.
So slide 4 kind of gives you a
more general broad view of what
the guardrail build does, right?
So it includes accountability.
So with accountability, we're
looking at ensuring that
whatever gets created has
continuity of care.
Because if an individual is
gonna receive behavioral health
services.
Those services in order to have
an effect, you need to continue
to receive them for a duration
that's appropriate, um, to
ensure that you have the proper
outcomes. If not,
You, you end up kind of in the
same cycle, and you never really
get to a healthier point. Uh,
the second is ensuring that
there's behavioral health
standards and um ensuring that
we're able to capture promising
practices. And what we mean by
that is the behavior health
standards is the standards at
which service, behavioral health
service needs to be at in order
for individuals to
Uh, actually get better. And
these are recognized by national
associations. It's things that
are covered by Medicaid, um, and
that's actually one of the key
pieces. It's being able to
leverage those extra Medicaid
dollars and promising practices
captures the things that we
don't know definitively whether
they work or not, but they're
showing promise, and those are
things that we need to try to
invest, especially when it comes
to um promising practices within
our diverse state. So an
example, uh, promising practice
can be
uh
Something within uh a tribal
community that's religiously and
culturally appropriate for them
and addressing their behavioral
health um needs. So that's an
example of something that
Medicaid currently doesn't
recognize it, but if we can get
that program off the ground and
evaluate it appropriately,
eventually, and Medicaid could
recognize it. So setting up
those type of systems. Uh, we're
also looking at ensuring there's
performance measures within all
of this as well as reporting
requirements to not only you
all, but also to the executive
branch and the judicial branch.
And then, um, ensuring that
funding is optimized and that we
leverage every Medicaid dollar
that we can, but then
recognizing that certain needs,
Medicaid just can't cover. And
that can be anything from
infrastructure to equipment,
things of that nature, and
that's where the state should
step in.
And then also ensuring that all
behavioral health service
providers are universally
credentialed. So the current
mechanism is a behavioral health
provider.
goes and gets accredited by
Medicaid.
And then they have to go to each
individual MCO that we have in
the state to get reaccredited
through them every year.
It's like if you're accredited
by Medicaid, why do you need to
go through all those extra
steps? So ensuring we can, you
know, streamline that process is
key.
Um, the second pillar of this is
oversight, right? So the
guardrail bill ensures that we
have appropriate oversight. And
for the first time in state
history, we'll have all three
branches accountable to the
behavioral health system.
To date, the only thing that's
been accountable has been the
Behavioral Health collaborative,
which, as all of you have
probably heard or know of, um,
you know, they haven't had a CEO
for over a year. It's not
functioning and um.
You know, it, it was housed
within the executive branch. So
now it's very much on all three
branches of government to ensure
that this system works. So the
judicial branch will be in
charge of the planning.
And what we mean by planning is
getting the stakeholders
together and making sure that
there's some level of stability
within that process, right?
Because the executive
potentially can change every 4
years, the legislature has a
longer time frame before it
changes, but it also changes and
the judicial branch out of the
three is the most stable. So if
we want to have a stable system,
we need a stable entity in
charge of the planning and
organizing of that component.
The executive will still be in
charge of quality control, cause
they're the ones that still have
the expertise within their
branches of regulating
behavioral services, they know
what qualifies for, for
Medicaid, uh, they know what the
standards are, they know what to
look for. So the executive
branch will still serve that
role.
And then the 3rd, of course, is
you all and you all based on
plans that every region submits
will determine whether things
are working or not and whether
you want to continue funding or
not.
So you all will be able to
evaluate the services, evaluate
the needs and performances in
every region and fund them
appropriately, right? If things
are successful and you're
noticing best practices, you
know, on those, the things that
aren't working.
Well, stop the flow of money for
those.
And then the last piece about
this bill that's really critical
to understand is we're shifting
the paradigm. Up until now,
everything in relation to
behavioral health has been a
top-down approach.
State agencies, top down telling
providers what to do, telling
communities, oh, this is what
you're gonna do because it's the
one thing we got funded for from
the legislature, and that's the
only thing.
Right? We're taking.
The inverse of that. So now
we're looking at
The bottom up. What does the
community need? What do the
service providers, the patients,
the advocates.
The people, the boots on the
ground, what have they?
Identified as the critical needs
within every region.
Because the needs in Albuquerque
are not the same as the needs in
Farmington. They're not the same
as the needs in Silver City and
Hobbes, Clovis, a region of the
state, it's gonna look
different.
Right? And you can't have a one
solution fit all to address
behavioral health in the state.
You need to customize it to the
needs of that region. And that's
what this bill tends to do so.
Uh, overall, the administrative
office of the courts in dealing
with the planning, you have a
quote from the actual bill right
here at the bottom.
That basically tells you that
the AOC will designate behavior
health regions, which can be as
small as a county.
And as large as multiple
judicial districts, right?
They'll designate these regions,
they'll coordinate the regional
meetings with help from local
stakeholders, be it the cogs,
the nonprofits, and others,
they'll complete the regional
meetings collectively, and then
they'll also complete sequential
intercept mapping. So that's
connecting all the services, all
the gaps, all the assets that
are in the area, to the judicial
system. So this way you suddenly
have a behavioral health system
that's reactive, proactive.
Um, to the actual criminal
system. So we're creating an
entire ecosystem here.
And then lastly, the um the
administrative Office of the
courts will also help them
coordinate these regional plans
and the regional plans are
basically
We've come together
We've looked at what we can do.
We look at what we're missing,
and we're prioritizing. We're
looking at our top 5 things that
we know we can deliver right now
to improve our behavioral health
system for this region. So if in
a certain region, for example,
they're in need of a facility
where um individuals can receive
detox. They'll identify that as
one of their priorities. In
another region, they might say,
you know what, we want to focus
on mobile units. We want to send
individuals from a local hub and
basically meet individuals who
having a behavioral health
situation where they're at,
right? So it can vary depending
on the region and we're
designing this to be as flexible
as possible.
So if we go to slide 5,
I'll go into Senate Bill 2,
which is basically the down
payment on this behavioral
health system. So these are the
appropriations. So now that you
understand the guard rails and
how things work. We're gonna
dive into the money. So in the
next slide,
Uh, you have the 1st 7 of 13
line items that are already
funded within House Bill 2.
Right? These are things that are
already allocated in there, and
this is basically how we're
gonna focus. So if you look
under the purposes column, that
kind of gives you the general
idea of what that appropriation
does. So the first appropriation
in section one goes to the
administrative Office of the
courts, which is basically the
planning money.
Here's the money the court has
asked. They need to be able to
deliver on their planning duty
that um Senate Bill 3 is asking
them to do.
On section 2.
That's the diversion money. This
is how AOC is going to be able
to connect.
These behavioral health systems
to
Criminal competency and whatever
criminal package we end up
getting out of the house.
Um, section 3 goes to the
healthcare authority, and that's
to address outpatient related
treatment.
So being able to, for example,
as sort of community treatment
where you go out into the
community and you meet the
individual where they're at to
receive treatment, to receive
their medicine, to um receive
services. Uh, this also applies
to Medicaid assistance
treatment, other promising
practices, community supports,
wrap around services, anything
that goes out.
Right? Where they receive
treatment outside of a facility.
Section 4 looks at inpatient.
Because the reality is you need
beds to be able to address a lot
of this. Right now the state as
a whole and Eric can correct me
if I'm wrong, has about 520
beds.
They're located in different
parts of the state. Some are
used, some are not.
Right? But there's still gaps in
terms of facilities and beds for
individuals to receive inpatient
type treatment so that can be
things like detox.
Um, it can be residential
treatment.
This could also impact the youth
as well, right? Currently, the
state, I believe only has one
facility, correct or no?
Facility for youth.
OK
One
Um, currently the state only has
one facility dedicated to
inpatient treatment for youth,
for example. So this allows us
to kind of build out the system.
And the idea behind this isn't
necessarily let's do brick and
mortar because that's gonna take
5 to 10 years to get something
built if we've recognized
anything from the backlog in
Capital LA which Kelly will talk
about in a little bit.
Um, this is more, you know what,
let's get these operational in
the next 6 months. If we can
rent a building and get it up to
code.
Quickly, let's just do that.
Instead of building something
new from scratch. We can talk
about building out new
facilities later, but we need
something that's fixes the
problem now.
Section 5 looks at crisis
response, and this is basically
how can we respond to a crisis
at the moment it's happening,
right? So be it a suicide call.
What do you do?
Right? If someone's having a
really bad episode, normally
what the criminal justice system
tends to do or law enforcement
is they'll just take the
individual and drop them off at.
An emergency room.
And that creates a backlog in
the emergency room to address
other more critical needs. So
how do we address the crisis
care. So that's money for that
piece. Section 6 gives money to
corrections, and this money can
also go potentially to local
jails and um.
To ensure that we have a
discharge process, right? So
right now, an individual who's
uh an inmate.
Right before they get
discharged.
Ideally, they'd be connected to
Medicaid and then they'd be
connected to outside services so
that way they don't end up just
falling back into the system
after they're released. This is
to expand beyond that because
the things that we currently do
are limited to only things that
are funded by Medicaid, and
there's opportunities to go
beyond that. So that'll address
that gap.
Section 7 looks at money um
within the Department of Public
Safety to go to law enforcement
so that way they have the
equipment and vehicles to do
crisis response and do outreach
and mental health and behavioral
health outreach, um, so these
are considered some of the best
practices and this is what will
allow them to hit the rural
areas, not just be grounded in a
more urban or um municipal area.
If we go to the next slide.
We have the last few items, so
section 8 looks at actually
funding the teams that are these
mobile units that will go out
from these hubs. So think of it
as a hub and spoke approach
within every region.
Section 9 of the Healthcare
Authority. Uh, obviously, we
need to allocate money for
education because individuals do
not know what they don't know,
and they won't know what's
available in their area unless
they're educated on it and
having appropriate outreach to
make that happen. Section 10
looks at training money to
ensure that at every stage of
not only the criminal justice
system, but also um the 988
system and uh the judicial
system that everyone knows how
to navigate and be appropriately
reactive to behavior.
health situations.
Um, section 11, look and 12
looks at expanding existing
programs that UNM Health
Sciences Center and the
Department of Health have in
relation to homelessness, and
this includes telemedicine and
being able to actually reach the
homeless populations where
they're at. And lastly, as an
appropriation to the MFA to
address housing.
So in total, the current version
of Senate bill.
2 has $140 million
appropriation. And again, that's
the down payment to build out
the behavioral health
infrastructure.
And then lastly, if we go to the
next slide.
I actually, I'm gonna skip to
one more slide. Uh, we actually
talked about the sustainability.
So how will we make this
sustainable and the idea is to
have a behavioral health trust
fund. If we've learned anything
over the last few years is that
trust funds are the things that
will stabilize our volatile
revenue source and ensure that
regardless of whether we're in
the, you know, boom or bust
cycle with oil and gas. Things
can continue to be funded. So,
The Senate Bill 1, which is the
trust fund.
Follows the same practices that
we have for the early childhood
trust, the higher ed trusts.
This is just the next iteration
of a trust fund for the state,
and we have a billion dollar
target. That doesn't mean that
the full billion dollars will be
allocated right off the bat.
There is an appropriation that
for a billion dollars and that's
the signal that's our target,
um, so the way it works for our
newer members is whenever a fund
is created like this, it'll have
a corpus.
Think of it as the billion
dollars.
That money is invested by your
state investment council, who on
average has a return of 5.2% to
7% every year.
And basically this fund every
year starting in 2027 would spit
out 5% of the market year in
value.
So in essence we'll get at
roughly $50 million.
To continue
Um, all of these efforts. Now
keep in mind this is money that
can be used for all the various
uses in the last little green um
bubble there, so it includes
treatment, intervention and
prevention, infrastructure,
technology, workforce, any
matching funds, meeting federal
requirements, and to do whatever
is asked within regional plans.
So it's flexible, right? It,
it's gonna meet the need
regardless of whether, you know,
the regional plans are
functioning or not, it's like
you all can appropriate it the
way you all see fit based on the
needs of that year.
Um
And this, of course, is on top
of all the money that's already
within the recurring budget in
relation to Medicaid to treat
behavioral health.
Which Eric will go over, um,
during his presentation. So with
that, Mr. Chair,
I'm done.
We'll go to questions and just
remember we're gonna maybe do
this 1 or 2 more times is that
Bill and his committee came in
today.
So we can get the weeds out of
it and figure out where we're
going. Senator Steinborn and
Senator Trujil. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Adrian, thanks for
all your work on this. I mean,
you, you've really done a lot of
great work and we appreciate it.
Um, I know you went out to Miami
and I'm curious what you're, I
think you did.
Here's what your impression was
of the
The Miami model, uh, I'm not an
expert in it, but I know a lot
of fans of that.
I do want to say though before
we get to that, Mr. Chairman, it
would be really good. I know
that we do have, you know, the
healthcare authorities working
on some amendments, some
behavioral health and to make
sure the money's going to the
right place and doing the right
things.
But I would also love to hear
from NGOs and others because
this is such a big deal and
billions of dollars, you know, a
lot of money, a lot of
infrastructure, I think it's
important to hear that feedback.
There's no analysis with the
bill, and I'm sure that, you
know, we always usually get
that. So this is a kind of a
first iteration briefly on it,
but as we move forward, those
are things that would be good to
have and
Invite the public in to tell us
what they think about it too.
Um
Because it is a lot of money and
we're stand, yeah, it's an
interesting model that you're
creating, Adrian, that you're uh
It's just different concepts of
approaching this, all which
sound great, not, not critiquing
any of it. I just
But that's, I'm not an expert in
the field either, so, um,
I do want to ask though.
I know a year ago and I was
trying to get more money for um
substance abuse, there was
concerns that we didn't have the
infrastructure.
Um, to deploy it.
And resistance to getting more
money for Iran, which is kind of
weird, but I'm just wondering
now.
Are all the recipients of this
money saying to you that they
can deploy it, if they have the
staff to deploy all these
resources or what is this
appropriation include money that
they'll then hire staff to
deploy it.
Thanks.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so I'll start off
with the judiciary, right? AOC,
these numbers are exactly the
numbers that they ask that they
need to be able to deploy.
Obviously, this is the down
payment for the next year. It's
something that's gonna have to
get baked into recurring the
following year.
Right, so it'll come within
their budget as for the next
year, assuming you will pass the
legislation. When it comes to
the work of the other agencies,
the healthcare authority has
signaled to us and we, we've
been meeting with them,
obviously, these bills dropped,
um, before we had full
communication on this, uh, but
they have communicated that
they're gonna need some
recurring funding. So an option
for that that we're gonna bring
to the table for you all to
consider is putting that funding
through growth so this way it's
like, all right, let's.
Give you the money and
Massage it before we say
definitively, OK.
This is the full amount, and
these are the specific FTEs you
need.
Um, within recurring.
Um, so those are the big two
players, uh, in relation to
this, and then the rest are.
You know, it's small amounts of
money that they don't have an
issue moving.
So thank you, Mr. Chair, kind of
follow up to that Adrian. So do
they
I know some of your goals are to
scan these services up fairly
quickly. You said like within 6
months, for example.
But
Do they have the staff to get
that money out the door within 6
months, or they have to hire
staff.
And administer these things.
So Mr. Chair, Senator Steinborn,
they do have staff, but they're
gonna, the staff that they're
requesting is to help coordinate
the system, right? So for
example, the healthcare
authorities requesting judicial
liaisons, right? If we want to
create this system that
interacts with the judicial
system as well, as well as
having it separate because
behavioral health is its own
thing. Yeah, but we needed to
function with the judiciary. It
can't just be a full standalone.
So having some individuals that
function as intermediaries
between the two. That doesn't
exist. So that's something that
they're gonna have to hire.
And then obviously they have the
staff to do, you know.
Get the money out, but they
don't have the staff locally.
Within regions to help them
organize. So that's something
they're gonna have to hire.
Um,
Chair, Adrian So, have you had
meetings with like providers
around the state and.
Those leaders in the space
around the state to see how they
feel about what it is that we're
proposing.
So Mr. Chair, Senator Steinborn,
yes, we send, uh, Munoz and I,
and he can speak as to how many
hours we spent on Zoom with
different stakeholders,
including the providers
association and during one of
those meetings, I believe we had
over 60 different providers on
that call.
And how do they feel about
That's true
Well, I think we're in the
beginning then and then we, we,
we were just spending
information, how do we set the
structure up? How do we do this?
Uh, I believe they're all on
board.
They're, they're different in
every area. Carlsbad was like,
we have to use our reserve money
so we cause we don't get our
Medicaid reimbursement. So can
you time that so we can get
those better because we offer
everything you want.
Maybe we can offer more with
this money, but
You know, Gallup was Santa Fe
recovery, which is 4 corners and
gallop.
Two different places, but the
locations are completely
different than what they're
trying to accomplish. They're
trying to start the linkages
program in Gallup, which is
wraparound services and then you
walk in the door, we give you
Medicaid, we snap, we get you
the service that you need and so
it's different and so some
places it's non-existent.
Yeah, and so.
We gotta let them determine
that, but we spent what, 60
hours on Zoom?
Let's just zoo.
And to add to that, Mr. Chair,
uh, we asked all the the
behavioral health providers
association to send out a survey
to all their providers to
collect like
If you could wave a magic wand
to fix the system. What are your
thoughts?
Right that's Senator Schino's
wife calling him. Oh, that's
what it is, yeah.
That's his office so we have
that list and that list actually
informed this design.
And a lot, some of the
appropriations were designed
based on what that list is, as
well as some of the language in
the guard rails. So for example,
the universal credentialing
process, that was a huge flag
that multiple providers were
like.
You know, we just need this to
streamline our process because
then.
we suddenly are able to actually
build Medicaid more
appropriately.
So you feel, Mr. Chair and
Adrian, you feel like this has
been vetted with them and
they're all in support of what's
being proposed.
They like it.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair.
And finally, um, what are your
thoughts on the Miami?
if you're prepared to speak
about that and is that
incorporated here in any way,
shape or form?
Of course, so actually it was
the Miami model, um, the Senate
Majority sent me over to Miami
to see the model and actually
see what they're doing.
And uh in doing all the readings
of all the work that they've
been doing and during the
meetings, one of the mornings I
woke up at 1 a.m. and suddenly
all the dots started to click.
Right, and the beautiful thing
about Miami is they created a
very interactive system.
Describe it maybe for just sure
to the community so the Miami
model to, to give everyone a
little bit of context. Uh,
Miami's at the forefront of
behavioral health.
Um
When it comes to
The judicial system, their
judicial system has been leading
the charge for behavior. So
specifically their Miami-Dade
County's judge, judicial judge.
They're the ones who back in the
90s started the first drug court
in the country.
Right? And then from there it
started.
Increasing and expanding, and
they realized really quickly
that they need to integrate
behavioral health services with
the judicial system to address
crime.
And that's kind of the impetus
of the Miami model. So what
they've done is they've actually
got a lot of private funding.
To be able to stand up,
something similar to the Gateway
Center in Albuquerque.
But it's fully operational,
right? And um a lot of other
behavioral health services,
homeless services that are just
all integrated and where the
judges themselves, the public
defenders, the district
attorneys, know what the
behavioral health landscape is.
So now you have a way to divert
criminals into this other
mechanism that where they can
receive treatment.
Right? Um, so that's the overall
of the Miami model, the one.
caveat with this. I'll add a
little asterisk.
Miami has a population of all of
New Mexico. And it's.
Very centralized and
consolidated, right? So having
a, you know, multi-story
facility.
Makes sense for an urban area.
That would not translate
directly well with New Mexico.
Which is why the design of this
is.
Look at the locals, look at the
assets, look at the gaps.
And create something that works
for this region, knowing that
these are all the options on the
table.
So whatever you decide is most
appropriate for you all.
Go forward and conquer.
Thank you. So with that being
said, of course, Miami, like you
said a lot of private money and
that's not necessarily
sustainable, but for us, we're
funding it with public money,
yeah.
And number 2 though, question.
I appreciate the bottom up
because you're right, different
places have different resources,
some have none. At the same
time,
That kind of in a way requires
everyone to have to figure it
out.
And maybe they don't know best
practices and maybe they're
gonna make mistakes and so I
think they need.
Expertise, they need guidance,
they need pros telling them.
Here's how you started, step one
and build up too. So does this
system and this funding allow
For that support.
We're just gonna give them money
when they say, here's what we
want.
So Mr. Chair, within all of
those behavioral regions, the
healthcare authority, which are
the experts, the judicial
branch, or higher ed
institutions in the region, all
of these major stakeholders,
right, are going to be at the
table.
That are experts and the
behavior health providers
themselves are experts within
their niche as well.
Right, so you're gonna have a
pool of people that.
I have a very good understanding
of behavioral health.
And you'll have a pool of people
in there that have a very good
understanding of the
bureaucracy.
Leverage Medicaid among other
things. So it's, it's finding
the balance and just opening
dialogue. So to give you all
perspective during the special
session, right? You all
appropriated money to the first
judicial district.
And as of now 6 months later.
They've finished their
sequential intercept mapping,
and they've launched their AOT
program.
Assisted outpatient treatment,
which is
What they determined was
critical for their area.
Right? And during that process
of the planning, it was multiple
days. Everyone met at Northern
University.
You had stakeholders from even
legislators, regional
legislators were there, former
legislators to um.
You know, the courts and pretty
much everyone, um.
And what they did is,
They even had a little activity
where it's like, all right,
everyone gets 5 little stickies.
What do you think are the needs
of this area? What can fix our
system? All right, we'll put
them around, categorize them a
little bit. But now everyone
gets 3 votes. You get 3 little
stickers.
Read through all of this. What
should we prioritize?
Right? So even though they
identified 36 different things
that are needed. They narrowed
that down to 5.
These are the 5 things we want
to focus on and dedicate all of
our efforts on delivering for
the people of the first judicial
district.
And the success of that model is
what's basically inspiring this
package.
And then the last thing I'll
say, Mr. Chair is
You know,
For many years, it kind of
stumped me that
We'd say, well, how much money
do we need for treatment, right?
We keep reading reports that
have the highest alcohol deaths
in some region, the highest
opioid abuse, and we don't have
treatment in all of our
communities, right?
And so we'd say, well, what do
we need?
And kind of get an answer back.
We don't know.
Which is bizarre.
But we don't know, we don't
really have a plan. And so I
tried to get funding to create a
plan so we could see, OK, here's
where the needs are, so we could
write size the plan.
So I guess my, my curiosity is,
is the market gonna figure that
out basically by doing this
approach where we need more
alcohol treatment or we need
more opioid or more math
treatment or whatever it is,
like,
Is that
Knowledge and those resources
going to come from the bottom up
because they know that's what
they need, or is there?
We're gonna figure this out on
the top down and actually say,
here's where our shortages are.
So we're kind of looking out for
that. I, I'm just curious, how
do we get to the solution.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, I think in having a
collection of these map, you
know, regional plans, we will
now know.
Exactly the assets that are
available in every community.
And what the gaps are. And we'll
have a price tag.
And you all collectively can
decide what to prioritize at
that point. But right now we've
been flying blind. We've been
looking, OK, best practice, this
is evidence-based, it's worked
in other places. Let's try this
everywhere in the state, and
sometimes it works, sometimes it
doesn't, right? Now we're
shifting it where it's like.
You all tell us what's best
practice or what you need.
And we'll give it a shot. And
the guardrail bill allows us to
basically say, well, you're not
delivering on the performance,
you're not delivering on what
you said this would do. So the
funding stream is gonna stop for
that piece and now switch to
priority number 6.
Oh, sounds good. Thanks for all
your answers and your thorough
work on this, and thank you too,
Mr. Chair. Good work on these
bills. I look forward to
learning more in hearing from
the public too. Thank you, Mr.
Senator Trio.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Thank you for this presentation.
Um,
And the work that you've done on
this, I would benefit greatly,
maybe some of my other members
would.
With the flow chart.
I visual in what I am, but let
me just, uh, I just wanna try to
understand this. So Senate Bill
1.
Um, is what creates a behavioral
health trust fund.
But then
And that's, that gets invested
in consultation with the
healthcare authority. I'm
wondering why they're involved
in the consultation for that.
That doesn't seem to be their
area of expertise.
Uh, Mr. Chair, it's more of just
they're the entity that are
gonna be the recipients of the
money. So they need to know how
much money they're going to
receive.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And
then what is the difference
between the behavioral
Health Trust Fund and the
behavioral health Program Fund
is the money come from the trust
fund. That's where I'm thinking
the flow chart might be helpful.
Yeah, so, Mr. Chair, Senator
Trujillo, so the trust itself is
invested in the market, right?
So that money flows out into the
market, the compounds and grows.
And then from there, it's gonna
flow 50 million 5% of the year
market value into the program
fund, which is basically think
of it like a checking account.
Got you.
OK, thank you. Um, Mr. Chairman,
so then let's move to um Senate
Bill 2.
Which is kind of the
This is where we drop money in
to uh get us started, right?
Kind of jumpstart us, um.
What I don't understand is
Why that money is non-reverting.
And why we're not reverting it
to the behavioral health trust
fund.
I mean, I, I, I, I get that we
don't want it to revert. I just
have concerns like
You're giving agencies general
fund money.
And then
There's no, it's just for
subsequent years instead of we
usually identified 25, 26, 27,
an amount of time and then if
it's non-reverting, we say which
fund it's going to go into. This
doesn't seem to say which fund
it doesn't revert to.
Does that make sense? Yes, so
Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo.
Uh, the reason for Senate Bill 2
being non-reverting.
Is this is the carrot.
Right.
Locals want behavioral health.
So go organize, come up with
your plan.
And the legislature saying the
money's waiting here for
whenever you're ready to bring
your plan.
Some, some of this money will
probably get wiped out really
quickly in the first few plans.
Other money
Might not, right? Depending on
their priorities, but just
because it's not their priority
in the first phase or the first
year, doesn't mean it won't be a
priority for year 2, year 3, or
year 4.
So this is meant to basically
ensure that the money's there
for when it needs to be
mobilized. OK. um, thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
that explanation. I, I still
have a little bit of heartburn
over not having some sort of a
stop date or when the the money
at the agency level, not at our
level, but at the agency level
and the auditors follow that
through and report that out.
Um, typically you have a fund
that reverts at some point or
doesn't revert at some point and
has a certain number of years
that it can be used. Um, so
that's very confusing for me,
um.
Mr. Chairman, the last thing I
would say is I, I don't notice
that.
We've made um
Note of the fact that our
licensing boards are the ones
who were the first step for
credentialing.
And unfortunately, many of them
have authority and use that
authority to charge for those
lists of licensees so that the
credentialing agency and verify
their license, and I would love
to see us take some action that
prohibits those licensing boards
from charging or lists that the
credentialing agency needs in
order to credential the
individual. Most all of those
license types are online and are
available.
online.
But there still is the authority
in their authorizing act.
that give them the ability. I'm
looking at their website right
now and they've got a little
link on there for fees, um, and
I just think that's
unconscionable for us to
continue to let that happen.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Adrian, that's a good note to
make in the licensing stuff if
we can change that in the
structure of that bill.
And then go over um
I've only been over this 3 times
today, once last night.
At the end of the day. And so,
So one community can't take all
the money. So Albuquerque tried
to nab all the money for one
section, there's a stop gap
there that allows other
communities to get make sure
that they're they can get money
in that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, that is correct.
The, the idea is it's equitable
distribution based on
You know, the needs of
disproportionate communities and
that's actually a word that's uh
our Republican partners have a
Wanting to have a definition for
which we're working on.
It
too much.
So I know there's a House bill
that we're following. I forget
the number, um, about judges
being able to order certain
people into treatment. What's
the currency, um, bed like
vacancy rate and do you have any
kind of pro forma of
Or I, I hesitate to say goal,
how many beds would be filled
around the state in these
facilities.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, so
with that until we know what the
final language is on whatever
comes out of the house, it's
very difficult to have a.
Accurate depiction. The
Version of.
You know, um, competency that's
been introduced, the FIR should
capture that, those details and
I'm not well versed in it
unfortunately, so I don't have a
specific answer for you.
Um,
E.
Eric,
what's our vacancy rate in, in,
in behavior health beds across
the state.
Eric works for LFC. Yeah, Mr.
Chairman, I don't have that off
the top of my head. I was just
opening my laptop to try and uh
get that for you. I'll see you
in 2 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Center compost.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
As we go through this, of
course, and again, thank you
very much for not only the
presentation, the hard work.
The vision building is we move
forward, there's a few things
that
Uh, consistently, um.
If you will impede the the
growth of development and the
full services as we move
forward.
And that happens to be, if you
will, uh, as has already been
mentioned in lines with the
licensing other credentialing,
and so within our higher
educational facilities.
The programs, how do we deal
with social work, psychiatrist,
counselors, how do we ensure
that we're gonna have uh the
full gamut, if you will, of the
staff to take care of these,
these issues.
And uh one of the primary
concerns as an example of the
Beaver Health Institute in Las
Vegas as we deal with.
Um
The full range of mental health,
behavioral health, the
facilities and uh
The improvements are are ongoing
and over the years, of course,
we've evolved, but, but how does
this tie in so that in some of
these rural regions that get
into the frontier communities.
How are we going to work to
Educate, to keep, to retain, if
you will, uh, the experts to
provide these services in in the
rural parts of our state and I
think that's going to be a very
important part and integral part
of the entire plan for SB 12 and
3. So, Mr. Chairman, uh, you
might want to comment on that in
terms of what you've seen out
there and how we can better
improve our system as we move
forward.
Of course, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Campos, so in terms of
the workforce and, you know,
leveraging our higher ed.
Um, institutional partners.
I think the key to that is
making sure that within every
region, any higher ed
institution.
That's in that region is part of
these planning sessions.
Because that will give them an
indication of, well,
We're now gonna have so many
potential FTEs that focus on
social work or psychiatry.
Or other things, and that will
basically jumpstart them.
To actually make sure those
programs are operational and
they can create that pipeline.
In Senate Bill 2, the $43
million appropriation to the
healthcare authority for
inpatient treatment. Basically
says it's like if you want to do
inpatient, let's start off with
doing inpatient at a location
where there's a higher ed
institution, right? Like, you
know, uh, municipality or county
that has one of those.
Because then it very much
signals.
You now have.
In rural communities.
Jobs that weren't there before
or they're about to be there. So
it signals to those institutions
that you need to get that
workforce basically lined up.
Um
So that that's kind of the idea.
In terms of the funding directly
for workforce, it's not captured
in here.
Um, the state has the
opportunity scholarship, has the
lottery scholarship, you all
have allocated a substantial
amount.
amount of money towards
dedicated social work programs
and centers of excellence for
social work.
Um
However, once we get these
plans, we'll know if we need to
wrap those things up as well.
So that's also one of the the
key components is we don't know.
How much like the scale of how
much money needs to go into
workforce until we get those
plans back.
So, so Mr. Chairman, what it
really evolves around is going
to be the investment in our
human capital.
Uh, we can do the facilities, we
can do the non-recurring. We can
build, if you will, the model,
we can go ahead and have, if you
will, the trust fund, the
investment and the resources
coming in to
support the program, but if we
don't have the people that can
provide the services.
In all regions of the state, in
essence what we're going to
find.
Is again we're trying to grow
out, but in reality we may have
the issue where we'll have to go
to some of the more densely
populated areas where people
have chosen to live.
Uh, because of their experiences
and because of their, their
professionalism and in the
careers that they've chosen.
So I, I would encourage that we
really look at
That piece where we will have
the uh
Experts to provide everything
from the recovery in a small
community all the way to uh
dealing directly with the
counseling necessary for people
who
going through some of these
troubled areas and possibly even
consider suicide, so it's uh
it's gonna be an important
model, Mr. Chairman, as we deal
with it, we want to make sure
that the human capital is going
to be at the forefront of this
model that is being developed,
and again I applaud the work
that you've done, Mr. Chairman,
uh, Adrian, as you move forward
because you've researched,
you've seen it.
But in small communities as we
deal with it, we continue to
live it so with that, Mr.
Chairman, I just hope that would
be part of the consideration.
Thank you.
Some, uh, Senator Cambo. So do
you think we ought to
incentivize that 1st, 1st
working group and a higher pay
rate, or do you think there
should be
I know we can't do bonus pay
with state.
But do you think they should be
there should be a higher rate of
return to incentivize those,
those workers to influx into
these centers. I mean this is a
conversation today, I mean.
I mean, Las Vegas, you and him
have both have hospitals in
higher ed institutions in Las
Cruces may have one too. I don't
know for sure, but
I mean, is that something that
we should target in this to
incentivize some some type of
employment to push the
The workforce in that direction.
So I believe the uh retention
and completion are important
components compensation and
benefits definitely are
important, but.
In these communities, they also
need to gather around, if you
will, and talk about uh with
their families.
How they're going to become
important parts of providing
these types of services.
And as an example in Las Vegas
over the years we have been a
very accepting community of the
people that have uh been there
at the behavioral health
Institute and when they've been
uh released, they stay in the
community and we, we support
them, so definitely
compensation, education, but
then also, if you will, the uh
support.
Uh, and that goes back to our
school districts to the
amenities, the things to do, the
quality of life, those kind of
things also need to be uh
considered as part of this, not
necessarily part of this bill or
these bills.
But more than that, how we're
going to provide that incentive
that you're talking about, so it
would be and it would derive, if
you will, through the education
and we'll say New Mexico
Highlands University in in the
Las Vegas area.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK
I, I, I think we've made some
good points today. I think maybe
we do have another hearing.
Maybe the beginning of next week
in and bring those providers in
so we can hear them.
Adrian, so we can start talking
about it. The one thing I don't
want to happen is, is that
providers come in and and try to
do a MoneyGram, just to say, oh,
I just, this is my and I want
more money here and I mean, this
is a statewide thing that I
think they're gonna have to
collaborate. I mean, uh, what is
it called the industrial
nonprofit industrial complex
that comes in and tries to, to
grab money and but because we
want this to work.
No matter where you're, we want
it to work in that functionality
has to work and when someone
tries to
corner that.
Then it's gonna ruin it for
everybody else, so we want to
steer clear of that, so maybe
you want to plan on getting
Um, a group next week having
another hearing.
Wrapping up some amendments.
Anybody else have any comments?
Senator Gonzalez's.
Oh, thank you all, Mr. Chairman,
and a little bit on the, the
same line.
Oh
Adrianna, how will the the
accountability flow.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Gonzalez, so the
accountability.
It's in Senate Bill 3, and I can
actually point you um.
So it's
Those are
They're in your books, I
believe.
Your, your bills are in your
binder, so.
Mhm
So on page 4,
Subsection D, starting on line
13.
Kind of brings in uh the annual
written reports that every
region needs to provide.
Right, and that'll basically
provide you all along with the
executive and the judicial
branch.
The status of the regional plan,
the implementation.
What data performance measures,
how they're doing and all that,
uh, the public feedback.
Right? Like, actually reaching
out to the public in those
regions and being like,
How do you feel about what we're
doing, you know, so you'll have
a collection of all that.
Along with any other uniform
data requests that a legislative
committee or the AOC or an
executive agency request. So for
example, if you all wanted to
know exactly how many
individuals are in detox, just
blanket term for all regional
plans to include.
All right, well, now they have
to include that data point,
right? So once you have all that
data, now you can hold that
region to account.
Right, because as of right now,
for example, if you were to take
Albuquerque.
There's been a lot of
investments into behavioral
health in Albuquerque.
Yet
Do we know definitively what
those investments are, what
they're doing, who's being
served. We don't have that.
Now you will have that.
Right? So this allows you to
actually have the oversight and
provide the accountability.
Um
Of the various regions.
Mr. Chaman, how you doing now?
Just a thought
You know,
Uh, the possibilities of having
an internal and external audit.
Into the program.
And uh I think that also would
really help with the.
Or we're trying to see is, well,
first of all.
To assist to make sure that uh
The implementation goes well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you so you're tracking the
comments, so let's look at those
ra rack them up and let's see
what how they're stepping into
each other. I got 2 more in
front of your center call before
we go back to Senator Lanier.
Yeah, mine to be quick. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. No, you know,
we've, we've spent a lot of time
in, in mental health and in
farmington and I know McKinley
County has two, and we've had a
lot of success, but I think part
of our success is because we
have them come in about every 6
months.
And, and let us know exactly
what's going on, how many beds
are filled, how many people have
stayed with the program. How
many people have left the
program in the middle, things
like that, and I think that
accountability is one of the
most important things to make it
work.
So that those agencies
Well they know that you care
about what they're doing.
But they know they're
accountable, they have somebody
to answer to. We're fortunate
enough because our
municipalities work with us.
With the counties
So that
Their answer to several
different people, not just one
organization.
But it's worked really well and
And I, I would like to know
about the incentive program. I'd
like to talk to you, Mr. Chair,
about that a little more because
I think that's one of our
problems is getting
Certified or qualified people up
in our area.
To keep these things open and
keep them growing.
Because that's really what we
want to do.
So thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Adrian. Senator, you have a
second question, Senator Compos.
Uh thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, for a second
opportunity to talk about some
of these things. So the other
component that you all were
mentioning dealt with
corrections, so as an example at
the behavioral Health Institute,
we're working now on uh.
A new forensic unit and that's
an important part of
corrections. Uh, the other piece
continues to go ahead and be
what we're doing with our
corrections department, and that
is the programs that we
established for those people who
are incarcerated and prepare
them if you will, for
reintegration back into society
to be with their family, so, uh,
I hope that if there is going to
be a hearing that we also
include, if you will, uh, the
corrections department and as we
deal directly with it.
The uh educational department,
it can be head in head in
combination of both possibly,
but the whole issue is going to
be as you indicated, this is
gonna be a collective approach
on behalf of the state of New
Mexico. So it really involves
each and every one of us and so
with that I just again applaud
you and thank you very much for
giving me that 2nd, Mr. Chair.
It's all I have.
We'll wrap this up real quick.
So, so let's plan on next week,
Adrian coming back. Maybe we
need to visit with individual
members and, and look how that
fits inside the uh some of them
go in 3, some of them going in
2.
How we, how we flush it out. The
other thing is I want you to
look at Project Echo and
reassigned dollars cause this is
right up their alley on training
and getting uh in I don't know
much how much we're giving in
state funding, but we gotta move
some of those dollars and, and
really fortify them to where we
want them to target and do that
work for us.
Especially in in what Senator
Campos just mentioned in Sen
near and when we have those
conversations, OK?
Uh, Mr. Chair, can I make a
suggestion? Uh, maybe, maybe,
um, so on Friday, you all have
on this agenda, hearing the
healthcare authority, DOH and
one other agency. I don't
remember off the top of my head,
but that might be a good time to
also have the behavioral health
providers. So then it's like we
have that discussion and that
provides me the weekend to work
on fixes.
Well, let's do it. Let's hear
DOH and HCA because I mean,
carry the two secretaries, carry
in.
Gina Gina, I mean they were in
office 7:30 in the morning till
9:30 in the morning working on,
on this, so let's
Let's have their, their regular
hearing and then that's maybe
circle around back around on
Monday.
To light those are kind of, you
know, the provider groups that
we're gonna need to attract to
come in.
Any other questions?
Eric, did you give us the number
of vacancy meds.
Mr. Chairman, that's correct and
it came from the secretary
actually from HCA and it's 186
beds that are vacant right now.
And so what occupancy rate
520, 186 and they're all mental
health beds or they, I believe
so, Mr. Chair.
And secretary that a head shake,
yes.
OK, thank you.
you're gonna start us off, how
long do you think you're gonna
be?
Mr. Chair, it can take as long
as you want, um.
For sure as you want.
I want you to give us the
information that we need to know
in the.
Time the order.
All right, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
My name is Eric Chee, mal
analyst at
LSC I see the staff is passing
out.
Uh, my presentation right now
that I'll be going over.
Uh
We did this presentation back in
I believe it was November for
LFC something similar to this.
Not quite exact.
Uh, this is kind of our, um,
Our, our first kind of step into
doing a behavioral health gaps,
needs and gaps analysis.
Um, we don't have all the data
yet. Uh, we're working on
getting the data. We're gonna
continue working on this report,
uh, throughout their interim,
uh, going forward and so.
I just wanted to kind of put
that out there.
We'll start off on slide 3. And
this is basically covering
A health money that we have.
Currently in-house bill to which
totals roughly a billion
dollars.
That's correct, Mr.
Chairman I should probably
also mention, you know, I'm, uh,
as a LFC analyst, I'm not for or
against any uh
Legislation.
Just wanted to make, you don't
want to be on our team.
I'm on the legislature's team,
OK,
you're on our team, yes.
So some of the findings uh from
the behavioral health, um,
Uh, needs and gaps analysis.
New Mexico's um
The state, federal government,
local communities, uh, we've all
invested a significant amount in
the last few years.
Um
Putting us among the top of the
states in the United States as
far as investing in behavioral
health.
Uh, the number of providers and
provider organizations have
increased during that time.
You'll see some of the data, uh,
once I get to that in a minute.
However, there's a significant
diffusion of roles within the
system.
There are 17 state agencies,
many local governments and local
provider agencies receiving
funding.
But there is little planning to
strategically use the resources
we have.
Uh, more effectively and um
boost performance.
We'll get into that a little bit
more in a second.
Where there is planning, it's
spotty, you know, there are some
places that do it very well, um,
and there's other places that
other parts of the state that
don't do it at all.
Um
And there's continued high rates
of behavioral health, um
increases the urge, the urgency
to kind of address some of these
issues.
Moving on to slide 4.
So what are some of the needs?
Um, I just wanted to, I just put
the slide in here to kind of
give us an idea of where we're
at in the state when it comes to
behavioral health.
New Mexico ranks poorly on key
behavioral health metrics.
The number of behavioral health
providers is growing.
Focus on providing more high
quality evidence-based services
as needed and improved data and
analysis will show where to
focus our efforts.
If I point you to this table
here on the right-hand side.
Uh, just wanted to mention.
Um
The, the column there on the
left, Behavioral 2023.
And then behavioral health 2024,
these are the health rankings.
So we went from 36 in overall uh
mental illness prevalence.
For adults and children.
The 44th
Uh, we went from 32nd to 49th on
adult substance use disorder.
42nd to 46th on youth with major
depressive episode and then 47th
to 51st.
On use substance use disorder.
So just um wanted to put that
out there that we're putting all
this money into the system.
Uh, we've put a lot of money in,
uh, between about, you know,
2000, 2005.
Um, and we're not seeing the
outcomes that were uh hoping
for.
That kind of investment.
Moving on to the next slide,
slide 5.
Uh, so the entity.
Vanity and state government most
responsible for coordinating
efforts and improving outcomes
as the behavioral health
purchasing collaborative.
I think as Ad already kind of
mentioned, it's not, it's not
meant for over a year, um, we're
getting close to about a year
and a half now. Uh, there's no
director.
Um, and in the absence of the
behavioral health purchasing
collaborative.
Um
Doing her needs and gaps
analysis, this report is, is an
attempt to do a needs and gaps
analysis, and it's a work in
progress and we expect to update
it as more data becomes
available.
Moving on to slide 6. So, uh,
Senator Trujillo, you know, in
the, in the last presentation,
you'd kind of asked about, you
know, is there a flow chart? Is
there something like that? Well
this is the flow chart of our
current system.
Um, it's pretty messy and we
didn't include, this is only
state agencies. We didn't
include local governments. We
didn't include local
organizations. We didn't include
the federal government on this.
And if we were to include those,
those groups, uh, this would get
quite a bit bigger.
And quite a bit messier.
And I think the one, thing from
this slide that I want you to
walk away with is that
Uh, nobody really has their arms
around this entire thing. It's,
it's a big complicated.
Uh, system
And I don't think anybody really
uh is 100% on top of everything
else.
Moving on to the next slide 7.
This is just a table uh to show
what enrollment looks like, um,
and Medicaid, uh, in, in our
Medicaid program, approximately
42% of the New Mexico population
is covered by Medicaid.
Uh, with such a large portion of
the state's population covered
by Medicaid. It's our single
biggest, uh, lever.
To make change within uh.
Within the behavioral health
system.
Moving on to slide 8.
Uh, Medicaid is the largest
payer for behavioral health
services in the state and
nationally. Again, it's our
biggest lever.
Um, about 900 million went into
behavioral health in FY 25.
However, there's a significant
amount of funding coming from
the federal government, which
will, which I'll get into more
detail that is not tracked at
the state level.
Uh, moving on to slide 9.
This is just to give you an idea
of where the funding is, uh,
within the state.
About 830 million of it is in
Medicaid, uh, or that was in FY
25.
Um, or about 75% of it is in
Medicaid.
The rest of the funding is
distributed among the other
agencies which include
development disabilities
counsel, uh, behavioral Health
Services Division, which is also
a part of the healthcare
authority Department of Health,
Children, Youth and Families,
and, and so on.
You can see that the elephant in
the room is obviously
Uh, Medicaid.
Uh, moving on to slide 10.
Uh, behavioral health special
appropriations, um provided
additional funding for 2020
through FY 2025.
So this is non-recurring
funding.
Uh, between 2020 and 2025,
you're appropriated about 424
million in total.
Um, we budgeted about 240
million.
They can cupboard or expended
about 115 million and there's
about 90 million that hasn't
been touched.
Um, as far as, uh,
Um, right now, and then you can
see this little table here in
the middle, kind of just breaks
out what some of the bigger
chunks of that funding is real
health grants at 126 million.
You heard about that this
morning, they're asking for
another 50 million for those
grants.
Um
Going forward into FY 26.
Moving on to slide 11.
Federal grant data shows
significant resources for
healthcare and behavioral health
and substance abuse programs.
From uh FY 21 to FY 2024.
But, uh, so the table on the
left here gives you all health
grants coming from the federal
government, the table on the
right is just your behavioral
health grants, and you can see
that in 2021, there was that big
spike. That's because there was
still uh funding coming in for
the um moving on to slide 12.
More than half of the federal,
federal grant dollars over the
past 10 years went directly to
behavioral health provider and
uh since many federal grants go
straight to local government
and,
to track these grants and ensure
state funding and granting is
not duplicative.
Um, if you notice there are only
about 32% of the federal
government of the federal funds
that flow in from those sources
on the last slide, um.
Actually goes to state agencies,
the rest of it kind of goes
around the state and we don't
really get much of a picture of
where those findings, where that
funding is being spent, that
sort of thing.
Uh, moving on to slide 13.
Uh, federal grant funding flows
to many different areas of need,
um, includes grants to state and
local governments.
Um, on this table, you can see
the breakout of funds for
specific purposes. So like, for
example, that first highlighted
ones, uh, substance abuse, um,
you can see that over the, over
those 4 years that are covered
here, about 137 million came
into the state, um, just for
substance abuse, access to
behavioral health services and
behavioral health.
All right, I'm gonna change
gears a little bit here on slide
14.
Just talk a little bit about
what kinds of services there are
out there.
Um
I know Adrian kind of covered
some of this, but in House Bill
2.
Uh, a lot of these services are
actually already covered, um,
that we've got money in FY 26
for some of this stuff, uh.
Crisis intervention, um,
immediate support, which is
immediate support during uh an
emergency.
We've got money in in House Bill
2 for supportive housing, uh,
with behavioral health support.
We've got funding in there for
certified community behavioral
health clinics.
Um, there's money for medication
assisted treatment, which is
considered one of the
Uh, topwas to kind of reduce um
or to kind of
Help um with substance use
disorder.
Um
Expert, uh, we included money
for the screening brief
intervention.
Referral to services, uh, last
year, and I know the behavioral
Health Services division is
working on that.
There's also money in there for
Matt and the Carcere uh
settings including um.
And this is all part of that CJ
waiver that uh
The Department has
Also, certified community
behavioral health clinics, um,
moving on to slide 15.
Um, I just wanted to give you a
little bit of detail of what
certified community behavioral
health clinics do. This is kind
of a new model. Uh, we've got 7
that are being rolled out in
2025.
Uh, according to the department,
I think there's another 5 that
are supposed to be rolled out,
um, in FY 26 and then there's
more money in the FY 26 budget
for
Uh, certified community health
clinics.
Moving on to slide 16.
Um, limited access to care and
high need communities. Um, I'm
not actually gonna go over this
one, I think Adrian actually
kind of covered some of this,
uh, when he was talking about.
Um
Uh, credentialing and some of
those other issues, so I'll move
on from that.
Uh, some of the data that we
have on some of the actual gaps
in the state.
Um
On slide 17.
You can see there that uh
Our workforce is actually
growing, um.
And it's sort of led by
certified nurse practitioners.
You can see that under Blue
Cross and Blue Shield. This is,
these are Medicaid providers.
Um, we've gone from 175
providers to 231 and then in
Presbyterian, we've gone from
269 providers to 340.
So we've actually improved our
workforce out there in
behavioral health. It's just
we're not seeing the outcomes
that we would expect to see.
From uh.
From this improved workforce.
Uh, Medicaid MCO facilities on
slide 18.
Um, counts show a modest
increases and some declines from
2022 to 2024.
Uh, slide 19, I gave everybody a
Look here at um where the local
collaboratives are located local
behavior health collaboratives.
Um, and then in the appendix,
and you guys can kind of flip
through the appendix, uh,
At your own leisure.
What we did was we broke out
each of the local
collaboratives.
Um, so, for example, on slide
22.
Skip ahead, please.
You'll see that uh we looked at
the local collaborative area
one, Santa Fe, Ria Riba, and Los
Alamos counties. I'm gonna save
you some breaths cause in in
In Senate Bill 3, we get rid of
the collaboratives.
OK. With the approval of the ec,
so.
Jump to the next one. Well, I,
I, that's, and that's it. I just
wanted everybody to see, uh,
within their local communities,
what kind of workforce they
have.
And you can uh go through this
at your own pleasure, look at
your own.
Uh, communities and see.
Uh, where the needs and gaps are
located.
Senator Mason.
my.
the
ago.
person
You're the only one I see.
No pressure, but.
Mhm
Eric, could, could you
OK.
Right.
Um,
So this morning I learned that
the Medicaid children that
qualify for Medicaid.
They're reimbursing, I guess at
400% based on a family of 4
bringing in $128,000 a year and
change, so they told us that 70%
of children born in New Mexico
based on this chart, right, the
schedule, 70% of babies born in
New Mexico qualify for Medicaid.
So when you said that 42% of our
population qualifies for
Medicaid. Is it including
schedules like that or is it
just based across the board,
right? That's, that's correct, I
think.
Right now there's
Let's just use the round number
about 850,000.
Enrolled in Medicaid, that comes
out to about, you know, 43, 40,
44% of the state's population of
about 2 million. So Mr. Chair,
just, just so I know we're
talking about apples to apples,
you're not including.
Like the 70% babies that are
born qualifying for Medicaid for
like early childhood services
because of that sliding scale
would be children that are
enrolled in Medicaid also.
So that 80.
50 million
I'm sorry, 850,000.
People that are enrolled in
Medicaid, that includes children
or whatever.
So it's not
Mr. Chair, it's not really a
pure number than to say that 42%
because in another state it
those people wouldn't
necessarily be qualifying.
Correct.
Like the children that you're
counting and I'm, I'm just
trying to get real clear on how
we are talking about you qualify
for Medicaid versus other
states. Am I making sense, Mr.
Chair?
No.
Ask Erick. He's an expert.
Mr. Cherry, yeah, I think you
are. um, and this is just the
state of that data was just the
state of New Mexico. Um, it's.
It's, you know, if you could go
back to that slide, and I think
it's the uh
I probably have the slide I'm
talking about, Mr. Chair, in my
bag somewhere, but for time's
sake.
I'm just saying other states
maybe aren't saying that.
In other states, let's take
Arizona. The, the 70% of
children born in New Mexico here
by our rules wouldn't
necessarily qualify in Arizona.
That's, that's correct. OK, by
the way, we calculate.
It's different than other
states. So when you say 42% of
our population.
are covered under Medicaid here
in New Mexico. If we flip to
that whole population over to
Arizona, potentially they
wouldn't be qualifying. We,
we're, we're looking at this
differently than other states.
Am I correct, Mr. Chair?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
yeah, that's correct.
OK.
Mm. Thank you.
Center trail.
Thank you. um, and Mr. Chairman
Eric, I don't really have a
question, just a comment, um,
and thank you for this flow
chart.
That helps, um.
Not anywhere listed on this is
um what cinder compost was
talking about earlier, which is
Our health licensing entities.
have a tremendous amount of
responsibility at the very
beginning, right? And they kind
of drive the workforce or drive
out the workforce and
You know, I, I will just point
out that, you know, we've got
the medical board standalone,
the nursing board stand alone,
pharmacy board is part of RLD.
We've got all these other
healthcare professions, part of
RLD we've got some facilities
are licensed in the healthcare
authority, other individuals are
licensed into the Department of
Health.
For years I have advocated that
we should have one entity that's
responsible, and there's a lot
of pushback because professions
want to be their own.
Uh, they, they, they wanna be
their own person, right? They
want to be their own entity, and
I, I get that. I understand it,
um, but it's also not helpful
for New Mexico when we're trying
to figure out how to, how do we
get these individuals trained,
how do we move them into the
workforce because every little
independent licensing entity.
We give them authority to create
their own roles.
For how you get licensed and
what you can do.
We don't have a standard scope
of practice, we don't have an
entity that looks at scope of
practice, they bringsco
practices up here. I'm carrying
a nutrition and dietetics
completely redoing the scope of
practice because we're so far
behind, like 20 years behind
with the national level is.
We just don't have a strategy
for how we get people trained
and licensed so that they can
get into the profession, just to
comment. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you.
Any other questions Eric, let me
wrap some things up. Do you
think there's a problem when,
when the ACA, they reassigned
all the behavioral health,
right?
To each and they assigned a
certain number to each provider.
And some providers got a
majority and some providers got
a minority.
And so, do you think?
That because of an imbalance,
we're gonna have an imbalance of
services because, you know, the
secretary left and and so she's
not here so I can ask her that
question, but there's an
imbalance of the number of
People being serviced by certain
providers, and then other
providers are left short, and
those providers cannot continue
because they don't have enough
base to continue the operation,
you have to give it up and give
it to another provider. Do you
think that's gonna be an ongoing
issue is.
Mr. Chairman, I, I think we're
asking about is the is the
managed care organizations and
they have networks of providers
out there, each, each one does.
We recently went from 3 MCOs to
4, but we dropped 1 and that was
Western Sky and we added Molina
and UnitedHealthcare.
And so
Um, I do think going into the
Future, that's that's a great
question, and I think as we
continue to add to this uh
behavioral health needs and
gaps. That's something that
we're definitely gonna be
looking at since we're so much
in flux right now with
Presbyterian, you know, the only
two that are left are
Presbyterian and, and
Blue Cross, we don't have a lot
of new data yet from the other
two.
CEOs, but once we do get that
data, we're definitely gonna be
looking into that. We need to
balance that right now,
especially as we head down this
road, right, because if we have
a majority of providers taking
the majority of the clients and
other providers that are saying
we can't sustain it because we
don't have enough.
Patients
And, and they drop off, then
we're gonna lose providers and,
and so we got to rebalance that
somehow. So think about how in
that language needs to hit
inside the bill. Some
rebalancing has to take shape in
one.
Or another, so.
With the amount of money and
then
You know
In 2020 when COVID hit, we put
$20 million into Be Health
Services.
And from 2020 to
20
24.
The money sat there unspent.
And that was turn the lights on,
buy a bed, get hire people, rent
a building.
Nothing happened, right?
And then we transferred it to
CIFD for child.
Mental wealth.
Health and then we put them in
offices.
Wholly, the thing that Kevin has
told us not to do.
And we spend that 20 million
buying.
Furniture
Rooms, I guess, beds, whatever
they needed to stay overnight
off the thing that Kevin has
told us not to do, find out what
the balance is and where that
exactly that 20 million because
we, it sat there for 4 years,
$20 million doing nothing.
Do that.
Can you tell me on page 15 were
the 7 certified behavioral
health clinics are. I know
there's one in Las Vegas center
conferences.
this uh so they're Mr. Chairman,
my understanding is uh there's
one in McKinley, one in
Sandoval, one in Santa Fe.
One in Bernalillo County, one in
Curry, one in Eddie, and one in
Donia Hanna County. OK.
Can you get us the background on
them, how many patients they
serve, what kinds of services
they provide.
Get us all that. I, I can look
into that for you.
OK. Don't look, get it, we'll
get it. The mayor is up next,
uh, he may know a lot of this,
that one in Korea is the one
he's operating, so.
Alright, thank you for your time
presentation. See you back here
in 5 minutes with the
information. Thank you.
Beer.
Good afternoon. Sorry we run a
little bit late.
Yeah, that.
Welcome. Good afternoon.
Chairman and committee members
and Mayor Mike Morris from
Clovis, and um I believe you've
been provided like you have, uh,
with, with that you have to push
the little person that's with
the voice on there and then turn
it off when you're done. Thank
you, Senator and then, uh, let
me ask you before you start, is
one of those health clinics in,
it's in Curry, so that's Clovis.
We, we do not have an inpatient
facility in Curry right now. I'm
going to tell you about the one
we're working on, uh, but we do
not currently have one
operating.
Well
We'll, we'll get that
information because he's was
shaking his head yes when Eric
was listening, so you know
what's there and we don't, so go
ahead, yes sir, again, uh, sorry
about the microphone issue, but
uh, good afternoon, Mr. Chairman
and committee members. I'm Mike
Morris, a mayor of Clovis, and
I'm really happy to be here
today to tell you about a
regional effort that that uh
Clovis has led on but certainly
is not doing it by themselves. I
in partnership with Portalis
Fort Sumner.
Curry County, Devaca, Quay,
Roosevelt, and Union Counties,
uh, for about the last 3 years,
going on 3 years, we've been
working on addressing behavioral
health in in our region. And uh
that involved pulling all of our
community leaders together, uh,
back then and um discussing what
we viewed as a problem, uh, too
large for any one of us to deal
with and that we would need to
band together in order to deal
with it and that led to us
engaging a
consulting firm called Initium
out of Denver uh to help us with
the feasibility study and to
assess the gap and what was
needed in, in, in our region of
the state.
Fast forwarding to, to where
we're at today. Let, let me just
uh tell you um what.
We could have that 2nd slide for
you if you just tell them what
slide when you change. I think
it's slide 2.
You just say slide to hill
chains.
My slides aren't Mr. Chairman.
Uh, so when we looked at the uh
traditional uh crisis flow and
and literally what we're
experiencing in eastern New
Mexico, uh, it seemed that
everything would either end up,
uh, I say everything, folks in
need of crisis intervention with
their behavioral healthcare uh
challenges would either end up
in the emergency room or in the
county detention center.
And that um obviously is is not
um
As good as we think we can do
and so uh we've moved to, if we
can have slide 3,
The, the goal being a uh new uh
continuum of care. And if you
notice on the far left, um,
Is the um um uh least
restrictive and and least costly
and, and then, and then it moves
left, but um um I wanted to in
the interest of time, point out
in the middle, you see the uh
crisis or the mobile crisis team
as part of the continuum of
care, we already have that stood
up in, in Clovis. We have a
mobile crisis team that is
having a a a great deal of
success when our law enforcement
encounters of an individual who
may have, you know, been called.
You know, 911 was called because
they're trespassing or or what
have you and our officer is able
to ascertain that, you know,
they don't need handcuffs and it
down to the detention center,
they need some help. They're
able to call our mobile crisis
team out right then and have
them engaged and we're seeing
some really good outcomes from
that. OK stop you right there
and yes, Mr. Chairman.
So when they call the crisis
team out, right? Do they have
the ability to take them right
then and there.
And
Or do they have to coach him
into going so.
The
Well that ability isn't there at
all right now because we don't
have the facility in place yet,
but um, but there is an
involuntary aspect to uh to the
crisis triage center that we're
we're establishing.
Uh, right now it is, it is
voluntary, right? And in that
individual oftentimes is
choosing between continuing to
have a conversation with law
enforcement or have a
conversation with uh a crisis
care professional.
OK, great. I'm sorry. No, no,
that's, that's fine. Uh, let's
go to the uh next slide. We
won't spend too much time there.
I, I told you that, um,
Almost 3 years ago, we engaged
in Ium Health to help us with
the feasibility study and a gap
study for uh our our region, and
the results of that study were,
uh, what was proposed is a 48
bed inpatient facility, and uh
that was, that was our thought
and we had, you know, an
estimate for that of $40 million
to construct that facility and,
and so on, but then we had the
the the legislative changes that
came that would give us the
ability to do a crisis triage
center and, you know.
I'm not sure if we would ever
get the 40 million, uh, we, we
pivoted and and have now um
focused on establishing a crisis
triage center and um having a
combination of observation beds
and inpatient beds, which, of
course, the law allows the
inpatient beds to um to have
someone stay for up to 14 days.
Slide.
The, um, again, just to expand
on the the crisis uh triage
center services that that will
be available and that the law
provides for uh short term
observation, assessment and
treatment and planning for
behavioral health crisis so that
can happen literally in a
recliner in an observation area
and a triage area in the in the
facility and an individual can
be in that recliner and and be
under observation for up to 23
hours and they, and it may be
that they're connected to robust
outpatient.
He, uh, and, and, and, and they
leave the facility or it may be
that they need to spend some
time in the inpatient facility
and if that's the case, then
they can be moved to the uh
inpatient side of the facility.
We identified.
A location, um, a couple of
sessions ago that uh we, we were
our project was um was supported
with Capital outlay from the
governor of $10 million and so
we received $10 million to get
started with in addition to that
funding, each of our entities,
each of the municipalities and
counties have pledged their
opioid settlement funds, uh,
towards this effort and so we
were able to identify and
purchase the land. It's on the
west side of Clovis. It's near
the hospital, really.
kind of right across the street
from the hospital and, and, and
that's, uh, that's a good thing
and so we've identified an 18
acre uh location. We have a
picture of the location, um, and
I
I think that's on the next
slide.
I
And then if we could go to the
slide after the picture of bare
ground because someday I want to
show you a picture of a
facility. Uh, the, the
strategies with this, um.
involve obviously law
enforcement partnership, uh,
that's fairly easy law
enforcement partnership has been
part of our consortium and our
working group on this project
all along the way, providing
input as to, you know, what it
is that that they see the needs
are and and what would be great
features in a crisis triage
center, um, the service mix is
of course going to include detox
services and uh involuntary
admissions, um, staffing as it
was discussed earlier. I was
actually encouraged by the the.
right before me that the
staffing seems to be getting
better or that the workforce
seems to be improving. Uh, we're
doing some work on our own, uh,
to, to try and improve the the
workforce or to develop a
pipeline working with Eastern
New Mexico University who has
stood up as of last fall, a
master of social work program as
well as, you know, expanding
their social work program, their
bachelor program, uh, we've also
partnered with and, and, and had
as a partner in Clovis Community
College who is um working on,
um, you know,
programs, courses that put
students on a pathway to being a
behavioral health professional
and so we're working very hard
along with our higher ed
institutions in order to
Uh, build the pipeline. We can
let's go 2 slides.
Maybe 3 slides.
OK, right there. So I told you
that the crisis triage center
would involve uh observation,
um, care, as well as residential
care. So in, in our facility, we
will have 10 receiving recliners
where observation can take
place, and this is important.
Mr. Chairman and committee
members. I know that you all are
probably acquainted with how it
flows in maybe your, your home
community, but uh in Clovis,
inpatient care is at least as
far away as Amarillo, but
sometimes as far away as Massa
Valley, and, and sometimes El
Paso.
And so if you think about a
person who, whether it's
substance use disorder or
otherwise is in in crisis and
absent this facility in our, our
community, they're going to end
up at the emergency room.
At the emergency room, they
don't really receive the, the,
the best care and if it's.
If it's something that doesn't
seem so serious, sadly, they
just get released. They just get
asked to leave, and so they go
back out. If it is, if it is
something that's obvious that
that there's inpatient care
required, well, then they're
referred to an inpatient
facility.
Miles and miles and hours and
hours away from our community
which creates a strain on
resources to get them to and
from and also creates a strain
on that family, uh, trying to
support that individual or
In many cases, it creates a
strain on a squadron at Cannon
Air Force Base trying to support
an airman who already doesn't,
you know,
You know, Clovis and Cannon
isn't home and now they're
4 or 5 hours away from, you
know, their duty station and so
their first sergeant is having
to make trips to to check on
them. So this observation
recliner is a is a deal changer
because that gives the, the, the
patient and the professionals
the time to really evaluate
what's going on and get them
connected to the appropriate
care, whether it be inpatient or
just simply stabilizing things
and having them connected to the
robust outpatient care. The um
Short term uh stay beds, there
will be 12 of them and as we
talked about it, uh, or as I
mentioned earlier, the law
provides for an individual to be
able to stay in an inpatient
facility like this one for up to
14 days.
So on the next slide uh we show
you where we're at with our
funding. I mentioned the capital
outlay from a couple of sessions
ago, $10 million.
We, um, also have funding from a
couple of different sources, uh,
smaller amounts, of course, and
then the opioid settlement funds
we've spent about 400,000 give
or take on the land. We have um
Identified an operator.
Uh, because there's no one in
eastern New Mexico that's,
that's in the business of
operating a crisis triage
center, so we went out for that.
Uh, we went on a couple of times
for that. And uh ultimately
landed on and and have um uh an
agreement working on an
agreement with the community or
a company called Community
Bridges who's in the behavioral
health care business and so
we're very excited about that.
It's important that we bring
them in at the time that we did
so that they could provide input
into the design build phase that
that we're moving into.
very quickly. Last Sunday, the
RFP went out for the uh the
contractor that will actually
construct the facility for us
over the next 18 months. We hope
it's that short or less, uh, but
over the next 18 months, we're
actually gonna do a design build
process to get this constructed
and get it up and running.
There is a um website uh
Horizon.
D H Center.com and I can share
that with you all, uh, you know,
an email if you like, uh, where,
um Initum Health has established
a website to, to, for anyone
that's interested in our
facility and where we're at with
this, um.
And then the question becomes
what next, right? If it's, and
which is why I'm encouraged that
you're considering what you are,
Mr. Chairman and committee
members, uh, in, in the way of
investing in behavioral health
care because we don't know
exactly once we have this up and
running, we don't, we don't
know.
We don't know if we, if we will
wish or we will realize that we
needed more inpatient beds. We
don't know if there will be a
second phase where you have more
residential type care or it may
be that we need to invest more
in the the hub and spoke type
model where we're really
standing up more robust
outpatient care in the
communities that that um uh that
are all involved in this and and
that we're trying to support
with this facility and so, you
know, it's, it's, it's really
encouraging to hear you talk
about setting up a fund and and
and.
You know, really giving us the
opportunity to get our facility
up and running and then pilot
the services, you know, if it's,
if it's more observation type
care, uh, that, that we need,
we, you know, we may need
support in developing that and,
and continuing to provide that
where, like I said, it may be
more residential or it may be
that we get more creative and
more robust in how we build out
the outpatient care into the
communities around us like to
carry, Fort Sumner, and, and so
on.
Questions.
Yeah, I think there'll be a lot.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you chair and thank you,
Mayor. I think it's, it's
outstanding that you're, you're
really leaning into and
investing in your community in
this way, I think that's
terrific. I just had a couple of
questions on the, on the crisis
triage triage center, is that
also for youth or is that uh
solely for adults. So that's for
um age 14 and 14. OK, I didn't
hear that. OK. And is the detox,
uh, Mr. Chairman and mayor, uh,
is that alcohol and drug both
and what is it, what are they
detoxing from?
is both alcohol and drugs, any
substance use disorder that
someone must be might be
suffering from.
And are you accepting patients
already there or or full uh
clients there already or are you
still standing at a?
I still standing that up, sir,
uh, we.
Mm
We haven't begun construction on
our facility yet.
We, we, we have the RFP out for
the contractor that's going to
construct this for us in a
design build process. We, we do
not. This is a future facility.
We're almost 3 years in and this
is the stage we're at.
OK. And Mr. Chair, I apologize.
I was listening. I just didn't
hear that. That's fine. Are you
modeling this on some other
communities, uh, programming or
what what are you doing to
decide this is what we really
need here some somewhat, yes
sir, uh, Mr. Chairman and uh
Senator, uh, to this point, it
has been modeled on this other
facilities that Initium Health,
who who's been our consultant on
this out of Denver they they
have uh done projects similar to
this, but as you know, this type
of care is evolving all over the
country.
And so, you know, they're.
Until very recently, there
wasn't a lot of other models
exactly like what we're trying
to accomplish, but yes, answer
your question we have modeled it
after a facility, um, in the
Denver area and I forget where
the other facility is, but uh
initum Health has sort of
brought that that operational
and in some cases have brought
the individuals running those
facilities in to the
conversations as we've tried to
build this and then it was
important that we bring our
operator community bridges on
because they are in the
business.
And they're able to provide
input as to the design and and
the finished product.
Well, OK, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Mayor, and I, I, I
think you're on the right track,
absolutely. The question that I
have is, is, is, uh, sort of
this is gonna be the, the, the,
the big one out there what next?
So once I've gone through your
triage center and I've stayed
for the period of time I'm
allowed to stay there.
What next for me? I mean, cause,
you know, you drop them right
back out into the community
where they fell into this.
Behavior. What are you gonna,
what are you gonna do next?
Yeah, so, you know, so currently
in Clovis, we have, you know,
outpatient care, right? We have
a couple of different, um, you
know, private practices that are
providing outpatient care and so
we need to continue to grow
that, that.
That piece of this puzzle,
because it's so important that
you know we we think about
stabilizing the crisis that the
individual is in and then a good
handoff to robust outpatient
care, and we got to imagine
that.
That
That's at least the right
direction to go, but, but yes,
sir, to your point.
Chairman and senator, what is
next? You know, how, how does
all of this work out? We just
know that this feels like the
right direction to be moving.
And chair and I think you're
absolutely right that this is
the right, and then you're gonna
succeed in in a bit, you know,
in a big way with this. When you
start seeing though in
inevitably you will see some
repeat behavior. What do you, do
you have any uh documented
standard operating procedures on
because you don't want to keep
using this bed that could
potentially succeed for somebody
else.
You know, I, I worry about that
part because then there's
employee morale, there's any
number of things you're gonna
have to deal with.
At some point there.
Chairman Senator, yes, sir, um,
that's um.
I, I'm not prepared with any of
that data, nor, you know, what
our policy may look like, but,
but we've we've looked at the
cost of providing care to the
repeat.
Um, you know, patients, uh, and,
you know, the, the.
They're the the it's a it's a
small number of repeat patients
that are the vast majority of
the cost of providing care in
any community, and we know that
that may be the case, um, in, in
our community, but again, we
want to have as, as, as great of
outpatient care as possible, and
then, you know, trying to do all
of the other things in our
communities as well to provide
for great opportunities for, you
know, healthy.
Successful living.
Mm
Well, thank you, chair, and, and
again, thank you, Mayor. I have
a suggestion for you if you're
interested. So, um, you know,
and I've disclosed this before,
I mean.
People here don't say it out
loud, that's fine, but I have
family that have fallen into
this, uh, kin that had fallen
into the stage of of their life
or something like that, and, and
we get heavily involved and try
to help them overcome this and
get away from it and all that,
uh, substance abuse primarily
and, and what we do is uh we
have family all over this
country and what we do is we, we
move them if they're willing to
a whole other community because
we find that if we don't, then
they, it's very easily for them
to fall back into. So the
suggestion I have for you is,
and I.
you know, AJ behind you and
others, but, um, you know, maybe
you partner with the community
out there somewhere on the other
side of the state and you just
kind of help each other through
this. And if you, if you drop
someone in another community
that they don't know where to go
3 minutes down the road or 30
seconds down the road where to
get the whatever it it tends to
be a little more successful
after that initial treatment.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank you
for that suggestion that, that,
that's definitely something to
consider incorporating right,
thank you.
Let, let me ask you one
question. Do you think that we
ought to change the restriction
for only 14 days or 18 days in
the bed. I think we ought to
extend that, or do you think
that will clog up the number of
bits. You know more about
behavioral health than I do, so
I know really nothing.
Mr. Chairman, you, you're giving
me way too much credit. uh, you
know, I.
I would shoot, I'm tempted to
shoot from the hip and, and say
uh yes or no, but I would prefer
to, you know, really lean on the
experts that have helped us all
along the way and I asked that
question. I'm not sure.
You know, you landed on 14 for,
you know, for, for some reason
with, with that legislation in
23 and so, um, you know.
I got to imagine that it was
There was a good reason for
Yeah, and then you've heard our
plans.
You want to take that back to
the company that you're doing
your pay with and trying to give
you some comments. If they're
in, we're, I'm not in the arena,
me and Adrian were kind of
tasked with this and, and it's
been a learning lesson for me,
believe me, more than I really
wanna know. I mean, we need good
input.
And we need experts and so we
need experts that aren't looking
to chase the money. They're
actually looking to provide
services and provide them the
right way.
I mean, if, if we need you to
spend some time with Adrian and
tune you up or get on a Zoom
with your you to give us some
good advice. I think the best
advice we could get.
Is everybody's advice and then
expert advice.
Mr. Chairman, I totally agree
with that, and I would, I would
actually like that opportunity
to visit with Adrian and and uh.
get him included on one of our,
our meetings so that so that we
can discuss uh how, how relevant
we think the plans are.
How much shorter are you on to
finish your building?
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
I
I've been doing public service
and projects long enough that I
don't want to, you know, be too
confident, but uh we have uh we
have 9.5 million, uh, after the
purchase of the land and um
We think that might be enough uh
to construct our first phase in
this crisis triage center, uh,
but even as I say that I, you
know, I would love to have you
all think that we need double
that so that you can support us
on on it when, when and if we we
run over.
Design builds are sometimes not
the best way to go because they
The contractors at no risk, so
they're gonna budget a high
number, so we've paired.
Um
Or deal with Caval Alley next,
so we'll we'll tell the governor
we're gonna take another 9 out
of her share.
Give to you and you can tell her
you can break the news to her.
Thank you. And and then see if
she still likes Clovis. Thanks
for your time. We appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh, uh,
AJ I'll get you in touch with
Adrian.
Kelly, your next best you coming
up to or?
You want me to talk about your
pay raise to your boss.
handout to Kelly.
Um, Mr. Cherry, yeah, they're
coming around.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thanks for having us
today. My name is Callie
Carswell, um, I do capital
outlay for LFC. Joining me today
is Wesley Billingsley. Uh, he's
my counterpart in the executive,
um, on the statewide capital
framework and also the director
of the infrastructure division
at DFA.
So, um, for those of you that
are new to this committee or to
the legislature, uh, the first
thing we're gonna go through
today is what we call the
statewide capital outlay
framework.
Um, kind of our core job as
analysts working on capital
outlay at the LFC is to develop
this with the committee in the
fall. It's basically the budget
recommendation.
Um, for state capital outlays,
so, uh, kind of physical assets,
uh, owned and maintained by the
state of New Mexico. Usually it
makes up about half of the
overall capital bill.
That you all passed during the
session.
So, um, like the rest of the
budget, uh, this, uh,
recommendation is developed over
the summer and fall with the
Legislative Finance Committee
adopted by the committee, um, in
December and it becomes the
foundation for the capital bill,
the big spreadsheets you have
behind the bullets, uh, give you
a side by side of the LFC versus
the executive recommendation.
I'm just gonna walk you through
the bullets today, um, but you
do have all the detail in the
spreadsheets.
If you would like to look at
those. And essentially how to
read the spreadsheets, um,
they're organized by agency. Uh,
there's a title of the request,
column B shows the amount
requested. The next 3 columns
show the LFC recommendation
broken down by funding source
and then a total, uh, the peach
colored columns show the same
for the executive and then
column K is how much the LFC
rack is either over or under the
executive. There's some staff
notes uh in column L.
And then the county of the
project is located in.
Or if it's a kind of statewide
general purpose appropriation is
in column M.
So, starting with the bullets um
on the front of that page, uh,
you'll see our overall total
recommendations and then a
breakdown by funding source LFC
versus the executive. So the LFC
framework proposes a statewide
capital outlay package totaling
about $525 million 275 million
of that would come from the
general fund, uh, about 165
million in severance tax bonds
and $85 million in state funds,
um, at
At this point we're in the
ballpark of around $400 million
off from the executive a little
over that, uh, which proposes a
statewide package of 90942
million with around 500 from the
general fund, a little under 300
million in severance tax bonds
and 152 million in other state
funds. Um, all right, so the
next set of bullets on this, uh,
overview under major
differences, um, gives you a
list of
projects that are in the
executive framework that are not
in the LFC framework at all, um,
and this accounts for, um,
probably about 3/4 of the total
differences in the overall
recommendations. So you'll see
$150 million for the executive
office building.
Uh, 36 million for um uh fire
training academy in Santa Fe,
uh, 25 million for DOT
facilities and heavy equipment.
Um, 16 million for plugging
orphan and gas wells.
Uh, 15 million for a state-owned
plane. 10 million for a
veteransource Center in
Albuquerque, um, 7.2 million for
uh purchase of a private
property, uh, adjacent to Museum
Hill in Santa Fe, um, 10 million
for a film school and 20 million
for a STEM institute.
Um, and if you kind of look at
the staff notes um on the
spreadsheets, you can see, uh,
some explanations for some of
those differences, and I'm not
gonna go through those in
detail, but, uh, Wesley and I
are happy to answer questions on
those, if you have them in
discussion.
So if you flip over to the back,
um, we do the same for projects
that are in the LFC framework,
but not in the executive
framework. Um, there's fewer of
those at lower dollar amounts,
uh, one is for $5 million for
renovation of the Department of
Public Safety's headquarters
here in Santa Fe and uh $5
million to, uh, the state
forestry division, um, for
improvements to facilities that
house a newly established
hotshot crews in San Miguel.
Socorro Counties.
And then, uh, the last set of
bullets just shows you some
differences in the overall
recommended funding um for
projects that are in both of our
frameworks.
So I'm not gonna go through
those in detail, but you can see
those, and again, we're uh happy
to answer questions.
And then I should have said at
the beginning that, um, the
spreadsheets, there's both one
for uh state agencies, and then
there's a detail for higher
education, uh, which is also
totaled in the first sheet.
So, um, Mr. Chair, we will stop
for questions on that.
Questions from committee
members.
to heal.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and so
on the backside.
The difference, the L in the LFC
and not in the executive.
Um
Does DPS really need to have
another 5 million? I thought
they just did a complete
upgrade. They've got a new
building, elevators.
What are they gonna, what are
they gonna do now?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
so this is not a renovation to
the new building. It's to an
older building, um, that they
also use that they're kind of
repurposing and running out of
capacity and so that's what it
would cover. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So kind of in the
back. No, this may be for the
beds for the trainees that may
be that facility, he left the
room. I don't see him back
there.
OK
We will confirm that for you,
Mr. Chair and Senator. Thank
you. And then on the, um, Mr.
Chairman, the 15 million for the
senior center statewide and LFC
is proposing 7.5. How much of
that is shovel ready and
It could 15 million truly be
spent this next year or will it
take a couple of years and are
these new facilities or upgrades
to current facilities.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
so it's a mix, um, just a little
bit of context on senior center
funding. Um, these are
essentially local projects that
go through the state.
Wide framework, um, senior
centers applied to the aging and
long-term services, uh,
department for funding. They
review the projects and then
they make a recommendation to
the legislature.
Um, so typically they're funded
in larger amounts in general
obligation bond years. So these
are one of the types of projects
that we fund through the GOB
bill every other year. And then
historically kind of in the off
years, um, it's been a much
smaller funding package for the,
for the last several years,
we've been doing those GOB level
appropriation packages for
senior centers every year. So in
kind of the $30 million range.
Um, these facilities were hit
particularly hard during
COVID with kind of every, the
project's all coming to a halt,
um, a lot of capacity issues
that were kind of hard to catch
up with. Um, so essentially the
reason for the lower
recommendation in the LFC
framework this year, um, is that
there is a significant backlog
of existing appropriations, um,
which kind of indicated that
there isn't immediate capacity
to spend at a higher level. Um,
it does include a mix of
projects that could be both new
construction and kind of
smaller.
stuff as well as just vehicle
purchases, stuff like that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
then, um, I'm excited to see
that we're looking at uh 40
million to upgrade our state
parks.
Um, could, uh, they could use
that money. And then the last
question I have is, um, second
to the last bullet, 20 million
for the state park.
State Fair is included in the
executive framework. I thought
the plan was to tear that down
and and build housing there and
if that's the plan, and what are
we giving 7.
$7 million for.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
that's a great question. Um, so
the LFC recommendation was
developed before that
announcement came out, um, and
once the committee adopts it, we
don't.
Change anything um until the
package starts to get negotiated
and, you know, you all give us
direction to make adjustments.
Um, so the LFC recommendation
was intended to support kind of
general infrastructure
improvements at the fairground,
um, although we had discussion
with the committee and, you
know, I would kind of agree with
you that now it's a question of
should that investment be made
at all. Um, and, you know, we,
we still don't exactly
know what the future of the
fairgrounds is gonna be, it's an
open question, um, and maybe
Wesley can respond on the
executive recommendation.
Thank you Mr. Chair, um, senator
Trujillo, I think um there is
still some work that needs to be
done at the existing fairground
location, um, infrastructure
wise with regards to electricity
and things of that nature. So I
think there's some funding that
can still be used for that, um,
and then the goal is to
obviously move the state fair to
a different location, um,
purchase land potentially for
that as well. And then there's
gonna need to be some
infrastructure done at that new
location as well. So that's the
reason for the 20 million. We
don't obviously know if that's
going to be enough or if there's
going to be more, um, most
likely more will be needed.
but um that's where we're at
right now with our
recommendation. OK, thank you,
um, and Mr. Chairman, one last
comment. I, I, I guess, um, I'm
very much, uh, I, I, I'm aware
of the ability for, there's a
private residence up on Museum
Hill. It would be a huge
addition to the museums here for
training and other purposes and
it's kind of a once in a
lifetime opportunity. So I'm,
I'm, I'm wondering, you know, I
would like to see that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Steinborn, you're
next. Thank you.
I, I was just gonna ask about
the same.
Residents on on Museum Hill,
what that's about.
But I'll ask my colleague here.
I'm sure she can enlighten me. I
think that's behind the opera.
That's what the opera.
OK, no, no, museum, no.
Yeah
Um, Mr. Chair, senators, um, so
this was not presented as a
formal request when we went
through the capital process this
fall. So I don't have a lot of
details about it, so I'll tell
you what I know and sort of open
to correction, and I haven't
gotten any of this on paper, so,
um, and Wesley can maybe follow
up to what I say. Um, so, yeah,
my understanding is that it's
adjacent to Museum Hill, um, and
that the owner passed away and
donated it to the opera.
which is now looking to sell it.
Um, and there's an interest in
the state acquiring it, um.
You know, possibly for events or
something like that, so, um,
we'll kind of put more questions
out there about the purpose and,
you know, an appraisal
condition, maintenance costs.
Um, all of that and um
Report back.
Sounds good.
So I have, thank you, Mr. Cha.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had
the same questions that Senator
Trujillo had on the state
fairgrounds. I guess I'm, I, I
didn't keep it, I don't know
that I followed that line
exactly, um, but yeah, I'm not
quite sure why we're gonna plow
$7 million into a site that
Well, I guess we haven't made
the decision whether we're gonna
move it, so we should just keep
investing in it.
I, I don't know that I follow
that logic.
You want to add any more to
that? I'm not quite sure we're
20 is the total 20 and then
sevens for infrastructure or
it's 20 + 7.
No, so, Mr. Chair, Senator
Padilla, um, so the LFC
recommendation was 7 million and
kind of
Developed before the
announcement was made that there
was an intention to move the
state fair. So the original
intention was under the idea of
the state fair would still still
exist where it's located, and,
you know, they've been doing a
bunch of improvements, I've done
a good job with it. It needs it.
So that kind of old logic. I
would say, you know, we agree
with you. The question is, if
that is not going to be its
location, should we put money
into it, um, and how much?
Um, and that kind of depends on
the timeline, you know, I mean,
if it's gonna be there for
another 10 years and you need to
do things to keep people safe
when they're there. You might
want to do something, but at a
minimal level. So I, you know, I
would say that's really up in
the air at this point.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
have you seen the money, the,
the, the movie, the Money Pit.
Tom Hanks.
That place reminds me of
sometimes, uh, go back to page
one then, um, the first, the
cover sheet on the uh
LFC analysis.
The 20 million for broadband. I
just, you know,
It's like a, you know, it's,
it's one of my primary swim
lanes here, but this seems like
a runaway train sometimes. I'm
seeing 20 million here. I heard
$70 million for this satellite
stuff. Then I heard $25 million
was the ask, what, what is this
one? Do we know what this 20
million is here?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
um, this is, this is separate
than the 70 million that you
heard earlier, um, with the
satellites. Um, this is just to
continue developing the
infrastructure throughout the
state. Um, this was a request
made by Office of Broadband, um,
through Do it.
I'm just really surprised
because they, they need a lot
more money than that. So, and,
and they have this, this uh uh
bead money that's come into the
state. They haven't gotten any
of it out the door. I'm not
quite sure why we would add
anything else until they get
that in order and they get that
uh so I, you know, appreciate
you bringing this to our
attention, but I'm not quite
sure what is this 20 million for
because I've heard 25 million,
70 million, not 20, 675 million,
we've got to, you know, start
moving and until that money
starts hitting the the ground. I
I can't be as supportive on
The additional funding there. So
I just want to make that
comment. And then on the 15
million for electric vehicle
infrastructure, uh, again, no
pun intended, but that doesn't
even get us out of the parking
lot with, with the electric
vehicle um apparatus, I'll call
it,
uh, what is, do we know what
this is for?
What the objective is here Mr.
Chair, Senator Padilla, yeah, I
think it's to begin to develop
that framework on the
infrastructure for charging
stations, um, and I think um
Anna Silva's here as well. She
might have a little bit more um
to, to, to, to put into this,
but yeah, I think it's just the
beginning phases of, of trying
to develop the infrastructure
throughout the state because
there is Mr. Chairman, an RFP
that's dangling out there that
has not been announced yet, I
guess. The elect called the
electrifying New Mexico or
something like that, uh, or
power up New Mexico, some one of
those, those very catchy names.
But I'm just trying to figure
out how that figure was
determined because it's gonna be
a heck of a lot more money than
that.
Mr. Senator Padilla, I can't
speak to how the figure was
determined that was the request,
um, but
Uh
So there was a similar request
last year, um, that was funded
in the capital bill, and the
purpose of it was to develop EV
charging infrastructure,
essentially in parts of the
state that the federal funds
didn't cover, which those are
mainly in the interstate
corridors, um, so, you know, my
presumption is that it is for
that again, and there still are
gaps.
Yeah, and then there was an
announcement of a MOU signed for
electric school bus, um.
Infrastructure also or something
like that. So maybe a little
more clarity if we can get a
hold of that, that'd be great.
Thank you. Thanks, Joe.
Thank you, uh, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, um,
Kelly.
And uh
Under the funding from the
framework.
Uh, where you have, um,
164.5 million service tax bonds
for.
Wildfire
in any of those funds be used
for?
Like
Like, um, say, um.
Building an earth dam to, to
help them water capacity in case
of a fire.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
so specifically there, let's see
if you turn to
that infrastructure.
4 of the first spreadsheet.
Starting on line 103, energy,
minerals and natural resources
department. So there's a few
different requests related to
wildfire here for different
purposes. So the STB
recommendation is for, um, a
facility for the wildfire
response program at the Forestry
division, um, they are losing
lease space they use in Santa
Fe, so they need to relocate.
Um, so that would not be for
that purpose. There's also 10
million for watershed
restoration.
Um, which is a program that
state forestry has been doing
again, um, to kind of
And watersheds, you know,
preventative burning, um, that
sort of stuff, wildlife wildfire
uh risk reduction efforts, um,
so I could ask them if that sort
of thing is ever um covered
under this program, but I would
have to get back to you on that.
and Mr. Turin, before you do
that, uh, you know, maybe I can
visit with you.
And I'll give you a little bit
of an insight. OK.
Like
Kelly, didn't we put 10 million
in the special session for
Waspread, watershed restoration.
Uh, to the
Emer in the special for the
fires in special appropriations,
um, there is some funding in
specials, um, for wildfire stuff
as well, um, and I will have to
get back to you on the exact
purpose. It's not entirely
duplicative of this though, I
don't believe. OK. The, the 20
million for the state fair, they
haven't decided what they're
gonna do.
And, and we gave him ARA money,
right? And it took him 5 years,
so you're gonna laugh at this, 5
years to decide that they're
going to buy bleachers into a
building that.
Needs to really go away.
Right? And so we wasted.
That amount of money in the
What is that in the 60s?
Reborn in the 60s when that
thing is built.
And, and so until the exec
decides exactly what they're
gonna do. I'm not interested in
looking at the state fair.
They got to make a decision.
And they got, they got 2 years
left.
I, I don't want to go through
the scenario of the exec says
we're gonna get this one's gonna
get rid of it and the next one
comes in and says, oh now it's
gonna take us 100 million to
save it.
Uh, I'm not going down that.
That path, so you need to make
sure Wesley that the exec makes
that.
that conversation and then
Senator Campos.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Just a few points with
the state parks and I'm gonna go
back to what uh.
Uh, Senator Til was talking
about in terms of the uh parks
themselves that we received a
list.
how those resources could be
expended and in particularly as
we've dealt with it, I know that
we visited uh Story Lake a
couple of years ago and it
definitely has has a need for
improvements and there's quite a
few others, but uh, is, is that
list available or we haven't
gotten that far yet.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, so
for the new request, um, we have
a list of them of specific
projects tied to specific sites
totaling about $65 million and I
can also get you detail on their
plans for existing
appropriations for state parks,
um, the most recent of which
named some specific parks
including Story Lake.
Um, elephant Bu and a few
others.
Uh, thank you. And Mr. Chairman,
as we go along, one of the other
uh projects that uh I've
mentioned to you is the native
aquatic species.
Restoration facility and and
that of course is to go and take
care of some of the endangered
species that we have in this
state, and I know that that's
gonna be an important project
and that's about $10 million. I
just wanted to flag that and
then uh just to go down with the
sick is, uh, I know that we uh
put in 2.5 million and we were
asking for another 2.5 million.
We have about 750secas uh that
uh have been affected, if you
will, not only by fires and
floods.
But uh some of the other
devastations as we move forward,
and then there are about
750secas that uh uh haven't been
totally sanctioned, and I know
that there's quite a bit of work
there, so I'm hoping that we'll
consider, if you will, the, the
full 5 million and then going to
dams, I know as we've.
I dealt with that, that's gonna
be another focus as we move
forward because we have several
that are in dire need of repair
and uh that's gonna be be
important to us. The, uh, the
last thing that I would just
bring up as we go forward is the
Mora courthouse and uh Mr.
Chairman, uh, Wesley you might
help me a little bit with this.
You've been very instrumental in
helping us not only secure the
resources which you visited the
site on on many occasions and um
It is a 5 million going to be
enough, uh, Mr. Chair?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Campos
know the $5 million will not be
enough, um, they, they need
roughly 9 to 10 million to to
finish um the build out of that
one section of the courthouse
and then I think an additional 8
to 9 million for more um of the
public safety side of the, of
the courthouse renovation
improvement. So I think they're
looking at another close to 18
million that they need total.
Um, I think they probably could
get away with 10 million this
year just to just to finalize
the show um before kind of
focusing on the public safety
renovations.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much just to uh enlighten the
committee as we move forward on
some of the other projects we're
gonna continue to try to seek
resources for. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, sir, composite. I
mean, there's, there's a lot of
things here that
We're all in agreement with the
exec on, right? State parks,
what do we fund state parks at
what level last year, Wesley, do
you remember that?
Kelly, I mean, we gave them a
big chunk of money and I don't
know if they've gotten through
that yet.
Um, Mr. Chair, I believe it was
between 10 and 20, maybe the
higher range.
OK.
Senator Tobiasson.
The woods we're going to try to
wrap up because we still got to
do as capital subcommittee and
framework Center to. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I have two questions.
One, on page 6, the line item
for the spaceport.
Does that generate income for
the state?
Is that a conversation for
another time?
Um
This is a funding sheet.
Mr. Chair, Senator, so that's
probably a great question for
them more generally at their
budget hearings, um, you know,
the intention originally was for
them to be an enterprise agency,
so at least self-funded, um, and
that has not quite panned out
and the state has continued to
need to assist with, uh, capital
investment for sure. OK, thank
you. And then my second
question, um, your section on
higher ed, that total number,
it's not broken down there, but
I did see.
in a prior um hearing.
That adult literacy program, the
governor, I, I think the
executive asked for $9 million
and the committee recommended
1.2 and currently they're funded
at $750,000 a year, which to me
just seems completely
inadequate. We're number one in
adult illiteracy. So, do you
know why the committee
recommended such a small amount
of money.
We may have to go back to
unexpended balances in what they
spent in like a 3 year average
and see if they spend all that.
Kelly, do you know any anymore?
Senator, Mr. Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, so there wasn't a
capital request related to that,
so I'm guessing that was an
institutional request or maybe
an RPSP or something, um, there
was a capital project last year,
um, for illiteracy center that
went to the higher education
department, but that was focused
on kind of structure, structured
literacy training for teachers
in the K through 12 system.
OK, thank you.
Thank you, Mr.
Kelly.
OK, um, Mr. Chair, so I was
gonna go through kind of a memo
providing some context for the
problems. Do you want me to do
that or would you like me to
jump straight to the other
thing?
Uh, jump to the directives and
then they'll have that sheet in
their hands, OK,
and then I'll just give a very
brief setup to it. Um, so, uh,
if you would like to look at
this memo, especially for those
of you who are again, new to
this committee or legislature,
uh, it'll give you kind of an
overview of some of the
challenges that the capital
program has been facing, uh,
recently, and then also for many
decades, um, which, uh, the
legislature over
the last few years has been
working on um improving for lack
of a better word.
Uh, the chairman, um, appointed
a subcommittee of the
Legislative Finance Committee
this fall, uh, to focus in
particular on um some solutions
to some of these challenges that
the legislature could act on
rather quickly.
So we kind of focused on
Um, a few areas of work, um,
and, uh, we are really focused
more on how to improve the
success of local projects.
Um, so how to improve the
success of the projects that you
all appropriate funds to
directly, um, and that the
governor also appropriates funds
to directly that mostly benefit
uh local and tribal governments
and other political subdivisions
of the state.
Um, so these types of projects
among kind of three major
categories of capital spending,
which are local, uh, state
agency and higher education. Um,
there's the most local projects
out there. They have the most
outstanding balances, so most
unspent funds and we see the
high, the slowest expenditure
rates on local projects, and
they have the highest risk of
incompletion, um, for a number
of reasons. Uh, one of those is
that they tend to get funded in
piecemeal manner, um,
essentially because the demands
that you all have on you for
these funds, uh, far, far
outstrips what you have
available to appropriate, um,
there are also relatively few
boundaries around how these
funds are appropriated, um, so
we often see, um,
Uh, entities coming to you all
for money, um, before projects
are really ready, um, maybe
before they have real cost
estimates, um, and what that
results in is basically it takes
a long time between when the
money is, is first put out there
when the project is ready, um,
in that time period, costs go
up.
Uh, sometimes priorities change
and the result is that the
benefits that you intend to see
in your communities are delayed,
um, or in some cases, as we've
seen in evaluation work we've
done for many years, um, never
completed at all. So we found
examples where, uh, you know,
maybe half the sewer system, um,
or a new well was built in a
community that was never
connected to electricity, um,
the partial sewer system was
never connected to the rest of
it, uh, for lack of
or sort of lack of planning, um,
and that means that the problem
you are trying to solve with
this capital investment is never
addressed in your communities,
never benefited. So that's the
kind of stuff we're kind of
focused on trying to improve,
um, so a couple areas that we
looked at, um, one, due to the
kind of rapidly outspan
expanding, um, overall balance.
in our capital program which to
give you a sense in the most
recent quarter we reported on
was $5.8 billion across more
than 5000 projects, just two
years ago at the same time, that
figure was $3.5 billion. Um, so
it's really grown, and that's
for a number of reasons. Uh, you
can see some of those on page 2
of this of this memo, uh, you
know, one of those is just that
appropriations have increased.
Um, other parts of our capital
program which include dedicated
sources for
certain types of projects, a
dedicated program for public
schools, revenues to those
programs have grown, and then
some of the other uh problems I
just talked about, um, as well
as a really dramatic rise in
construction costs in COVID and
beyond COVID, um, and
limitations that we have in both
the public and private sector in
New Mexico to spend all this
money and get things done.
So, uh, with that said, um, one
thing the committee has asked us
to look at is to try to identify
stalled projects, um, so we did
that, um, you can see the
results on that, of that on page
4 of this memo. Uh, so in the
fall,
We identified 5060 projects
about that had reversion dates
of June 2025 that had spent 10%
or less of the appropriations.
Um, recently, we narrowed that
list uh with updated expenditure
data to only, and this is on
page 4 of this memo.
Um, to only projects with
balances of 99% or more, so, um,
1 1% or less expended and zero
encumbrances either
self-reported or um kind of
official encumbrances in the
state's financial system.
Uh, and that list narrowed to
300 projects with balances of,
um, just about $78.2 million.
Uh, so the committee had some
discussion about, um, whether
they wanted to repurpose those
funds, which we'll get to more
in a second. Um, more generally,
we also discussed limiting
reauthorization of projects in
some way, um, so again,
currently there's very few
limits around reauthorization,
appropriations can be extended
to give, uh, grantees more time
to spend the money.
You can change the purpose, you
can expand the scope, um, and
kind of without any limits on
that, there's little incentive
to bring you guys projects that
are more ready to go, um, and to
make sure grantees have a plan
in place to spend the funds
efficiently and get the thing
done.
Um, we also talked about
opportunities to improve, uh,
vetting and prioritization of
projects, um, this year for the
first time, um,
We, uh, implemented at the
behest of legislative leadership
and earlier deadline for local
capital outlay requests,
pre-session that was intended to
give you all more time to
consider requests and with that
time, um, more opportunity to
gather more information about
the things you're being asked to
fund, where they're at, um, we
have worked with leadership
staff in the Legislative council
service to make sure the request
sheets you got.
have information and just a
simple yes no fashion on whether
projects meet certain key
vetting criteria, um, and we've
also provided, um, staff in each
of your caucuses with a tool
that can easily sort requests
for you. Um, so one of the
things we've talked a lot about
in LFC the last couple years is
encouraging legislators and
we've a applied the same
principles to the statewide
framework to prioritize
completing funding for existing
projects before starting new
stuff.
Um, but given that
You, uh, request didn't even
used to be due until session,
and then you all had very little
time and basically no staff
support to go through them. Um,
we didn't have a good way of if
you wanted to do that, telling
you how.
Um, so these tools that you have
now, like there's just a button,
the caucus staff can click and
sort the request by county and
tell you, OK, here's all the
requests in your county that are
related to an existing capital
project. Whether you want to use
this information is entirely at
your discretion, um, but we're,
we're trying to help support you
in having, um, more resources,
essentially.
Um, related to that, um, we have
also talked about strategies to
support project completion, um,
that's one of them. There's also
a $24 million recommended
appropriation in the statewide
framework that would go to DFA
or project completion grants for
existing capital projects, um,
that would come from the first
distribution of funds from a new
um capital development and
reserve funds that, um,
was a bill um that the LFC
chairs and the House tax and rev
chair, um, supported and um got
through the legislature last
year that uh is essentially
aimed at diversifying our
revenue sources for capital and
for the first time, it provides
us a um specific mechanism for
funding planning and design for
capital projects separate from
construction, which we have not
had before for local projects in
particular and allows us to move
towards
um, a, uh,
Uh, capital program that relies
more on cash and less on debt.
Um
The legislature is also focused
recently on creating and
bolstering special grant
programs that fund many of the
same projects that you all get
asked to fund with your local
capital outlay dollars, um, but
in some cases, um, can do it
better because they're able to
fund them at larger
Subs, essentially, then you have
available to you.
Um
Of particular importance is um
these kind of programs that fund
critical infrastructure in your
community. So not nice to have
stuff but the must-have stuff.
Uh, we have these types of
programs for water and
wastewater, um, and for roads,
which interestingly are two of
the most common types of
projects that, um, the
legislature funds through local
capital outlay and are also
among the most difficult to
complete with those limited
dollars cause they tend to be
larger, cost more, more.
Um,
you know, I think what that
indicates is that your
communities are bringing those
requests to you a lot, that it's
a need that is out there, and
that legislators have a desire
to fund it because it's
important, um, but we also know
that at the end of the day, if
that stuff isn't getting done,
it's not helping address those
needs. So you, you all have um
made additional appropriations
to those programs that we know
are working, um, and one of the
things we'll talk about next is
ways
that you might um either
encourage or require communities
to kind of go there first before
they ask for capital outlay
dollars.
So, Mr. Chair, we can transition
to this, and would you like to
introduce it first?
Sure, do we need to adopt it as
we go or do we want to just do
the framework and then adopt it
later.
I think that is up to you.
want me to make a decision today
you're the boss.
Um,
so we, we talked through the
interim about how to change
capital and what structures and
You know, I don't know if we can
get a bill passed.
That that's always seem to be
the problem and so as we move
this, right, I made, do you
wanna go for or do you want me
to go and buy 11 by one. I can
go over them, um, so, um, so
these are some options for
addressing some of these
problems, um, that I think the
chair and vice chair wanted you
all to uh consider and um
consider voting on and sort of
endorsing some of them apply to
this session and some for future
sessions. Um
So, uh, the first one,
is both about where reversions
for future capital outlay
projects would go, um, and a
potential limit on
reauthorizations for this year
for those stalled projects I
mentioned, um, which are within
months of approaching their
reversion date and showed no
spending and no encumbrances.
Um, so item A specifies that
reversions for future capital
outlay projects funded with
general fund would revert to the
capital development and reserve
Fund. So, as I mentioned, this
is a new trust fund, um, that is
aimed at diversifying our
capital program away from oil
and gas revenue on which it has
been almost 100% dependent in
the past, um, providing you the
opportunity to start, uh,
specifically funding planning
and design, separate from
construction.
And uh providing um the whole
capital program with more
options for cash financing.
And then for this year, um,
those projects that fall within
that kind of.
Reduced lists of identified
stall projects, um, would not be
permitted to be reauthorized,
um, balances on these projects
would revert to the original
funding source, so either the
general fund or the severance
tax bonding fund, um, except for
general fund appropriations for
tribal projects, um, which would
be repurposed.
To the tribal infrastructure
fund and for Colonia projects to
the colonius Infrastructure
Fund, and those are two of
those, um, special grant
programs I mentioned that um are
successful.
Questions
There's more.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Kelly. Um, I do have a question.
So starting with the first
sentence.
All future revisions.
Capitol outlay funding with
general funds shall revert to
the capital of Almaon. So,
The beginning of that sentence
implies that the project has
been reverted.
In a way, or it's, it's been um
Sorry, reversions. I was
thinking reauthorization. So
when we say reversions, we're
meaning the money is coming back
to the state. It has not been
spent.
Time's up, coming back or they
didn't want to reauthorize it.
OK, so what we're saying there
is that
When that rever reversion
happens, it will go into this
new fund.
OK, got it.
OK, moving on to the next
paragraph.
I think I'm concerned, if I
understand this right, projects
with the 2025 reversion date.
It means this year. So projects
that would be reauthorized this
year, we're basically saying no
this year to any new riots. Am I
reading that right?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, not
quite. So it would not be any
project with a 2025 revision
date. It would just be projects
with a 2025 reversion date that
had spent no more than 1% of the
money. The reason that that
figure was chosen is typically
if there's only 1% expended and
no other activity, it's just a
deduction for art in public
places. It's not an actual
expenditure. So we're really
trying to identify projects that
run their almost the full
authorization period have spent
no money and have not encumbered
any money either, and we
identified that both by actual
kind of official encumbrances in
Cher and also self-reported
encumbrances in CPMS. We're
trying to have a pretty kind of
like
Low bar, I would say for no
activity, um, on a project.
Yes, indeed.
But we've all had those
projects, you know, and I, and I
know it's like
Frustrating as hell.
Pardon my French, late in the
day, but um
But yeah, I do have a concern
though doing it.
Now suddenly, cause I think
there's no notice suddenly.
We're not doing it suddenly.
These are projects that will
expire in June of 2025
automatically.
So we're not expiring them,
they're automatically going to
expire in June 2025. I'll give
you an example of one of mine.
It was a fencing project in
Iambato.
That 6 years ago was a fencing
project in Rato
3 years ago I reauthorized for a
finishing project in Iyammato
and if you can't get a fencing
project done in 6 years, then we
got issues and so these revert
in June they automatically are
gonna revert. We're just
dedicating where they're gonna
go. And the 1% limit, let me
tell you, uh, there's counties
in there that are just saying
I'm gonna draw 10%.
Just to hold the money and
protect it. That's a shell game.
I'm not gonna let him play. So
some of those may, may have to
come back in a different,
there's, there's 45 million for
bridge in Gallup that
Actually lands below grade.
And then they have to build a
tunnel to come back up and it's
just no common sense in some of
these projects.
So let me ask you this, so Mr.
Chair, so, and Kelly, so
If the 2025 reversion date,
that, does that mean though that
they could reauthorize at this
session.
That's, that's where version day
that hasn't really happened yet,
right? That would be a project
for Rio this session, wouldn't
it?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, it
It would mean that unless you
all chose to say we're not going
to reauthorize those projects
this time. And again, not all of
them just
ones that showed no activity and
then they would still have the
opportunity to spend those funds
up to the reversion date, but
not an opportunity to extend the
time.
It does, although a little
caveat though.
The chair so this language says
with 99% balances. So if they
were to spend
Any more than 1% between now and
June.
And then that project would be
saved, right? And it would not
revert if it was reauthorized.
They, they would have to
probably reauthorize it this
session and then they'd have to
spend more than 1%. They'd have
to do those two things, then the
project would be saved though,
right? We're not gonna chase
that rabbit down the hole. I'm
just saying that's what it says
here. Those are the rules of
what's written. I mean, that's
the current rules, but, but if
they would spend, they'd have to
spend more than 99%, they'd have
to spend more than that. There's
projects in there that are STBs
that are being reauthed for 6
years. So those are not gonna be
a reauthorized because number
one, we're going to pay the
IRS a penalty on the STDs.
Um
If, if they want to play that
game, then we're going to send
auditors and we're going to send
people in to look at the files
and make sure they are spending
the money, but a 1% project and
I just explained my fancy,
simple fencing project. These
are projects that have not moved
and a lot of them are within 6
years. A lot of them are within
DOT. A lot of them are, are
throughout and then, and so.
They have till June.
They don't spend 75%, then the
money's not encumbered, they,
they can't just say they're
gonna spend 10% more and trying
to hold the money. It's just
what it says.
But that's what it says it could
happen. And, and so let me ask
this question then, Mr. Chair,
Kelly. Um, if something is set
to expire this year.
Can you reauthorize it? Will
this somehow prohibit a
reauthorization if they've only
spent 1% or even 0% of it.
It will revert
So, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, I
think the answer depends on how
you would opt to implement this.
So the first option is like, you
know, that we identified based
on expenditure data in January.
The projects that fit into this
category and you say they will
not be in the reauthorization
bill. So then you're basically
saying we're not gonna
reauthorize projects that have
no activity, and then they would
have till June to spend.
The money if they could, and
then whatever they hadn't spent
would revert, um, you know,
along the lines of where I think
you're going, where if there
was, you know, language in the
Rios bill that limited
their ability to be
reauthorized essentially based
on a determination of the
balance after the bill was
passed if they were in there.
Um, would
The
Possible, maybe and but more
administratively complicated and
and kind of introduce more
uncertainty, but, but the answer
is it depends on how you do it.
this. So when we say projects of
the 2025 reversion. Do we mean
as of
first
That'll be fiscal year 2026, but
As of what date or do they mean
January 1st 20 June 30th, so the
reversion date is, um, there,
it's always the last day of June
in the year specified, so the,
the last day of the fiscal year
we could reauthorize it and they
could do it.
Having said all that, Mr. Chair,
I honestly feel like the fair
thing to do because these things
do help local government's light
a fire. There's no doubt about
it, and we need that obviously
in a lot of stock projects, but
I know there's a lot of them out
there that they're still working
on and I, I just feel like we
should start this maybe a year
from now.
So that they have this year to
light a candle. I'm just saying.
That would be my preference, um.
But I understand where it's
coming from, but that would just
be my preference.
My suggestions. Thanks, Mr.
Chair.
Senator, do you have a question?
Any other questions?
OK, let's look at the next one
and then we'll
OK, um, Mr. Chair, so this kind
of segues from that discussion,
um, and so this would be for
next year and going forward, um,
essentially limiting
reauthorizations more than
Um, you do now.
So, um, the proposal is that a
project may only be reauthorized
for a timing for a time
extension once, um, to give you
some context on that, uh, last
year, the governor vetoed a few
projects from the Rio bill and I
Believe the oldest one dated to
2012. Is that correct, Wesley?
Um, so there are instances where
the rials are done again and
again and again, and still, the
money isn't spent. So this would
essentially say, you can only do
it once, um, for the time
extension and the time extension
will only be one year. Um,
currently the default is 2
years. Um, and additionally, um,
that projects must demonstrate
that at least 40% is of the
appropriation is encumbered at
the time of reauthorization, um,
to be
uh, and so the idea behind that
is essentially um that they're
able to show that there is some
activity, um, some progress on
it that it's not just stalled
out, um, doing nothing.
OK, move on to the next one.
Uh, so I don't see is um
Directing legislative council
service, uh, in all capital
outlay applicants that future
capital submissions to the
legislature, um, may seek
funding only for equipment or
planning and design phase or for
construction funding, um, and
that funding requests cannot
include um all of those phases.
Um, additionally, that if an
entity is asking for
construction phase funding that
they provide the legislature
with some documentation.
That, um, the design work is at
least in process and confirmed
the stage of the design funding
or the design phase.
Um, and provide an associated
cost estimate that supports the
request.
Um, so, you know, this would
essentially um give you all more
of a kind of front end request
process to be able to identify
the projects that fit into these
different categories and make it
easier um for you to start
phasing funding for design, uh,
versus construction.
Um, I will add kind of a, a
little bit to this is that um
we've had discussions over the
past year, um, with the
infrastructure division in LFC
and kind of talking about how
they can assist with some of
this going forward, um, in terms
of kind of providing more
information, um, about where the
projects are at, as well as
providing more direct assistance
to communities in planning and
developing projects, um.
Before they get to you. So if
you were to kind of be
interested in pursuing something
like this and starting to
separate out and phase funding
for projects, um, you know,
we'd, we'd be continuing to work
with you all and and them as
well as legislative council and
kind of making that um work well
and better than it is now.
There's Stein.
Thank you, Mr. Kelly. I really
don't like this one, I'll be
honest, cause I think
You know, when we say they can,
they can't be capital outlay for
both, we'll just say
construction and equipment at
the same time.
To me, that doesn't make any
sense. Um.
Because you need equipment to
furnish a building.
So why would you say you, you
can only do one or the other.
That makes no sense. And then
planning and design, I realized
that is an initial phase and you
know, it takes time until they
do construction, but at the same
time,
Given the long time it takes to
get Capital outlay and to
process it by saying, especially
if they're relying on capital by
not allowing.
Planning to be coupled with
construction, and we are, we are
elongating that process a lot.
Granted, we're trying to not
have stranded money, and I get
that cost of financing and all
that, but
I think this is like
means sometimes, and I'm not a
construction GM kind of guy you
are, Mr. Chair, but I mean
sometimes you do a plan design
construction contract all
wrapped into one.
Right.
So
Which may even be
Value pricing for the person.
In the procurement. So anyway, I
just don't know that this is the
way to go.
I don't like it personally.
But
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Terry Campos, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, just very quickly when
we start talking about
reauthorization and reversions,
uh, people can always come back
and request, if you will,
resources for that project, but
as a new project later on, so
it's not.
Necessarily going to go and be
uh inhibited from what uh what
this process would mean, and
then the second part.
With uh 12, and 3, are you
considering maintenance as well,
and the reason I indicate that
because.
Oftentimes as people are gone
through construction, they're
coming back, if you will, for
resources for rehabilitation or
if you will, renovation or in
some cases even with this, uh,
go round of requests uh uh
restoing, if you will, a public
building, so the whole issue
then becomes, is, is maintenance
inclusive and in uh possibly the
3rd part on item C.
Mr. Chairman
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Campos,
yes, um, and it, it could be
that, you know, this needs a
little more detail. You're
correct that there are some
small projects that, um, would
fall into the construction
category and don't necessarily
need a design phase. So,
essentially, you know, that
would just involve like
developing a request form that
allowed that to be identified.
Um, then there are also kind of
renovation and repair projects.
Uh, that are significant enough
that they do require a full
design phase that maybe doesn't
take as long as building a new
building, but, um, is likely to
still take, you know, possibly a
year even so.
So, so, Mr. Chairman, just the,
the, the last question there
related to this. Does it mean,
as an example if we support
planning design, uh, for a
project.
That and we're not going to be
committed to it, but that we
would entertain, if you will,
the larger phase, which would be
the construction.
Later on and again not to
mislead anyone, but if we're
going to provide the plan and
design, and it's not going to be
planned, design and construct.
What does that mean, especially
if a community is going to be
relying heavily on uh general
funder of the resources that the
state can provide, Mr. Chairman.
Well, we could just take the
project we just heard about
behavioral health, right?
It really didn't have a plan,
right? They had to go.
build that themselves. Then they
came in their piecemealing money
together, right?
We're gonna do phase one, we're
gonna do phase 2. We're gonna do
phase 3 to complete the project.
And so, I mean, do we want to
continue that or should we just
went to Clovis and said, you
know, here's, they want a
million dollars to design their
building. OK, here's a million.
Once you design it and you get a
good estimated cost.
And you can come back. I don't
know if we're gonna make the
total commitment, but I mean, at
least they're in the phases and
I'll give you, you know, a
contractor can do design build.
And the builder at risk, and
that's what you're seeing in
school districts where
classrooms are going to $1000 a
square foot because the builders
at risk. They're not on the bill
or risk contract, they're not
leaving any money on the table.
They're taking maybe double your
money because they don't know
what they're getting into. But
if you hire a contractor and say
I want to build the state
capitol building today and give
me modeling and, and give me
cost. They can do that in Harvey
We'll send that to estimators
and they'll say model me
something and, and what's your
budget, right?
And so then you can build the
design, build at the same time,
and you can come for a total
cost, but the contractor will
want something up front to do
the design because you may
abandon him.
And go shop his design to
another contractor, so I mean.
It can get a little different.
Then you got little projects
like that, little maintenance
project or little warehouse
buildings where they just
Really, they buy mail billing
and stand it up. There is no
really design there prefab,
they, they need to go, so it's
basically construction, but then
you can go to
To Chita, which is a chapter
just south of Gallup that I
represent, where the governor
gave him 3 million for early
childhood center, but they don't
have anything.
They don't have a plan, they
don't have a design. They just
have $3 million for a building,
and they're stranded on on an
island.
I mean they, they can't really
they can design it, but it's a
waste of money if they can't
build it.
So if you don't
You know the first part in in.
Send him in a direction because
everybody comes with the.
Something they want.
I mean, I can
I'll honestly tell you, you look
at my list and Kelly's gonna
laugh and I tell her to quit
using red ink when she prints
mine out of 36 projects.
I have 3 movies.
Some are as simple as a vehicle.
And they'll go to the Naval
nation, and let's say there's
all the paperwork I'm required
to have a vehicle and then that
whole nation will say, well, you
missed this sheet, but nobody
told us about that sheet. Well,
now you have to fill out this
sheet. Now you go back to the
Bottom of the pile for another 3
months, right?
And you come back up to the top
and they say, oh, you missed
this sheet.
And they're just struggling to
death and I don't know, I'm
gonna have to.
trying to figure it out for him,
but I mean, everybody runs into
this, right?
Mm
To give the, the, the I am a to
fence project. I told him if you
lose it.
I'll just refund it, but you're
gonna have to show me you have
the ability to get it done.
That's, that's the thing that
we're missing in this process.
And then it comes to a point in
time is like,
You know, we went from 3.5
billion to
5.9 in 2 years, Wesley, 2.5,
Kelly, 3.5 years, I mean, almost
doubled it in, and nothing's
moving.
Because construction costs went
up, the workforce is not out
there.
Um
Contractors are only booking
jobs where design build in.
Where they can make the most
money, and projects are falling
by the wayside and and then we
go into the problem, there's not
enough contractors, right?
The hardest thing to do is break
into the contracting world
because for you to get it, I
think you have a contractor's
license too, don't you? I mean
to get your contractor's
license, you gotta have so many
hours working for somebody, and
then you got to have other
contractors sign off. Well, in
small communities, they're not
going to sign off for the
competition, whether you're an
electrician, plumber, or
whatever, and so.
The whole system is.
Is messed up, but I mean, you've
worked on this for years and the
only way we're gonna do it is
Just to do a hard line.
Mr. Chairman, I totally agree
with you, and their points well
taken. So the issue would be,
let's say for example, we do the
design, the design is complete 2
or 3 years go by, and this has
happened on several occasions as
I've dealt with projects and
then from there they have to
redesign.
And so that that's an additional
cost. So it would just be
possibly considering language
for a caveat that there there
could be something there that is
gonna go ahead and at least have
that connected so that we're not
going to go ahead and have any
additional costs for the for the
project. A lot of times there
are those unintended
consequences that surface, so,
but again, I'm, I'm, I'm
supportive of it. I'm just
thinking of some of the things
that we might run into as we go
down the path. Yeah, we need all
that this is like, we need all
eyes.
Right, because we're making a
big change and we're sending the
change up for the future.
The more a county courthouse has
been.
One of those challenges for how
many 20 some years and 25 it's
gonna be close to 3 decades.
Yes, Mr. Chairman.
And that's what probably gave
you all your gray hair.
got very little of it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
But I mean, we're all hands on
deck. Let's figure this out
because
We're not, if you and I are not
going to groundbreakings where
we're sticking the shovel on the
ground and showing our
constituents that we're getting
things accomplished.
Totally agree. Thank you, our
voters don't see us in the front
page of that groundbreaking.
With the golden shovel.
Mr. Chair, can I clarify one
thing and response to Senator
Campos's concerns. So, you know,
I think what this is aimed at is
a couple of things. Um, one,
developing a request process
that is
Makes it easier for you all to
identify, like, where is this
project actually at and
You know, if it's not ready to
go to construction, but you
still think it's a worthy thing
that your district needs, you
know, providing you with easy
information where you can still
fund it, but at an appropriate
level to where the project is
at.
To, um, having a system that is
doing a better job of kind of
developing a pipeline of high
priority projects that are
getting ready.
When they are coming to you for
those construction dollars, you
know, kind of going back to how
all of this could integrate with
the new and expanded functions
of the of the infrastructure
office that um have not really
existed within the state's
capital program before, um, you
know, so say you appropriate
that planning and design
funding.
In the meantime, um, they're
also able to, if they need these
resources, work with the
infrastructure office to
identify the funding sources
available to them to build the
thing, um, which might include
capital outlay, might rely more
or less on capital outlay
depending and kind of have all
of those ducks more in a row,
um, before they're coming to you
for those larger dollar amounts,
so that when they are, um, you
have more confidence in what's
actually needed.
And that the money is going to
move soon after you appropriate
it and to the chairman's point,
um, that the thing will get
accomplished and produce
tangible benefits, um, in your
communities. And, you know, I, I
think there's lots of like, you,
you are all bringing up a lot of
good details about like how this
could actually work and that's
all stuff we could work on. So
maybe, for example, um, you
know, there's general language
in the bill, um, that
Or it just in specific
appropriations that even if it's
a planning and design grant
primarily if there's money left
over, it can be put towards
construction of the same project
or something like that.
I said, Kelly, I said, we want
to be in front of the show, the
golden shovel with the newspaper
there.
So anyway, you want to move to
the next one, or did we do the?
Are we on?
see.
Let's do D and E together and
then OK, um, I'm gonna jump to
item E first if that's OK. Um,
so, um, this goes back to, uh,
looking at ways to encourage
communities for certain projects
to only use capital outlay is
kind of fun, a funding mechanism
of last resort. Um, so
specifically here, um, we're
looking at water, water projects
and road projects, um,
both of which for local water
and wastewater and local road
projects have, um, very
successful grant programs that,
um, communities really like and
use at this point outside of the
capital process. And again,
these are some of the most
commonly funded things, um, with
roads in particular, they're
also very commonly stuck capital
funds.
Um, so, uh, this would
essentially require them to go
to those sources first, um, and
only come to the legislature for
those projects if they could not
get funding through those
sources, or if they could
document that there was a
funding gap for the project that
could not be provided.
Uh
By those other sources, um, and
again, kind of here, I think,
you know, if this is in spirit,
something you all want to
pursue, we can kind of work out
the details of how it might
work. It might be that this
comes to you in the form of, you
know, like.
Um
Sort of like the aging and
long-term services department
process where the agencies that
are involved in these programs,
um, maybe in collaboration with
the infrastructure office, kind
of provide you all with a list
every year of, you know, road
and water projects that have
these funding gaps, um, or
something like that.
comes. Thank you very much. Just
very quick, Mr. Chairman, in
terms of the funding sources,
uh, what a seca be one of those
considered and then to go back,
if you will, to the
infrastructure office, Mr.
Chairman, within that, then if
the water trust board was to
approve and allocate the
resources, but yet they were
going to fall short whatever the
project was, would there be
recommendations so that whoever
it was, whatever organization
they would be able.
go out to try to put together,
if you will, the resources to
fully complete their project.
Um
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos,
sorry, I, I'm not sure I
understood that last part of
your question it parts the sick
and then on the second part, if
they go before the water trust
board and the water trusts board
doesn't have the resource in
order to go and fully fund the
project at that particular
phase, would there be an avenue
or venue to have recommendations
so that we can try to get that
uh project complete because
that's our objective fully fund
the project, so that's what I'm
asking, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair, Senator Capos, yes,
um, we would work closely with
the water chessboard colonius,
um, just to ensure that any
project that is not, does not
have full funding from those
boards, um, we would get those,
get those lists at the
infrastructure division and we
would try to find alternative
funding sources, um, prior to
even recommending them for
Capital A. Um, that's one thing
we want to do, not just for
those board projects, but all
projects throughout the state.
Um, it's a big ask if there's a
lot of projects, um, but I think
we can definitely uh make sure
that we do those first um to
make sure that there's a
complete
list for you all when you're
funding.
And Mr. Chairman, just to close,
I just really thank you because
I've seen that already occur and
I appreciate what you're doing
to help uh communities and of
course the state is we move
forward with these projects.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So just
to note, there's a bill that's
going to come to us that we put
an additional 222 million in the
water trust board.
For those projects because they
had $380 million worth of
requests that weren't funded, so
that would fill up the water
trust board to complete those
since that House bill already
has a list of projects.
They could go back and
completely fund those.
That's our goal is to, to get
the water trust board to a level
where they can completely fund
projects, and so that they're
not coming to us to piecemeal.
Projects together and Mr.
Chairman, if I may just very
quickly, so in terms of that,
there's some of the projects
that are on the list that are
going to be phased in, but in
order for them to be fully
complete, they're gonna need the
additional authorization for
additional resources. So in that
we just want to make sure that
they're going to be fully
completed as they move forward.
Thank you and the water trust
but is able to go back and look
at those with the excess money
and say, OK, it's a $10 million
project, we only gave you 8, now
we have the ability to come back
and
be the other 2 million to
complete it and get it off our
list.
That's our hope with the extra
222 million. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator
Trujil.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, um, I
really like a couple of these,
or do we have to pick one or the
other or we're looking at.
I mean, there's a lot of
conversation and I don't think
it's fully bedded out in the
detail that we really need to
get to. So let's, let's go
through them and then we'll
probably wrap up and have Kelly
start having an individual
conversation with people on
where we think the shortages are
and and stuff.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I,
and thank you for talking about
that fill in for the water trust
board.
I love the idea, quite honestly,
of having to look for
Other funding for roads and for
water. Um, I remember being on
the school board, um, Mr.
Chairman, and my former
representative at the time, uh,
we asked for technology funding,
and we were told, have you, have
you gone out for your technology
bonding, and we had not.
We did and you know, we got $55
million from our community and
didn't need to come for
technology, and that was kind of
a change of what?
You know, for us in our
community, but this uh water
projects and road projects, Mr.
Chairman, just seemed to go on
forever.
Um, I remember the former
representative Trujillo when I
first came into the house
saying, yep.
They'll be funding those for the
rest of your legislative career.
They do get things done, so I'm
not, you know, saying that they
don't get things done, but it's
just never ending, and it's hard
to, it's hard to figure out like
how to make sure that that money
goes. Um, I will just say one
last thing. I, I also like um
item B.
Um, I think item B adds some uh
Some definitions, some
Boundaries, some guard rails as
to how money needs to get spent
and would incentivize people to
get it done. Do any or all of
these, Mr. Chairman, have to
have a bill to implement it or
can we implement it?
We can implement it through the
capital outlay or the reauth
bill which probably it may be
some of both, maybe a mix.
Remember this, cities and
counties can go get a 1% loan at
the environment department for
wastewater systems, right? But
they won't do it because they
got to pay it back. But if
they'd go get those loans, maybe
we flex capital enough and say,
hey, you went and borrowed the
money for this project.
Why don't you just take this
money and repay that loan.
And it just cleans it up even
more, but I mean, nobody's
applying for anything. They're
coming to us with these big ass
and then seeing what they can
get. They're not taking it upon
themselves to say, hey, let's go
get a 1% loan, we know that the
legislature is gonna come back
and say, hey, you give us
capital and
And they borrowed half a million
dollars and, and you say, OK,
well, 5 of us get in the room
and we'll just pay off your
loan, so you can continue your
next project. That's, that's an
option we can float to Senator
Steinbor doneent training. No, I
was just gonna, um, Mr.
Chairman, I was just gonna ask,
is this something that the House
would have to agree on.
There's been conversations in
Shindo and Senator, um Linte and
Chairman Small and I have had
conversation. We had
conversations with leadership,
uh, on what we want to do and
how we want to change and this
is we're kind of building the
framework, the LFC kind of built
the framework over the session
over the session over the
summer.
And uh
And so we've been discussing
this because Keppel is just
It's out of hand and we're not.
They're combos that I am not in
the front page of the Gallup
Independent turning into golden
shovel.
Mr. Chair, can I give a one
quick comment to Senator
Trujillo's question. So just
want to call your attention to
this chart on page 6 of this
memo. This is showing you water
truss board awards for water
projects relative to capital
outlay Awards. So these blue and
orange bars just are showing you
how much bigger the average
water trust board award is.
versus the average capital
outlay award. And then there's
also a really interesting trend
in the overall total
appropriations in the two
programs where the capital
outlay total kind of plummeted
in 2024 and the Water Trust
board went up. And I think this
is showing you that this program
is really working in communities
are using it. There's way more
money going into this program
than in the past.
And so they're able to support
things and get things done, and
I think maybe we're getting to a
point combined with the
appropriations the chairman
mentioned that the legislature
has been making to further boost
these kind of programs that are
priority investment areas for
you, or maybe you won't be
funding it for the rest of your
career. Like we're in a place
where we can get this stuff
done, um, and communities are
using these programs that are
working too. So there, there are
advantages, um, for all your
districts as well.
OK, I got Senator Steinborn
Compos and Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So he looks pretty reasonable to
me, although
Small communities, I mean, I'm
not an expert in like the local
government road fund, but let's
use a real small community that
I represents some of them.
Um
Unincorporated areas actually
like
Of course they're managed by the
county, but like I, I don't know
their sophistication level to be
able to go to a local road local
road fund to try to apply the
money for a road if we're gonna
fund one road, for example,
Water Trust board and
sophisticated wastewater
projects kind of a different
animal, right, and funding a
small road. So I can see that
makes a lot of sense for a lot
of projects, but you might have
these smaller projects that you
were talking about that really
You know, they just may not have
this sophistication, but they
need a little bit of money to
just to do a rope, you know, so,
so that's a kind of an asterisk
on that.
Um
On item and we hear, you know,
by the way, with small rural
communities, they don't have
money for technical assistance.
It's a problem for a small
areas. So are we creating a
barrier there for the smallest
of projects to jump through some
of those hoops, but maybe for
the bigger ones. So maybe
there's a threshold even for
like projects on $1 on $100,000
on up or something so that we're
kind of limiting those little
small guys.
Wesley answer it answer that
you, um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Steinborn, um, so that's what
our office does. So our office
will assist the local
government, however small they
are, try to get the funding and
help them even with technical
assistance, trying to find them
funding for technical assistance
if we don't have it in-house to
be able to do it. So uh we will
do that for them, OK, and that's
kind of a newer thing, Mr.
Chair, right? That technical
assistance from DFA. So that's,
that's great, but we're not kind
of used to that, but um I'll put
that out there.
So it's really vague to me.
Um, the second half of that
first sentence like.
Consider for
if the design is started, but
then the second half.
But the design is not needed.
It's like if it's started, but
then if it's not needed, so I
think the wording of that is
super vague. I'm not even sure
what it means.
Um
And then I do have the second
comment, but if you want to say
something on that part. Um, Mr.
Chair, do you wanna speak to the
um intent of that this is not
all language I saw, so I'm not
sure. There had been discussion
about, um, an interest in
helping to identify planning and
design projects this year, um,
but I'm not sure how the
reauthorization language fits in
there.
While you're thinking, can I
comment one could pass on and
sort of come back to you later.
Well, then the second part is.
kind of worse in a way because
it says
construction only projects will
be considered for
reauthorization.
Something is
So this kind of really ties into
the reauthorization one on A,
where we're setting a set of
rules. We're saying if you have
spent more than 1%, you're
eligible. But now we're saying,
indeed the second paragraph,
current year implement will only
be considered for based on data
considered, which is like
somebody sitting in an office
somewhere that says, yeah, we
know you've met the criteria,
but we still don't like it, or
we just don't smell right, so we
don't allow you to reauthorize
it. I, I don't like that.
that. But because it makes it
arbitrary someone else's
decision on criteria that's kind
of more work they're required to
do quarterly reporting, correct
me if I'm wrong, Kelly or
Wesley. A lot of the quarterly
reporting is not even reported.
And so they're not doing
anything.
Uh, and so that quarterly
reporting is not getting
completed, but if someone
Let's talk about the football
field in Albuquerque. I can't
remember what the name of the
football, the gladiators or
something in the Larry Barker
story where they had a project
and then all of a sudden they
decided, oh, they're gonna do it
here, do it there and then they
just abandon it, right?
I mean, that's, that's some of
that there's the music, the
music museum that wasn't
licensed or didn't have an LLC
that was another Larry Barker
story that that didn't even
exist and it wasn't in existence
so we funded in capital outlay,
I mean, I think you could put in
language that says if a project.
was attempt to be something
totally different outside of the
legislative intent and
legislative counsel or, you
know, has a authority to not
reauthorize, you know, something
squirrely.
But if otherwise if we set
rules, we have rules, so.
Bacteria. Well, we operate under
squarely for.
A lot of years and it never
worked.
And so I just messier and
messier and messier.
Uh, Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Chair, and thanks for
bringing this. I also have the
question like exactly what is
this and what are we going to
actually do with it? I mean, I,
I, I feel like there's some
really good stuff here, but I
feel like we, we, we need to do
something with it actually, or,
or
Depending on whether it's a
reauth or new capital, right?
And, and I think Adrian and the
staff have been trained.
On how to look at your capital
projects. There's a YouTube
video that was sent out.
YouTube, YouTube for everything.
And so it it's
we, we have to figure out how
we're going to do this, but each
one of your staff members was
trained on Capitol, you know,
there's a YouTube video out
there, how you, how you score
it, how you look at that, right?
So part of this will go in the
capital bill, some of it will go
in the Rio bill.
And this is a slow transition
cause we could just run a bill
and hope the governor signs it.
Uh, to kill it all.
But I don't think that's fair to
a lot of people, and so if we
make this slow transition,
right?
And start telling people.
You're one
We're gonna start with Rios.
They're not spent.
are not reauthorized because
I can't chase the fence for 9
years
to nurture heal.
Representative trio wore a
flower every day.
We won't use his theory of
Senator Munno's chasing a fence
for 9 years, so.
I just feel like, yeah, I've
been here 13 years and I feel
like we've talked about this
every single year, like we need
to do something about this and
we did make some changes to kind
of how we, how we, we, we um we
manage the process that I think
has been very positive. There's
a couple other things happening
this year, I guess that are
gonna be different. Uh, another
direct question I have is, do I,
I, I, I see themes here where I
worry that the planning and
design its costs are just gonna
Explode.
I get it all in there or we're
gonna lose this money and then
suddenly we're paying all kinds
of through the nose I'm planning
and designing.
Well, that's, that's the
problem. I mean, it it.
In my private business, and if I
was bidding city and state jobs,
right, which I don't.
I would say, oh, they have 5
million in capital outlay,
right?
I'm gonna make sure my design
costs are gonna be 30% of the
entire project, and then you're
gonna go out to bed and I've
already made my money. That's
why all the engineering firms,
Wilson Smith, all those
engineering firms are doing
these redesigns for conceptual
designs and architecture or or
cities and counties and to go do
that. I give you the perfect
example in McKinley County when
we did our legislative day. They
had all these architectural
designs.
Then by Wilson and them because
the governor had said, oh,
here's what I'm looking at
funding behavioral health
projects and all this. So they
did, they did it all these
design concepts, right, for
knowing that they would get the
design contract.
I mean
Architecture right now and and
design is about 15% of the total
project, right?
So that's what it should be, but
You look at the schools and
it's.
Or like 25.
So I, I would like an option F.
But I would like to recommend,
Kelly's gonna come around and
we're gonna discuss some of
these. I mean, but can I just
tell you what it is? It's really
very briefly,
and I, I know that I think it's
already, yeah.
I think it's already maybe a
process that we could, we could
follow. I just never maybe took
the time to learn it, but I, I'd
like to as a legislator be able
to say after 3 years or 5 years,
whatever. All right.
Didn't get it done. You didn't
get it. Sorry, I try I helped
you. I helped you get this thing
done. You couldn't do it. And it
might be, you know, 2357,
whatever, however many millions
of dollars I have left. All
right, I'm gonna scoop that up
and I'm gonna get this other
thing done.
And it should just be simply a
process that we are accountable
as a legislators with these
responsibilities that we have to
be able to turn that thing
around and say, OK, y'all didn't
get it done. I did everything I
could to help you, and now I'm
gonna take this money, pick it
up and move it over here to get
this other thing that can get
them.
Seems like we need to have that
as just sort of a regular way of
working through this process.
I mean, that's hard to do
because if you want to take it
at the end and and reauthorize
it to something else, right?
You may have 5 partners in that
project. Are they going to agree
to reauthorize that project and
then my job to go get them to
agree on that or just take my
piece out of that and they're
gonna be probably very motivated
to take their piece out and help
me get the other thing done. Oh,
I mean, I mean I do with it. I
did the.
The Kennel and Gallop, right?
It was
$5 million and then turned to 27
million I'm like, I'm not
committed to $27 million dog
shelter in Gallop when we got
bigger needs.
Uh
It needs to go back, it needs to
revert all at one time and so in
my area, what I do is if it's a
project, whatever, because I get
more money, I go to the, I have
5 state representatives that sit
inside of my district and the
portion that's in my district, I
have them a portion based on.
Whatever percentage of my like
Art De la Cruz is an example,
like a brother to me, his whole
district sits inside of mine. So
I'll fund 50% of whatever and
then if there's 2 or 3
representatives, I said, OK,
we'll go divide the rest of it.
And, and you guys put the rest
of that money in, I'll do 50% of
it.
But it just seems to me like we
need to have, we're elected for
a reason to come up here and get
things done and it would be
great if we just had that
ability to pick things up after
they don't get done and
reauthorize them somewhere else.
That way that other project does
get done, doesn't turn, doesn't
increase in cost by 30 or 50 or
80% has been sitting there so
long.
That's option F, thanks.
Effort fail.
Mr. Chair, um, so, um, you know,
just maybe to close unless
there's further further
discussion, you know, just a
reminder, this is draft. This is
a draft Senator Campos had one
more question.
Uh,
just, just very quickly, Mr.
Chairman, just to go through a
couple of things, and I
apologize for it, but, uh, let's
say for example, the higher ed,
they have their assessment
process, their approval process,
uh, you know, Senatorre was
talking about the tech notes we
have that, we have the uh public
school capital Oley Council. We
have the Board of Finance, we
have a lot of different venues
to go ahead and help fund all
these projects and in essence
what it's leading to and uh Mr.
Chairman, I, I, I go back to
this cause this was in my
dissertation and 2003, the
bottom line is we really need to
train and then more importantly,
really to expand that
infrastructure office as you
continue to go ahead and grow in
this, so, um, I hope that that
would be one of the, the
considerations as to how we're
going to
really set this up more
independently that office would
provide us with the information
to make well-informed decisions,
it would not make the decisions
for us, that would be up to the
legislature. So I just wanted to
make that comment, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I think Wesley's
office is.
That's the strategy we've kind
of set them up on, right, is to
go to that office and compile
everything and then give us back
a good decision, we jumped ahead
of you a little bit with
With the YouTube video and how
we're going to do that. And, and
so what we're trying to get
ahead of the game, so Kelly,
here's what I want you to do,
come back and visit with, with
members.
Um, I think Senator Woods, you
had a question. I'm sorry.
Yes, uh,
I, I appreciate you looking this
way.
That's to the left. I'm usually
looking to my right.
And
Mr. Chair, what we need to think
about here.
Two things.
Do we have a problem?
Now, Mr. Chair and Cali, how
much money we got outstanding
right now.
Uh, Mr. Chair, 5.8 billion I
think.
How much you get 5.8 billion
How much you get.
Now do you all hear that 5.8
billion outstanding? Do we have
a problem?
OK. If you'll agree that we have
a problem.
Then we have to find a solution.
Right? Now we can touchy feely
this thing all day long.
Or we can come up with an
agreement to fix a problem, OK?
Sorry, Mr. Chair, sorry, I
raised my voice.
Where a germs.
Note Kelly circled back with
everybody get their input. Make
sure you put senator Woods' uh
comments and bold the beginning.
Do we have a problem and do we
want to fix it?
And, and, and circle back with
members and let's see what
comments come back and then
we'll circle back around.
I was gonna point a Capitol
committee, but I think we need
to review this before we, we
appoint that committee.
OK, uh, Mr. Chair, I will do
that, um, and yes, this is
intended to be a draft that
Senate Senate Finance Committee
staff put together kind of
building on the LFC work and so
Adrian and I will, Adrian and I
will take these comments and
talk to you on more and come
back to you soon.
OK. Thank you. Have a good
night. I sleep, thank you.
Make sure you ask your boss for
that pay raise. I mean, I'm sure
he was listening. Oh, you're
gonna want to hear this. This is
his favorite radio station in uh
TV station that he tunes to.
Mr. Chairman.
Are we gonna have a specific
hearing on the C2 uh spreadsheet
that we were given earlier
today.
It's oh yeah.
As a budget moves over.
They had their hearing.
So we heard him today. The house
heard him today. So let's see
what comments flush out and
what's.
We didn't hear C2 today. Oh, no,
OK, yeah, I'm sorry. So I'm
what's it? Yeah, we'll add them
back maybe later in the week.
Thanks. I just wanna make sure
we have that open with
everybody.
