starting on page 388.
With me today, my counterpart
from the Department of Finance
Administration, Diego Jimenez,
State Fire Marshal Brandy
Varela.
Deputy Secretary Virginia
Chicone and state director for
Emergency Management, uh Ali Ri.
Um
At a very high level, the LFC
and executive recommendations
were pretty close, uh, general
fund, uh, increased by LFC by
about 122,000 or 3%.
Whereas the executive increased
it by about 953.2,000 or 23.8%.
Um, that wasn't where the
majority of the budget action
happened though that was, uh,
you know, just the general fun
part.
LFC recommendation funds
increase the group insurance
rate, um, $52,000 in audit and
compliance contract costs by
70,000. The executive adds
$325,000 for brand management
software, $292,000 for statewide
public safety radio services
services and does not fund any
of the audit and compliance
costs.
Um, we did reach a consensus on
our performance recommendations
and the executive did fund a
$440,000 expansion uh to add 5FT
for a disaster recovery unit and
to be clear, to make permanent
FTEs that are currently under
contract for the agency.
Um, with that, Diego, do you
have anything?
I think he's got, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I
don't really have anything
additional to add that won't be
covered by the, by the uh
Departments themselves.
So with that, I guess I'll hand
it over to uh Mr. Coe. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. So we are, um, we
have.
come a long way in the last uh
couple of years, um, in the
meantime, we also had a couple
of major disasters um that we
worked through, but what we
found is that we needed an
expansion to our um
To our staffing. Um, our base
staffing is really all contract
staffing. So we have a $2
million contract with one
contractor and a $300,000
contract with the local
contractor, um, AT Services. And
what that does is that is
supplementing or augmenting our
current staff. So we would like
to grow that staff. So we are
asking currently at a
conservative rate of 5 FTEs to
to
Start augmenting our finance
staff because that is the base
of all of the money that flows
through the state of New Mexico
for all these disasters. We
don't have that in place if
we're not, we don't have that
clean, it's not working.
Um, the next thing that we we
were requesting is um an in for
our IT services, so the last
almost 4 years, IT services have
all been, uh, privatized.
And so, um, we're bringing back
IT into the department, which is
much, much needed, um, having an
emergency department without an
in-house IT. The computer went
down, uh, we put a help desk
ticket in and hopefully we had a
computer fixed in the next
couple of hours in order to
function. So doing that, it
meant that we needed to upgrade
our network, our Wi Fi access,
all of our security, um, we're
also, you know, we're one of our
main.
Um
Uh, charges is for
cybersecurity. And so our
department needed to make sure
that our network was um
sufficient for cybersecurity.
Um, that is the, the really the
crux of the of everything that
that we, we are asking for this
year. It is nearly not enough,
and it is something that we are
um
wanting to grow, um, but we also
want to make sure that we're
growing responsibly that we are
growing at a um steady rate and
that we're, we're making sure
that that we are um on the right
path as far as our goals and the
goals of the state.
So
Um, at that point, I'm going to
hand it over to fire Marcia
Varalla, and he's gonna um speak
to the um his budget.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm gonna present our budget for
SFMO this year we're requesting
for FY 226 budget is going to be
for 26, it's gonna be 10
million $291,000 750,000 of that
goes to our parent or volunteers
in the state of New Mexico or
distribution to our local fire
departments is 123
million,643,000 or grant fund
for 26 would be 22,644,000.
To increases for like 26, you're
looking at 48,699.
3.4% increase is for personnel.
When we increase the person I'll
bring him up to that midpoint.
And then our 13.5 and our 400 is
an increase of 367,000 and
that's for the increase for
travel equipment, fuel that is
needed for all the travel that
our inspectors do throughout the
state.
And if we go through our
priorities list for SF the more
we're looking at the request of
577,700.
And uh it's for personnel
services. So 210,700,000 is for
reimbursement to DHCM for their
support.
Uh, DCMs finance attorneys, and
others to support the fire
marshal's Office.
And so we need to reimburse them
for those services. And then on
the 400s, like I said earlier,
it's a 36% increase on equipment
travel course materials and
other operational.
Because for the fire marshal's
office.
stand for any questions.
Thank you.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members.
There.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you um.
For the presentation. I heard
you mention the term
cybersecurity a little while ago
when we uh uh established the
Office of Cybersecurity. We did
exempt you from the
cybersecurity Act because you
had specialized um
requirements. Is that still the
case for you? Or do you, are you
adhering to the requirements of
the Office of Cybersecurity have
issued for all other state
departments.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Padilla,
so we are, um, and we
appreciated the exemption, um,
but the Department of Homeland
Security is on the cybersecurity
Committee. I'm actually on the
cybersecurity Committee and we
do believe that those
requirements actually are good
requirements and so we are
trying to comply with those uh
requirements as well.
Uh, so chair and um and the
directors, so which one what are
you adhering to then? I mean,
are you adhering to the, the
standards of the office of the
New Mexico Office of
Cybersecurity or the federal
standard?
The New Mexico office, uh, Mr.
Chair, Senator Padilla, the New
Mexico Office of Cybersecurity
First.
OK, so then I guess I'm good. So
why do you need the exemption
then, cause it was quite the
effort to get all that done.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Padilla, I, I, it was prior to
this administration, um, and so
we're, you know, we, but we
realized the importance of
cybersecurity, um, and so we're,
we're on board.
Oh, I think that sounds great.
It was in this, you mean this
gubernatorial administration or
administration of your team? OK,
so it was like it was during
this administration. All right,
thank you, chair. I, I just hope
that you're meeting the highest
possible standards that you
possibly can reach. Thank you.
Thank you.
Let me ask you some questions on
your cat valley.
Tell me what I'm gonna get for
325,000 in landscaping.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um, DHSEM has been
Um
sorely ignored, um, and so when
we started looking into to this,
the, the landscaping, even
though it sounds like something
very minor to us, like we have
weeds all over around our area.
Um, we had a um a situation
where we have trees that are
falling and breaking all over
the complex, all over our um
part of our property for the
complex and
So it's things like that that
one, it's a safety issue, 2,
it's, it's, it's just a, you
know, we want to look nice. It's
our employees deserve to come to
to work to look to look nice,
um, and so we're not looking at
doing anything crazy and
fountains and statues. We're
just looking and trying to, to
just make it a lot nicer, and if
you were to to join our um you
know, come to our department,
which we would welcome.
You would see just the the
little things that that need to
be done.
I mean what I'm getting for
150,000 in plumbing.
Oh,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, oh my goodness, so
our department, um, has some
antiquated plumbing, and I'm
gonna give you an example and I
really don't want to be um lewd,
but we have 2 staff members that
have to go in and pump.
The actual um plumbing out. And
so if it gets stuck.
Because there are
Items that shouldn't be in
plumbing, they have to
physically pump those out. And
so what we want is that is not
all it just to do the, just to
have plumbing, it's to do an
assessment so we can find out
what we actually really need.
Our plan is for electrical and
plumbing and the HVAC is to
actually have them do an
assessment and then come back.
To this body and ask for the
money that will, that will
actually make it whole.
Is that a GSD owned building or
just an agency owned?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, it is not GSD
owned, nor does um nor nor does
DHSEM own it.
So is the least premises.
Mr. Chairman, there's a
complication there. So, DMA um
Department of Military Affairs
because it is on the base, they
leased it to DPS.
1012 years ago when um DHSM
became an agency. No one has
ever updated that lease, so
right now we're in the process
of working through all the
logistics either through GSD or
through DMA to figure out how to
even just do the, the basic
maintenance of, of that
building.
Well, can't you?
I'm 150,000 to do a plumbing
study is just ridiculous.
You can call any plumbing
contractor and say, here's the
issues we're having, give us an
estimate in detailed drawing, I
mean.
So I guess we're gonna talk
about those during capital so
some of those are just not
making sense.
Just stuck out in my head real
quick.
The same thing with electrical.
should be able to get an
estimate and say here's your
estimate, here's our cost.
And
Most contractors will do it for
free.
Instead of doing a
150, 250,000 to do a study, it
just.
There's no common sense in that
number, so.
I think that's it for my
questions.
Uh, Scott, thank you guys. I
appreciate your time.
You're back here when we get
house built too.
Don't pull the fire alarm.
The
So we're gonna catch up from
this morning because it's
accountability will give us the
next two agencies we're going to
hear.
So you'll be about what, 5
minutes?
Uh, yeah
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Austin
Davidson. I'm the LFC's natural
resource analyst.
I think being passed out right
now is a presentation that looks
something like this, and I'll
just give you the high-level
bullets from this presentation.
What this presentation goes over
is the cumulative budget growth
of the 3 natural resource
agencies, those being the
energy, minerals and natural
resources department, the Office
of the State Engineer, and then
the uh New Mexico Environment
Department.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee that graph you see on
that first page shows that
cumulative budget growth over
the past 10 years. And if you'll
see from FY 15 to FY 25, their
cumulative budget has grown by
123.8%.
Now breaking that down to each
of the different agencies, the
energy, minerals and natural
resources department's budget
has grown by 19.6 million, or
roughly 93%, the Office of the
State Engineer has grown by
18.5% or 118% and then the New
Mexico Environment Department
has grown by 21.7 million or
188% over 10 years. And so I
think that graph and those
numbers, I think clearly
illustrate the significant
investment that the state has
given.
to these different natural
resource agencies.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, you'll also see on
that bottom right hand graph, a
breakdown of the different
revenue sources that comprise
the budgets, the New Mexico
Environment Department.
You'll see in gray, the federal
funds blew the general funds
yellow, other state funds, and
then orange, other transfers and
each of those I think comprise
different revenues for this
agency. I think it illustrates
just how large their budgets
are, and how much of it is not
comprised.
of the general fund.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the next section of
the presentation gives some
high-level overview of the LFC's
recommendations for each of
these agencies, specifically the
energy, minerals and natural
resources department, uh, the
LFC recommendation recommends a
2.3 million or 5.6% increase
with a highlight 1.2 million for
the state's hotshot Cruz, uh,
relating to the New Mexico
Environment Department, the
department, the New Mexico
Environment Department did not
request a general.
fund increase but instead
recommended the movement of
funds from each of its divisions
to then create the compliance
and enforcement division, which
the LT recommendation
recommended.
Going to the office of the State
Engineer, the LLC recommended a
1.2 million or a 3.4% increase
with the highlights being
contract work for 50-year water
plan implementation and water
planning FTE.
The next page, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee has 2
more graphs that highlight the
revenue sources and then also
all of the non-recurring
appropriations that are included
in the LFC's recommendation for
the uh for time purposes, I'll
move to the 2nd portion of it,
which is a status update of
previous non-recurring
appropriations that the
legislature has given to Ener
OSC and NMED of note for OSE and
Ener, both of them, all of the
F.
25 non-recurring appropriations
for both of those agencies have
not been expended yet, so they
have complete balances.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the 3rd page of this
presentation also gives an
update. We have this electronic.
Are we keeping up with
electronically.
Don't have an electronic. It was
just a, yeah, just a handout.
Apologies, Mr. Chair. Uh, on the
third page, Mr. Chair, there's
an update on the enemyD specials
from FY 25 and FY 24, and then
the last sections of this, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
is going to be an update on
those special session funds that
were given specifically to
Riodoso in the village of
Riidoso for recovery laid to the
salt and South Fork fires.
Specifically in that 100
million, Mr. Chair, was the 70
million given to DFA's local
government division, and that
was split into two projects.
It's gonna be 26 million to
Lincoln County road and river
bridge damages and then 44
million to the village of
Riidoso to repair road and
bridges from all the damage, and
Mister Chair, an important thing
about these is that these are
going to be loans to these
entities to complete these
projects and then the federal
government will reimburse those
entities and then those entities
were reimburse the state.
With that, Mr. Chair, I can
stand for questions or we can
move on to agency presentations.
Any questions on this.
I mean, could you go over the,
the non-reoccurring balances in
agency, that's page 2 again for
me, right?
Yes, Mr. Chair. So specifically
for the Office of the State
Engineer, those 3 FY 25
non-recurring appropriations
that the legislature gave to the
state engineer, all of them have
not been expended or used yet,
so they have complete whole
balances for the FY 24
non-recurrent appropriations.
There was 27.5 million given to
the state engineer, 10 million
of that was for critical dam
maintenance that's been fully
expended 76% of the 7.5 million
for the.
Strategic water reserve has been
expended and then 53% of the 10
million for river channel
maintenance has been expended.
For the for the energy, minerals
and natural resources department
of the seven FY 25 non-recurrent
appropriations. Emner has not
implemented or expanded those
yet, so those have all balances,
and then of the three FY 24
non-recurrent appropriations.
One of them was fully expended
and then 81% of the 7.5 million
to state forestry for replacing
irons and vehicles has been
expended.
Mr. Chair, on that 3rd page is
gonna be that enemyD update for
those non-recurring
appropriations.
The majority of its 4 FY 25
non-recurring appropriations
hasn't been expended so those
balances are whole, and then for
FY 24 of the 11, the majority of
those funds has been expended of
note, there's only some large
balances left in a 2 million
appropriation to meet national
ozone standards and then 34% of
a 4 million appropriation for
climate change initiatives.
Any question from Kimit? Nope.
All right, coming up first Ener
or.
I'm secretary.
And so do you like your DFA
analyst?
Do you like your DFA analyst?
Yes. Uh no.
I love the man.
He used to work for us
that's a pretty good question
answer there.
Austin, go ahead, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, the
agency code is 521. It's going
to be behind tab 5 in your
binders, uh, just the high level
overview for the differences
between the LFC and the
executive recommendation, the
executive recommendation
increased the agency's general
fund by 3.9 million or 9.8%,
while the LFC's recommendation
increased it by 2.3 or 5.6%. The
main differences is going to be
the executive.
ation increasing the state parks
operating budget in the uh oil
conservation divisions operating
budget. There is also a large
differences between the LFC and
the executive's recommendations
for the non-recurring
appropriations, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, that's
going to be in the back of your
packets. I think of note and the
differences between the
non-recurring appropriations
between the LFC and the
executive would be that the
executive gave 10 million for uh
flexible and
innovative financial products to
emission reduction projects, uh,
to 20 million to geothermal
projects for development for
those, and then 1 million for
grid modernization and then 2
million for a public education
campaign to reduce uh human
caused wildfires with that, I'll
turn it over to DFA if they have
anything else to add.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I'll
just defer to secretary
designate candidate to talk
about.
Uh, no, you're not getting off
that easy. OK.
SJ.
You don't want to go over the
agency for history.
Uh, I mean, everything that my
counterpart at the LFC just said
we
Increased the executive
recommendation increased the
budget by 9.8% and the LFC
recommendation increased the
budget by 5.6%.
Good, we're getting you trained.
Madam Secretary, is that.
OK.
Thank you and uh thank you, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee for having us here
today.
Uh, I only have this on the
overhead. We don't have a.
Paper copy.
But
Your presentation, we didn't
have a print copy when sent to
us. So we have only have it on
the overhead. I will get
you paper copies without the,
the nasty notes in my face, so,
uh, and, and I have now been on
the job for 8 months.
I, I think I know most of the
acronyms, but I still don't know
all the details of everything,
so, uh, so I'm gonna have to
rely on staff for certain
things, but
Um, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before
you today, um, on the energy,
minerals and natural resources
departments, uh, FY 26 budget
request when it, when the
language appears up there, it
says M and nerd. OK, I just, I
don't know if you've noticed I
have. Uh, we are nerds. Um, I
would first note that there is a
significant amount of agreement
between the DFA and LFC funding
recommendations. We appreciate,
uh, both their support for
critical programs at Imner.
These
investments include the ability
to manage a robust portfolio of
grants and tax credits to
accelerate the deployment of
clean energy technologies.
To regulate oil and gas
production as well as coal and
hard rock mining and reclamation
to prepare New Mexico's forests
and communities for the
increasingly frequent and
intense threats of wildfires, as
well as fire fight fires when
they occur and to enable New
Mexicans and visitors to
experience all the natural
wonders of our state and all
that it has to offer in its 35
beautiful state parks.
The executive budget request and
the LFC recommendation also
align on funding in their to
execute the state's first of a
kind quadrennial energy review
or QER.
The QAR will be a multi-agency
effort that will deliver
rigorous data and
technology-based analysis that
will inform a set of
recommendations for policy and
investment strategies to guide
the state's clean energy future.
These strategies will provide
the legislative and executive
branches with the tools needed
to navigate the energy
transition while strengthening
New Mexico's economy. New Mexico
has a significant clean and
conventional energy resources, I
think that such a review could
serve as a model for the country
and I think even for some
regions of the world for
identifying policies, programs,
and investments needed to
successfully, cleanly and
affordably manage our energy
resources over the next 25
years.
Um, I appreciate the work as I
mentioned in that went into the
LFC recommendations and the many
impactful investment sees would
make. However, there are two
critical differences between the
LFC and DFA recommendations in
Imert's operating budget.
I wish to bring those to the
committee's attention. First is
funding for the state forestry
division Smokey Bear Seedling
and inmate work camp programs,
the state forestry division
needs to restore operational
funding for these programs that
are funded through
self-generated revenue and do
not impact the general fund.
These programs put funds into
the general fund and receive
funds back in for operations.
This was not the case in the FY
26 LFC budget.
And transferring 381,700 back
from the general fund to these
programs is essential for their
operations.
Um, second is a state park.
State parks fee collection
services over the last 8 years,
state parks has contracted with
a vendor to provide an online
reservation system to collect
fees from state park patrons
under the original contract on a
monthly basis, the vendor held
back the revenue collected to
pay for their services and sent
the remaining balance to state
parks with a new RFP and
contract done this past year was
determined by DFA that the
revenues collected by this
vendor over the past 8.
years was done incorrectly.
Moving forward, state parks must
collect all revenues, and the
vendor must submit an invoice
for their services so that parks
can then pay for the services
rendered.
This change in process where
state parks collects the money
first and reimburses the vendor
will increase the division's
overall expenditures by a
million dollars to manage the
gross funds received by the
reservation system, the vendor
services, and to pay the
contractor for services
incurred.
This expense of a contracted fee
collection service is critical
for the efficient operation of
our state parks, they collect
$6.2 million in annual revenues
and state parks ongoing
operations is important for
ensuring that these revenues are
collected and used to enhance
the uh state parks and their
value to the state.
In addition to deficits in
critical operating budgets, I
want to flag some key areas of
difference in our special
appropriation request and
propose some add-backs that I
believe can make meaningful
contributions to the
department's mission.
First is investing an additional
$20 million in geothermal energy
development.
Last year, the legislator
provided the legislature
provided $5 million to our
energy conservation and
management uh division to
jumpstart the geothermal
industry in New Mexico. The
funding support subsurface hot
rock mapping feasibility
studies, and early stage project
grants and loans.
The industry has responded over
the past year, Emert has seen
significant interest from
geothermal companies looking to
invest in New Mexico. I spoke to
one just the day before
yesterday. The geothermal
companies all over that want to
invest in our state and they're
very interested in these funds.
Importantly, New Mexico
currently ranks 6th in the
nation in geothermal capacity.
Um, the US Department of
Energy's national renewable
Energy Laboratory Eel has
identified 15 counties in New
Mexico with the most favorable
geothermal potential and 5
counties that already have
mapped hydrothermal sites. Um, I
have a fact sheet here, um, uh,
that I can hand out to anyone
who is interested in the fact
sheet uh has notes from.
Something I needed to say, OK, I
have clean ones though, OK, um,
but I'd love to show you what
the counties are that have um a
huge potential. I checked the uh
counties and the members of this
committee and uh all but 2
members have substantial
geothermal uh potential in, in
their districts. So at $20
million appropriation would
expand our toolkit to move more
quickly to affordable 24.
7 clean geothermal energy to
help ensure grid reliability,
promote energy security, enhance
energy independence and
increased private investment in
our state.
In addition to add-backs for
this important program Imner has
prioritized the following
special appropriation, um, it's
20 million for the wildlife
prepared Fund.
Wildfires and the lack of fire
insurance continue to threaten
the livelihoods and
neighborhoods of many New
Mexicans, Imner is seeking a $20
million special appropriation
for the wildfire prepared fund.
It's $20 million would provide
two types of home hardening
grants to help eligible property
owners make necessary wildfire
resistant upgrades.
This request is contingent on
the passage of SB 33. I went to
that, uh, uh, meeting the other
day of the conservation
committee that passed SB 33
passed a 9 to nothing, so
there's a lot of support for
this, um, the wildfire Prepared
Act is currently moving through
these committees, this dollar
amount is scaled for a pilot
project primarily centered in
Lincoln County, the dollar
amount to scale this program
statewide would need to be
significant.
higher, so this is really just
one county. We need it in many,
many locations. Uh, then, then
another 250,000 for the Atteno
uh litigation defense, um, we're
asking for this special
appropriation uh for the OCD or
oil conservation division, uh,
and that covers the entire
executive branch. It's not only
for Mners depends, but the
governor's, uh, office and the
New Mexico Environment
Department.
And so, so that's, uh, that's
another special.
From reauthorizations, um, the
energy conservation and
management division needs two
reauthorizations.
Um, in the amounts of 1.8
million plus and 1.75 million
plus, um, both extensions are to
support federal matching
requirements for the solar for
all grant program through fiscal
year 2026, the feds have been
very slow, um, in, in slower
than anticipated in the rollout
of these dollars so we would
greatly appreciate the
extensions that we need to
accommodate that.
In, in addition uh to the during
the 2024 special session, 10
million was appropriated to the
forestry division to support
post-fire mitigation, watershed
restoration, slope
stabilization, erosion control
and post-fire management in
Ruodoso from the, the fires
there.
The RFP process to undertake
this extensive work has taken
longer than anticipated. This
work is incredibly important for
the village of Ruidoso, and I
urged the committee to
reauthorize these funds through
FY 26.
Finally, Emner is seeking
changes to the budget adjustment
request language.
In this regard, a recent LFC
rule change that could have
major fiscal implications for
Emner, and I heard from a lot of
other agencies have the same
concerns, eliminating category
transfer authority and the 5%
bar increase would severely
limit our agent's ability to
manage its budget without
transfer authority, critical
positions may go unfilled and
essential work could be delayed.
For example, the 5% bar increase
authority is especially crucial
for state parks, which has
relied on this authority for the
past 2 years to cover rising
operating costs due to
inflation.
In FY 26, this flexibility will
be more essential as a new state
park reservation system contract
will increase our operating
expenses, as I mentioned, and
the legislature may add a new
state park to our network of 35
state parks already without the
ability to adjust our budget
accordingly, park services could
be disrupted at the same time,
there is growing demand for park
services, so, so it's, it's a
problem for us. So we
urged the committee to reject
these new LFC rules. Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
again, thank you for your time
and I look forward to your
questions. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members. It's hard for
us to follow along if we don't
have a presentation because
we're just trying to do it by
memory and that's a pretty long
presentation and so.
May not have a lot of questions,
we may have to get that slide
deck back so we can.
Go through it thoroughly.
Brent, I know he had a question
for the state parks director.
Hope she's gone.
Senator, you have a question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Kind of going back to the state
parks.
And this is what Mr. Brandt was
going to bring up, uh, Senator
Brandt was gonna bring up.
The, the state parks will kind
of run down.
And we know we got the, the fees
coming and all of that stuff.
Is that gonna be enough to
upgrade our parks?
The increase in fees.
Well, we, it, it is, that's,
that's 11 thing we need the
increased fees for, um, and I
would note the the LFC
recommended for parts and flat
operating budget for FY 26, um,
but it also recommended a $40
million a capital increase, um,
and so I think that that is, it
was 2 DFA recommended uh uh 20
million, um, uh, at $20 million.
Uh, increase and uh we of course
support the DFA's recommendation
and uh but uh but 40 million
sounds nice, um, and we are
spending a lot on capital
improvements across the system
and actually more than ever
before and uh we are one of the
only agencies that has expended
an obligated all of our federal
ARPA funds well in advance of
the deadline. We just spent over
$18 million at the large.
State Park Elephant Butte to
improve roads in Sierra County,
and we have nearly completed
construction on new cabins at 2
state parks, uh, the first
offering of this kind in 92
years, so we're, we're working
very hard on you, you hit
exactly where I was going.
You, you did great. Thank you.
um, Mr. Chair.
I heard a rumor. So, so the
federal monies.
You you've spent all of it so
far.
On from on the ARPAA stuff, it's
all good and do you foresee any
new federal money?
Coming
Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
There is some additional funding
that does come in. We do have a
new BOR grant that has been
awarded to the state. So that
funding will continue to support
uh Bureau of Reclamation Parks
across the state. And so we
continue to use those funds to
help uh with offsetting some of
those infrastructure work that
needs to be done.
Mr. Chair and senator, I would
note also that we are, we have
been concerned about federal
funds and uh and our energy
conservation and management
program so far has received all
of its federal funds we are
having problems with metal and
minerals, metals and minerals,
and uh oil conservation and uh
Just to, I think just those two,
but, but we are having a
problems.
Getting the federal funds
obligated in those areas, so.
So it's a concern and we're
monitoring it and we're doing
what we can.
OK, and Mr. Cha, this.
This one I'm gonna hit you with.
I'm not hitting you personally
with it, but.
I am from San Juan County and
elephant Butte has no water in
it, and we spent a lot of money
down there.
And my folks in San Juan County.
I would like to know if you
could spread some money.
Up to where the water actually
is.
Um, and I, and I, and I am kind
of teasing. I, you know, but,
but it is really a concern in my
area. I get, I get phone calls,
um,
All all the time and, and Toby
behind you can tell you that.
Then I'm very active up there
trying to.
Ensure them that that we're not
getting.
Left out of everything just
because we're way up north.
Um, I would love to talk to you
further about it. Uh, we are, we
are, uh, doing everything we can
with the money that we have I, I
would love that. I would really
look forward to that.
And then my last one, Mr. Chair,
uh, the geothermal.
Um, do you have any
Big projects planned with
geothermal yet?
I, I mean, I know you have the
counties, but do you, you have
some specific projects like in
the hopper maybe
Mr. Chair and, and
Senator, we um, we did receive
uh $5 million in FY 25.
OK, and that money was it now
has a successful relaunch of
utility scale geothermal plant
in Hidalgo County.
Um, a major developer is moving
on an innovative 100 megawatt
plant development in one of the
many geothermal, that's the down
in the uh uh southwest corner of
the state, and there is a
project where New Mexico Tech
and Project Interspace are doing
high-level mapping of our
geothermal resources, the $20
million that we are seeking uh
would develop a much fuller
baseline deep industry quality.
Uh, mapping of the geothermal
resources, which is gonna help
attract investment, um, and it
would provide support for state
energy financing grants and uh
study the cost and benefits of
several different proposed
geothermal projects, uh,
including those supporting
manufacturing and military
bases, and I would note on
geothermal.
Um, that it is a renewable
resource. I said we're 6th in
the nation in geothermal
capacity.
But it, uh, the capacity factor
for geothermal is 90% compared
to like 29% for solar, so you
don't need battery storage,
which is geothermal is more
expensive on a per megawatt hour
basis, but you don't need the
storage, which is very, very
expensive. So, so geothermal is,
is an incredible.
Uh, opportunity for us as a
renewable resource and for
attracting investment, etc. etc.
I said again, I spoke to
somebody the day before
yesterday, very interested in
industry person, very interested
in New Mexico and for
geothermal, I'm meeting with
Sandia next week on their
geothermal effort,
so it's, it's a big deal.
Well, thank you very much.
Thanks for the answers. Thank
you, sir. Thank you. We're gonna
have shorter answers so we can
keep moving along, Senator.
Nice question.
Senator Woods and Senator Brant
the state parks guy is dying to
meet you.
OK, I just, I just got one
question, Mr. Chair.
But the Smokey Bear.
They need some.
I understand they, they're
needing about $5 million down
their capital.
So
Is that in the works or where we
at on that?
Uh, uh, Senator, I believe that
we have requested.
Uh, money for Smokey Bear, uh,
uh, in our budget request and
how much it's.
Mr. Chair, Senator, we did
request $5 million for uh
infrastructure upgrades for the
Smokey Bear Museum.
Um, that was recommended by the
executive, it was not
recommended in the LFC
recommendation. Therefore, we're
looking to see if we can get
some of that.
President
At least you didn't say madam.
Sabra, you.
We're hot on the state parks
today.
Thank you, Mr. uh Chairman and,
you know, I, I.
Shared some concerns the other
day. That's probably the rumors
you heard about the state parks.
Um, they're not in the greatest
shape, um, they're, you know,
we've been trying to, uh,
You know, broaden our base for
our economy, um.
And uh
One of the things we've been
really trying to do is increase
tourism, and yet, um,
I, I asked someone that likes to
camp and
Go camping, quite, quite a bit.
Um, you know, there's a couple
of state parks that have have
work done, but most of them are
way under what I see in other
states and so I'm wondering
what's our investment in that
and then I did have a specific
question on the, uh, you talked
about the vendor for taking for
your
Your, your income.
That you're paying $1.2 million
to collect $6 million worth of
income.
Is what you said?
Mm Mr. Chair Senator, what we do
right now is we have a
reservation system with uh a
vendor.
What they do is they do all of
the collections for reservations
on camping they collect roughly
in approximately $6.2 million a
year. What they've done in the
past is they would take that fee
off that top and we were
collecting anywhere from 5.1 to
about $5.5 million a year.
If, if I could say to Mr. Chair
and senator, um, uh, in
specifically to your Fenton Lake
State Park, uh, we are investing
capital funds, uh.
Totaling 1.5 million on vault
toilet replacements, 6 have been
completed for starting
construction this spring. Uh, we
have preconstruction plans for a
new park housing uh for a
million dollars if we replaced
the water lines in the main
campground and initiated a
five-year park management plan
that will include stakeholder
and public engagement, so, so we
are investing in upgrading uh uh
your park and other parks.
s across the state, it's not my
part.
Oh, it's the they told me it was
your parts people's park in the
state. I go to all of them.
I don't have a bar in my
district. I don't have a state
park in the town of Rear
Sandoval County
it's, it's a park I've been to.
I've never actually camped
there.
You
Because it's always full.
Oh
You're investing but we are
investing in Fenton Lake State
Park just so and it needs it
and, and I will tell you, I
think most of them need it.
Um, and so I appreciate that
we're doing that, um.
My concern on the reservation
system, you know, and maybe I
can share a link with you to
squared.
Um, because that, that
percentage is really high.
repayment system. I know they do
the whole reservations and
The fee is pretty ridiculous for
for.
The people of us that like to go
camping as well.
It's very, very high percentage
wise compared to the federal
system.
Thank
Me, where, where are we with our
fee increasing, Kelly.
Kelly Carswell
Did we not have 70 million into
Ener for state parks that I've
seen on the capital list, let
the secret to answer a question,
just getting you a heads up.
We are increasing the uh state
parks fees and it's been a long,
long decades since they have
been increased, and that's in
part, I think we will be
collecting more and, and you
might see the percentage uh that
you refer to, uh, uh, Senator,
uh, uh, go down, but Mr. Chair,
um, uh, we are, we are
increasing them. I don't know
when have they got, they're
going into effect shortly.
Yeah, I thought it would be,
yeah, yeah, so.
Or past January this past
January, yeah, yeah,
OK, Kelly, we had, I think I've
seen a number of 70 million in
there for capital.
For parts.
I know that San Juan wanted a
new parking lot cause they're
backed up on the ramp.
Where's that at? Um, Mr. Chair,
yes, the total capital
appropriations to M nerd
proposed in the LLC Capital
framework where over 70 million.
Um, the biggest of those was 40
million for statewide state park
improvements, um, and there were
also some major investments to
the forestry division.
OK. Did we invest last year in
state parks, I thought one year
we went on the state park tour
and and how much money we put in
there and how much is been
spent, how much has not been
spent and
That might have been the analyst
in Senate Finance. Do you know
that number SJ? Mr. Chair, there
were 16 million in capital of
the state parks last year, um,
and you all did name some
specific parks um that were to
benefit from that appropriation,
and I do have a list of the
plans for that money as well as
um sitespecific projects for the
new money that I can provide to
you.
OK.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam
Secretary, you know what I'm
gonna ask. Maybe, maybe not. Uh,
the Rio Grande Trail.
Commission.
Ben's ready to go.
Um
So you know, you've, you've
appointed some great
commissioners by all accounts is
what I've heard in a new chair
was fired up ready to go, so I'm
curious, when is the
Next meeting and when are we
going to designate 100 miles of
Rio Grande Trail that's ready to
be designated.
Thank you, Jay for letting me
take your seat, Mr. Chair and
Senator Steinborn, we've uh
appointed a few new members. We
had an informal subcommittee
meeting.
Last week, I believe our formal
meeting is scheduled for April.
We are um not content to simply
designate what you would think
of as the low hanging fruit
sections. We're definitely going
to do those first. We're also
skipping ahead and doing some of
the tribal consultation we
anticipate are going to be the
more difficult to negotiate
sections the trail, so we're
trying to um tackle the
of the easy part and tackle the
hard part right at the same
time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
Shelton, that's great to hear.
Um, that's really great to hear
because I think we could do much
of the rest of it during the
governor's time in office he can
be an incredible legacy as we
will see when we, when we make
it happen. Um, incredible. I
also want a flag for you both,
um, Mr. Chair, that there
There's an attempt to deal with
an issue from the conservancy
districts and legislation that
it was introduced by
Representative Case to deal with
some concerns from the
conservancy districts about
liability of using some of their
easements and stuff because we
have passed trails Act in the
past that allowed
Um, Conservancy districts to
allow use of their easements for
recreational access, but I think
they're looking for a little
more language. This bill might
have been a little too broad. It
might need some fine tuning, but
I will tell you that helps
unlock another 100 miles of
trail on the middle Rio Grande.
It might help a little bit with
bit down south and so you might
look into that.
And uh looking to, yeah, there's
a question of do we have enough
statutory authority right now
under the Trails Act.
that that bill isn't needed.
There's some kind of legal
disagreements over whether we
need a new act to give the
conservancy districts.
That, um,
Of that statutory authority, um,
Um
Anyway, so I'm looking for the
right word, but anyway, if you
don't mind looking into is
Representative Kate who
introduced the bill in the
middle Rio Grande.
And maybe engage that because
I think there's a solution to be
had there for the conservancy
districts who are facilitating a
long-distance trail like we can
super narrow it down to just
recreation on the easement and
not all other forms of
recreation and is expansive as
that bill started, but I'd love
you to look into that because
I'd love to unlock the middle
Rio Grande, which is super
important part of the Rio Grande
Tra Mr. Chairman and Senator
Stamborg, we would love to talk
with you and your staff later
and and figure out what we can
do and help with so that's,
that's the critical thing to
look into right.
there, but thank you, Madam
Secretary. I appreciate that,
Ben, thank you. Appreciate your
good work on that.
Well I have. Thank you. I think
that's it.
Appreciate your time today.
one house build2 comes over.
Now, let me ask, do we have
presentations from the state
engineer office.
And do we have presentations
from the uh superintendent of
insurance.
know.
They're only gonna get to use
one.
I went up from the engineer.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, while people are
getting settled, the agency code
is 550 for the state engineer,
it'll be behind 5 in your
binders.
But awesome mother.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, joining me today
for our conversation is going to
be the state engineer, Elizabeth
Anderson, uh, the director of
the Interstate stream
Commission, Hannah Risley White
and my DFA counterpart Monica
Tapia, uh, both recommendations
supported the agency's flat uh
fund balance request for the
executive recommendation reduced
the agencies' other transfers by
2 million for a general fund
swap, uh, the executive
recommendation increased the
agency's other revenues by 32.
and really the largest
difference between the two
recommendations. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee is
going to be executive uh
recommending the general fund
increase of 7.4 million or
21.6%, while the LLC
recommendation increased it by
1.2 million or 3.4% with the big
difference being the executive
recommendation, uh.
increasing the agency of
personnel budget for corrective
salary increases. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, also
in your packets, you'll see a
breakdown of the differences
between the special
recommendations for the Office
of the State Engineer that's
going to be on pages 10 and 11.
And I think the largest
differences Mr. Chair members of
the committee, it's going to be
the executive recommendation
giving 5 million for continued
support for the uh interstate
litigation and then 35 million
for the Indian water rights,
while the LFC recommendation
gave 20 million and then in
addition to that, the executive
gave $5 million to implement the
water security Planning Act or
the LFC recommendation did not.
I'll now turn it over to my DFA
counterpart to add anything.
Thank you, Austin. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I
quickly want to highlight two
key agency needs that were not
included in HAFC's adoption of
the LFC recommendation.
Competitive salary increases and
a litigation and education
program revenue swap. I can
provide additional information
if you'd like, and if not, I
will pass it over to the
engineer.
And
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you for having us here today. My
name is Elizabeth Anderson. I'm
the state engineer designate and
um with me here uh is Hannah
Risley White, the Interstate
Stream Commission director. We
also have a number of staff in
the audience. We have Tanya
Trujillo, Michelle Hunter, John
Romero, Jeff, oh.
Jennifer Braca, Jeffrim, and
Xavier Rodriguez.
Um, we have a brief presentation
to follow with key highlights
from our budget request and time
for questions. Um, we also want
to make sure that you received a
copy of a one pager comparing
the executive, executive
recommendation with the LFC
recommendation.
No, I have copies of that here
if it's still possible to hand
them out.
You have some too? Oh, yep, that
should work.
Yeah, and in addition to that,
we'll be handing out a um a one
pager that.
With something like this. This
is a summary that was put
together of the, the governor's
um executive recommendation
requests for the 50-year water
action plan, and so it
highlights multi-agency
requests, um, from all the
natural resources agencies. I
think it's a really nice concise
summary, um, but like I said,
this comparison of the exec and
the LFC rack, I think is really
um telling and it's really
helpful to just compare what
was, what was recommended. There
are quite a few.
apps there, so we'll go through
that today and
Um, with that,
And we switched to.
Oh, the next we're gonna go on
the one shooter or we're gonna
go off the six-page off the
6-page slide.
OK, let's get rolling. Thank
you. OK.
Oh, thank you. OK, perfect.
OK, next slide.
OK. So, um, this is just to
highlight the need. There's, um,
we're clearly in the middle of
a, of the drought and have been
for the last 20 years, um, New
Mexico is really struggling with
our water here and we don't see
that as a short term issue. This
is, this is climate change and
we're all getting ready and
preparing for um for what we
need to be able to, to meet the
challenges ahead.
So we do expect that this
pattern will continue, um, it's
time to address the urgent needs
and prepare for long-term
implications of a hotter, drier
future, and this map emphasizes
the urgent need for action.
We're working.
To implement the governor's
50-year Water Action Plan
elements as outlined here in the
one page.
So we've um water check is all
aspects of our livelihoods and
economy in New Mexico. This um
budget request is focused in
three key areas. The first one
here is modernizing water
management. There's an urgent
need to invest in 21st century
tools to support decision making
and ensure sufficiently funded
sufficient funding for skilled
staffing. Um, this is looking at
modernization, both of our
technical resources and our
administrative tools.
Um, investing in the Rio Grande,
we're not ignoring the rest of
the state, just highlighting the
work needed on the Rio Grande as
reflected in the budget request.
And I'll go ahead and transition
to Director Risley White.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
It's a pleasure to be with you
here today, Hannah Riley White,
director of the New Mexico
Interstate Stream Commission,
um, just to say in case you
couldn't see the numbers on that
first slide that those red blobs
all over New Mexico we're
looking at snowpack right now
about 30%. Um, we're seeing this
trend continue, um, and in terms
of investing in the Rio Grande
estate engineer designee, uh,
Anderson said, certainly we're
working hard in all corners of
the state, but we see a critical
need in the Rio Grande.
what happens um throughout the
system is important. We're gonna
need to be managing every drop
as carefully as possible. In the
middle Rio Grande, we have a
significant effort ahead of us
in terms of ensuring continued
compliance with the Rio Grande
Compact. We also are heading
into negotiations for settlement
of the water rights of the six
Middle Rio Grande Pueblos and
have lingering endangered
species Act concerns that we
need to address. So the effort
there is going to be only
increasing. What happens in the
middle Rio Grande affects the
lower Rio Grande.
also working actively, not only
in terms of the litigation in
the lower Rio Grande and more on
that later, but also to
implement solutions on the
ground with stakeholders with
the significant funding we
received from you all in the
2023 legislative session. And
then the other priority that
will highlight is planning for
our water future that includes
not only implementing the
governor's 50-year water action
plan and you have this handout
in front of you.
I'd like to just emphasize the
real leadership that we're
seeing both at the legislative
level and at the governor's
office around water, I feel
really fortunate to be working
in this environment. The
coordination across the natural
resource agencies that you see
reflected in the action items in
the 50-year water action plan is
significant, so there's work
ahead to, to implement those.
Also, as you all know, you
passed the water security
Planning Act unanimously in the
2023 legislative session that
was essentially an entire
rewrite of
Mexico's regional water planning
statute. I'll say more about
that later, but we're also
really actively working to
implement that as well as
investing in Indian water rights
settlements, which are critical
in terms of planning for our
water future. And I think with
that, I'll hand it back to uh
Liz Anderson.
I we'll try and do this.
Thank you. Um, we're, we're
gonna try and move through these
quickly, but um,
So the next one here is just
digging more into the
modernizing of water management
and within the within the
breakout here of the budget
comparison, um, the number one
thing here is the, the gap in,
in our salaries. Um, we need to
ensure sufficient funding to
recruit and retain technical
staff. We, um, the governor's
executive recommendation was for
2.6 million um for that funding
to, to kind of fill a gap, um,
we're really struggling with
staffing right now, um, and
there was none of that in the
Let's see, we recommend, we
recognize that there's a job job
architecture um project ongoing
right now, um, a couple of years
ago, there this um Spo did a a
salary study for some of our job
classifications and 80% of the
staff, over 80% of the staff in
the agency were affected by
those, those salary studies. So
the, what they should be getting
paid has gone up, and we haven't
been given any funding to fill
that gap.
So the result is that we're
losing people and there's with
the needs, like this is the type
of work that we do is technical.
We have a lot of lawyers,
engineers, hydrologists.
I'm very technical people who it
takes years to train, and when
we lose somebody, it, it could
be 5 years before we get someone
fully trained back in that
position again. So for us, this
is our critical need. Um.
In addition to a couple others
that will highlight the other
thing I wanted to highlight here
is our implementation of the
Water Data Act, which I think
the legislature for passing,
it's really an incredible
opportunity for people to
understand the needs of the
agency and what that means in
terms of data availability. Um,
so we have a recurring funding
for staff and key initiatives
requested 2,000,000 here and
then our non-recurring, we
wanted to make sure it's clear
that, you know, we know this
budget hearing is about
recurring funding, but
overlap with, with non-recurring
funding is critical because
without the recurring funding,
we can't do the non-recurring
tasks.
Um, and vice versa. So, we have
an asking here for real-time
water measurement system of $3
million. Um, that one is gonna
allow us to use the metering
funding that you've been
providing over the years for us
to increase the number of meters
in the state and upgrade the
meters and actually take that
data and make it available to
the public and to our staff, um,
in a more meaningful way. That's
an important ask. The waters
database, I have to say is the
most important to ask. This is a
30
old database that we'll be
replacing, um, and it represents
security risks for the agency.
It's also something that every
single one of our staff use on a
daily basis, and the public use
as well.
Um, in saying that, I want to
thank you because we did receive
funding for the RAs database
update, and that's the
adjudication database with more
of the legal side, the two
databases will be fully
integrated, but it's really
critical for us to get moving on
this water's database. So thank
you for rats and um we have
staff ready to, ready to move
forward.
And with that,
I did want to highlight, we have
an enforcement bill that's going
through right now and that's
gonna be another piece of
modernization with the in the
agency in terms of
administrative tools needed are
enforcement bill is Senate Bill
210, um, and House Bill 348.
And that bill is gonna allow us
to, to increase our um penalties
and really make a more
meaningful penalty that we can
use to enforce water, um, water.
Um, theft and administer water
rights in a meaningful way. The
current fees were set in 1907.
Um, and with that, I will go
ahead and.
the
Right
Investing in the Rio Grande. So
here we have 500,000 increase in
recurring funding to support um
enhanced management and
administration in the Middle
Grand, which includes staff
capacity, um, that's needed to
actively manage water and be
more strategic with every drop.
The other ask here is 700,000
increase in recurring funding
for office space in Albuquerque
and Las Cruces.
Um, and this is, this is also in
it and.
In in
Important ask. I'm gonna go
ahead and pass this to Hannah
for the.
this fine.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you state engineer
Designie Anderson, um, uh, just
wanna emphasize again the point
that she made about staffing
salaries, I think that is
definitely a critical need for
the state in terms of investing
in the Rio Grande. Um, the other
item that we see is a is a
critical need that's missing in
the LFC budget is a special for
litigation, um, as you all know,
we're in active litigation in
the US Supreme Court, um,
We're working incredibly closely
with the Attorney General's
office. Uh, we expect, however,
that we, it is likely we'll have
a trial date later this year.
We're very proud of the work
that we did in negotiating the
settlement across the three
states, we are still locked up
with Texas, um, and we're
heading into further settlement
discussions later this month,
we're really optimistic that
those will go well, we are
leaning into settlement, but we
expect it's likely that we will
have a trial date. It will be
very difficult to head into
trial without this necessary.
funding, the last time we were
at trial in this case, our burn
rate was about $3 million a
year. So having a zero amount in
House Bill 2 and this special is
concerning to us, not only in
terms of the message that it
sends to the parties in the
case, um, but also because of
the real implications for how we
will navigate trial without
sufficient funding.
Um, next slide. Uh, I would also
just highlight that we have
significant other uh capital
requests associated to investing
in the, the Rio Grande including
a capital appropriation for
river channel maintenance
habitat restoration and flood
control work. Um,
OK, uh, and also I mentioned
this earlier before, before I
move on, I would also just say
that we are working really
intensively with stakeholders in
the lower Rio Grande to
implement solutions in parallel
to working on the litigation.
Uh, the longer you wait to
implement solutions, the more
expensive they get. We see that
there are many things that are
going to be needed regardless of
the outcome of the litigation
and we're actively engaging,
including with the funding we
received from you all in the
2023 legislative session to get
those solutions on the ground
and feeling very positive about
that work.
Uh, related to water planning,
uh, we're very pleased to see
that in both of the budget
requests, there's an expansion
recurring funding for our
planning shop, both LFC and the
exec Rec have an $800,000
increase in that, that will be
critical for both implementation
of the governor's water security
Planning Act, but particularly,
sorry.
50 year water action plan, but
particularly implementation of
the water security Planning Act.
You all should have received um
at your offices, and if you
didn't, I brought some extra
copies, some updates from our
planning shop with regards to
the extensive public engagement
that we conducted in 2024 after
passage of that act, that
engagement resulted in input
that was collected for a
discussion draft of the rule and
guidelines that are called for
by the Act, those are also in
this packet. We're looking for
comment.
on those as we head into
will be working to stand up
those future regions, and that's
where this funding will be super
important. We're very optimistic
about what's coming in that
process and the potential for it
to really support communities
across the state and planning
and preparing for, for water
challenges. Uh, also, I would
say in terms of 50 year water
action plan, the, the special
that was another point of
concern for us between the two
budgets, you'll see that the
exact graph has a $5 million
special for both uh water
security.
Planning Act but also
implementing the governor's
50-year water action plan and
other efforts that dollar amount
is not included in the LFC's
recommended budget, we think
that will be really important
for kickstarting the regional
planning effort I just
mentioned, laying the sort of
scientific foundation for the
planning process convening the
future future regions, but also
implementing action 1A from the
50 year water action plan, which
calls on us to develop a water
education template, that would
be looking at curriculum
existence.
curriculum and developing
further curriculum for all
education levels and then also
improving our website so that
there's better access to data
and information and online
engagement tools including
further implementation of the
water Data Act. So that
initiative is very important.
I'd also like to highlight that
water security Planning Act
called on us to convene what's
called a water security tribal
advisory Council for the first
time, and we convened that
council last year, that process
is going really well. We're
looking forward to engaging with
the, the tribal participants in
that process, both in terms of,
of what that planning process
needs to look like, but in other
issues as well.
And it's hard and so next on
this slide, there's emphasis on
the funding for uh Indian water
rights settlements. There's a
difference between the two
budgets, the exact rec has 35
million LFC Rec has 20 million
for Indian water rights
settlements. We see these as
critical to continue the
progress that the state has made
in advancing those settlements
in the last several years,
utilize that funding to
implement those settlements and
leverage significant federal
funding of the settlements
moving a total around 3 billion
in federal.
funding, so that piece is
important and also it's hard to
plan for your water future with
large outstanding Indian water
rights claims. So that
investment is going to be an
important uh component of what's
next.
And then the last thing I'd like
to highlight on this slide and
we're getting, we're getting to
the end of our presentation. I'm
really looking forward to your
questions. Is that trust fund
swap that's in the executive
rack, so we're, it's not an
increase in the overall agency
budget. It's an exchange for the
current dependency on our trust
funds, so the irrigation works
construction fund and the
improvement to the Rio Grande
Income fund for general fund.
We see that swap as being really
important in terms of reducing
agency dependency on the trust
funds, which creates solvency
problems for the trust funds,
but also allowing those trust
funds to be returned to their
originally intended purpose. Uh,
there's a effort moving
including from Senator Campos
this session to increase funding
for Asakias out of the trust
funds. We have serious concerns
about the implication of that
without this trust fund swap for
general fund. So planning for
our
future is also gonna require us
to remove agency dependency on
those trust funds so that we can
have them available for what
they were originally intended
for, uh, last I would say we
have a couple other initiatives
in our capital requests related
to, to planning for our future,
including additional funding for
Asakus and funding for the
strategic water reserve.
And I would like to emphasize
that we're doing everything we
can to secure funding from other
sources, federal funding and
grant sources and also the uh
ability to continue have having
bar authority helps us be able
to transfer in funding including
from grants.
And last, I would just say
before handing it back to the
state engineers. We have on all
the critical items on that one
page comparison handout, we have
specific one pagers for each of
those. So if any of those you'd
like some additional information
on. I have those available with
us today and thank you so much
for your attention to this
important issue, and I'll hand
it back to the state engineer
designee. I think we're gonna
wrap up, aren't we?
Yes, our last slide here is just
to closing, and I just want to
say our agencies full of
talented, dedicated employees
who are ready to take on the
challenges ahead, but last lack
funding for staffing and
resources. We appreciate the
opportunity to present our
budget to this committee and
welcome any questions. Thank
you.
We're gonna go through this
pretty quick, so we're gonna
limit our questions like 2
minutes so we can get through.
Senator Stein.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just real
quick, explain to me when we say
budget swapped from the general
fund and irrigation works
construction fund, are we saying
that
We are basically, is it a one
time deal where we're gonna use
or it's a recurring thing where
we're going to start using the
general fund to fill up the
irrigation works construction.
what we're saying? So I think uh
specifically, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, what is happening is
the two funds, one of them has a
6.2 million balance right now,
the other is a 2 million
currently in the LFC's
recommendation, we would
continue their utilization of
1.5 million in the irrigation
works and then 500,000 from the
Rio Grande. And so by offsetting
it with general fund in the
OSC's budget, we would be
maintaining those balances where
they are now and then utilizing
them for other purposes.
Mr. Chair and Senator, if I
could say it's just, it's the
it's, it would be recurring is
what's proposed that, that our,
our, we would source our budget
from general fund in a recurring
fashion.
OK, thank you.
Um, and then the $5 million
we're requesting for the Supreme
Court case supplemental, is
that, where is that in the
house, you know.
Mr. Chair and Senator Steinmo
uh,
where is it at in the house?
Yeah, um, I guess I would say
we've had numerous conversations
with committee members from
House Appropriations and
Finance, they understand and
hear the need. Again, I think
it's critical. Do I wanna spend
that on litigation? No, but if
we need it, it'll be really
important for us to have it
there. Do we think we still need
it, Mr. Chair?
Is the case moving along, I
mean, I don't know exactly the
status I think they currently
have a $4 million balance
somewhere. I don't remember if
it's a attorney general's office
or there Austin, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator, good point. It's a 2.9
million currently in a previous
special that was going towards
these litigation efforts. Then
there's also existing balances,
uh, with the New Mexico
Department of Justice that also
goes towards these litigation
efforts.
OK. Well, Mr. Chair, I guess I
was told that these pots of
money are separate because the
work you do is different than
the work the Attorney General
does. And so even though money
may exist with the attorney
general, the technical money you
have is still important. That's
what I was told. I don't know,
is that accurate?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, that
is, that is accurate. I think we
have the remaining 2.9 in the
special from 2022 that Mr.
Davidson just mentioned, um, we
anticipate significant spending
on that this fiscal year and we
see a real likelihood we'll have
a trial date later this calendar
year and so heading into that
without sufficient funding, um,
is concerning.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
deserve to be. I thank you,
Charlie, super fast. I think you
can do yes or nos on these ones.
So on page 4, thank you for the
presentation, by the way, and,
uh, on page 4, the real-time
water management or measurement
system and the water's database,
will that, uh,
those two tools tie into say
like MRGCDs.
Software and applications and
all that kind of make sure
everybody's talking apples to
apples with how we're looking at
all this.
Mr. Chair, um
Senator Padilla, that's a good
question. I think in the sense
that the data will be available
for others to use in a more
accessible fashion, then yes,
but the intent isn't necessarily
to tie it together with MRGCD's
databases.
You want to add to that? I would
just add, Mr. Chair, we are in
active conversations with MRGCD
about enhanced data sharing, and
this will help us do that
better. Thank you. That slices
right through the middle of my
district. Want to make sure that
we're just apples to apples.
They're looking at a gallon the
way you're looking at or
whatever, you know, right, and
for that for that
and that thank you. And then the
second one is on page 5. I want
to be real, real quick as the
chair said, um, the second
bullet accessibility and
reinforcement increased staff.
accessibility and enforcement,
um, what does that mean exactly?
What's especially the
accessibility, I'm assuming.
Are you going to make them team
more accessible, I guess.
The team will have, we need the
office space to be able to have
the the accessibility is that we
have district offices all around
the state. We have 7 different
district offices and um and so
this, this means that we're
expanding both in Albuquerque
and in Las Cruces and the
additional funding is needed to
be able to do that, particularly
with what's happening for the
additional administration that's
needed in the middle grand, and
then the um the work that we're
doing that we just talked about
down in Texas, New Mexico,
litigation and in Las Cruces.
an engineer and and the
director, so uh you opening
another office in Albuquerque or
simply expanding the one
expanding,
and then are you adding
additional staff also. There
would be some additional staff,
but that's not part of this, OK,
all right, thank you, chair.
Thank you Senator there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll keep
it really quick. This is kind of
my wheelhouse. I love water.
I've got to work with most of
these people in this room and I
appreciate everything that you
guys do, but just real quick on
the metering, the water
metering, can you just give it
like a really brief description.
Of what you're talking about.
1 m in the water.
The metering, well, we have um
an ICIP that we've gotten
recurring over the past couple
of years for meter installation,
and we've been doing that all
over the state. Um, we really
can't administer water without
metering the water. So we're
expanding the, the metering
that's being done and, and
that's making it more and making
it more real time accessible
data. So I guess my question is,
how, how much are you fixing to
expand?
So how, how many more meters are
we talking about?
Like our location. That's a good
question. I think that might be
something we can get back to you
and that's fine they know we're
trying to answer these because
we've got, we've got lots to do
and I would love to visit with
you after your confirmation.
Good luck on that and I
appreciate you guys coming in
today. Thank you.
Senator Shindo.
Oen Gonzalez, I'm sorry.
Thank you, Sherman, I only have
one question, and thank you. Um.
On page 6.
On the top one on implementation
of water security Planning Act
and Water Education.
What do you mean by that?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Gonzalez, uh, so in the 2023
legislative session, the
legislature passed the water
security Planning Act, which was
essentially a rewrite of New
Mexico's regional water planning
statute.
Under that act, Interstate
stream Commission is tasked with
developing rule, a rule and
guidelines for how the future of
regional water planning will
occur, including redelineating
the regions themselves. We
released in January a discussion
draft of that rule and guideline
that are called for by the Act.
Once those are finalized by
about the middle of this year,
we'll be working to stand up
those future regions and
coordinate planning processes
within those regions. I should
also highlight that.
calls on us to work with the
regions to craft priorities for
state funding. So hopefully
coming out of that planning
process, each region will, will
come up with a list of
prioritized list of what's
needed to address water
challenges in their region, and
we'd be reporting on them as
required by that new statute
annually to you all. So
hopefully that, that helps
explain.
OK, so education doesn't mean
that you're going to the
schools. Oh, thank you for that
like follow up, Mr. Chair, and,
uh, Senator Gonzalez, the
governor's 50-year water action
plan has as recommendation A1,
water education, including
development of what's called a
water education template or what
that involves capturing and
we're already working to collect
input from across the state
around existing water education
curriculum at all education
levels and
developing and integrating that
to create a resource that could
be utilized by schools and by
others across the state related
to water resources.
OK, Mr. Chairman, I know that
Senator Padilla has uh
legislation on that and I'll
probably will have.
some too, but what I'm looking
more is uh.
Uh, K-12.
With the curriculum sequential.
You know, scope and sequence,
Mr. Chair, we'd love to discuss
that further with you. That's
great news.
Thank you.
Sashinto, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I thank you for the
presentation. Just quickly on
page 6 on the uh Indian water
rights settlement, uh, I know
executive recommendation is 35
LFC 25, which of the settlements
would that cover, uh, with the
35.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Schendo, um, there are a number
of settlements moving already
that have early funding
components. So I know there's
been concern about approving
funding for settlements that
haven't been approved by
Congress, we will be able to
utilize that for a number of
those settlements. Deputy State
Engineer Tanya Trujillo could
speak to this, but also we're
looking to develop a pot of
money that could be used for the
6 settlements that are currently
moving in Congress, depending on
which of those get through and
when, and I don't know if uh
Tanya, do you want to add to my
answer or you?
Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman.
We report on an annual basis to
the interim Indian Affairs
Committee and the Natural
Resources Committee with a
report of all the existing
settlements and the ongoing
obligations that we're gonna
have our cost cost share fund
requirements, and there are
currently 6 that we would be.
Contributing towards.
Pueblo of Hemes in the Rio Zia
Hemis water rights settlement.
A blow of Akima and pueblo of
Laguna in the Rio San Jose
settlement, Navajo Nation, and
the Rio San Jose settlement,
the, uh, OK, winge Rio Chama,
water rights settlement, the
settlement agreement with the
Zuni tribe and the Zuni Salt
Lake protection agreement and
additional funding for the Taos
Pueblo settlement. Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, I'd just like to
emphasize that these settlements
include not only the tribal
entities, but non-tribal.
entities as well, typically the
state funding goes to the
non-tribal entities and the
federal goes to the tribal.
Thank you.
Appreciate
Thank you, uh, but none of those
have moved through Congress,
right? And how much do we have
built up in that fund from last
year because none of those were
settled, correct?
Austin, you know, the mountain
we have built up in those funds,
uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator 20.
OK.
OK, let me ask you something. On
the two funds, I'm looking at
them on page 63 in volume 3. Why
is SIC have a 5 million $5.1
million loss on page 63.
You know SIC lost 5.1 million of
that fund.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I can
get back to you with a more
detailed approach on
specifically that part of volume
3. I can also get them a copy of
that so they could maybe give
you also a breakdown of that.
I think they're bringing it up
behind you there, Austin.
German members, there is a
portion of
Uh, the irrigation works
construction fund, uh, which I
think is what you're referring
to. That's correct. It has been
uh invested uh.
Through the estate investment
council.
Uh, we've had very good returns
on those for all but one year,
we had roughly a $5 million
game, which was.
Phenomenal, but then the market
crashed the next year, so we had
an almost similar loss. We're
back to uh more
Reasonable games, however, uh,
one interesting thing about that
is, uh, in order to, to solve a
negative cash balance issue that
DFA finally had us reconcile. We
will have only about half as
much invested so that the really
strong investment returns that
used to help fund this, uh.
this uh
s
Balance is higher than they
otherwise would be, uh will be
reduced by about 50%.
So there are some revenue
pressures on that trust fund.
forward.
As the
Invested balances roughly 50%.
And and maybe you know this, and
tell me your name again, I'm
sorry.
Uh, yes, Chairman, my name is
Jeff Prim. I'm program support
director. So how long have the
funds been in place and and so
then they must have started
drawing from them rather
quickly.
only and they keep on a
declining level, it looks like.
Yeah there
Last year, 23, you drew more
than did the year before, you
returns on a negative loss.
So you drew more out in a
negative year.
than you did in a positive year.
So
He had 1822, you drew out 8
million roughly, maybe a little
more, a little less, then the
next year you had 15 million in
throughout even a little bit
more.
So you're drawing out funds on a
on a fund that is made a balance
and and returns aren't this
high.
So are we going to continue that
practice because general fund is
not going to save everybody.
Going forward.
Uh, so about 15 years ago, this
whole setup was put in place
where our agency used to be
funded, uh,
Why
Strongly by the general fund at
one point, the legislature
needed to find general fund and
this arrangement was put in
place. I understand from the
Asakia community, they're under,
they believed it to be a
temporary solution.
Uh, we're now about 15 years
down the road.
Uh, whereas there used to be
balances that were in the tens
of millions of dollars, uh.
I believe around 30 to $40
million.
When the, the
whole arrangement was put in
place. We're now in a situation
where uh we are in a declining
balance situation on that
largest trust fund, the
irrigation Works. Uh, so our the
Reliance on that fund outweighs
the revenues and we're in good
revenue years. So, uh, as we
know, if
If we're gonna be relying on
this fund for our agency
operation and the $1 million
that goes out to um
Forestry unit and for the $2.5
million into the Assea community
infrastructure fund.
All those hands in the cookie
jar, as I say it.
are outweighing the revenues in,
and that will just accelerate
over time with the lower
invested balances.
And it will also, uh,
End up
Getting worse if the revenues
into the fund from other sources
uh from the trust lands also are
reduced, so our effort right now
is to continue on the, the
process of trying to wean our
agencies's operations,
operational use of this fund.
This fund is better paired to
non-recurring uh to supporting
non-recurring activities like
aseia projects as the statutes,
uh.
Originally envisioned.
Uh, our operations are.
placed at risk and and we have
to talk about this trust fund
during our budget hearings
because uh
Because
The funds may not be there in
future years, not only to fund
the ACDIF in the forestry
distributions, but it would put
our agency in a very awkward
position because we would either
have to lay off a large
percentage of our staff or cease
a large percent of it percent of
our operations.
Based on the
The millions of dollars that we
rely on this trust fund for, for
our recruit. OK. Um.
State engineer, where are we
with the ARPA money in building
the dams.
appropriated 30 million.
I don't know if you want to
answer that question or the.
Uh
Chairman members of the
committee.
we
are at the point where we have a
grant agreement with the local
entity, the local entity is
procured or identified a
contractor, uh, we anticipate
that work will, uh,
Start soon on that damn project
and we anticipate at this point
we're quite confident that we'll
be able to get those funds spent
within the
HARPA expenditure period.
And that's all thanks to our
damn safety bureau and its
director and their hard work on
getting that agreement together
and working. OK.
Thank you. I don't have any
other further questions. Thanks,
Austin. Are you staying there
for?
Thank you.
Superintendent insurance, Lisa,
I don't see the superintendent
here.
Mr. Chair, she's presenting.
another bill, but we have the
deputy superintendent.
Yes, you should have a handout.
Not your handout. Do we have the
agency's handout.
I think
casting it out. OK.
It should be
you
We got it, we got it.
It's your highlights in this.
It.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is Julisa Rodriguez, and
I'm the LFC analyst for the
Office of Superintendent of
Insurance. Um,
To get you all situated, we are
gonna be behind tab 4, and
that's agency code 440. Um,
quickly, the HTFC voted on the
executive recommendation for the
Office of Superintendent of
Insurance.
Um, the executive recommended a
1.1% increase for the agency,
just a reminder that this agency
does not receive any recurring
general fund revenue of that
1.1% increase went mostly
towards staffing, so that's an
increase of 500,000 for staffing
for the office, um, primarily
for additional staffing for
this, the new, the new bureau,
which is a prescription drugs
and pharmacy Benefits Bureau.
Uh, the LFC recommendation was
slightly lower on personnel, but
in the slightly higher amounts
for contractual and other costs,
um, in, in, in the other cost
category. Um, I'll now pass it
over to Ariana. She's the DFA
budget analyst for any
additional remarks.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, at this time, the
executive doesn't have anything
else to add to that, so I'll
pass it over to.
What Tim.
Mr. Tim.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My name is
Timothy Bhill. I'm the um deputy
superintendent of insurance, I
have with me a friend Moya.
Versus that Rodriguez, Christian
Meyers, Roberta Baca and
Alejandro Ambra to help me with
any questions. Um, I thank you
for the time and the opportunity
to present to the uh our.
FY 26 budget request, um, as you
all know, our mission is part of
our mission.
Is uh a goal to protect
consumers, foster a competitive
marketplace and ensure that
companies are financially sound.
Uh, the day to day operations of
the OSI.
Are funded entirely through
revenue generated from the
insurance industry by
assessments and licensing fees
from companies OSI regulates.
Uh, the LFC executive budget
recommendations are close in
dollar or insurance fraud and
title operations with a total of
$184,000 difference.
I think
So slide.
We go to slide 5. You have to
tell them.
I'm sorry. Oh, you're, you're
signaling him.
But thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mm
Slide 5, this slide reflects
that the OSI's total recurring
request of 73.4 million,
including patient compensation
fund.
On slide 6.
The LFC and the executive both
support the healthcare
consolidation, uh, 1.5 million
in the fair plan 50 million.
The cost of medical malpractice
insurance is considered a factor
in the healthcare provider
shortage in FY 24.
OSI distributed 15.4 million for
medical malpractice premium
reductions pursuant to the
governor's supplemental
appropriation. To continue this
program, OSI requested $18
million budget increase. The
executive recommendation
increased the funding request to
25 million.
Uh, the, the LFC recommendation
does not support this request.
Um, as we all know, uh, New
Mexico has an acute problem with
retaining an attracting medical
providers, reducing the medical
malpractice caused is
consistently cited by medical
professionals as a potential
solution to this provider
shortage.
Um, based on some of our
statistics, the largest market
share medical malpractice
insurer carriers averaged over a
60% rate increase over the past
3 years, for example, an OBGYN
with the doctor's company, some
medical malpractice premium
increase from 27,000 to 40,000
over the past 3 years.
Providing this direct premium
relief to providers is the most
straightforward way to reduce
the provider's insurance costs.
And again, as I said in FY 24
OSI distributed 15.4 million to
independent providers through
this medical malpractice premium
relief initiative, we partnered
with insurance carriers to, to
determine how to distribute the
funds to 3,688 independent
providers. Uh, it provided the
program provided 100% premium
relief to OBGYNs and 60.5%.
Premium relief to other provider
groups. No refund was allocated
to towards the PSF surcharges.
Uh, we would like to in FY 25,
continue this program and
increase the funding to 25
million um and uh again, as part
of the rationale is medical
malpractice has insured has
increased over 60% since January
1st.
2022.
And the chart
Uh, would covers a rate
increases for the top 6 admitted
carriers that represent 80% of
the medical malpractice
insurance market and the data
request indicated that there
were 3,688 independent providers
in 2023.
On slide 9.
Uh, we also have some additional
bar requests, bar language
requests that we would like this
committee to approve uh OSI
received a special appropriation
1.3 million in FY 25 or salary
adjustments, and this was for
improving retention and
recruitment of employees, uh, we
processed over 60 in pay band
salary adjustments or current
staff to appropriate.
appropriately compensate these
employees based on their
education and experience to
recruit some of our harder to
fill professional level uh oh
positions, we increased base
salaries, uh, well above the
midpoint.
Because of that action, we were
able to find and recruit a chief
actuary, a chief financial
examiner, a finance uh
pharmacist, a cybersecurity
expert and a
CFO.
We request language for
reauthorization and extension of
the existing 1.3 special
appropriation to continue
implementing the salary
adjustments and recruiting
efforts.
believe that was um.
Slide 9, yes.
Um
Mr. Chair, uh, OSI also requests
bar language that allows the
fraud program to bar $400,000
from the fraud fund balance. The
bar will cover the fraud
division, salary adjustments and
one additional full-time
employee.
The fraud program has no vacant
positions at this time. The 5%
bar increase language is not
sufficient to cover the
additional positions and the
salary adjustments. The 5% bar
authority is $158,000 and with
an additional $400,000. It will
cover the cost for the salary
adjustment and the one
additional position.
We are also requesting a bar
lang language in FY 26 that
allows the insurance licensee
continuing education fund to do
a budget increase of of 150,000
from the continuing education
fund balance to meet auditing
requirements. OSI is currently
in the process of uh entering or
or looking at an RFP for these
auditing requirements, uh, which
the
proposals are $150,000 as the
maximum.
Funding from the fees from the
continuing end. Horses have no
uh general fund impact.
And I stand for questions,
mister.
Sure.
Cents name one.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. First of
all, welcome.
Deputy Superintendent and
analyst, and we appreciate the
work that the um
OSI does, I mean to help New
Mexico consumers really, truly,
I want to thank you for the work
that you do. I think New Mexico
has done some amazing stuff with
the patient.
Affordability fund and some of
the other work that we're doing
and really I, I think.
I think anyway, I like it best
when it is a consumer protection
agency and looking out for, for
Consumers, so I do have just a
quick question. The um
This bureau, the pharmaceutical
bureau that there's such a
difference between what the
executive asking for and with
the LFC is recommending. Can you
explain what that bureau does
and why, why do, what is it
you're asking for the LFC is
providing?
And Mr. Cha may ask for
assistance from our staff
members. Julia, you want to go
over the LFC rec and why we came
with that number
and Senator. Um, so last year
you all passed the prescription
drug transparency Act and that,
uh, basically manage various
entities.
Um, from the prescription drug
chain, um, to report drug price
trends to the to the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance. Um,
so I believe the agency
requested an expansion of
roughly.
Um
Maybe like, uh, let's see an
expansion of
Um
Uh, 589, um, and that includes
funding for personnel, um, for
contractors.
Um, for that.
Bureau, the LFC recommended one
person, so one FTE for the
bureau, while the executive
recommended to an HTFC voted on
the executive recommendations.
So now, right now the bureau has
funding or will have funding
for.
FTE for that bureau. OK, so, so,
Mr. Chairman, so you're telling
me the HAHAFC has approved the
hire.
And uh request from the
executive in House Bill 2. Mr.
Chair, Senator, so actually the
LFC's recommendation was higher
than the executive, um, you're
seeing it's gonna be, it's like
a roughly a difference of the
executive recommending a
1.1% increase in the LSC
recommended a 2.1% increase.
Um, as I mentioned before, a lot
of those differences were in
staffing primarily for this new
bureau.
Hm, OK, I guess I must have read
that wrong cause it looked like.
Pretty good
Like more than 1%, like it was
different of an FTE basically,
but it was 50% difference, but.
40%.
OK, um, finally, the the 25
million for the premium
assistance program for
providers. That's obviously a
big number and I'm sure helped a
lot of providers out.
Do you feel like you're getting
any traction for that in HAFC
right now.
Um
Mr. Chair, the, yes, the
Uh, senators, the program was
highly successful when we
implemented it last year and uh
I believe continuing it would be
highly advantageous.
Chair, I would just close by
saying, you know, 25 million is
great. That's a one shot deal.
You gotta do it every single
year and right now we got a bill
to eliminate GRT for medical
providers.
Which would also cost, of
course, yearly loss in GRT but
they really do need long term
relief. So I hope that we really
look at that.
Thank you very much and I hope
you're successful with this too,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator
Tobison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm
gonna piggyback on um Senator
Steinborn's question.
Can you explain why the LFC is
not uh recommending the request
for either 18 or 25 million.
What why is there zero money
appropriated for that.
My, am I understanding that?
Yes, and this is for chair
Senator. This is for the medical
insurance premium reduction.
Correct. Uh, the LFC
recommendation did not include
that, um.
For a couple of reasons. Uh,
when last year that was a
governor like I was a governor
special that 15.4 million that
they appropriated, um, the LFC's
recommendation took into account
that that's almost like a
subsidy for um,
on medical malpractice and
Um
It's not just for people in the
PCF, it's for like all types of
providers. Um, we just at the
point while we got the.
Request, we didn't have a lot of
information on who the providers
were, what, like who, which
providers were gonna be like
going to get the benefits, um,
so the time room the LFC
recommendation came out, we just
didn't have enough information
to, to be able to recommend it.
OK, and do you have more
information now?
Yes, now, Mr. Chair and Senator,
the OSI has provided a good
breakdown of
Where that 25 million would go,
um, and
It's mostly for OBGYN providers,
um, and they've seen some of
the.
Highest increases in medical
malpractice premiums.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, and,
and we've looked at all the
providers and we've determined
how we would distribute it.
And uh and it could include part
part of the surcharge through
the uh uh PCF that would have a
uh
A portion to contribute. OK, and
then looking at your chart on
page 8.
Can you explain why in 2024
there was such a sharp increase,
or I guess the last two years,
24 and 23, a pretty significant
increase and then you're showing
for 25, really rather small
increase. Can you explain those
differences?
It's, yes.
If I can, we'll ask uh Christian
Meyers, the chief actuary.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, yeah, I put
together the summary of the
medical malpractice rate
increases by calendar year. I
review those filings.
I'm not sure why it was so quiet
during the pandemic, uh,
carriers just were not making a
lot of filings during 20 and 21,
and then it almost appeared like
there was a catch up, uh, they
started filing during the
recovery and then again we saw
20, as you pointed out, 23 and
24, um, really making up for
lost time. Uh, we generally see
the rate or the, the claims
costs increasing between 7 and
10% per year. So it's almost
like they let the claim
costs increase without taking
rate during the pandemic, you
know, if there was just
sensitivity around.
Rate increases for consumers or
or what the reason was that
companies decided not to make
rate increases, um, and then in
those next two years, they were
really playing catch up and, and
accounting for the cost
increases that they were seeing
that year in 2025, uh, maybe I
should have put a footnote in
there. Um, that's only because
there have only been 2 months'
worth of filings so far. So I
really took like
The market basket of carriers
and then like I, I can't
remember if it was one or two of
them have submitted a rate
increase and then kind of
averaged it across the whole
way. There there was probably a
better way for me to present
that, but it's, it's really just
because we haven't seen all of
the rate increases this year. I
see. Thank you and Mr. Chair, do
you have um a detailed breakout.
I'm really interested in some of
these larger claims that we're
hearing about that actually
aren't um MDs versus maybe nurse
practitioners, etc. I'm hearing
from the medical.
community that that's playing
into these increases and, and
losses if you will. Can you give
us a, a ratio of MDs versus
others, other types of
providers.
Mr. Chairman, I do not have
that, uh, right now, um,
And I think I can answer that
question, uh, so we're kind of
at the mercy as to what um
companies submit in their rate
filings, so I can go back and
ask for that, for that 1st
$250,000 in coverage for the PCF
layer, which essentially kicks
in between 250,000 up to that
860.
Apologize, I can't remember the
exact number, uh, but
essentially that higher layer
that we have detailed, like, is
it a CRNA OBGYN, what kind of
down to the specialty level as
to what type of claims are. So,
yes, I can follow up with some
additional information about uh
those higher claims for the PCF
layer.
Which I think is probably what
you're most interested in, and
unfortunately for the 1st 250, I
just, I'm not confident that
I'll be able to put that
together.
OK.
Thank you very much. I
appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Center
Thank you, Chair. So, um, I was
approached actually about um
about 100 and
40,000 $145,000 issue related to
the, the um enforcement bureau
within your office. I know that
the, I think the director or the
manager is here today.
Uh, I wonder if maybe we could
get a little more uh detail on
that because I didn't quite
understand it. I want to make
sure that we're addressing it
here.
When we have the opportunity and
and maybe there's some other
piece of information we need to
know.
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Roberta
Baca. I'm the insurance fraud
bureau division director, we
support the New Mexico A the
prevention Authority and
essentially, um,
A year ago, uh, we took over our
budget. We of the division with
the new superintendent was
allowed to take over their own
budget, and when we looked, we
simply moved some money from
contracts to the 400 category
and somehow it just got
clipped out. We were trying to
move it into the appropriate
category, so we don't have to do
it in ours and so I would let my
finance person speak to that.
Mr. Chair, um, members of the
committee.
You're gonna have to come to the
mic otherwise they're gonna hear
you on the web.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. So what I'm seeing
and, and we'll let Julissa and
Ariana speak. What I'm seeing is
what we requested was to move
131,000 from contracts into the
other cost category, and they
both supported the movement of
the 131,000, but on the
executive side they um
recommended Only movie 19.5 and
on the LFC side 32.5.
Um, so we were just trying to
understand.
Or the wider reduction in the
other category. Answer your
question, Senator Padilla thank
you pointing at each other, but
Well, maybe they need to figure
out what they want to come
forward with to get uh
transferred or repaired. I'm,
I'm just trying to give you an,
an audience with this group to
get your issue resolved, uh,
when I was
Uh, approached with it. I
thought that, you know, I
thought they'd have a little bit
of an understanding of
What you really needed here.
You can come back, we'll bring
you back for a budget hearing,
make a decision on what you
want, see what the differences
are between Vanessa, right?
Julisa,
so.
It's a, there's there was a
discrepancy, there's a
discrepancy between the LFC and
the executive recommendation.
The LFC took the
And
Um, I obviously don't work in
the DFA, but in talking with
DSA, I know that they were
concerned about the fund
balance.
Um, which is why they have less
going um.
I think for us to like kind of
get down to it, we'd have to
look, and I, I believe we have
these numbers, we have the fraud
fund balances that we could look
at, um.
And we could compare.
Um,
What page are you on?
Uh, this would be, I have the
fraud on balances on just like a
different.
Again, um,
Key code, but we would have to
look at the broad balance which
I believe is roughly like 1.3
million, um, and then there is
a, we have to look at the base
request, so that's roughly like
700,000, um, and I believe then
there's an additional like bar
adjustment that would happen and
what the DFA what DFA was
concerned about, and I don't
want to speak for them, but what
I know that they were concerned
about was that it was going to
make the fund very low, but
that's when the OSI said that if
there was a like a challenge
with the um
investments and fees, we get
that fund back up.
I don't want to speak for
anybody, but, um, that was, you
know.
I'm totally confused now, Mr.
Chairman. So I think uh instead
of us going through this line by
line, why don't you put a plan
together as the chair said, I
think he's going to give another
opportunity for you all to be
back again. I'd like to hear
more about it because I want, I
want you to walk out of here
happy, and I know you guys are
doing a really good job over
there in that division and so
just uh bring back what what it
is that's really going on here
and what the.
Recommended solution is. Thank
you.
Senator Woods, I mean, Senator
Brent, and then Senator Woods,
and then we're gonna wrap up.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, I have a
couple of questions on the uh
Medmouth.
Um
First of all, you said it's for
OGBYNs mostly, um, is that, uh,
Have to do with is that around
the abortion clinics that are in
Las Cruces or what's that around
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, our
focus was just on the shortages
of the different providers and
uh it was our understanding that
the OBGYN community was really
Uh, facing a severe shortage. So
we wanted to make sure the
communities had access so my
understanding last year.
Was that this was kind of a
temporary stopgap so that we
could actually
Do something in law about
Medmouth.
Was that your understanding?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, it's
my understanding that there are
attempts to address the problem
on a longer term basis. My
problem with continuing this,
and maybe this is why LFC
decided not to, um, want to do
this is basically we're taking
taxpayer money, and we might as
well write a check to, you know,
some of the lawyers in the, in
the Senate because that's where
it's going, right? We're just so
you know, supplementing our
lawyer's income in the state of
New Mexico at the expense of the
tax.
taxpayers.
us paying the medal insurance
increase instead of dealing with
the issue like every other state
has done. I mean, even
California.
It's like one of the
worst states in the union, and I
grew up there, so I can hit
California all I want. That's my
home state.
Right, one of the worst states
in the union their medal
insurance is like 25% of what
ours is.
Because they even have tort
reform there.
And until we deal with the
issue.
We're not gonna have doctors.
But
Apparently we don't have the
You know
Courage
On one side of the aisle to deal
with the issue.
And so, you know, that we're
just not gonna have doctors
apparently. I, I hope none of
these lawyers get sick.
Oh, never mind, they'll take
their private jet to
To Texas or Arizona and get
medical treatment.
Thank you.
you, Mr. Chair.
He would, OK, uh.
I noticed that the
LFC recommendation.
I uh
All right, let me just read this
for the Mexico fair access.
To insurance requirement pilot
plan projected in Lincoln County
contingent on the enhancement of
legislation, the first session.
And it's talking about, I'm
assuming Senate Bill 81 is what
we're talking about here. And it
says uh requires plan holders to
mitigate properties to the
insurance Institute for Business
and Home Safety, wildfire
prepared home standards. We
can't find that in the present
bill is that in the bill or is
that a substitute bill coming.
Mister Chair, we, we didn't
identify the ABHS specifically
because what our goal was uh
depending on
you know, in the future, if
there is a better model or a
better institute that has uh up
to-date requirements that better
um address mitigation efforts.
We didn't want to be locked into
IBHS, so we left the language
broader.
To, uh, adopt wildfire safety
standards.
OK, I guess we need to
I need to see that in the bill.
Mr. I don't wanna hammer you on
it any further. Men use had a
long talk.
So thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Cheers.
I heard Mr.
Mhm
Thank you guys for your
presentation. Robert, let me ask
you one question.
And so,
It, it's a personal question
they probably gonna come up, so
they knocked the windows out of
my truck, right?
And so my insurance.
I don't realize what was in
there, but I
took it to the dealership, so it
would be inside and wouldn't get
other stuff sorted. So when I
make the claim on my insurance,
if I don't know what's in there.
I'm not gonna be talking to you,
am I?
I don't know anything I need to
upgrade. I think I can buy
everything I want.
OK, I just want to make sure
because
And
anyway, all right, I'm good.
I hope you respond faster than
the police do. Mr. Chair, as we
all know, you and I drive the
same truck, but you always have
the nicer one for some, some way
you always have the nice I'm
telling you, I always drove a
3/4 ton truck and then my kids
always took my three-quarter
trunk to haul something, so I
bought a half ton trucks so they
would not drive it anymore.
There you go.
Thank you guys. Appreciate your
time.
