4, which is the main recurring
budget for
Uh, state agencies, as well as
Section 8, which is
compensation.
Mr. Chairman, I think it's
important.
For me to briefly go over how to
read some of these documents,
uh, as
They're a little bit different
depending on the document. So
HAFC when it's doing its work
will make a preliminary.
A decision on an agency budget.
Uh, this year, basically, they
chose the LFC budget which was
lower.
Overall
And then they would make an
adjustment from that amount. And
so what you see here are amounts
where they
Chose LFC and this is the amount
that's above what the LFC
recommendation was.
That's different than maybe what
the total funding is for a
particular item.
Uh, so that's an important,
you're gonna see a bunch of.
Um, documents as you do your
work here in the Senate.
Where you're changing from HAFC.
And so you'll see the
incremental difference either
positive or negative. And so in
this case,
HAFC
Uh, took the LFC recommendation
for a number of the district
attorneys.
Uh, and there were some district
attorneys that were newly
elected and this wasn't their
budget request and they
requested an adjustment above
what um their predecessors had
submitted to LFC in the fall.
And so HAFC made some
adjustments totaling 354,000 for
those DAs, uh, that are listed
there.
They chose to add additional
money in financial control for
the Department of Finance and
Administration. They added money
for uh personnel in the
Secretary of State and uh
economic development and the
PRC.
Uh, they added money for an
additional position in gaming
control board.
Um
There was additional money for
some.
Uh, contracts.
In the next agency, uh.
Cultural affairs, uh, additional
funding for their personnel in
museums and historic sites. What
we are seeing in a number of
agencies, uh, this past fall and
and into uh this year's.
They had been
Uh, doing a better job of
filling positions, but also
giving raises that were
squeezing their overall
personnel budgets in ways that
we've not seen in the past and
so this was an attempt by HAFC
to give a little bit of extra
money uh to be able to staff up.
Um, those departments. Livestock
Board, an additional 700,000 for
the meat inspection, uh, program
in nerd for resource management
division, MLK, uh, they had a
change in leadership and ask for
a revision to their request and
Uh, they, uh, received an
additional 100,000.
The environment department has
submitted a flat budget overall,
but they had cut some of their
enforcement and compliance uh
funding to give to uh program
support which is administration
here in Santa Fe, I think for
some attorney and other
positions that the LFC didn't
recommend uh HAFC restored that,
basically bringing it back to
the executive recommendation.
DPS, uh, HAFC went with the LFC
recommendation, uh, which found
that they typically spend money
um in other categories because
they've got vacancy savings, uh,
HAFC decided to put that money
into a step increases uh in
targeted uh compensation for the
state police.
An additional 3 FTE at Homeland
Security, public school support
added 10 million.
Uh, to the SCG for secondary
supports. There's already money
in the LFC budget to phase in.
Uh, a formula changes for the
family income index, as well as
for uh the waiting factor for
6th grade students to bring that
in line with uh 7th and 8th.
State engineer, uh, this is
moving into section 8.
Ask for a targeted compensation
increases, uh, this I believe
gets close to half of what they
asked for, so that's something
to consider the pay study that
was done uh by Deloitte and is
ongoing in terms of
implementation now that we had
last summer, found that the
state engineers, uh, positions
in general were within the
market averages, uh, so you may
want to take that into
consideration before providing
additional uh targeted salary
increases that looked like they
were for the most.
part, uh, within market.
The courts had asked for a
rather large increase in their
overall targeted compensation
with the intent to bring up some
of their lowest paid employees,
but then move everybody else in
their pay plan up as well.
The HAFC chose to focus an
additional 2% compensation
increase on the very lowest, uh,
pay, pay bands, and that would
be in section 8 as well.
Turning to the next page, uh,
Mr. Chairman.
This is some more detail,
because a lot of the action in
the early childhood services
department, and you know, I
think, uh, you're planning on
holding a hearing to go into
more detail on this is not in
general fund adjustments, but
HAFC did make a large
adjustments uh from the LFC
recommendation in early
childhood services. The LFC
recommendation used the current
statutory formula for how much
money is supposed to be spun out
for the early childhood trust
fund.
And you can see the trust fund
breakdown starting on line 38 in
this spreadsheet.
And the way that we read this
particular spreadsheet, Mr.
Chairman, let's go to, to start
on line two.
On page 2.
So this is the starting point
for these particular programs
that are embedded in the
department. This is the base
budget for the current fiscal
year, and then each of those
lines that you see below it are
incrementally how much more.
Uh, are recommended and for what
purpose? So this is helping you
get a better understanding of
what you're buying, um, for this
particular program budget. If
you look in House Bill 2, this
document.
You'll only see personnel
contracts and other, doesn't
really give you a good breakdown
of your buying an additional 3
auditors to do X, Y, or Z.
you're paying for more home
visiting, um, you're paying for
more IT staff, and that's what
this document tries to do.
Then we start looking at it
across, and this is a
complicated budget again that
you'll get into more detail.
Then you start comparing across.
The columns, first column is the
executive recommendation, the
second column is LFC and then
HAFC and then you can see HAFC.
Over or under LFC. So what
changed from the LFC
recommendation. It's a quick way
to be able to see that.
So if we go down
To the early care and education
trust fund. So this money is not
general fund, it comes in as
other state funds.
We can see that the LFC
recommendation at line 66 at a
total of 298.9 million.
So that's above the 250 million
that's in the current operating
budget and then you can see the
things that the LFC funded with
that increase based on the
statutory distribution.
The executive recommendation
included a contingent
legislation that would increase
the trust fund distribution,
another $200 million to 500
million. So they've
In their recurring budget
requested an increase to 430
from 250.
There's some other special.
Um
appropriations uh that account
for the balance of that 500
million.
So what did HAFC do? HAFC
increased the spending to 400
million from the 250.
And you can see where they did
that on online 42 significant
increases in childcare
assistance.
Getting to the executive rec on
line 53.
Line 55.
Home visiting when combined with
uh the permanent school fund
where within striking distance,
well, we're we're there
basically there for home
visiting.
58, again, another increase to
get to the executive.
Same with the educator
incentives on line 61.
And pre-K expansion online 64,
increasing that by 25 million.
There was also a pre-K expansion
on the next page in the LFC
recommendation that they
maintained that money comes from
the permanent school fund.
Which is, uh, was a
constitutional provision that
the voters said increased
spending for early childhood
education, that money actually
flows through the general fund.
Uh, and then we're tracking and
accounting for it, uh, what
portion of that is coming from
the permanent school fund here.
So you can see a substantial
movement to fund the executive,
uh, request, uh, from the early
childhood education and care
fund without going above the
general fund target online uh
36.
Uh, for the LFC recommendation.
Mr. Chairman, the next page.
Or
This gives you a summary in
millions.
Of all the big agencies.
And the changes that I just went
over.
Uh, in aggregate. So,
You'll go over, uh, next week, I
believe, Mr. Chairman, line 28.
Where there was a a substantial
rearrangement between lines 28
and 29.
To take some of the savings from
a new Medicaid enrollment
forecast.
Which
Was, uh, came down significantly
on how many people are currently
enrolled versus uh what they
thought were going to be
enrolled and reallocate those
savings for additional provider
rate increases as well as income
support priorities that the
executive had all within the
LFC.
Uh, spending total from the
general fund.
So and then on line 43, you can
see the uh 18 million that I
talked about when I opened up.
Above the LFC for House bills 1
and 2.
The next couple of pages, Mr.
Chairman, are the detail of all
of the agencies.
Many of them are rolled up in.
Line 36.
On page 4, all other agencies,
so these are all the, you can
see if, if you've got a priority
to look at Martin Luther King
commission or something like
that. It'll be on this detailed
page, you won't see it on the
one with the big roll up.
In section 8 on page 10, Mr.
Chairman.
This is a high level. They took
the LFC recommendation in HAFC.
Uh, for compensation. And so
there's
In the back of the bill, uh,
increases for the judicial and
executive branch and higher
education, totaling an average
of 4%.
That would go out to those
entities.
Or compensation increases. The
school's compensation increases
are also, uh, 4% for school
employees.
That is loaded into the state
equalization guarantee in
Section 4.
I want to bring your attention
to a couple of other items that
are uh important in here.
The new classified pay plan
right there in the middle, $17
million.
That is
The state is creating
essentially a single salary
schedule.
Within each of those pay bands,
there will be different uh job
families for different types of
workers.
Much simplified.
A system than what we have now
where you've got a.
Classification system that is uh
very detailed fragmented, uh,
not uniform across uh state
government, even though people
might be doing very similar
types of work.
So this money is intended for,
and it's also driven by uh a
market-based analysis of what
the pay ranges should be
compared to uh our peer states
in the private sector.
So the 17 million is intended
for
If there are people, when we
move them onto this new pay
system and their salary is below
the minimum to bring them up to
the minimum. So that's
important. The other important
thing about this new pay plan is
we do not have an expectation
that where somebody sits within
the pay range should be the same
going forward.
Like the legislature adjusted
our pay bands this uh fiscal
year so significantly moving up
like our lowest paid uh entry
level fiscal analysts, for
example, I start them at the
bottom of the pay band because
that's the market rate for an
entry level fiscal analyst. We
should have the same expectation
for
The rest of government that in
before we implemented that I was
probably paying closer to
midpoint because that's what the
market was demanding. But now I
don't have to do that. And now
I've got room to make pay
adjustments over time, uh, as
they spend their career if they
want to stay in that pay band,
uh, to do that, so we don't want
to see what we've had in some
agencies like the Environment
Department where they moved
everybody to the top of the pay
band, then you don't have any
room to continue to give pay
increase. So that's gonna be an
important interim oversight.
Um
Um, item
The next is $17 million.
For supplementing all of the
liability fund increases that
were built into the LFC wreck
for agencies. This liability
funds, uh, the payouts from it
are significant.
Uh, it's being driven by a
handful of key agencies, but
overall the liability fund
payouts are really increasing
significantly. This is helping
supplement it on a recurring
basis. DFA will load this these
amounts into agency budgets on a
go forward basis.
To basically help get the
liability fund into the black.
It's not gonna build a fund
balance.
Uh, and this is an approach to
to build these recurring costs
into the base, as opposed to an
infusion of a huge amount of
non-recurring that won't get us
to a balanced liability fund
budget. So that's an important
uh figure out there.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, there's
general provisions in both the
LFC and the HAFC.
Um
That include things related to
uh leave.
And leave payouts that basically
say all three branches of
government should comply with
the current law for leave
payouts for sick leave.
With that Mr. Chairman, I'd be
happy to answer any questions.
Questions from Senator Woods.
Mm,
Mr. Chair and Charles.
Where did they cut?
Did they cut any of your
recommendations. There is a
couple of places, Mr. Chairman,
where they went with the
executive rec that was lower,
and that.
The one that I can.
First point you to is line 126.
That was the exact wreck and
they gave it to him and it was
200,000 plus lower than LFC.
That was it. I mean, um, there,
there's no great big cuts is
what I.
Going in and reducing LFC now.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So
Thank you chair and thank you,
Charles, um, on page two, down
there at line 60 in the early
education, uh, early care and
education fund areaable one.
The 10 million that's there, um,
so you know that when we passed
the legislation to create the
department, we required a career
and wage ladder and, and the
career ladder and all that.
So when are we gonna get to that
point and I'm not, you know, I
mean, the department's got to
sell it and all that, get it,
you know, but you know.
Mr. Chairman, you've already
funded it, uh, through Grow
Appropriations last session. So
they've got 3 years' worth of
funding to pilot that and come
back and show how well it worked
before you build it into the
base budget regardless of the
funding source.
So I just want to make sure that
I, I, the chair informed me of
that. I wanted to make sure that
that got out in the open, that
that's out there, doesn't look
like we're cutting left and
right over here. Um, all right,
good. And then on uh.
And, and this might be helpful
to maybe some of the, I guess, I
guess
to buy Tobiasson is probably the
only new member at the moment
that's in the room. I know
Senator Lanier, but um, can you
just talk a little bit about
like how vacancy rates are
managed and what uh Mr.
Chairman, what is allowed in
terms of like some departments
are told you have to have a
vacancy, you have to have this
vacancy, right? And you just
kind of air that out, you know,
put that laundry out there.
Sure.
So in your packets that you had
when you were hearing agency
budget, there's a.
bureaucratic form that we call
the PSA.
And that basically
Looks at how much funding is
available.
Uh, for personnel. I'm sorry to
interrupt. I want to make sure
it's Senator Lanier heard this
also, so OK, thank you.
So there's a, there's a, we're
talking about vacancy rates and
calculating those and there's a
A form in your packets that you
were hearing during your
different sheet discussions
called the PS calc.
And that is estimating uh at a
point in time last fall, how
much money they had to fill.
Uh, positions, how many
positions could they fill?
And how much money, how many
physicians were actually filled.
And so there's something called
a funded vacancy rate. Those are
positions that they can fill
with money that's available in
their budget.
Then there's separately
something called an unfunded
vacancy rate.
Where
Oh, I guess maybe 10 years ago
and before the legislature would
actually
Set the number of FTE in House
Bill 2.
You haven't done that for like a
decade.
Because basically you're saying
here's enough money to fill.
Whatever amount of vacancies,
but the executive branch has
continued to maintain.
Basically an organizational
listing.
Of positions that SO recognizes
on a a document.
The agencies want to keep, so
there's positions out there on a
bureaucratic document that don't
have any funding associated with
them. It may not have had
funding associated with them,
but.
Years
That's an unfunded vacancy rate.
The agencies want you to give
them money for those positions.
But they also
Sometimes, uh, don't want you to
focus on how much money they
have to fill.
Physicians that are in that are
funded in the budget but that
are unfilled.
We've seen a dramatic shift.
In the number of
Uh, funded vacant positions has
shrunk significantly in many
agencies and so the question for
you when they're coming is do
you have funding for these
positions and if you don't.
You know how many of them have
been vacant for how long? And do
you really need them? You're
growing government, essentially,
if you start funding more of
those unfunded vacant positions.
And so does that help you get
the job done better? That's, you
know, good question.
Uh, it can't be just that we
need money for, for just getting
money for it, and we saw that in
request after request in LFC.
Um, this last one, this last
fall.
Give us more money to fill these
positions because that's helpful
senator. I appreciate that, uh,
Mr. Chairman and Charles. I
mean, I, for the new members, I
just wanted you to hear some of
this because it's never made
sense to me. I mean, I would
never manage my business like
this. Uh, if someone did that in
my company, they'd be fired. I
mean, that's, that's just not
acceptable. So I'd rather us and
I brought this up last year, Mr.
Chairman. I mean, I, I really
feel like we need to just
Give them a budget and that's it
that's what you managed to.
it's, there's so much gray area
and horsing around and back of
the airplane that it just, it's,
I mean, and, and aren't they,
are they, are you aware of
Of uh departments picking up
dollars that should be for
salaried purposes or positions
and moving them to other areas
of their operation because they
just felt like that was
something they wanted to do.
Well, Mr. Chairman, you provide
authority for agencies to move
money between categories and.
So if they can't hire people for
some reason, but could contract
to get the work done. They
could.
Do what's called a budget
adjustment request.
But we've seen this fall is
Let's give out larger raises in
our personnel budget can afford
or hire more people than our our
personnel budget could afford
and we can forego like contracts
or other costs and where we saw
that we tried to take credit for
it and say, OK, well, if you can
live without that.
And you want to put it in
personnel, then we'll budget it
there instead.
Um, they'll probably come back
and ask you to backfill.
You know, that contract amount
or
Uh, the other amounts that they
thought they could live without
when they did the bar, so and
so, uh, chairman and I'll, I'll
probably stop after this, but so
if I, if the department did
that.
For a number of positions in
their department for that year
because they made those
adjustments or whatever that
that doesn't mean that's gonna
be their pay the following year,
because that, this is another
reason that just kind of, I, I
just don't understand how this
is allowed, you know, well, they
would come in and ask for a
larger personnel budget.
And probably the same amount for
the 3 or contracts and others,
and that's where the LFC analyst
would reduce the contracts and
others and maybe on the
positions if they were actually
hired and needed to needed to
get the job done.
OK.
I appreciate that Chairman. Uh,
I really feel like we need to
get our hand and just simply
this is your budget.
That's it, period. I mean that,
you know, you come and argue
with us if you want something
else. Yes sir, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, and we have worked with
uh DFA on this uh concern.
They've issued a directive to
agencies that they will be.
More heavily scrutinizing and
discouraging.
Uh, these budget adjustments in
the first quarter of the next
fiscal year.
Uh, and working with us on a
regular basis that if we see
that it's really not needed, uh,
to kick it back and not allow
that budget to adjust. If for
some reason they need additional
authority when they come into
the session.
Uh, because it will save.
Money for the general fund for
letting them move it between a
category versus giving them
extra money because they're
they're short, then that's
something that you can take up
for the next session. So trying
to get our arms around the fact
that you're putting together a
budget, why would we change it
right out of the gate next year,
DFAs in agreement that we should
try to really limit that and
make it on a
Um
A very limited basis for a good
reason.
Alright, thank you very much,
Chair and Charles. I would like
to see, you know, a a list of
how, you know, or do we
We're given so much information
here, maybe you already give
this to us, but I'd sure like to
see a list of, you know, top to
bottom, every department like.
Who's doing this and, and, and
to what extent and over 3 to 5
year periods, so we know, is, is
this a trend?
Yes sir, Mr. Chairman, we can
get that information to you. I
think we provided some already
to Senate Finance staff.
Uh, I don't know if that's in
your books, but uh there's
information in volume 3 as well,
but we'll get that information
in detail to you. And the LFC
reviews that every month and
it's uh LFC meetings. Thank you,
Chairman.
Thank you Senator Storm by
Steinborn.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning, Charles. Thanks
for being here. I just have one
question and I don't want you to
necessarily answer it now. I'd
like to learn.
More about the compensation
strategy that you talked about.
I kind of missed some of that.
So, uh, do you guys have one
pager or maybe we just talk.
After the hearing, you can
explain it to me again. Senator
Steinbor, we're gonna have a
hearing on Saturday on the comp
and the pay study.
Sounds good. That's all I have.
OK, mister. OK, Senator Trio.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and um,
thank you, Charles for being
here. Um, on this first page
though, I'm trying to
Figure out how I can track.
For these things where it does
look like the.
House appropriations added money
from the LFC recommendation.
Do I have to go back through
the.
Old book to see what the
executive recommendation was,
cause that's important to, and
that's what I'm trying to figure
out in, in a simple way to do
that. That one other column
might have been easier, but.
Or you can do that at a very
high level for the big agencies
as on.
Uh, page 4.
Is that part of it that's what I
and the next pages it
won't tell you the detail by
program or any of those things,
but if you have questions, you
want to know for
Um, you know, a certain agency
like aging, what were the
differences? We've got high
levels just like we do for early
childhood, uh, that we can
provide you so you can see some
of the, the detailed differences
between the recommendations and
what they may have done and what
they may have chosen not to do.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Charles. I would love
to see that for the Secretary of
State's office.
Um, that would be really
helpful. And then I, I just
wanna just add to what you were
saying about the vacancy levels.
From a, from the perspective of
being at a state agency, those
vacancy levels were historically
there because the legislature
understood that there's always
moving attritions, people
retire, people move on to other
positions, so you're never as an
agency gonna get to zero vacancy
rate, right? There's always this
moving when you've got 300
employees or you've got
thousands of
employees, that is a moving
target on a daily, sometimes
hourly basis. And so that was
kind of built into it, um, and
so, so when you see a vacancy
rate, it's really important to
keep in mind that there is just
no way to ever in this green
earth to get it to a 0 vacancy
rate. There's always gonna be
attrition. That's correct.
OK. Any other questions?
Let me go over some stuff,
Charles. So
For OSI and the personnel, I
mean, I understand the
environment department and their
increases took a lot of people
out there. Now they're coming
back and they, this is the
It's not com uh compaction,
what, uh
They want to be paid equal, but
they're not equal in engineering
terms or.
Pay terms is correct.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, that and that
change to the environment
department.
Um
They ended up giving their
people big salary increases. Now
other agencies with similar
types of employees saw that and
went the same. So you're seeing
that with the state engineer.
OK, and
as well.
And then in the courts, the, the
741 for the lowest paid, does
that complete that completely?
Are they, are they still gonna
be short. Well, I'm talking for
the 75,000 and under.
Mr. Chair, there hasn't been a
pay plan study.
In the courts, like there has
for the executive. This is just
an attempt to, they came in and
said our lowest paid people need
to be paid more.
Uh
The highest paid people have
been getting disproportionately
large.
Uh, pay increases over the last
number of years. Uh, this would
Raise
The lowest paid people an
additional 2% on top of the 4%.
And you could choose to build
off of that or not.
But how, how many does that
affect, you know, off the top of
your head? I would need to get
the number of people, but we
have that.
OK, cause I, I mean, a Supreme
Court makes 115 an hour in the
the guy that runs the AOC makes
111.
From 2 years ago they make it
$85 an hour.
And so they're almost as paid as
high and and so they're paying
the top end, but they're not
fixing the bottom end on their
own, so, I mean, that's an
issue. You're gonna pay
everybody at the top higher and
then you're gonna leave the ones
below and then come back and
say, oh, we'll help us fix this
well.
You're the ones that raised
yourself up before you took care
of the people that were probably
really need the raises first
place.
Um
On early childhood.
Uh, we're not seeing an increase
in the number of children
getting services. We're just
seeing an increase in cost,
correct, Mr. Chair, you're
seeing both, so childcare
assistance, the enrollment has
increased, but the cost per
Um
Kid has also been on a.
An increased trajectory for
20 years.
Uh, same thing for
3K you're buying more pre-K
slots, uh, the costs are going
up a little bit because of like
trying to keep pace with teacher
raises that are going on in
K-12.
Uh, as well as general
inflation.
And do we see a leveling off
cause I mean they one
additional.
200 million and and we've seen a
leveling off of costs and
leveling, because at some point
you're gonna have to level off
and see and set of bases.
Well, we may have created this
ourselves, but we now have an
arms race to who can get paid
the most in the state. I don't
care where it's at, what agency.
That's why that case study is so
important, so we can get
something leveled off.
But you're seeing an arms race
in early childhood. I want more.
I want more, and I want to get
paid higher. You're seeing that
in in
police agencies you're seeing
that in, in across the board now
and at some point we're gonna
have to stop.
Because
Otherwise it's gonna all be in
pain, I mean, if we got to send
the 4% to try to balance some of
that.
That's gonna be
A little tough to do, um, but
we're gonna have to figure it
out, I mean.
Uh, they want another 1.5 on top
of the 4%. I mean, either give
them one or the other, they
can't get both. So we're gonna
have to look.
Really hard at where we need to
really strategically makes money
to equalize that pay, and that's
why that pay study is so
critical. I hope it's just not,
uh, here's something to do and
let's keep pay low. Uh, I hope
it helps us fix problems, um.
So
That's one of the other things
and then.
In in House Bill 2, you have
nothing for DOT. I thought we
had.
Will that not reflect on this
page. I won't be reflected
there, Mr. Chairman, because
this is only general fund and
the road fund and federal funds
will show up in House Bill 2 I
think north of 1.2 billion all
funds budget for DOT.
And I think that's it.
Senator Padilla, you know, if
you look at in volume 3 and you
look at the transfers out of
some page starts on one page 54.
We start looking at the
transfers and the reversions.
You'll see out of the FTF FTE
category, the 200 category where
they're transferring money out,
right?
I mean, the LMC made it uh had
reversion for the last two years
and, and no transfers, but you
can go through there and start
looking at the transfers and you
look at the agencies.
But then you go to the specials
and section 5.
Um
And what's happening in
departments? Well, what's
happening in the environment
department, they're staying
flat. They probably have.
What's your guest, Charles, 80
million in specials. We've got a
significant amount of 80 million
in specials and
And one of the funds that cleans
up the toxic site. It
transferred all the money out
and used it for FTEs or
contracts, and they're hiring
former.
Cabinet secretaries and paying
them under a contract so they
don't get caught under the
violation of the governmental
Conduct Act.
can't do that. And so there's a
lot of contract money moving
out.
That uh funds and using it for
contracts for what we don't
know, we'll have to dig.
But
That's why the environment
department came in so low
because
What did they request 496
million in specials.
It was significant, driven
largely by the strategic water
initiative.
Yeah, that was 75 million, but
that's still a lot and so
there's still a lot moving
around in the environment
department in here, meaning if
you take the money out of the
contamination fund for the most
toxic websites and then spend it
somewhere else and then come
back to us to back Philip.
That's not what those funds are
intended for.
And that becomes a problem
because then they overspend and
they spend it where they want
and then they come back, we
backfill this cause we spent it,
and it, it's a hard media, hard
to get to the media to
understand that, but they're
spending a lot of money in
places that wasn't designed for
and doing other things that they
want.
Uh, the same thing with the New
Mexico partnership.
That that was designed for
economic development to help
them uh bring people in and
recruit people and and now I
don't know where that money is
spent, but we're gonna have to
dig into them and see what their
money looks like.
And how that's functioning, all
their donations in and out for
travel.
Let's look at all that, er
Padilla, I just want to make
sure I'm reading this correct,
Mr. Chairman. Um, so it goes all
the way, you said 154 to 156. I
see several um.
areas that are in double digits
for transfers.
Am I reading that right?
the state auditor, 21%.
Um
Uh, out of which what page are
you on, I'm on 154 down toward
the bottom, 30,800, that's the
agency code.
You have the 8th judicial I'm
sorry the 11th judicial 10% 2nd
judicial 10%.
Uh, Spaceport Authority on on
155, 10 10.5 MLK commission,
18%.
Uh, 156, uh, page 156 Office of
Family Representation, 52%.
Adult parole board 13%.
Am I reading that right? Those
are all transfers off of their
budget. That's correct.
Yeah, I'm
Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman, the
support employees in the lowest
pay bands, there's 647 that
would be covered by the
additional 2% out of the total
of
Uh, over 1800 non-judicial. Oh,
I do have one other question if
it's all right with you, but
yeah, so, um, on this on the pay
study.
Would one employee in state
government only fall into one of
those bands.
In terms of their
qualifications. The reason I say
that is we're going to continue
to kind of
Um
Leapfrog from department to
department, if you will. We, we
need to get away from that
because that I think that
contributes, Chairman, to what
you were.
Which is we'll never quite woke,
we'll never quite catch up.
This it's getting out of doing
the classification plan in that
way where you're creating like
unique small groups of
individuals, uh, own
classification.
One single schedule. That's
correct. OK.
That's gonna be very helpful.
s
Charles, what it, what was our
largest supplemental request
this year from an agency or
maybe the top 5 that the
healthcare authority is the
biggest one for the um.
Employee benefits program.
In and that's 128 who came in at
about 1:25 and then they revised
it down during HAFC to 85
million.
to this committee about that
revision down as well.
And that's the one where we're
gonna have to, if we keep
rolling that, that's gonna cost
us 500 million over the next
couple of years.
Well what yes sir and and so I
don't know how we're gonna fix
that. I mean, we just gotta
And bite the bullet.
Because we have to fund 85
million every year because
They're not charging the correct
rates.
Well, Mr. Chairman, there needs
to be cost containment done
under any scenario.
There needs to be probably a
methodical
Review of.
Uh, plan design and whether
there needs to be any changes
there.
What they basically ask uh the
legislature to do.
is to increase the cost to the
general fund for um
A health plan that's insolvent.
OK, so
Senator Woods.
Charles, uh
Yesterday I carried that bill,
the LFC bill about transparency,
the portal bill, and I was asked
the question, are we, are we
self-insured?
On that kind of liability.
And uh I told him yes, we
worship self-injured that was
correct, the GST risk management
we are.
The schools are self-insured up
to a certain point and then they
have private.
Um
Reinsurance that they also
purchased, but the uh risk
management and self-insured.
OK. Oh, and one other thing, Mr.
Chart real quickly, uh, we do.
I've had been contacted by the
DAs about uh
Um, you know, the DAs have
individual budgets, I realized
that, but they do have a, a
common thread on.
Some kind of uh
Uh
connection to
The database.
And I know that I, I can talk to
you offline if you want to on
that, but
I was just wondering.
If that's something new, that's
a new appropriation or.
And we can talk offline, sir,
Mr. Chairman, they use a common
um case management system
through the administrative
office that was compromised this
last year.
Not sure of the status of.
Uh, that particular system and
whether they've got everything
resolved yet or not.
OK.
Thank you, Mister Chair.
Thank you that's
That's it.
Intros
Let's see, Senator Gonzalez,
you're here, so let's do your
bills first. We're gonna jump
around in no order because other
people in other committees, so.
We'll do your two bills for
Senator Gonzalez 201.
In 202.
can do two Senate Bill 201 1st.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, um.
Starting with uh Senate Bill
201.
Uh, this, uh.
It's an LFC.
Yeah
And uh
Mr. Chairman and members some
201 requires the public
education department to develop.
Accountability and education
plan approved.
By the Department of Finance and
administration in consultation
with LFC.
The legislative education Study
Committee.
Or programs funded by the
appropriations from the Public
Education Reform Fund.
This bill will also move the
submission of the deadline.
For public education department.
Budget requests along with the
request of the appropriations
and the reform fund to early
date of September 1st.
Rather than November 30th.
And with that, uh, Mr. Chairman,
I have Mr. Sonny Lou from LFC.
As a technical witness and he
can cover more points into this.
Mr. Chair, thank you. The only
thing I would add to Senator
Gonzalez's summary, which is
very good, is that you've got
$82.5 million in the current
budget, uh contingent on
enactment of this bill.
OK, you don't have any
amendments. Anybody in the
audience and support.
Anybody in opposition.
And I zoom.
One wrestle.
Are you there, Russell?
Yeah
We can't hear you wrestle, so.
My apologies. I'm waiting to
speak for a later bill. Excuse
the interruption. All right.
Uh, question from committee
members.
See I can I have emotion. I'm
over do pass, Mr. Chairman and
motion for a due pass from a
second by in woods.
We called her
Senator Brent.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Yes.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes,
Senator Lanier. Senator Lanier
votes yes. Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla votes yes.
Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes yes, Senator
Tobiasin. Senator Tobiasson
votesia, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo Posia, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes yes,
Senator Sendo. Senator Sendo
votes yes, Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz votes yes, we have
a due pass, 9 to 0. OK.
We're gonna have her call the
road each time because we got
got ahead of her yesterday and
then
Senate Bill 2 Center.
Mister Chairman and the members
with the Senate Bill 202. This
is also in uh.
This is also um an LFC and um.
Um
This is a physical cleanup bill,
the result of a year-long effort
by the legislative Finance
Committee to streamline state
financial administration.
Align investments, fund language
to ensure clarity, consistency,
and compliance with.
investment standards.
It also distinguishes between
the permanent and the
non-permanent funds allowing
each to be invested
appropriately for better
returns.
Clarifies funds reversion
timelines, accelerating, audit.
Completions and insurance timely
financial reporting.
This also ensures investment,
consultants aligned with.
One beneficiaries, so strategies
better serve each fun purpose.
Incorporates input from the
financial agencies, including
the state Investment council.
Board of Finance Department of
Finance and Administration and
tax and rep department.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I.
I will yield to our our expert
witness also to see if he wants
to add anything and we have um.
Um
Mr. Torres here from LFC.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, this
is just a, a page out of Tax and
Rev's book. Uh, we have a lot of
language in our financial
management of the state that
could use cleaning up every year
and so this is pretty much just
a financial cleanup bill.
You're sure.
I'm sure,
huh?
Usually when tax and love comes
in, they say, oh, this is a
little bill that does nothing,
and then you find out it attacks
marijuana or tax something to.
Uh, we're gonna go anybody in
the audience and support.
Anybody in opposition.
Zoom.
Have anybody questions Senator
Woods, we'll start with you and
my analysis it talks about the
regulation and, and uh
Licensing department that have
questions about the reversion of
the mortgage regulatory fund.
You want to, uh, say anything
about that madam, Mr. Chair.
So
Mr. Cha and Senator Woods, I, I
can take that question. I think
there was some confusion from
the agency analysis. Uh, there
is duplicate language about the
fun being non-reverting. It
strikes the 2nd instance of that
language, but, but it is still
going to be non-reverting as
stated in the first paragraph of
that section.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Any other questions?
I mean that I'm looking through
this and so the higher ed
transfers here that we created
that program last year, the year
before.
And then you struck.
In on I'm on page 7.
In in consultation with the
state treasurer and in
The higher ed sex, but the
higher life.
Why don't we put her back in
investing money.
Mr. Chair, um, thank you for the
question, uh, a lot of this, a
lot of the creation of the
fund's language.
Um, we hadn't done it in a long
time, and then obviously, as
you, you all know, we've created
a lot of funds in the last
couple of years, and council
service was using template
language from previous funds
that had been created, and those
template language that they were
using, um, had in consultation
with the state treasurer for a
fund that was a joint investment
by the SIC and the state
treasurer. Um, in working with
state investment council.
These funds are not invested at
all with the state treasurer,
and they're actually invested on
the behalf of
The, you know, higher education
purposes and so each of these
funds has been realigned with
their proper beneficiary being
the person that the SIC must
consult with.
When investing those funds
rather than the state treasurer,
which um was a mistake.
OK.
can have emotion then.
Motion by Senator Woods, 2 by
Senator Tre Hill.
What do you call the room.
Senator Brown
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes. Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes
yes, senator Padilla. Senator
Padilla Bosa, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes
Senator Tobiasin. Senator
Tobiasin votes yes, Senator
Trujillo. Senator Trujillo votes
yes, Senator Woods. Senator
Woods votes yes. Senator Shando,
Senator Sundo votes yes, Senator
Munoz. Yes,
yes, we have a due pass right is
0.
You
We're gonna get Senator
Padilla's bills up next since I
don't see the other sponsors in
the legislative sponsors in the
room right now.
I don't see any
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'll go ahead and start on 126.
One sent a bill, 126 correct?
Thank you, uh, members of the
committee, as you know that um.
We have been modernizing our
funds that manage and support
broadband here in New Mexico. We
do have a rural universal
service fund that we all pay
into, um, that fund we massively
reformed it in 2017 by ensuring
that more of the dollars went to
new technologies, i.e.,
broadband, all the, the bill
does this year is, uh, you know,
I got this wrapped around my
neck early on when I started 13
years ago, and I continued to
drive broadband in the state as
much as I can, but essentially
what we do is, is we increase
the funding for broadband.
from $30 million to $40 million
in terms of what the fund value
can grow to and then uh we also
uh make some administrative and
um.
Uh, other changes to make sure
that it's, it's available in a
much more fluid fashion, so the
dolls reached that particular
purpose. Uh, the benefits of
this are enhanced broadband
access, economic development in
our rural areas, uh, also, not
just economic development but
also healthcare, higher
education, things of that
nature, um, and then, as I
mentioned, the educational
opportunities, um, so
essentially this is what the
bill does and and it's something
that we think is is prudent.
We've taken very slow steps in
this direction, and this is the
next logical step.
Anybody in the audience and
support.
One, anybody in opposition.
So you want to say something
real quick for like one minute.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jay Santiannis,
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Exchange carrier Group,
the New Mexico Chain exchange
carrier Group is a group of 10
rural broadband telephone
companies that have been around
for many generations, uh, this
is a very useful fund, the state
rural Universal Service Fund is
very useful and uh it, it
supplies.
Broadband to the areas that are
hardest to reach and most
costliest.
Uh, and that's the purpose of
this fund is is to reach the
rural areas and at a at a
affordable rate.
Uh, urge the committee to pass
this bill.
Uh, we don't have anybody on
Zoom, nobody in opposition
questions from committee
members.
In it or rent and then Senator
Woods.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, Senator,
um.
So
You increase the fund to be able
to go up to $40 million. How's
the fund funded?
It is through an access
surcharge that are on, on, on
the access line telephone bills.
OK, so with those charges need
to go up?
Uh, they would go up slightly,
um, but, uh, yes, they would go
up ever so slightly, but that
would be
Build directly, I'm sorry, this
dollars would be used right back
into those communities where the
dollars come from.
So who, who pays into that fund?
Did anyone that has a cell
phone, anyone that has a
landline, how's that done, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, any access
lines, so it'd be primarily cell
phones at this juncture.
Um, Mr. Chairman Senator, so
would that be everyone in the
state that would pay an extra
surcharge. Mr. Chairman and
Senator, yes. Thank you. And I
do have, by the way, just, you
know, Smith Bagley, who was a
major South in the southwest New
Mexico, Northwest New Mexico,
excuse me, uh, full letter of
support from that organization
as well. They are the major cell
phone provider in, in the state,
one of the major ones.
Mhm. Thank you, thank you John.
Woods.
Uh, the only question I have is,
It will cap the fund.
But it doesn't
Exactly say what the rate
increase will be to the youth, I
mean to the cell phone.
User or the landline user, it
just says we'll cap the fund at
this amount, and Mr. Chairman
and Senator and, and uh you and
I've been here as long as, as
each other, um.
And what we decided in 2017, you
might recall as we gave the
public regulation commission the
ability to collect either a
percentage or an actual fee to
reach that amount. If they reach
that amount, it's capped out and
the fund just and and the the or
the uh fee stops uh but we also
didn't want the fee to like run
out of control and like a
runaway train or anything. So
we're just taking sort of baby
steps to make sure that we're
doing this the right way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
So what do I get from my dollar?
Um, Mr. Chairman and, and, uh,
in your area, you actually get a
lot of these dollars because uh
this, this is, this is for rural
uh broadband development and and
implementation.
And and so,
But it says they're gonna
transfer it to the
Local local.
Exchange carrier.
So we're paying then.
The, you'd be subsidizing Mr.
Chairman or and there would be
matching funds from them as
well. So the PRC uh promulgated
rules that are create a number
of ways for you to actually get
a hold of some of these dollars.
And the local exchange carrier
group is the 10 to 11 rural uh
telco carriers here in New
Mexico.
So then in in the next year is
we look at this.
If they raise it to $1 the $13
million that's going to
generate. So then we'll have to
fund lesser broadband because
well we have done this tax to
fund feasibly, Mr. Chairman,
that's feasible, yes.
I mean this is
This is the only business in the
state of New Mexico we came to
put the wire in and then they
get to, to generate money off of
what we did for them. It is an
exponentially more expensive to
provide broadband to a rural
user, Mr. Chairman, than it is
to in the, in the metro areas
well if you could call our area
metro.
we'll see how they string the
spaghetti because it hasn't
happened over the last 5 years.
Questions from committee
members.
Then.
And motion, and motion for Du
Pain by center Trujil.
Cholera.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes no Senator Campos. Senator
Campos votes yes. Senator
Gonzalez. Senator Gonzalez votes
yes. Senator Lanier. Senator
Lanier votes yes, Senator
Padilla. Senator Padilla votes
yes, Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes yes Senator
Tobiasin. Senator Tobiasson
votes yes, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo Bosa, Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Shindo.
Senator Sendos, Senator Munoz.
Unknown
Senator Munoz votes know, we
have a do pass.
92. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Would you like me to move, let's
skip. We have members in the
audience, so you will jump toen
souls walked in first and then
senators.
I always get here would be
helpful.
We're doing uh 343, correct?
Yes, right.
Thank you. Uh, this bill is some
very quick cleanup language um.
In education, we've been working
on how to get enough funding to
cover vocational teachers and
the language that was in here by
one or two districts was being
used to not pay them the
additional amount for
vocational, uh, where it says
except for those teachers with
the vocational education
license. The intent was they
were to be able to get even
higher than what the minimums
were, and so they're just a
couple of strikeouts on there
that allows that keeps the
district from misinterpreting
the.
Hint of uh paying vocational
teachers at a rate that allows
them to, to work with our kids
in their technical fields.
That's what it does.
OK.
Anybody in the audience can
support.
Anybody
I guess let's, we'll go to
support anybody in opposition.
And we have to support Zoom.
No let's hear from both of you
like.
One minute.
They're compass.
Uh, thank you, Chair, members of
the committee. Um, my name is
Mike D'Ario. I'm the vice
president of Program and
learning at the Lannel
Foundation. We're the largest
foundation in New Mexico focused
on education.
We support SB 343. We hear from
many schools across the state
that they have challenges
recruiting and retaining CTE
teachers. This bill will help,
uh, with this by ensuring an
equal minimum salary for all
teachers at each licensure level
by removing exceptions currently
in statute for vocational
teachers.
This will signal a commitment to
CTE programs and make teaching
more attractive to industry
experts. We urge you to pass.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, stand rounds, the
superintendents Association.
This is an important part of the
CT rollout we're doing, we ask
you to help us uh correct the
record and correct the statutes
so we can move ahead. Thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Bran
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and, and
Senator, um.
OK, I just wanna make sure and I
don't have a problem with this.
I just want to make sure we're
correct I'm correct on this. On
page 3, it's, it strikes uh
except for teacher license
pursuant subsection E. That's
the counselors, right?
Mr. Chair and Senator, I don't
think that that's what that's
talking about.
In subsection E of this section,
never mind, that's up here.
You're right, I got it. Thank
you.
Senator, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning, Senator.
I just have one question. So, I,
I wanna make sure I got this
correct.
So a new teacher coming in as a
base salary.
So a new
Um,
E-teacher
be the same big salary or is
that going to be?
Mr. Chair and and Senator.
The concern is that a CTE.
Sure.
coming in
And a level 2 and
a couple of districts have been
using this language to not pay
them at a.
too because they didn't
initial years of experience, and
so they were getting a low.
salary that
Should have been getting by the
intent of the
pages for CTE teachers. So this
just makes it very clear to
districts that you can't.
The CT
Just
They would have been getting
Some districts are saying no, it
says there's an exception. We
don't have to.
This just makes it clear that
CTE teachers get paid.
was.
Perfect. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other questions
then.
of emotion.
motion next
taking nice.
Color.
Senator Grant, Senator Grant
votes yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez, yes, Senator Juvenir.
Inline senator.
Sinners senators.
Senator Steinor Senator
Tobiasson
Senators, yes, Senator Trujillo.
Senator, Senator Woods.
So
Yes.
In your syndromes ceremonial.
the past 10 to 0.
And what did you do
Chapter
We have an
in the book, Mr.
It's not in the book.
Substitute
So.
It was an extensive amendment.
To surely change things from the
previous.
So it's hard to see what changes
were made. So you tell our staff
to print?
I just, I just saw Mr. Cha
notified.
with you, so I'll tell her you
So.
for the Senate Conservation
Committee for Senate Bill 5.
It's not in the book.
OK, so
And it's an extensive.
I
No, no, no, no, you're good,
you're good. No, no thank you
committee. I appreciate it.
So I, I know our staff's
listening in the back, so you
print the print the uh
conservation amendment for
Senate Bill 5. So Senator
Steinborn can have it in his
book. We can all have it in our
book. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And then we'll get
that done so we don't get.
tangled up, uh, Senator Rosel.
And then we're gonna send her
compost, we're gonna get you up
there for 31 and then run to 5.
Mr. Chair Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, thank you very
much. I'm
here today presenting Senate
Bill 280 joining me today is
Colonel David West from Mexico
Military Institute. This is a
simple bill.
of um
Hey Jasection C.
Line 8.
We are wishing to add New Mexico
military institute to the public
school capital Outlay Act as one
of the constitutional special
schools.
And Mr. Chairman, we will stand
for questions.
Kate, anybody in the audience
and support?
Anybody in opposition.
Zoom
And questions from committee
members.
And then can they have emotion.
motion by Senator Gonzalez,
seconded by Senator Lanier, what
do you call it.
Senator Brent.
Senator Brandt votes, yes,
Senator Compos, Senator Campos
votes, yes, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes,
Senator Linier. Senator Lanier
votes yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Padillasia, Senator
Steinborn. Senator Steinborn
votes as Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Tobiasson votes yes,
Senator Trujillo. Senator
Trujillo votes yes. Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Shchino, Senator Sendo votes
yes, Senator Munoz.
And you do pass 11 to 0.
take note, we don't talk
forever, try to slow down
committees, we're trying to move
through bills today. Mr. Mr.
Chairman, I tried to accompany.
Thank you.
Senator Figueroa.
I'm sorry, I
If you came in, you snuck in
somewhere.
I did, Mister Chair. I'm sneaky.
Senate Bill 345, Mr. Chair, it
does two things, has no physical
impact at the bottom of page 2,
UC language codifying what's
already in practice, allowing
the teachers to get their first
level license.
With the attesting or portfolio,
the new language is actually on
page 5.
And its reciprocity for
instructional support providers,
commonly called ISPs in
education.
So that if they come from
another state, we recognize the
education license that they
carry. This includes everyone
from athletic coaches to
audiologists and school nurses.
It's a wide variety.
Um, it has minimal impact.
But if New Mexico joins the
compacts for some of these
medical licenses, then we will
have reciprocity through this
bill with the educational
license and hopefully someday
reciprocity with some of the
medical licenses.
And that is it, Mister Chair.
OK. Anybody in the audience and
support Anybody in opposition?
And one in opposition she was.
Sorry about that.
Nobody on Zoom
questions from committee
members. Senator Trio.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator for bringing
this forward. Um, I'm just
wondering on page 5.
uh, for the instructional
support provider. What would the
online 9 professional experience
fee.
is that like someone who's who's
a counselor, is that what we're
talking about? The support those
professional support licenses
are those kinds of licenses,
correct? Yes, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair and Senator, it includes
everything from EAs to
attendance coaches, athletic
coaches, health assistants.
Counselor, school social
workers, school nurses, physical
therapists. It's a long list,
and they're professional
experience required here is
experience in the schools
because this is reciprocity for
the educational portion of the
license, all right, Mr.
Chairman, thank you.
Any other questions?
I'll move with do pass a motion
by er Padilla for Du Pa.
The second leg in Tobiasson
Moro.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brant
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes, yes,
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes. Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes,
yes, Senator Padilla. Senator
Padilla votes yes. Senator
Steinborn Senator Steinborn
votes yes. Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Tobiasson votes yes,
senator to you. Yes, Senator
Trujillo votes yes, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes yes.
Senator Shindo. Senator Shino
votes yes, Senator Munoz.
sports, yes, we have a DuP pass
11 to 0.
OK, Senator Campos, we're going
to do Senate Bill 31 and then 5
and we're gonna try to get
Depending how long those take.
10:18 right now.
So we'll try to get wrapped up
by what time we go on the floor
and 1111.
10:45 because I still got to
finish my Kalala.
Compos Senate Bill 31, we do
have an amendment.
Thank you very much Mr.
Chairman, members of the Senate
Finance Committee, do you want
me to go ahead and uh explain
the bill and then you very much
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee in essence Senate
bill, uh, 31 establishes the
natural disaster revolving fund
to provide zero interest loans
to political subdivisions of the
state and electric coop
cooperatives that have been
approved uh for federal
emergency management, uh, agency
public assistance. In essence,
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
Senate Finance Committee, uh,
several years back.
Bill 6. What we did is we
appropriated thanks again to
this committee, uh, $100 million
in order for us to go ahead and
help communities like uh Mora
and uh uh and counties like San
Miguel out of the areas as we
were hit by the fire disaster,
uh, within that, we continue to
go ahead and have those issues
that uh are uh lagging, if you
will, in terms of the
reimbursement and resources that
are available what this bill
would do with $150 million is
continue with the zero interest.
alone program, uh, the other
$100 million that we use has
already been committed to uh
public entities within the area,
uh, just one last, uh, closing
note, uh, with the cooperatives
within the area and other places
as an example, uh, with the
Morris and Rio County Electric,
uh, we have a, a need to go
ahead and have 160,000 trees
cut, uh, improvements made to
lines uh right now, the estimate
there is going to be about $125
million just to go ahead.
and help to uh make those
corrections. What's happened
within that area, we have homes
because of brownouts because of
surges, and if you will, because
of the uh the loss of uh
electricity, uh, we've had some
homes that have burnt to the
ground. We've had others that
have had other electrical
problems, and again this uh
continues to go ahead and plague
not only those two counties, but
uh also within Lincoln County as
an example. So with that, uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the Senate
Finance Committee, I'm available
for questions.
OK, we have anybody in the
audience and support.
And two of you come up and then
on Zoom.
Anybody in opposition?
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Vince
Martinez, interim director or
CEO of the New Mexico Rural
Electric Cooperative
Association, as Senator Campos
mentioned back during the fires
in Mora Mora Electric had to
borrow, go out and borrow about
$7 million before the FEMA's
money started kicking in and $7
million to a small co op is a
lot of money.
Uh, a program like this would
have been perfect for a kind of
a bridge loan until those those
reimbursements started in, so
we're standing full support of
this measure. Thank you.
And nobody else.
we're good. Nobody in opposition
questions from committee
members.
Senator Lanier
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning, Senator Campo.
Um, I just had a question, so.
What's the top amount we're
going to hold in this account
before we start reverting.
So thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, uh, Senator Lanier in
terms of the amount if this was
to go through uh as presented,
there would be the $150 million
that would be available, uh, and
it would be the low interest
loan and then of course, it
would have to be repaid in terms
of that as an example with
Senate Bill 6 and the resources
there, there's $100 million that
have been obligated as soon as
FEMA uh gives the approval to go
ahead and use those federal
resources in order to go ahead
and help with the issue, uh.
Then of course the uh the loan
is approved and then from there,
uh, the, we'll just say the
community would have uh 30 days
once that approval and the
resources have been sent to the,
to the community, uh, in order
to go ahead and uh and repay
that, uh, but in terms of uh the
resources that would be
available and the amount that we
would hold in the account, it
would be the 150 million and
that would be uh revolving as
resources become available to
replenish, if you will, that.
that particular fund. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Lanier.
Thank you, sir. And then my only
other question and, and you may
have covered this, I may have
just missed it.
If we don't have a fire, we
don't have anything like that.
We just have a flood cause I
know we're all worried about
floods this spring.
Because I promise we're gonna
get some rain.
We are gonna get some rain. With
the floods fall underneath that.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Senator
Lanier, a very good question.
Yes, they do fall in under that
in that category as long as the
uh federal funds are approved
for uh reimbursement, if you
will, uh, and then this is
basically the lead loan that
would be available in order to
go ahead and take care of that.
But uh it would be because it's
part of the uh catastrophic
piece that we're dealing with
again that has.
To be approved by uh FEMA
before, if you will, these loans
would be uh approved by the
Department of Finance and
Administration through the
emergency preparedness uh
portion of, of the agency. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chair.
All right, thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Let's play catch up. We do have
an amendment center. This is a
standard Senate Finance Aend
that strips appropriation.
Uh
41
8.1, which he brought to you.
can have a motion.
Mhm
So moved for discussion
purposes.
Send her any comments on thank
you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the Senate Finance
Committee, I'll keep looking for
the resources. Thank you.
The resources are on their way,
uh, a motion to adopt the
amendment
I have a motion my center ran
2nd. Any objection to that, and
I'm gonna slow down so she can
catch up. Good. OK, we're back
on the bill.
Any questions?
But
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Um.
So can I ask, um, your, your
The person that testified with
the co op.
Have they been paid back now by
FEMA?
Uh, Mr. Chair and, uh, Senator
Brandt, it's a very good
question because right now FEMA,
uh, has not fully approved, if
you will, the resources in order
to go ahead and help them and uh
in terms of this once they give
that approval because they've
already made the application,
but once they've been given the
approval, then of course they
would qualify, if you will, to
use this revolving loan fund.
But uh no, at this point they
have not uh been been fully
approved for the, the resources
that are needed. Thank you, Mr.
Mr. Chairman Senator, can you
remind me when did this fire
happen?
Mr. Chair, Senator Brandt, uh.
A little over 2 years ago and
uh.
It still brings back a lot of.
Bad memories to the people of
the area because we continue to
go ahead and struggle.
And we don't have the resources
in order to go ahead and make
people whole.
In order for us to go forward.
Thank you very much, Mr. Can you
remind me how this fire started.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Brandt.
This was a uh prescribed burn by
the uh
Excuse me, Mr. Chair.
Uh
Presents there.
couples were he's trying to
answer his question, Senator
Campos, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Senator
Brandt. It was a prescribed burn
department of the forestry
department and from there, uh,
the high winds came and it got
out of control and uh the
forestry department of the, the
United States is basically
indicated it was uh their fault.
Mr. Chairman Senator, I, I'm
just, you know, I'm trying to
make a point. I'm sorry to take
a few minutes of the committee's
time.
But this was a fire that was
caused, lit by the National
Forest Service.
To, uh
quote unquote manage the forest
because they're so great at it.
Um, on the windiest day of the
year.
That we had seen and the wind
had been had been uh.
You know, the weathermen had
told us it was coming. They've
been telling us that for several
days.
But the Forest Service in their
infinite wisdom lit the fire
anyway.
Isn't that correct?
Mr. Chair, Senator Brandt,
you're correct. And so it's been
over 2 years.
Since the federal government
took quote unquote
responsibility.
And we're still waiting to be
paid back.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brand, you're
correct there are resources
coming into individuals as some
of the claims uh have been
settled and uh as we go forward,
however, particularly because of
the loss of electrical lines,
loss of roads because of fires
and floods, uh, we're still
continuing to go ahead and deal
with this on a daily basis and
when we uh do get, if you will,
the spring rains, uh, even
though with the ground covered,
that is not going to be
sufficient. It'll be uh ongoing
issue.
issues with infrastructure, with
roads, and then again going back
to the electrical uh need in the
power in that area, uh, we still
have a lot of repairs to uh to
be made. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Senator
Brett. Mr. Chairman Senator, as
the, has anyone
In the government in our state
like the AG maybe, has anyone
sued the federal government over
the fact that they haven't made.
Uh area hole, Mr. Chair, Senator
Brandt, uh, there may be
discussions right now. I'm not
aware of anything formally that
uh has been brought forward to
go ahead and uh work and to try
to settle, if you will, the
entire claim, but I will say,
uh, in working closely with uh
FEMA representatives, uh,
they're doing the best that they
can with a limited staff that
they have, and unfortunately,
there's constantly a high
turnover when it comes to FEMA
employees, uh.
With that these claims are
taking quite some time and as
you've already alluded to, Mr.
Chair, Senator Brandt, uh, for
the past two years, people
continue to go ahead and deal
with this. We have had families
that have relocated to some of
the other areas of the state,
uh, because they have lost their
homes that we have had some that
have tried to go ahead and make
uh infrastructure improvements
within the properties that they
do own, there's been problems
there, uh, we continue to deal,
if you will, with fencing issues
another problem there. Uh, so
This is gonna go ahead and take
uh many more years in order for
us to go ahead and work through
it, not to make families whole
of these that we've always uh
also had people who have uh
passed of uh heart failure and,
uh, other, other issues, uh,
respiratory issues and so forth.
Again, what we're dealing with
is an enormous situation that
definitely has affected the
lives of people, uh, the loss of
animals and if you will, the
destruction of property. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
with Senator Brent. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator. I, I appreciate that.
I, I get really frustrated when
I see our AG so the current
administration.
Over
Uh, supposed things that they're
doing.
And he's done nothing.
Nothing at all.
Against the federal government
to sue them.
When they have actually already
taken responsibility for this
and have not taken care of the
people in those areas or even
the utilities in those areas,
it's absolutely ridiculous.
And that was under the last
president, so don't tell me that
was Trump's fault.
We can't blame Trump for this
one.
They're the ones that lit the
fires. They're the ones that
didn't manage the forest.
They're the ones that are so
stupid, they don't understand
that in New Mexico we have one
windy season. It's called
spring.
Really not a good time to light
fires in our forest.
But they do it anyway.
And then when the federal and
then RAG.
Sits there and does nothing.
But he sues over all kinds of
other BS.
To the federal government.
I'm tired of it.
It's time for him to actually
represent the people of New
Mexico and go after the federal
government for what they owe the
state.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you
And buy a camera, he'll show up,
um.
Yep.
Um
Compos.
Uh, let me ask you a question.
So if, if a co op borrows money,
the feds say, OK, you can
reimburse this, uh, the feds pay
the co op. The co op doesn't pay
the state.
Are we gonna come back and sue
them.
So a very good question, Mr.
Chair, to go back to that in
terms of this, this is an
obligation, so the, if the, if,
if the feds, FEMA, uh, approves,
if you will, uh, X amount in
order to go ahead and work on
the rehabilitation, then from
there, uh, the state through DFA
would go ahead and manage the
resources and within that the
contract and the obligation
would be for the uh the
reimbursement, if you will, or
the repayment, uh, so far.
with uh SB 6, the $100 million
that has already been
appropriated, uh, resources once
the feds have approved that, uh,
those repayments are continuing,
but to get specific to your
question.
Uh, then at that point, uh, we
would have to, and I would
anticipate, uh, that it would go
ahead and be possibly litigation
in order to go ahead and recoup
the resources that uh uh had
been obligated and borrowed, uh,
we'll say for example, by the co
op.
OK.
I think the problem's gonna come
in and this is not a GLG bill.
It may say that.
But
Adrian Avila drafted this.
That's why Senate Bill 134 and
31 are duplicates. The executive
didn't tell us that until after
we are done doing all the
executives work on this bill.
So
I don't think we can strike GLG,
but I, I would because that's
who drafted this and worked over
this.
I thought it was a legislative
bill. We did the work for the
exec.
Um, my question is, what happens
if there's a microburst in
grains and we have flooding.
You're never gonna get the feds
to declare a FEMA.
And and so.
We're gonna have to start
thinking about that because
there's places where FEMA is not
going to declare and we have
some emergency money at DFA but
it's never enough.
So that's something else we
need.
To look at, but
lone now becomes the
The timeline for the federal
government, I don't know if we
can.
bad language may look at this
amendment.
That if they're not reversed,
reimbursed within 3 to 5 years
that
The Department of Justice must
seek the resources to litigate
against uh human to pay.
So we can start getting some of
that reimbursement.
Think about that, there's some
people behind you, they're
shaking their heads, but we're
gonna start putting a timeline
on this because
Senate Bill 6 originally was
what, 3 years ago or 4 years
ago.
And they still have 3 billion
and we I'm being reimbursed for
anything. So we're gonna have to
start looking at some timelines
to to start.
Suing the feds to start paying
everybody back, so that the fun
starts regenerating itself.
We'll Senate Bill 6 is money
when it reverts back, it's gonna
go to the general fund, won't go
back into this one, correct? Uh,
Mr. Chairman, you're correct.
This is of course gonna be
different. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair. OK, I think you just
need this to, to put some
accountability in a timeline in
there.
So the feds know that there's a
suit coming if they approve it
and they don't reimburse it
within the timeline that that
you can
Collected
I think that's all my questions,
other ones can have a motion.
2nd, and motion my center
Gonzalez, 2 by center Padilla,
what do you call the wrong.
As it ended.
Senator Brent Senator Brent
votes yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes yes.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes. Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes,
yes, Senator Pailla. Senator
Padilla votes yes, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes.
Senator Tobiasson. Yeah. Senator
Tobias and Bosia, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator T Trujillo Go yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Shindo.
Senator Shendo votes yes,
Senator Munoz.
Sennoz votes yes, we have a DuP
pass 11 to 0.
Thank you members of the Senate
Finance Committee. We're gonna
do Senate Bill 5.
And who's your expert witnesses,
have them get them up there. Uh,
thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the Senate Finance
Committee.
And uh with me here today, of
course, is uh Senator Brantley.
What I'd like to do is get
started, of course, uh, before
we do that, just briefly ask the
uh expert witnesses to uh
introduce themselves and then
from there I'll make an opening
statement, Senator Brantly will
go ahead and make an open
statement and then of course
we're gonna be available for
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Judy Calman. I'm the New
Mexico Policy director for the
Audubon Society. We worked to
make sure that birds are healthy
and that bird watchers have
everything that they need to see
them. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Jesse Dubell,
executive director of the New
Mexico Wildlife Federation,
Wildlife Federation is the
state's largest and oldest
organization representing the
interests of hunters and
anglers. I appreciate the
opportunity to be here in
support of SB 5.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and uh of course, members of the
committee, uh, would you like me
to go ahead and maybe start with
an explanation on the bill and
then from there uh it looks like
they're.
Would be an amendments that we
need to look at. We have 3
amendments, uh, why don't you
explain the bill real quick.
And then
OK. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman of the Senate Finance
Committee. I'm gonna go just uh
in brevity in terms of uh a
couple of things and then from
there if of course to uh my
co-sponsor, uh, Senator
Brantley, and then from there,
uh, go to the experts for some
of the more technical pieces as
we go forward, but again, Mr.
Chair, members of the Senate
Finance Committee, uh, it's an
honor to go ahead and present to
you this reform package on game
and fish.
New Mexico has a long and proud
history of taking care of our
wildlife.
The Department of Game and Fish
was founded on the need to
provide a uh sustainable food
supply for people, many who
still hunt and fish to feed
their families today.
We owe it to the hunters and
anglers who provide funding to
the department through their
license fees to keep, to take
care of our game fish and
wildlife species. This bill
honors those traditions and
ensures we hand down a well
funded department and
functioning commission to
further uh generations to future
generations in New Mexicans.
Passing this bill is very
important to them and is also
supported by a broad coalition.
This is also a compromise bill
that has been negotiated in good
faith.
For the governor's staff and the
department itself.
Accepting many recommendations
made by the executive and
stakeholders.
A reform package aims to do 3
things.
Number one, update the
department's authority to
reflect our modern day wildlife
challenges.
This bill would give the
department the authority and
flexibility to manage non-game
species without mandating the
management of any species. 2, to
reform the state game commission
to make it a more functioning
independent body.
Number 3, to fund the
department's work.
To ensure healthy populations of
wildlife by modest increases on
hunting and fishing licenses
which have been negotiated with
stakeholders just like the last
time that I sponsored some of
those uh fee increases in 2004.
I want to note that the Senate
already had passed a version of
the fee increase was strong
bipartisan support.
But it was never signed into law
and then also, uh, I want to
note that uh there is a 10.5
million in the growth fund, uh,
for the department for species
of greatest conservation need to
help continue their work to keep
species off of the uh federal
endangered species list and then
in closing, I just want to
ensure um, Mr. Chairman, members
of the Senate Finance Committee
as we deal with this, uh, there
will be a lot of questions, but
as we work and sort through it
as we can.
continue to go ahead and see
amendments, concerns, uh, our
intent is to continue with that
reform.
And hope so that as we move
forward, wildlife and the
environment here in New Mexico
continue to go ahead and be
improved and with that, uh, Mr.
Chair, respectfully I deferred
to uh my co-sponsor.
Senator Brantly, please.
Thank you, Senator Campos. Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, I came on board with
this bill because I've
successfully co-sponsored Game
commission reform in the past,
and we know that that was a
large bipartisan effort to do
so, um, and it was vetoed by the
governor. And so while there are
some drastic changes to this.
This is a collective of several
efforts. One, it includes that
portion of the Game commission
reform, additionally has a, a
clause in there for license
fees, and it also addresses uh
name change and, and some.
in that. I would say that this
bill has come as a result of
months and months and months of
collective and collaborative
efforts. It is certainly a
compromise bill and it has
addressed all concerns that have
been brought forward by the
parties in the interim, specific
to the commission reform, this
protects rule representation on
the commission. It adds
designated seats for farmers,
ranchers, hunters, and anglers,
uh, most important, I want to
discuss what the bill doesn't do
because there's some talking
points that are very outdated.
still being circulated, and this
has been um a work in progress.
What it doesn't do is change any
existing law to the endangered
Species Act. It does not change
any law to land use. It does not
change any private landowners
use, hunters or anglers, and the
reality is, is if it did, I and
many of the hunting
organizations would not have
come on board with this bill.
This bill does not make uh
changes that will allow
individuals to trap on.
lands. This bill does not repeal
the Jennings law. It does not
limit predator management in any
way, and it does not change a
landowner's ability to hunt,
take, capture or kill any
cougars or bears, which is
killed domestic livestock. The
bill does not make changes to
the statutory framework for the
ELK, uh, land use, known as the
E+ system.
And it does not move the
department away from using game
hunting as a primary method of
wildlife management, or as a
primary source of funding for
their wildlife uh wildlife
conservation. The bill, most
importantly, does not expand the
department's ability to list any
species is endangered. The
department currently has the
ability to conserve species that
they feel are threatened or
endangered at a state level
only. And in fact they do quite
regularly. Today the game to
manages over 400 species on
their uh species of of
conservation uh management
plans.
The bill also does not allow the
state to federally list species
under the endangered Species
Act,
and that is uh federal issue as
we know the endangered species.
So we will stand for questions
and address the amendments
brought forward, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Uh, let's see, anybody in the
audience and support.
Anybody in opposition.
So how many do we have on Zoom?
That's it.
So let's take uh 5 and support 5
against, and we're gonna do
about a minute apiece.
So we're probably gonna hear the
same points over and over again.
We have 3 on zoom in opposition
and then we'll.
Wait, let's, we, we need to
amend the bill so we know what
we're doing, correct? Let's step
back for just one second.
Uh, similar near you have an
amendment.
128.2.
But
Yes, sir. Wait, wait, he's
looking puzzled.
No, I've got mine.
number
128.2 his last 4, 12.2.
pass up you have the amendment
center.
Cos in diamond, you have them
in.
old
OK, Senator Ne, you want to
explain the amendment. Yes, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome
this morning. Um,
This, I hope is you find is a
friendly amendment. Um, I think
it's pretty simple.
Be it from San Juan County, we
have uh a lot of anglers up
there, fly fishermen, things
like that. I know some of the
other uh members here have live
fishermen, and I was amazed to
find out this amendment is going
to take care of, we're gonna
strike.
Where the um the fly fishermen
when they sell a license.
They get
Um, repaid $1 for that license.
And if they run a credit card,
it actually costs them more to
sell the license and they
actually do to retrieve it.
So that, that's one of them,
that's, that's probably the
biggest one,
in the amendment there, it is
subject to um
Up to $2 where the commission
will actually place that price.
On there, so it's not just a, a
guess. And then the second part
of the my amendment would be um
removing Gazelle from the list
of licensed big game since we
don't have those in this state
any longer.
So
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Lanier,
thank you for bringing this uh
proposal to us early. We visited
with stakeholders and it is a
friendly amendment.
Oops, can I have a motion to
adopt the amendment for
discussion purposes.
Motion by Senator ran, 2 by
Senator Near.
Any objection
They questions on the amendment.
None
and a motion to adopt the
amendment.
Sinner Tomain.
And second by Senator Lanier.
You need to call the roller now.
Hey
compos
And
we have one more amendment. It
is mine, uh, 357.1.
Let me go through that real
quickly.
It adds shed honey as a license.
The residents of New Mexico is a
dollar and for non-residents in
New Mexico, it's $300.
And then on
Big desert bighorn sheep are all
big horn sheep, non-resident
increases it from, I think it's.
what currently is in the bill to
15,000 for any of those sheep
tags.
And I'm sorry, uh, it increases
shit hunting for non-residents
to 500 and residents are.
And a motion to uh
Adopt the amendment for
discussion purposes.
the motion by Senator Hill,
second by Senator Padilla.
And can look through the
amendment.
Mr. Chairman, this is not
necessarily an unfriendly
friendly amendment. There's just
a lot of stakeholders and a lot
of sponsors that haven't visited
with us. I'm gonna defer to
Senator Campos and maybe the
floor.
Or visit with the thank you very
much Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much, Senator Brantley, uh, what
we'd really like to do, if at
all possible, is to have this
considered, uh, if this bill was
to go and pass out of the Senate
Finance Committee, uh, to have
this considered, uh, to be
presented in the Senate chamber,
and the reason for that, uh, we
want to go and give the uh
advocates as well as the uh the
opponents and opportunity to
review this particular
amendment, but again, we respect
you, Mr. Chairman, in terms of
Uh, the intent, but again, we
just ask for a little time in
order to go ahead and uh have
that further review. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Well, the, the
amendments here, I think I
discussed it with Senator
Diamond.
She knew about it.
And discuss it with you, uh, but
it, the last big horn sheep with
the governor's auction sold for
103.
Every big horn sheep hunter
pays.
Well, whenever you're hunting a
non-resident, whatever guide
you're using, they're paying
$10,000 or more for any type of
guide service.
Uh, so this just allows New
Mexico to capture those
non-resident costs.
Uh, there's very few sheep.
If you do draw a sheep tag and
that's like drawing the golden
ticket from Willy Wonka.
You ever get one.
I've never got one and so a
non-residents need to pay their
fair share. Sit hunting, and we
did ask the game commission to
look at this. They didn't do it.
Um
But when you're out there
hunting and all of a sudden you
have shit hunters when you're
hunting. They're all coming from
Oregon and California.
Uh, they're selling the horns in
a very uh
Uh, they're very costly when
they buy them and they sell them
for a higher price. They're
getting them for free in New
Mexico. And so that's what it
does.
So, so Mr. Mr. Chair, again, uh
thank you very much and as you
indicate the amendment is here.
Uh, so if, if we may also defer
to the experts to maybe help us
to to comment in terms of what
the amendment may do.
OK
Uh, Mr. Chairman, committee
members, again, thank you for
the amendment. I appreciate the
sentiments uh that you're
presenting here today.
Uh, back in 2021, of the New
Mexico Wildlife Federation, uh,
also worked to try to get some
the potential for some
regulations surrounding shed
hunting, so I certainly
recognize your concerns on that
regarding the fees, I, I do
believe it would be ideal if we
had an opportunity to spend more
time with stakeholders. Part of
this bill, as has been discussed
already, is to increase license
fees and when we went through
that process, we got all of the
license buying organizations,
Trout Unlimited, Mule deer
Foundation, the Wildlife
Federation, Backcountry Hunters
Anglers New Mexico counseled
out.
and guides to all work together
to set those fees and I would
really love the opportunity to
see a similar process as we set
fees for shed hunting or make
any other adjustments to some of
our big game species as it is
right now, non-residents by 31%
of the hunting and fishing
licenses in New Mexico, but they
provide 60% of all of the
funding to our state wildlife
agency already. So already a big
horn sheep ram tag is more than
20 times higher than it is for
New Mexico residents. So I, I do
think
This requires some further
consideration, but thank you
very much, sir. OK, do you want
to roll the bill over till we
hear you guys in consideration
because
We're gonna try to get this
amendment on. So if you want us
to roll over this until we uh so
Mr. Chair, and again I'm gonna
go ahead and uh openly confer
with uh Senator Brantley, but
uh, I would hope that we would
go ahead and uh consider the
bill, consider the amendment,
and uh move forward and of
course that's at your
discretion, Mr. Chair, members
of the Senate Finance Committee.
Uh, if I may just defer quickly
to my co-sponsor.
Mr. Chairman, you guys can vote
on the amendment. I'm not here
to.
Say either way. There's a lot of
sponsors and a lot of concerns.
We'll just discuss it after
committee.
Yeah, and I'm, I mean, out of
state residents in big horn
sheep. That's the only thing
that's changing.
We know that that, you know, if
somebody draws it out of state
bighorn sheep tag. They hire 5
or 6 outfitters.
And then they go find the
biggest sheep, and then they put
an outfitter on that sheet 24/7.
Until they come in for that
hunt. So they're spending on top
of that, probably another 25 to
30,000 with Outfitters to do
that.
If you don't want to protect the
species that you can actually
make money on how many sheep
tags are drawn a year.
There's a director out of state
she takes.
Director Sloan, you're back
there.
3 or 4 sheep tanks, so you're
affecting 3 or 4 people that
drawn out of state sheep tagged,
uh.
1.3 million for the governor's
tag, either that or we should
just send them all to auction.
As we get a higher rate if we do
non-resident tags.
At auction than we will for
anything.
This is just a balancing act.
The shit hunting, the game fish
didn't do it.
We know what happens, doesn't
cost us anything to go shed
honey. It will cost
non-residents because you have
an influx.
Uh, California residents in
Oregon, uh, I forget which
senator told me they were out
there shit hunting themselves
and came upon some people from
Oregon or California had stacks
of them.
Uh
And we're gonna sell them out of
state, so.
Questions on the amendment
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, so my
question has to do, I'm not as
concerned with shed hunting
because I've been hearing about
that issue for a long time.
Um, although I really would like
the opinion of particularly Mr.
Dubell up here who's probably
got more experience than most in
this room, but
But the issue that desert sheep,
you know, I, I think listing it
as an entity to be hunted on.
You know, issue licenses for me.
It's about conservation and
whether or not this should be a
species that we're adding to a
list that we're directing the
department started issuing
hunting licenses too, and I,
that's a decision that has to be
made really carefully and so.
I know there's a market for it,
sure of that, so there's a
market for everything, um,
particularly the rarer it is,
but that doesn't mean it's the
right thing to do to hunt it,
because it is
Rare and maybe threatened even.
So I, I guess maybe that's a
good question to ask. Is the
desert sheep listed as a species
of greatest conservation need.
Can that question be answered by
the director or, or perhaps.
You're, you're gonna have to
come up.
Mr. Chairman Senator.
Um, desert bighorn sheep are not
a species of greatest
conservation need, and we have
been hunting them for at least
the past 10 years.
Uh, Mr. Chair and director, do
you do any um
Counts on them. Do you manage
this species actively right now,
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, we do.
We, that's part of the, the
license that gets sold funds the
work that we do on those sheep.
We have 2 sheep biologists. The
Mr. Chair director, why do we
need this language if you
already doing this.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, it's not
our language.
Understood. So would you view
this language as unnecessary
because you already provide, you
already do this, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, I'm not taking a
position on the bill.
OK.
But on the other hand, if you're
already doing it, then this
language.
What is this language accomplish
if you're already doing it
outside of putting it in
statute.
Is that what it accomplishes or
what it accomplishes senators,
show me where you're referring
to that language. I'm referring
to page 3, Mr. Chairman,
specifically number 22, adding a
desert sheep license.
That's, that's really what I'm
focused on.
I, I guess I'm just really
trying to quantify Mr. Director,
what this would accomplish.
Pro and con, without you taking
a position.
Just looking at it objectively.
Mr. Chairman Senator, I'm, I'm
not sure this is on the
amendment and I haven't seen the
amendment prior to having it
handed to me now so I'll have to
take a look here.
You've seen that on page 3.
22.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I guess
currently I think believe and I
don't have statute in front of
me, the statute creates a big
horn sheep license and we divide
them into big desert and Rocky
Mountain. This would designate a
specific desert bighorn sheep.
So, Mr. Chair, OK, so I do see
on the previous page, we do have
big horn sheep.
But then what you're saying is
the desert she is that a subset
of bighorn sheep.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes. OK.
Well, that concerns me a little
bit, Mr. Director and Mr. Chair,
because, I mean, I know we're
trying to recover bighorn sheep.
I mean, we just, they just
brought some into the Franklin
Mountains, and I don't, you're
saying right now you do issue
licenses to hunt desert sheep.
Mr. Cha, Senator, yes, so I'm
not sure, Mr. Chair, I mean,
Sounds like it's not needed
because we already do it. So
what downside would there be to
putting this in statute then
from that perspective.
Yeah
Mr. Chair, Senator, I'm not sure
there is a downside. It it just
designates a specific type of
license.
Right
Mr. Dubell, if I can ask the
expert witness, do you have any
thoughts on that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, um,
The way that big horn sheep tag
allocation exists in New Mexico
is is super unique and I think
there are some reforms needed to
Bighorn sheep tag allocation in
the state, but I don't know that
it's necessary to to specify the
difference between desert sheep
and Rocky Mountain bighorn sheep
at that at this time.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair and Mr.
Director by adding desert sheep
could it increase the number of
Of hunting tags for that, would
it kind of trigger that like
creating a new
License for that, Mr. Chair
Senator, we base license numbers
on surveys that we conduct and
so no, we would only issue
licenses.
In numbers that would sustain
the population.
OK. So final question, I think,
Mr. Chair, for now is uh the
shed, the shed license. Do you
have any concerns with that?
Mr. Chair, Senator, we don't
have a position on that.
OK.
Yes, do you have any thoughts on
that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, I, I think it's good
practice to to start to consider
some regulations regarding shed
hunting because the concerns
that were brought up by Chairman
Munnos are valid. They're real,
and they certainly exist. The
concern that I have is, is the.
The amount of the fees for
non-residents, uh, it is
generally a commercial activity,
but not for everybody. There are
people who come here to hunt and
buy a hunting license that are
non-residents, they spend a lot
of money to come and hunt in the
state. They spend a lot of money
in our rural economies, and I'm
not certain that those
individuals should have to pay
$300 to pick up a couple of elk
sheds while they're hunting
spring turkeys, for example, so
uh I think there's maybe could
be more discussion or
consideration regarding the
amount of the fee for
non-resident as it relates to
shed honey.
The other thing, Mr. Chair, is I
know some people as a hobby like
to go out and do this, right?
And so what would be considered
a shed hunter.
By virtue of going out just like
somebody who goes out and kills
one game species is considered a
hunter, right? Somebody goes out
to collect one shatter they now
considered a hunter, would they
be required to get a license,
so.
Um
I think based on other types of
licenses, the answer would be
yes to that, would it not, Mr.
Director?
Or could
But this exclude private
citizens from going out and.
Doing it as a hobby.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I think
that it would depend on
ultimately.
The commission rule that would
be associated with the permit.
Mm
OK
I have for now, Mr. Chair.
Thanks. Thank you. I'll just
give you a background for me. My
dad was on the game and fish for
16 years or 13 years, right?
The, the desert bighorn sheep
were brought from the Tiberone
Islands in Mexico and put it red
rock. And so that's how the
desert bighorn got moved into
New Mexico.
They did the same thing with A.
They did the same thing with the
Persian ibex when that game
commission was in place, um,
they bought ranches, they bought
the volley the doll, they bought
uh what's the other one up
there? And they, they increased
the amount of private
landowners, uh, private land
that was bought by the game
department to manage for for
hunters. Um, the game department
hasn't done that lately.
And this board made
Changed their mission, but
there's been a lot done and then
there was really nothing done.
Uh, directors come and go, and,
and we really haven't done
anything for the quality of
hunters in New Mexico by
expanding species or licenses,
um, there's a special carve out
for Outfitters that they get a
preference over New Mexico
residents were the only one of
the only states that does that.
We tried changing that, they
sued over the interstate uh
licensing because game crosses
the Arizona border, and so
The species of game really
doesn't belong to the, to the
New Mexico residents. It's
controlled by other people.
And so if you're going to
continue to let them come in,
she hunters, they probably sell
their horns for
$35 or $40 a pound in other
states. They buy it here for 16.
You can see him in Komodo or
alongside the road where they
buy it, but they haul it out.
But she hunters, it's a big
business. It's a business for
out of state residents, in-state
residents, my son goes out and
rides horses and collects them.
There's a pile in his garage and
And they do it for fun and they
may be out spring turkey
hunting.
They may be
Just messing around, but there,
there's a time, but then you get
to a point where you're in honey
season and all of a sudden you
got this group of shed hunters
out there where you're hunting
elk or something else, and here
they are clanking through the
forest when you're trying to
game
And so you need to start saying
if you're gonna do that, there's
a cost.
If New Mexico, just like the oil
and gas. If you're not gonna
take advantage of revenue.
From oil and gas, when we have
the opportunity.
If this tag sold by for 1.3
million.
We should just get rid of the
non-resident tags completely and
maybe I'll bring that amendment
and send them all to auction.
Because, and put a cap on them.
Because if we're gonna get 3
tags for $45,000 a year or sell
them at auction for 1.3 million.
What do you think we should do?
We should sell them at auction.
There's no requirement for us
to, to have a big horn sheep
nonresident tag.
I mean, you wanna make 3.9
million, or do you want to make
$45,000?
Yeah.
Common sense tells you if you
need to to generate money, then
generate money where you can
make money. I don't know what
the lowest sheep tag sold at an
auction this year it was, but I
bet you there's nothing probably
under $25,000.
At auction.
Every morning I get an email
from all the auctions that are
going across the state or across
the United States on hunts and
and you can buy trophy hunts
anywhere on the cheapest or tags
in New Mexico is 5000 plus
you're not resident fee.
And so this is one of those
species that
When you can make money, make
money.
So, we can amend it and send
them all to auction. I'm, I'm
good with that. We can send all
three sheep tags to the auction
and generate 3.9 million.
Or you can set a fee, which they
get refunded if they don't draw.
Uh, how many booster director,
how many people apply for
non-resident.
Sheep tags in New Mexico. Do you
know that number?
Mr. Chairman, I don't have that
number specifically, but it's a
significant number.
OK.
And only 3 tags, so.
If you don't like the $15,000
and we'll just roll this over.
I'll run an amendment to send
them all 3 to auction, and, and
generate 3.9 million, and we can
have that debate on the floor of
how we generate money for New
Mexico, I mean.
Uh
So
And compost.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the Senate Finance
Committee, again, uh.
We'll go with your discretion as
a committee what your thoughts
would be in terms of this
particular amendment with uh
that discussion that's already
been held. Thank you. Senator
Brent.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, um, I did have a
question on the amendment, um,
the
The resident.
She honey
I've never shed them.
But the resident one at $1.
Honestly, we should just make it
where if you have a New Mexico
driver's license, it doesn't
cost you anything because it's
gonna be cost more for the
department to even process that
in the dollar.
So, um,
Sure. Yeah, I mean just, you
know, have your driver's license
on you, you're good to go. It
doesn't cost you anything if
you're an out of state resident
then it causes. I have no
problem with the out of state
resident fee. It doesn't bother
me at all. Um,
But uh I I'm concerned that
that's actually gonna cost the
department more money to
process, then it's gonna bring
in and then we're gonna, we're
gonna have a.
Hit on their budget because of
that.
there
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My, my only comment is
On the out of state license, I
want to make sure that we're not
raising them so high and making
them so difficult that
People aren't coming to New
Mexico and hunting anymore.
I don't want him to go to
Colorado, Wyoming.
All of those different places
where we're already in
competition with them. I want to
make sure that we, we moderate
it where we're not doing um.
So does the witness have a
Come in, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much,
Senator Lanier. Yes, I'm gonna
go ahead and defer if you will
to uh one of the experts for for
their explanation. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, um, rather than, uh,
well, to, to, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Lanier, to answer your
question, I think that concern
is very valid and, and it's
really important that we
recognize the economic benefit.
to New Mexico, particularly our
rural communities that
non-residents provide, including
those non-residents that come in
to uh engage in the activity of
shed hunting and again I, I
think there's a difference
between someone who's doing it
for commercial purposes as uh
Chairman M Munoz mentioned
compared to someone who's doing
it as a recreational activity or
as an opportunistic activity
while they're engaged in some
other type of hunting, and Mr.
Chair, uh, Senator Brandt to
respond to your question on the
driver's license issue. I think
it might be more appropriate to
have it.
Um, where any valid New Mexico
hunting license resident New
Mexico hunting license that way
the individuals contributing to
the state wildlife Agency
financially.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Lanier, to
address your concern as well on
page 6, item 6, increasing the
cost from 3150 to $15,000 a tag.
does exclude a certain
population which only allowed
the Uber wealthy to hunt in New
Mexico.
Thank you, that's all I had.
Um
So
When a person applies for an out
of state non-resident tag under
that current license fee right
now.
For an antelope, it's 400 bucks.
What is it in Arizona, Colorado,
and other states that any expert
witnesses know that Mr.
Director, do you know that?
Non-resident licenses for
Mr. Chairman, I don't
specifically know those. I do
know that the numbers that were
in the bill are approximately in
the range of where other states
were when those numbers were
developed a couple of years ago.
So the, the new numbers are
comparable to surrounding
states.
OK
And so Mr. Director Ibex in
other states, what's that?
Mr. Chairman, I believe you know
there are no IEs in other
states, OK?
There's another species they,
they're not allowed to hunt in
another state. They, there is
private ranches in Texas. Mr.
you're correct about O.
Correct. And so there is works,
there's private ranches in other
states that have a hunts. None
of those are $1600.
Uh, for non-residents, um.
But I mean
If you, if you guys decide you
wanna give a non-resident.
A better opportunity above a
resident and, and, and not
offset their license costs.
Uh, in some of this, that's a
different question. With the
dollar.
If a person wants to go horn
hunting.
And then they gotta buy a honey
license.
They may not want a honey
license, they may not want a
fishing license. It may be
elderly, they may be just out
there walking.
Uh, if you want to amend that,
but I think we'll have to look
and see, we take the dollar off,
does it create an issue for the,
the shed hunting portion.
But if you want to continue, uh,
Well, I'll look at that, we'll
call upstairs and see if we take
the dollar off if that affects
that. I don't really have a
problem with that.
But, um, if you want to give
away the, to the non-residents,
the cheapest hay on earth.
Uh, it'll probably be the big
horn she'd take, she takes for
our price we're charging for
non-residents now or what it's
gonna go to is
Uh
3, 300 and
Or 3150.
Uh, for a big horn sheep.
Is that the cheapest big on
sheep tag in the United States.
Desert bighorn, do, do they
exist in other states?
Mr. Chairman, Bighorn sheep do
exist in other states. I believe
ours is among the highest.
OK.
Steinborn, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. First of all, tell me
if I'm wrong, but the fees, all
the fees in the back of the
amendment are already statute.
The amendment actually doesn't
propose any new fees, isn't that
right, Mr. Chair? This deals
with the sheds and the sheep
license, OK, just so we're
clear, that's a kind of off the
amendment.
Um
I did want to say just
To just for education, I guess,
uh, sheep are, bighorn sheep are
native in New Mexico. They were
almost hunted to extinction in
the 80s, unlike Os, which are
not native only to this
continent, but uh
But I just want to be clear on
that and uh you know, they are,
even though they're no longer in
dangered.
They are a species, kind of, I
guess you could say in recovery
a little bit, that is being
managed to recover, which is why
we're still relocating them, so
I, I don't think you should
compare.
A desert sheep to say, uh, dear,
or something that's just
completely for that reason, I'm
probably gonna vote against the
amendment, Mr. Chair. I think
the shed ideas are really
interesting one, the sheep idea.
is kind of more science, more
education needed for me, but,
but on the shed idea, I think
it's kind of interesting. I
wouldn't necessarily delineate
it as between New Mexicans and
non-New Mexicans, some New
Mexicans could be doing it
commercially too. So I think the
delineation should be maybe how
many you're collecting.
You know, just for guidance for
the, for the department. So
thank you, Mr. Chair.
New Mexicans are doing it and
it's a cash business, right?
You can take your, your shit
horns, we're not getting GRT
we're not getting anything from
the shit on me, but.
The non-residents, uh, other
states, California charges, I
think 300 bucks for shit honey.
Uh, other states already have
shit honey laws when times when
you can hunt shit, uh, shit hunt
and not.
So
Uh, the big horn sheep, the
issue with the big horn sheep is
that they get scabies when
they're too close, and that
kills the sheep, that's why
their management at Red Rock.
Uh, and manage the sheep down
there, so.
Any other questions?
So that, I'm sorry.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chairman
and thank you, senators for
presenting this. I, uh, will
take a quick whack at my um not
being appointed to the judiciary
instead of being on this
committee, which I wanted to be
on, um, but
Under on page 2 of the
amendment.
There's the definition for
bighorn sheep, and from what I
understand, I'm not a hunter, is
that the big horned sheep
includes Rocky Mountain and
desert sheep. Is that correct?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, yes. OK,
so, Mr. Chairman, if we want
The big corn or the, the desert
sheep to be a type of license,
we'd have to make sure that
there's language under number 6
that says it does not include
desert sheep. Otherwise someone
could in fact apply for a desert
sheep license and I'm assuming
that you would still have to let
them hunt either the Rocky
Mountain or the desert sheep. In
other words, there's gonna now
be two kinds of licenses that
someone could apply for.
And then I want to point out
that on the next page, page 4, I
noticed that there's uh there
are senior game hunting licenses
that can be purchased junior,
um, licenses that can be
purchased handicapped licenses
that can be purchased and under
all of those, it lists including
big horn sheep, and we haven't
included.
the desert sheep in there. So
there's a number of places that
if you truly want to have a
desert sheep license, then it
needs to be added in more places
than just adding another line to
have a license for Bighorn
sheep. Um, I do think that this
needs to be further vetted, um,
Mr. Chairman, I'm not in
opposition to what you're
saying. It makes perfect sense
to me, but I think this needs
more discussion, and I would
prefer to see that it had that
kind of discussion with the
large collaborative.
That's been working and so for
that reason, I'm gonna be unable
to support this at this time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. OK, so
I'll tell you what we'll do.
We're gonna clean this up.
Roll over the minute we're going
to hear for and against, and
then when we come back, uh,
probably this afternoon we'll
hear this bill again.
Let's go to Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and members of the Senate
Finance Committee.
OK. So we're gonna pull this
amendment for now. We're gonna
go in support, we're not voting
this morning. Uh, we're gonna go
for those in support, let's get
5 lined up about 1 minute a
piece and those against on Zoom,
how many do we have?
Right.
Right, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Debbie Hughes, I'm
the executive director with the
New Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts, um, my,
my family actually farms and
ranches in Southeastern Mexico,
um, we supply water and mineral,
um, and all kinds of habitat to
the wildlife, we want to work
with the game and fish
department to keep species from
being listed by doing habitat
restoration. We want to support
this bill. We believe that it's
a a great improvement on the
commission that uh.
This bill now actually uh gives
egg producers and hunters
guaranteed seats on the
commission, which we did not
have before, so we did
participate all summer and fall
with the sponsors in the
governor's office. We don't like
everything about the bill, but
this is how laws are made. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Carrie Romero,
executive director and
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Council of Outfitters and
guides. We also stand stand in
support of this bill, which
seems to come as a surprise to
some people. I think just
because previously, we have
stood in opposition, but I think
what people are failing to
understand is the massive amount
of behind the scenes work that
has gone into creating the bill
that's in front of you today.
It's not the bill that you saw
in 2019, it's not even close to
the bill that you saw last
session.
We, uh, the stakeholder groups,
and we appreciate the sponsors
inviting us to participate.
We've worked hard through the
interim and then we have
continued to work through this
committee process. I sent you
all an email yesterday kind of
outlining some of, um, the
broader details of the aspects
that we support just to really
quickly summarize the game
commission reform piece is
solid. It does strengthen the
existing statute. Game and fish,
they truly do need a license fee
increase. They haven't had one
since 2006.
They're an enterprise agency. We
agree with the fee increases. We
can live with the name change,
especially since this bill has
been amended so that that name
change will be accomplished
through depreciation of assets
rather than all at once and then
we are strongly in support of
the amendment that proposed by
Senator Brantly in the Senate
Rules Committee that basically,
um, changes this from an
unfunded mandate and we will
continue to support this bill as
long as that amendment remains
intact. Thank you, Mr.
Sherman.
Uh good morning, Chairman Munoz
committee members for the
record, Dan Roper with Trout
Unlimited, uh, in the interest
of time, I will agree with many
of the uh all of the comments
you just heard. I'd like to add
just two things. I'd like to
stress that this legislation is
broadly supported by New
Mexico's hunting and fishing
community, uh, in addition to
Trout Unlimited, this bill is
supported by nearly every
organization in New Mexico that
we work with that.
Represents hunting and angling
interests. The second point I'd
like to make, uh, is just simply
that we need to do more for all
of New Mexico's wildlife, the
species we hunt and fish and the
species we don't, this bill
coupled with new investments
from the land of enchantment
Legacy Fund and some of what's
in House Bill 2 puts us on a
path to do that. We're committed
to this being a bipartisan
effort and we ask for your
support today. Thank you.
Good morning members of the
committee and Mr. Chairman, uh,
my name is Bill Lowe. I'm a
resident of Santa Fe, excuse me,
and I'm here today as an
interested citizen. I don't
represent any specific
organization, but I am an avid
angler and as an avid angler I
support everything that you've
heard this morning. I also want
to specifically say that uh the
one thing that will affect many
anglers is, uh, paying increased
license fees, but, uh, in
speaking to my friends and
colleagues everyone's in support
of that they recognize there's
not been a fee increase in the
last 20 years and.
Those resources are needed so
that we can have a robust and a
well functioning uh department
of game and fish so that they
can ensure, as you've heard the
health and management of our
wildlife, so thank you very much
for your giving me the
opportunity to speak.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Mike Sloan, director
of the Department of Game and
Fish, while the department
hasn't taken an official
position on this bill. We do
appreciate the um collaborative
nature and the hard work that's
gone into the bill and several
of the amendments that have been
made.
We do still have concerns about
the language in the bill in
particular related to the
removal of commissioners.
Thank you.
Those in opposition.
Mr. Chair, my name is Brandon
Wynn. I grew up in Santa Fe. I'm
6th generation New Mexican, live
in Albuquerque. I don't
represent anybody. I mean, I
don't work for anybody. I've
never been paid to be an
advocate for the New Mexico
resident hunter and Mr. Chair, I
love the way where you were
going with the non-resident fee
differentials, um, but I would
go around about it a little bit
differently because there's so
few desert big or big horn she
tags that you're not gonna
really make much money with
that. So in this bill, um.
The increases in SB 5.
Are $4 million.
Of the license fee increases in
SB 5 or $4 million short of just
inflation, so really you're
setting a budget for gaming fish
that is $4 million less than
what they had in real dollar
terms back in 2006, last time
you did an increase, so I wanted
to raise more money, which I
think you should, so we can have
more resident hunters because
whenever I come and I advocate
for more resident hunters, I'm
told by everybody the game
commission, the Outfitter
Association, they jump on me.
say we can't afford it. So what
I'm asking you to do is to
increase the nausea and resident
be at least to inflation and
increase the game hunting
license fee to over $100 for
non-residents, you raise 4 or $5
million extra dollars, money
that could be used to
essentially buy down
non-resident licenses and have
more residents hunting. I think
that we're, we need to build
that bridge in here and
accomplish the actual tag
transfers later, but if you
don't put the fiscal bridge in
there, then I.
I think you're trapping us into
the same old we have more
non-resident tags relative to um
resident tax in New Mexico by
far orders of magnitude than any
other state, and I would like to
see this corrected over the next
10 years in Mexico. Thank you,
bud.
Mr. Chairman, try to keep it to
one minute so we could.
We're going to get called to the
floor here in a minute.
I'll make it quick, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
David Sanchez, uh, board of
directors, Northern New Mexico
Stockmans we represent 16,000
members across the northern
counties, uh ranchers and
farmers, and I'd like to make a
very critical point that this
time we are an effective party
because we feed the state's
wildlife.
Uh, our families have been on
the land since 1597 with the
livestock industry and
We stand opposed to this uh
legislation for a couple of
reasons, and I did email you a
laundry list of objections, so I
hope you've had a chance to
review that, but first, uh, Mr.
Chairman, member of the
committee.
There were no public hearings.
The sponsors of the build and
the two interest groups, I think
they have a fundamental problem
that.
The department is not
You're gonna have to hold that
mic to your mouth. The
department is not behind this
bill. The game commission is not
behind this bill. They didn't
consult with any of the
effective parties, uh, uh, the
ranchers, the tribes, uh,
anybody, uh, we, we disagree
with the sponsors that this is
not going to affect.
Chapter 17 because there are
language changes in this bill,
as I've indicated in uh.
In my email to you all, where
they are changing the mission.
Of chapter 17. They are
changing, uh, the commission in
the department into a
conservation agency.
Which allows them to defer and
not have to comply with
basically the Jennings law, all
of the provisions in there that
provide uh protection to the
landowners and the landowner
system, the wildlife programs
that are identified in there, so
I agree, especially Mr. Chairman
with, uh, uh, Senator Trujillo
that this bill needs.
review
it needs to identify what the
impacts are going to be to
chapter 17. We can't afford to
lose chapter 17. Currently the
department directors alone in
conversation with me and others,
uh, clearly states that they
don't have to comply with
chapter 17 anymore because they
have uh the rule 19, uh.
In place now, so those are the
problems that we're having with
the department and the
commission, Mr. Chairman, we ask
that this bill, uh, be tabled
for further review or that or
that uh it'd be uh voted
against. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, committee members, my
name is Tom Patterson. I serve
as president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association. We oppose Senate
Bill 5. We object to expanding
the department's mission in
Section 5A to management and
protection of any species of
wildlife. There's some who claim
the department already has that
authority, it does not. It is
not in the statutes were opposed
to expanding the department's
mission to cover any new
species.
Because the department isn't
managing even its current
species responsibilities
properly
examples of that poor management
appear to come from a department
philosophy that livestock and
ranchers should be removed from
the landscape. The department
treats us like the enemy.
On January 22nd, for example, a
department employee testified
repeatedly that cattle should be
removed from our forests on the
Mexican wolf, the department has
championed new evidentiary
standards that make it more
difficult to confirm a wolf
depredation. The department has
insisted on cross fostering more
wolves into areas of the state
that are already saturated with
wolves on elk, the department
has refused to consider changing
the purpose statement in the 4
year.
Ok rule to factor in management
for public safety and livestock
grazing department population
management of elk ignores
Rangeland Health and the
carrying capacity of our lands.
We support a license fee
increase. they need it, but do
it as a standalone. We oppose SB
5.
Good morning.
Excuse me. Good morning, good
morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, um.
The executive director. My name
is Carlos Salazar. I'm the
executive director for Northern
New Mexico Stockman's
Association.
I think this bill in time is
gonna gradually um.
Reduce uh.
Landowners, private property
rights, it's gonna chip away at
them because this bill I think
sets that framework sets up that
framework.
And I believe in time that our
private property rights are
gonna be taken away. Thank you.
Thank you, we're gonna go to
Zoom now.
take
3, and then you have 1 in
opposition, right? One minute
each, Logan.
You, you, you're muted, Logan.
Can you guys hear me now? Yes.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, good morning. My name
is Logan McGara. I'm an avid
houndsman, hunter, and angler
from Dexter, New Mexico. I know
that wildlife policy is
complicated, and that this bill
has many parts that are not
perfect.
But as someone who thinks about
hunting and wildlife daily and
wants more wildlife in New
Mexico tomorrow than there are
today. I believe that this bill,
as it is currently amended, does
set forth the reform that we
need to move our wildlife
management system in a positive
direction.
As Senators Compos and Brantley
and many others have mentioned
this bill is the result of many
years of refinement and
compromise from all parties, and
as such, I encourage you to vote
yes on a due pass
recommendation. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you. Who's next?
Yeah
Yeah
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee, um, my name's Jeff
Aerburn. I live in Las Cruces
and I fish and hunt all over New
Mexico, and I wanted to offer my
support um in for the license
fee increases that are that are
part of this bill. It is
essential to have a well funded
department so that they're able
to do the work that they do in
managing game species enforcing
the game rules, monitoring
populations, operating.
the fish hatcheries, stocking
fish, and their work with the
other species that are of
conservation concern because
it's essential to have healthy
ecosystems, complete ecosystems,
and, and, you know, particularly
when you look at the, the impact
of natural disasters, these
massive wildfires and flooding
and what that does to the
populations, we need the
department's work doing the
science, doing the monitoring of
populations and, and doing the
restoration work to get those.
populations back to to to where
they're healthy again and so I
think that the increase in
license fees is definitely
appropriate, um, uh, as has been
pointed out earlier, it could be
even larger, but these are at
least in the right direction
and, and this will, this will
benefit the, the resource for,
for all of us across the state.
Thank you.
And you've got one more.
OK, one in opposition.
Turn your next. Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Karen Cowan. I'm on the
board of directors of the New
Mexico Federal Lands Council and
Protect Americans now, um, I
probably can't speak any better,
um, or more eloquently than Mr.
Sanchez and Mr. Patterson did.
Um, we support everything they
said. I would just like to
reiterate that the people who
who take care of the wildlife to
provide the water, the minerals,
the feed, all of that. We're not
consulted in this process, so
This was not a huge
collaborative. I thank you, I
thank you for your time and I
urge you to vote no on this
bill.
Kate, who's the other one that's
opposed?
Howard, you're next.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, I'm Howard
Hutchinson with the Coalition of
Arizona to Mexico counties.
I was a participant in the
negotiations and drafting of the
wildlife conservation Act back
in 1995.
What we agreed on strongly at
that point.
Was that conservation biology
was absolute necessity in
managing species of concern.
Particularly those listed.
Uh, in the federal endangered
Species Act.
I believe that what is
Proposed in the current bill is
turning the department into that
conservation biology focus that
takes away from a totally
different aspect of managing
game in a scientific manner.
We respectfully uh oppose the
bill. They're certainly parts of
the bill that that we uh find
important as previously stated.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, but we're gonna wrap
up. We're gonna go to the floor.
I want you to think about one
thing on the big horn sheep out
of the 3 tags and the director's
still here somewhere I think.
One of those is given to an
outfitter.
That's a non-resident that has a
preference.
And that tag.
is worth more than a resident in
that outfitter preference is
still intact and so.
I think we're the only state
with that. I mean, that may be
something I may want to look at
when we're down there on the
floor, if you want to start
looking at.
Yeah
what's fair for residents and
non-residents will
We can do that. So we're gonna
go to the floor when you come
back up, we'll have another
amendment and then we'll uh vote
on it this afternoon. Thank you,
Mr. Chairs.
And accomplish you wanna close,
uh, Mr. Chairman members of the
Senate Finance Committee, we
thank you very much for your
consideration in this measure.
Thank you.
