You can see if we can address
they can.
It's okay apple.
No.
Okay very well so this so.
Time of would be
Turned into to you kids.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee thanks for having us
this morning I'm Kelly cars well
capital outlay analyst with LFC
we've got the state engineer Mr
my canon.
CEO of the New Mexico finance
authority Marquita Russel and
Jennifer Armstrong with the New
Mexico Environment Department
you'll have to remind me of your
exact title Janis strategic
programs director I think that
okay.
all right so I'm gonna start
giving you kind of a high level
overview from this hand out
which you should have in front
of you.
so water projects are some of
the more common project types we
see funded with capital outlay
they go to the state engineer or
the Interstate Stream Commission
and the New Mexico environment
department to administer so in
the table you can see the number
of appropriations that have been
made at that have gone to those
departments from twenty nineteen
to twenty twenty two as well as
the total appropriations in the
outstanding balances on those
appropriations as of December
there are about five hundred
ninety active water projects
funded with capital outlay under
way across the state and that
represents about fourteen
percent of the total outstanding
projects water and wastewater
projects are also among the most
common project types supported
by the earmarked funds so those
are the water transport the
colonias infrastructure fund and
the tribal infrastructure fund
you can see the estimated
distributions to those funds for
this year in those sub bullets
they are expected to go up by
around seventy five percent
compared to last year.
Also wanted to talk a little bit
about some of the reasons that
these projects are particularly
difficult to fully fund with
capital outlay dollars
particularly local capital
outlay dollars
and the basic reason is just
that these are expensive
projects that are technically
complex and you can see in that
third goal at how the average
local capital outlay
appropriation to a water project
in twenty twenty two compared to
the average award from the water
trust board which does have
sufficient funding and a process
where it tries to fully fund the
projects or fully fun functional
faces of them so the comparison
as the average was about three
hundred thousand dollars for a
local capital outlay water
appropriation and two point one
million dollars for awards from
the water trust board.
water projects in the water
finance system in the state as a
whole is something the LFC has
looked closely at a couple times
over the last about ten years
partly because we have a lot of
different programs to provide
funding for these projects and
it's a type of an infrastructure
that is really critical to the
health and well being of
communities we also know that
there's a big need for
improvements to water and
wastewater systems across the
state in the most recent state
water plan the need was the need
for water projects over the next
I think it was about five years
was estimated at close to four
billion dollars.
We know that the wide
availability of state grants for
water projects disincentive ISIS
communities from seeking low
cost financing so low cost loans
are in some cases no interest
loans and that limits the
state's ability to fully
leverage both state and federal
dollars.
we have that we've seen that
particularly with the drinking
water state revolving funds and
the clean water state revolving
fund over the years these are
federally backed low cost
financing programs we have made
progress in bringing down on
committed balances of those
funds lately
I think both Marquita and honest
could talk more to that so the
drinking water state revolving
fund in particular has brought
down its on committed balances
by a lot the clean water state
revolving fund balances have
remained persistently higher
although I think the New Mexico
environment department is making
progress there too one of the
ways they're doing that is
trying to bring in some of the
larger communities that can
afford to take on those loans
and that can take larger loans
from those funds those
communities had been absent for
that from those programs for a
while.
You can also see on the right of
this page
kind of the primary other
funding sources for these
projects you can see we have at
least ten of them just
administered by the state this
doesn't include separate
federally administered programs
that can provide funding for
them as well.
and I wanted to you know talk a
little bit about I pointed out
that it's fatigue it's
particularly hard to fully fund
these projects with capital
outlay one of the reasons that
that can be a problem is that it
creates risk that the projects
won't ultimately get it done or
they'll take a very long time to
complete just kind of do to
community is taking a long time
to try to piece together the
funding for the project from
capital outlay or from capital
outlay and other sources in the
last the in depth report we did
on these projects we did see
some concrete examples of how
that risk plays out we did a
specific a specific review of
ten local water and wastewater
projects funded with various
sources.
And we found that of those ten
three of the ten had not met
their intended purpose seven to
nine years after the initial
appropriations so that's just to
kind of give you a sense that
that risk we talk about Israel
in some cases and I I bring that
up just because you know the the
ultimate goal with all of this
funding is to get these dollars
on the ground and make sure
they're making the tangible
improvements that generate
public benefits that their
intended to make in your
communities and that they do so
in a timely manner so those
public benefits are realised so
I think we'll just go down the
line now and everyone can make
some brief remarks and then
we'll all stand for questions.
I miss that part you mentioned
forty percent of the
so that Mr chair is in the top
bullet so that was just
representing the number of
active water projects that have
been funded with capital outlay
from twenty nineteen to twenty
two so water projects represent
about fourteen percent of the
overall number of outstanding
projects.
Thank you.
This result for welcome first
and the you can introduce
yourself for the record.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Mike
Hammond served almost one year
as of next week as the New
Mexico state engineer
and I as a of also up at the
distinct pleasure of serving
as the
Chair of the of New Mexico water
policy and infrastructure task
force that the governor
authorized us to form a copy of
that report and I just wanted to
state that.
Of funding of projects in the
addressing of capital needs
within rural New Mexico is one
of the primary focuses of the of
the task force and they made new
metric recommendations to of of
of the process forward and I
know there's lots of interest
from the legislature this year
and trying to figure out how we
get over the hump of the issues
of of of addressing particularly
rural water security through
better infrastructure and more
reliable water resources and the
issues that we face and and the
of devastated watersheds and the
communities around them is
another very key and necessary
component to being able to
optimize our capital outlay to
the fullest extent possible as
well as all of the other funding
opportunities that we have that
that both the state and federal
levels so that was a huge focus
of our order of our task force
work
I think it's had some impact
that the where the the
governor's budget request of
both up for are operated our
operating budget and for
specials indicated that there's
a tremendous need for that that
she is recognized as well
we at the state engineers office
I just see we we have lots of
large projects of the on going
that have to do with Indian
water rights settlements that
are are are funded mostly by the
federal government but that has
have kosher requirements that
are being addressed through
appropriations by this so that's
one aspect of our agency from
the capital outlay perspective
our agency gets most of it kind
of threw the a secular a program
and I have a Jonathan Martinez
here to to speak to that if we
need to and.
The tail and and and other stuff
to to answer any questions along
that line other well the the
more direction I have to do with
them rehabilitation work we we
are primarily a regulatory
agency in that regard so when we
receive capital outlay dollars
for construction we're we're
just more or less a pass through
to the dam owners we we we have
the capacity to actually project
manage
in our agency for those projects
and and there's a huge backlog
and and them rehabilitation
needs we've identified seventy
at up to two hundred million
plus worth of need there are so
so that's another area of of
keen interest to our agency and
we have various other capital
outlay that we received just
sometimes because it has the
word water in it it just comes
our agency even though we may
not technically be the right
place for it but we end up
managing some of those cap
capital the projects and I'm
happy to answer specific
questions about those thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name's
Marquita Russel I'm the CEO of
the New Mexico finance authority
three of the largest programs at
the finance authority operates
or the drinking federally funded
drinking water state revolving
loan fund the water trust board
and the colonias infrastructure
board and I think those are
three of the programs that Kelly
has highlighted for you today
the drinking water program the
has its own unique challenges in
that as part of a federal
program there are some high
Construction requirements that
make some of those projects a
little more difficult to achieve
one of the things that we've
been able to do is Kelly
mentioned as to to work with
some larger communities in order
to get those dollars out right
now we're enjoying about a
little over a hundred percent
commitment on those drinking
water funds so that we do have
some balances those dollars are
committed to projects that will
ultimately we anticipate spend
down in the next year and a half
so that's been a relatively
successful program it certainly
didn't start out that way but it
it ended that it's it's been
that way for the last several
years the water trust board
which was created back in two
thousand and one of the colonias
infrastructure board which was
created ten years later served
as one of the first sort of
evaluate standards based
evaluation programs using these
sort of capital outlay dollars
very similar to the drinking
water program we got off to a
rocky start we tried at the
inception of those programs to
spread the dollars as far as we
could and that kind of
geographic diversity goal had
the unintended consequence of
piecemeal funding and so it took
about the but the water
transport approximately ten
years to really find its footing
and understands that full
funding of projects was
particularly important of the
colonias had a much faster start
learning a little from the water
transport and it probably only
took them about four years
before they realized that though
well intended it was not going
to have the impact that they
hoped it would have both of
those programs currently have
high spend down range I think we
are including the unusually high
awards from two thousand twenty
two I think word about overall
eighty five percent expended on
the water trust board and very
similar numbers for the colonias
infrastructure port so I think
we have found a pretty good
strategy here we've enjoyed a
wonderful partnership with of
the environment.
Permits construction programs
bureau they have through a
contract with the NMFA provided
engineering and construction
oversight that's ensure that the
dollars that are going in are
going for the intended purpose
is that we're not having it over
cost overruns that we're not
foreseen unfortunately there
workload is such that we're not
going to be able to continue
that relationship so are
efficient operation of the
program is going to need to
change in this upcoming fiscal
year so that is one of the big
challenges we have a point which
funding is at an all time high
from all three of those programs
so this wonderful successful
program is going to have to
change a little bit in order for
us to keep pace with the funding
levels that are coming our way
and with the resources that we
currently have
with that man Mr chairman madam
chair I am happy to pass the.
Microphone over Jonas.
Thanks
committee I think I can speak
loudly enough to donate okay
good morning Jones Armstrong
special of sorry director of
strategic initiatives within
Mexico Environment Department
I also had the pleasure of
working for you all for a number
of years the legislative finance
committee.
We've got a few couple NMED
staff in attendance with me from
the construction programs bureau
our chief to table and also run
the holder and with with Judy
this morning.
Really appreciate the focus of
this committee is taking the
legislature as a whole elevating
scrutiny capital outlay dollars
and projects it also gives us a
chance to NMED to talk about the
massive workload that you just
heard from miss Russell is
limiting our ability to offer
services to other agencies.
On on the list that you're SFC
staff provided there were four
hundred sorry there were.
Sixty three red or yellow red
and projects that sounds like a
big number it's sixteen percent
about of the four hundred and
one act capital outlay projects
the NMED is managing.
We follow the committee's
direction provided the
information to fiscal agents and
it looks like based on the hand
out your staff provided this
morning that almost all of those
were responsive with the
information requested so it was
nice to see
again highlighting that it's not
all bad for capital outlay water
projects Environment Department
overseas over the last four
years the environment department
has closed two hundred thirty
capital outlay projects and
dispersed sixty one million
dollars in capital outlay
dollars
But it's not just capital outlay
that construction programs
bureau oversees as miserable
just detailed we work with NMFA
under I'm always on a number of
programs we also work with the
office natural resources trustee
and economic development
department to provide technical
support.
We also have our own clean water
state revolving fund in rural
infrastructure project fund that
our construction programs team
manages
We received some funding from
all of those agreements with
other agencies to support their
projects but we do not receive
an administrative fee from the
legislature to to manage all the
capital outlay projects that we
receive.
Which account for almost two
thirds of the six hundred twenty
eight projects that CP is
currently managing I technical
staff and construction programs
bureau was doing all that work
with an average of a hundred
twenty six projects per staff
which is about double what a
comfortable level workload would
be based on prior experience for
those folks just like state
engineer said we don't have the
capacity to truly project manage
all six hundred twenty eight of
these projects.
We have made progress on clean
water state revolving funds
reducing interest rates but face
similar restrictions to what
miss Russell detail
like the water trust board.
Clean water state revolving
projects are evaluated a range
based on the level of uncertain
criteria specifically level of
water quality protection that
they will achieve.
But there is scrutiny before
projects are selected
I just state engineer Hammon hi
what are held up a copy of the
water task force report I had
the pleasure of being involved
with the community drinking
water water wastewater and
stormwater capacity
infrastructure in finance
working group that working group
identified the current capital
outlay process is problem number
one for water infrastructure in
New Mexico.
Specifically making
recommendations to create a
water infrastructure projects
authority that would fat
prioritize and fund projects in
provide navigation services to
communities for the number of.
Funding sources that we have
the task force also recommended
promoting ins and incentivizing
regional collaboration among
water and wastewater systems
Senator one has been introduced
this year and and you all might
hear that on that topic
Also the task force recognizes
the need to tackle local
capacity issues and to provide a
consistent reliable investments
to support communities through
state agencies and or technical
assistance providers.
And then the last thing I would
say just from NMED is that
You know legislative staff of
legislative criteria for
legislators to evaluate local
practicality just requests I
think those are great needs
based and planning based
criteria essentially that.
Rejects are fully funded and can
and and and planned and ready to
go.
With those comments I would turn
it over to SFC staff thanks also
on the agenda.
Mr chair visited vividly on us
is serwis Senate finance
committee analyst is the one who
put together the spreadsheet in
front of you so she can help
explain what you're seeing there
if you would like.
I also just wanted to make one
quick follow up point to some of
the capacity discussion the LFC
is budget recommendation this
year does support capacity
increases that were requested by
both the I see in the
Environment Department in these
respective areas so just wanted
to point that out real quick
assistance of if you could get
closer to the microphone.
And Senator Steinborn has a
question yes we like in five
minutes okay okay do I apologize
yes I have a meeting in four
minutes now and I just have a
quick question thank you all for
coming and it's good to see
Senator Paypen in the house and
always great seeing Senator
Papen
Quick question in I'm gonna be a
little ignorant here but I know
that I think is the safety of
funding that we had approved a
year to go is drawing down some
fund that was approaching the
cliffs
what fun was that and how we fix
that issue.
Started Mr chair Senator
Steinborn that's the issue works
construction fund
and and that the that fund is to
for a little bit like all the
the the funds through the
through the
through the current earnings and
one not and and also it's been
tapped for a a watershed forest
the restoration fund as well so
yes of the and and and also I
think there's a proposal to
double the the the the second
funding out of that fund the
session as well so so it is
heading
to a point of concern I think it
it either needs to be pushed up
somehow or or of or or the other
at the other aspect too is that
during the previous
administration of the because of
a lack of of general fund
support for the agency we had
to tap that fund and and the Rio
Grande works fund for of on
going of support for the agency
we don't we will begin to wean
ourselves off of that with the
work with the LFC as well we're
not quite at that point but
those two factors are are
declining of of but both of
those permanent fund so so so
yes the something needs to be
addressed their.
At about to my colleagues I mean
we want to help the acequia is
with your gauge works
construction fund service a
multitude of constituents and so
we're out of look at.
And and there's no really of the
revenue source right I mean it's
kind of like a one time pot of
money that just a plea to
overtime right.
No revenue sources.
This real quick seven PM on
program support act state
engineer does receive funds it's
a a permanent type of funds so
it actually does receive
royalty funds into it what
you're actually part of the
reason why in the last couple
years the find out
outperformed our expectations on
the revenue side that's the only
reason why the fund is even in
the ballpark of assisted
renewable but as these other
demands come on
and some of the demands let
friends LFC in the volumes does
have a projection for the OSC
trust funds of both of them the
irrigation works construction
fund is a larger one and those
balances appear to be closer to
sustainable but I would note
that it doesn't take into
account some bar language that
we traditionally ask for about
one point eight million and some
of these other
proposals to increase the demand
so we either need to do
something on the demand side or
something on the revenue side
either one time infusion or
something the yes so so using
the word sustainable a few times
so is this sustainable or is it
heading towards the shells or
maybe it's sustainable right now
but then when returns go down I
just think that's something we
ought to look at just to be sure
it's it's it is the state of all
but I just want to kind of make
a comment which is I I represent
an area with a handful of mutual
domestics and you kind of
touched on it John and the work
that the task force to done
regulates Mitchell domestics to
anybody have over seventy
children six.
Department sorry Senator
Steinborn the environment forms.
Our bureau yes okay.
Excuse me the senator also we we
regulate the Water Rights
component of that at.
Well it's an interesting case
because they're all volunteers.
They should Regionali sometimes
I have a system that has a
groundwater click I just have
committee meeting for the
session people don't want to
drink the water is Walter point
entrances it's safe I don't want
to Mesilla regional as of the
end of the next to it.
And so I think there is a need I
mean at the end of the year that
being
Poses interesting
Somehow or another they need
help more hand holding I think
maybe more oversight
Obviously funding but anyway if
the just I mentioned that you
know continues to be a challenge
I apologize I've got around
thank you all so much for being
here today.
Thanks thank you.
This is good morning madam chair
members of the committee if this
document is just like the other
ones you've been reviewing
previously and I I just on the
and
Highlight I guess you could say
the projects that are requested
additional funding to complete
the projects and so that's one
of the
request I think you I believe
you've made previously to really
figure out who's needing more
money which projects are not
moving forward due to that and
then also if any of the projects
have
stated that they need to
request re authorization so that
some it should be very clear for
all of you to see that on the
last two columns and so if you
have any questions I can answer
those.
Very well thank you.
go to vice chair will leave
this.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
good morning to everyone thanks
for your work and my goodness a
lot going on in before I go on
Mr chairman I really want to
express my deep condolences
Marquita just went through a
very painful time the last few
weeks and her mom passed away
and she had to leave for a few
days and and then had other
challenges after that and so my
goodness we'll leave it at that
but here you are Marquita
always just always continuing
incessantly to to serve New
Mexico thank you very much and
Mr chairman I just have a
question you know as I'm looking
at all of these projects and so
on I wonder
what determines who administers
the projects water projects for
example we have a lot of
projects at the Economic
development department that are
and and that's always confusing
to me there's some that either
originate their wards forget
moved there partially or
something for administration and
the NMFA ends up with the
projects most of the time at the
end and so how how can we tell
which or which of which and are
they administered maybe some
projects may be administered by
both the NMED and the NMFA tell
me can you answer that somebody
Marquita Jones or somebody
structure senator I think I can
answer that so capital outlay
projects are not administered by
NMFA so none of those go to Anna
NMFA they administer and.
Staff the boards that run that
you're more programs for two I
should take to their mark
program so water trust board
colonias infrastructure and then
the drinking water state
revolving funds which is one of
the federally backed loan
programs is also administered by
NMFA and they collaborate on all
those programs closely or they
have as market mentioned with
NMED for sort of a technical
side of things
on capital outlay with water
projects typically acequia
projects and dam projects go to
the state engineer and the
Interstate Stream Commission and
then drinking water wastewater
stormwater projects go to NMED's
construction programs bureau.
I see okay that makes sense unit
to radix here but let me let me
ask Mr Chairman to engineer
Hamit thank you work to you
mentioned something that earlier
that triggered this on my mind
you are up pass through entities
so we give you that too for the
and you but you may capital
projects like for dams and and
so on this Kelly had mentioned I
have how to what extent do you
management to figure out how
much work do you have to do for
these projects that you're
merely just a pass through.
Mr Mr chair of the Senator we we
do have a specific of projects
in in the dam safety but as I
mentioned earlier our our staff
we're we're hired to as as
regulatory and oversight so the
so they're the ones that
identify the deficiencies in the
needed upgrades to them just
based on current
standards for proper management
of the of them structures
throughout our state like I said
we've identified some seventy
plus that need serious attention
in some cases three of which are
are of a game and fish
structures and facilities so
we're we we do get the capital
outlay projects given to our our
agency and that kind of of it's
it's it's like a think of the.
An alternative the the the the
source of of of work alternate
work that the there are
regulatory
them people need to do and it's
a it's counterintuitive from the
standpoint that you shouldn't be
regulating a project that you're
also constructing yourself so
what we try to do is work with
the damn owner if they're
physically capable we we the
pastor I mention was that we
would provide it with with our
oversight to the the owner for
them to hire the engineers on
that whatever and the
contractors to go ahead and
complete the project so that's
that's that's what I meant by
pass through but there is
workload involved in it and it
takes away from our normal
workload of doing the right
regulatory side and so one of
the proposals that we we put
forward for the upcoming
consideration is that we have a
separate them projects group
either in our agency or wherever
it would need to go that that
could do the project management
separated separately from away
from the regulatory side.
Yes and and that makes total
sense to me because right now
it's all intermingled and to one
and that's yeah I it's it's not
good to do that thank you for
doing all that you do and I'm
glad you're proposing that I
think it's a great idea and I
look back
over the years now at how much
you have done with the limited
resources every year you Mr
Hammond you come here with the
truth is here here you have less
funding than what you need and
and so you have to borrow from
Peter to pay Paul you just
mentioned to one of the answer
for one of the questions that
came across that you know you
have to borrow from the the year
of operational funds for example
to make ends meet for other
things for vice versa and so
that's that's not good me you
should have adequate funding for
what you need we we put in the
requirements we have on funded
mandates many time and water is
as we all know preaching to the
choir here so important and we
shouldn't be.
These things so thank you for
what you do for your willingness
to continue to serve in your
position if you all have done
great work in Jonas we still
miss you it LFC but thank you
for your work to course step
Marquita I can't say enough hi
there no words to thank you for
your commitment and your great
thank you yes of course Kelly we
could what we do that Kelly
every paper we have everything
everywhere we look Kelly's name
is on it so thank you Kelly all
right Mr Chairman.
So for the.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the presentation for all run in
fifteen circles here's as we all
know and again also want to
thank Marquita for all of the
every single time on the spot
always on what's going on inside
or outside of the building so
really appreciate that and and
we just we we really appreciate
you very much so thank you had a
quick so when we were talking
Senator Steinborn the comments
earlier who have hall has a hand
in in mutual domestics
surprisingly folks here might be
surprised to know that the PRC
also has the interaction with
mutual domestics as well so you
have PRC you have your office Mr
Hammond and then you have there
was a third in the and the yeah
exactly so is there it because
many of them are volunteers much
like us that are setting these
things up and trying to run them
and sometimes unfortunately they
end up running them into the
ground and and have no pun
intended but but they do so is
there is there a move right
discussion at all possibly to
have sort of a project manager
that owns the process ages.
From the set up or if you re
running into problems does
anyone know if there's anyone
around like that they can help
these mutual domestics.
Mr chair Senator Padilla so
there is a there is some staff
and the New Mexico environment
department that ends up working
very closely with these systems
I will say that both the
proposal Janis mansions that has
come out of the water task force
which LFC has also tried to work
into our committee sponsored
bill to create a central central
infrastructure office
The idea of that not just for
water systems but for local
entities that need more support
in general would be to provide
more both front end and back and
support so project planning
development support and then
back and project management
support for communities that
need it
to help these things actually
get done and be successful so I
think we're working on that but
that.
Capacity still needs to be
created within state government
this is true water projects and
other capital outlay that the
primary job of the state
agencies that are sent these
projects to administer them is
to administer the funding and to
make sure that the funding is
spent consistent with the law
and consistent with legislative
intent I think NMED and
particularly because of the
other programs they manage for
these projects and their other
kind of regulatory functions
with drinking water systems yes
sort of ended up in a defective
away doing a lot more than that
for these projects
but as we mentioned just the
volume of work right now is
really constraining capacity
across all the agencies to
provide sort of that more value
add beyond that basic
administration I have to do
thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that discussion there
about that line of the
discussion there so now I'm a
business owner I built a
business where we had to do
massive projects a little tiny
projects and it doesn't matter
how small the project is or how
large it is all the components
of achieving a successful
whatever we're trying to do
still apply no matter what size
the project is so when I said
when I implement introduce
legislation created the office
of broadband access expansion
one of the components that
offices to have
The hopes but a set of
specialists that work with local
political subdivisions to do
just what I what you're
describing and I think in what
I'm describing so I I after all
this time it seems like we
really need to focus on on these
water projects to have somebody
own a dizzy income and the
existing ones when they run into
problems how do we get ourselves
out of this we have the state
auditor in here the other day
and they were the new state
auditor we're just you know
talking about how many of these
local entities are in trouble
from an audit standpoint and
that's going to cost them big
problems down the road even if
they want to fix everything but
if there ten years behind on
their audits they're not gonna
get a penny out of us so I I
just hope that we can maybe
convene maybe some sort of a
group that gets together and
puts a group of specialists
together to help these local
volunteers get through all these
processes thank you Mr chairman
I know there is another
commenter Mr chair Senator
Padilla if I could just make one
more quick comment there is also
mention of legislation to it's
kind of enabling legislation to
make regionalization of small
water systems easier not
mandatory but easier to do it
for those that want to pursue it
I think that is another really
key part of this discussion with
the capacity issues that small
water systems have to the extent
that they are able to regional
lies not necessarily even the
hard infrastructure but these
kind of capacity based functions
that help them run well that's
another important part of the
long term solution to all this.
We just have a.
You know a couple of comments
and you know maybe just a.
For discussion but
I remember that in the this is a
no.
During the Johnson
administration nineteen ninety
four ninety five.
And we had a lady that came and
spoke to us.
And I never have forgotten this.
Is so she mentioned though you
can get.
You know water is a cycle you
can run out of water.
And she said I'm not addressing
quality and I'm not addressing
quantity.
You know just water.
And she mentioned something that
always stayed with me and she
said the question is how much do
you want to pay.
You know and I think that all
what you see on the news from
all what's happening with the
Colorado River and the New
Mexico.
And just this morning though.
Thank you so the New Mexico that
I saw a big development
committee to Santa Fe.
And the.
You know where do we really
control of you know you hate to
say no or you can build but of
you know how much can we have
that capacity you know to say
like what's happening with the
users of the Colorado River.
You know and I always keep that
in mind because you know I think
it's coming.
No well the other part the.
I was gonna ask you from the
federal level or state level.
Is there anything coming of that
restricting water systems that
have lead pipes.
Mr chairman that's what our
specs.
A role on the internet.
In the next couple years we
expect that to increase the
workload for our drinking water
bureau staff the already over
one moment workload that they
face
We also received a large
disbursement of clean water
state revolving fund loan sorry
drinking water state revolving
fund loans out of the bill the
bipartisan infrastructure on the
federal level a large percentage
of that disbursement is supposed
to be targeted towards lead pipe
replacement.
The issue New Mexico is we don't
have a high prevalence of lead
pipes.
But will it come to us slide by
a certain here that we have to.
Not be serving people with what
I.
The regulation has not been
released yet but we do expect
something to come.
See I think that's another one
because so on your small
domestic users you know they all
in all the systems are all
thirty forty years old or even
more.
You know something that we need
to just.
Stay with you know what would be
happening with that of the other
one that I was going to ask you
all Kelly is so.
A look immature
and.
And not going across to the
twenty nineteen where you see
the thirty two percent
outstanding.
Then going to the twenty twenty
two of eighty five that's
understandable you know that how
has come down but the question I
have this on the on the thirty
two percent is that a lack of
funding or.
Mr chair it could be a number of
reasons and you know we would
also expect some chunk of that
money to get spent it does only
have about five months left so I
would say this is where the
spreadsheet that the Senate
finance staff should be really
useful and identifying some
specific projects that either
have said they lack funding and
that's holding them up or that
are going to need it re
authorization in order to spend
down the funds that have already
been appropriated.
Thank you.
The.
The comments
posted remarks.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee in in in reference
to use some of your your
questions and comments and also
Senator but is relative to the
range of all the systems that we
have up there the the PRC
regulates these private
utilities the have to.
Design their rate structures and
get PRC approval in order to
implement those rates to
properly maintain and replace
their systems over time and so
they're they're kind of
positioned a little better to
address their ongoing needs.
for operation and maintenance
where is a lot of the mutual
domestic since other small
communities systems or what not
have have are kind of right
increase at verse for obvious
reasons it's it's it's both
political and and financial
social economic issues that that
that we struggle with and and
rural New Mexico in particular
but with that said if we can
take this opportunity to get our
systems with all the federal and
state dollars an outstanding
capital outlay that could be
possibly re up re addressed the
in terms of of the need and and
and water wastewater and
stormwater needs within without
our throughout our state if we
can if we can get over that in
terms of of improving our
infrastructure over the next
five to ten years as well as
regionalization getting these
communities to work closely
together even just from managing
their finances getting their
audits improved all of those
things that takes all of
government approach from from
the state the counties the the
the hawks even water
conservation districts if
everybody has the capacity to
help these communities move
forward what what we have this
great opportunity with our
resources then we'll get we'll
finally get over the hump of
this that cycle we've been in of
of not getting enough funding to
fix systems and improve them
further the future of our our
communities but what we we can
start fresh and we can make sure
that they have the the support
and resources with the the well
trained operators and all the
things that are needed in a
regional context to move forward
we're also implementing
hopefully with the bill this
the sponsored by senator Wirth
and and stuff and I.
X. to improve reinstitute our
regional water planning efforts
that will also help the region's
throughout our state
prioritizing get their focus on
the important matters of for
their water systems and and and
water security so so those are
things that we're working on and
and and we do we have a great
opportunity to make major
progress in the in the in this
decade.
Mr chairman of like manager I'd
leave you with one COVID of the
lessons that the finance
authority has learned in the
administration of the drinking
water program colonias and water
transport programs are that
piecemeal funding is your
biggest enemy towards success of
the projects that we talk about
silos and fragmented funding
programs I don't think that's as
big an issue as only partially
funding these water projects you
heard earlier from Jonas about
the number of projects each of
those technical engineers are
overseeing the construction
program through that's an
incredibly professional group
about a hundred twenty six is
way too many for any single
person to oversee it we were
fully funding some of those
projects you would cut
significantly what they have to
oversee you would allow them to
provide a deeper level of
service to your communities to
get ahead of some of the
projects and then those things
would get completed and put
aside and the next set of really
important projects would come
before them so from a funder
from the construction management
perspective piecemeal funding is
the problem that most affects
the expenditure of of capital
outlay and all other programs so
I would just leave you with that
in and as I said we have learned
over time with those three
programs our success rate has
skyrocketed as a result of going
from again well intentioned
concept of of geographic
diversity in and spreading the
wealth as far as you can but it
has it has such such terrible
repercussions in terms of our
ability to actually complete
projects so that would be the
one the one thing I would pass
on to is key for success for us.
Well.
We want to.
We want to thank you for being
here at this is a very very
important you know probably the
most important thing to our
state and the for some reason we
have quite a few of our members
that are not here I wish they
would have been here but with
that thank you again and he left
the state information.
Reach out to our members that
are not present and we'll try to
see how we can have this
information to.
Thank you very much.
so that we start adjourned until
this afternoon.
This morning so.
The.
Thank.
