is a letter that was sent to a
higher education institutions on
Friday February twenty fourth
containing suggested guidelines
created by our analysts in
collaboration with the LFC and
HSD for cleaning up our P. S.
P.'s
along with the suggested
guidelines institutions were
given an opportunity to provide
a written justification for each
of the projects they felt needed
to be kept as our PSBs after the
review the suggested guidelines
and created their lists as I
mentioned earlier the created
guidelines were all our PSBs
that are for I. Angie purposes
be part of the IDG base all this
piece of two hundred thousand
below regardless of function
were to be rolled into I. Angie
our PSBs for medical nursing
education social work or
behavioral health pilots and
were expansions were to be kept
as is and because a governmental
agencies were exempt the higher
education institutions had a
deadline of Monday February
twenty seventh at noon to report
their compiled a list of our P.
S. P.'s rolled into I. Angie as
well as provide the
justifications for the project
kept as are PSP's the
spreadsheet before you as well
was compiled using that
information provided to us by
each into institution the
justifications provided by the
institutions for the projects as
I mentioned earlier they were
not rolled into I. NGA are
provided on the right on the
column on the right.
These again are it is
information and statements that
was provided directly from the
institutions so we put them on
this format for you to be able
to
and so that we you may be able
to consider them and find your
analysts with for the guidance
and next steps and I do want to
also be specific that these are
not necessarily cuts they are
just moving the funding from our
PSBs and rolling them up into I
Angie and with that with your
permission Mister chair I would
like to defer to nickel Misia's
from DFA to further explain the
summary sheet that was also
provided.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee if you'll go to
the summary spreadsheet all kind
of go over what's going on
within this document so from
lines three to twenty five that
is specifically for identity
within those lines if you go to
the SFC scenario call and you'll
see that there is an increase
for I. Angie in about twenty
point eight million also from
lines twenty nine to thirty nine
you'll see the break out for R.
P. S. P.'s in the SSC scenario
Collins you'll see the changes
as well as the far right column
you'll see how those those
funding for those RKS P. line
items with for shifted up to I.
Angie so as we have previously
mentioned there was a note
reductions within that funding
for the higher education
institutions and then online
forty three you have your role
of total for the institutions
which is about one one billion
Ten ten million dollars in total
and then the physics spreadsheet
you'll see each item reached
university so you'll see the
changes in the reductions for
the said SFC scenario by line
item for each artist Pete item
as previously mentioned all our
PS peas rolled up to the I need
line item
for the bigger universities
those are PSP items which were
listed under the branch campuses
were rolled up according to
their branch designation and
each you can see total for the
R. P. S. P. R. the institutional
line items part of the all net
to zero
I will now conclude and thank
you Mr chair madam secretary of
anything that.
Right questions and and I'm
pretty sure I don't remember
that the floor I know you
Michael young some of COVID USA
UNM's on the front page matures.
The push button and.
Mr chairman of the committee my
name is Mike pulley on the chief
government relations officer for
UNM first why no time short I'll
be brief thank you for your time
this afternoon I just want to
add to this exercise we
understand why the committee
would want to look at this
information this is a discussion
that's been going on for a long
time and the effort to look at
our PS piece it comes on you and
the biggest because we have by
far the longest and most complex
list of R. P. S. P.'s that being
said we got the memo over the
weekend any time we get a
request for information we did
try to apply those criteria as
written over the weekend as
quickly as we could to meet the
deadline and doing that about
forty forty four grams under
those criteria would roll up but
I want to make clear that that
is not an endorsement that we
agree that all of those should
roll up into I. Angie it's
following those criteria but
there are examples of programs
we still think that we the
committee and the legislature
might want to take more time
during the interim to take a
more careful look at on some of
these are legacy programs like
Catholic studies programs some
of the programs have a higher
national profile so I just want
to thank the committee and say
that we understand why this
review is being done and we did
try to in good faith take the
criteria as written and quickly
follow those criteria but if
there is at least a chance to
take a second look at that list
during the session or preferably
have this a deeper discussion
about this over the interim we
think it might better meet the
objectives everybody's after by
looking at the R. P. S. P.'s
thank you.
Thank you let me ask you some
questions my extension there
from you so if they follow the
guidelines.
And they looked at them and so
let's talk about line thirteen
graduation reality in dual roles
in the program you know anything
how many employees how many
students that serves where
that's coming that's going to
have an explanation in maybe we
have an explanation from UNM in
their comments so Mister
chairman of the committee on the
exercise we went through was we
brought together the financial
folks more different parts of
UNM over the weekend on Monday
to look at these I do not have
specific answers on every single
one of these are some of that
data I can get any of that data
for you we do have I think some
of our experts on zoom available
but I do want to tell you that I
am not familiar with every
single one of these and the
details but every single one of
these.
Which ones are you familiar with
well I know the one to kind of
floated to the top for example
I do know that among some of the
ethnic studies programs there
are certain ones that I've been
told would be alright thing
about five G. and some that
would decidedly not want to be
included part of I. Angie for
different reasons of
accountability and just legacy
support amongst the legislature
among stakeholder groups outside
the university so for example I
think and what state is an
example of a program that under
the guidelines would be rolled
up but would prefer not to be
rolled up to give a specific
example I think we have about
seventy five I know I'm looking
at a different listing yours we
have about seventy five R. P. S.
P.'s so if there's a particular
categories I could I could
explain some of those I do want
to give you examples to of some
of the ones that were sent
obviously are in the health care
arena like in mind things
programs of that nature so I'm
willing to get any detail you'd
like about any of the ones you
wish.
But the see at totaling twenty
six is disabled student services
isn't that programming already
for disables students services
and why would that be including
the R. P. S. those are some of
the detail questions.
Some of the more detail but Mr
of Mr chair members of the
committee that is a great
example of I think there is
funding for those involved I NG
with our student support
services for disabled students
but the R. P. S. P. I think is
an additional layer on.
Actually of services we could
detail what the differences are
between services echo through I.
Angie and Services that go
through the R. PSP but that's a
great example of how it's a
little more complex than all of
certain types of services being
just under the RTSP.
Okay.
but I give one more example very
quickly Mr chairman of the
committee so when the criteria
over the weekend they've talked
about existing expansions but I
do know from talking to the
committee that looked at this
they were different definitions
of what an expansion meant
meaning is our current expansion
request for example or something
that ever receive more money
there's even different channels
for providing expansion funding
to our PSBs so I'm trying to
give you a concrete example of
even with a good faith effort to
fulfill those criteria in a
short amount of time there's a
lot of new wants about which
programs would be considered
expansions and exempt and which
ones would not be considered
expansions and exempt and that's
particularly true for example in
the nursing area.
Sounds like you just confused as
we are yes and they don't
understand it either and so when
we increased tuition.
And you say we're not giving
enough money and and I NG.
And you have UNM's total of R.
P. S. P.'s I'll have that.
Toland from is two hundred and
you it is.
Almost ten ten million yes.
I mean that's almost one percent
and I NG the student services.
Mr chair committee members.
I think I would agree that
there's complexity in a lot of
history to this long list I
think it's incumbent upon me to
say I think the folks who work
on these are PSP's are not
confused about them how they all
fit together and the different
history behind different
programs why there are where
they are why they go up or go
down probably there's not one
person at UNM that understands
all of those and that's
something that I think we could
provide the committee with any
detail you wish I do agree there
it's because there's a lot of
complexity to our list.
Okay.
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr chairman to go back to
our meeting this morning and a
few questions that I would like
to ask particularly of the
secretary if you can help me a
little bit to understand where
we may be able to go with the R.
P. S. P. list as as you see this
and you had an opportunity to go
and visit with the different
institutions what what are their
feelings about this approach
that we may be taking.
Mr chair Senator Campos I think
the mutual feeling of higher ed
institutions is to support
affordability study and ensure
that we really do a deep dive in
our PSBs to see what should
actually be a line item our PFT
versus something that can be
funded through I NG I think the
general consensus is this list
needs to be short and they need
to be within reason we all need
to understand why we are
fighting our PS peeve of water
that performance measures we all
agree on that but ideally that's
what the institutions would like
to do and the higher at
department is dedicated to doing
that and in terms so so Mister
chairman and madam secretary as
we move forward with this
particular exercise I really
thing all the people that were
involved because I've I've been
in a situation where we had to
gather information in very short
period of time and it takes a
lot of work as an example
throughout the weekend to go
ahead and gather this staff
but within that in order for us
to move forward what do you see
as possibly some of the benefits
by some of the ideology that
maybe went behind this
particular week request is is
this is this a good way to
figure this out or what are some
of the initial we might say
questions that have been raised
or directions that we might
revisit in terms of addressing
the art PSP's as an example to
maybe quantify them and put them
in different categories or is
this is this just an exercise
right now that
that the state just really
should warrant in terms of
pursuing so that's it's at this
two or three professionals in
there but if if you can help me
of to better understand so we
can set the direction in terms
of what it is that we need to do
with the intent of the Senate Mr
chair the intent the Senate
finance committee is a good one
because we really need to
understand what deserves to be
in our PSP verses.
What traditionally should be and
instruction and general function
such as student services as you
heard earlier from my colleagues
some are PSP's are receiving
both to the need to receive both
or can we just roll them into I.
N. G. however I do caution this
committee that there's a lot of
things that we have to think
about such as our class I state
agencies there are also programs
that get federal dollars that
must be a line item or they're
at risk for federal matching
funds
there are also entities that are
agriculture specific that have
to be elected to the Department
of us have sciences center so
there needs to be those call
outs as far as some of your
other questions I do know we
have representatives from the
associations today they can
probably better answer that
general idea when it comes to
the higher education
institutions of the whole in
this exercise so Mister chairman
I don't know if if we're gonna
have time how you like to handle
it but if we could maybe hear
from one or two I I would
appreciate that but if not I
understand Sir come see on the
floor so let's come up that I
think is here your question that
thank you very much Mr chair so
so with that madam secretary of
there are some representatives
here that maybe would be willing
to speak on his behalf I I would
truly like to go ahead and
retain some of these questions
as well as we move forward so
with that madam chair if you if
we could with Mr Senator please
proceed in terms of what some of
your thought processes have been
as we've encountered if you will
this particular exercise here
madam chair our later on Senator
Campos members of the committee
marks rather a within Mexico
State University presents I
think that secretary did an
excellent job laying that out
I'm in the audience is president
treasures from CNN
representative New Mexico thank
my community colleges anti
Trujillo who's the next New
Mexico to director and president
Sean Palicki NMSC and present of
Mister Mexico across well I'm so
revert back to your question so
I think the secretary.
They did answer most of it but I
think first I want to commend
the committee we haven't taken a
deep dive like this since the
recession we actually did like
we did get rid of a lot nicer
there were red we will projects
up we're we are unable to fund
those numbers are less amounts
and so there has been a process
where there was a task force to
look at the criteria for our
PSP's and as a matter secretary
stated is our PSBs a research
public service projects so we
did back then as we look that we
identify those would be
considered instruction in
general so for example when you
talk about the student services
or senator Munoz chairman uses
question you do you will find
through this process or by this
HB Senate bill two zero two when
we study it our PSBs in the
interim is identified what is a
to our PSP let's find a public
service what's providing
research and there's a projects
were used instruction general
where you might want to move
those up all use the island
Center at the receiving that
supports efforts to water
resource program it provides
water resources for the state of
New Mexico it generates revenue
by providing those services
directly it's recognized
nationally that may be a project
you want to keep a low when you
look at the criteria because
they don't really provide an I.
N. G. function instruction in
general fund that's one way to
approach it present wells in the
audience to put him on the spot
he made a comment today not a
look at our PS pieces being a
start up type process for start
up programs originally when the
commission higher at when we
start our PSP's the way they
started was there's a three year
process review process what that
meant is is a nonrecurring
process for three years that
project did not show that it
should be supported by the state
then they would refund they
would fund that project anymore
but if it did show success like
for example start up project
that you can start up that way
thank you to continue to fund
that we got away from that
process so I think that's
something we might want to
reinstate I think this process
is somewhat it's hard for the
purposes of institutions like
you for to.
Apple to be able to meet with
everybody in such a short period
of time and I think I would just
wanna make sure costs and
there's a lot of concern is a
lot of constituencies there that
may not have the opportunity
given input right now that would
be better to give that input
during the intro I think that
the also commend the chair on to
bill Senate bill two zero two
and four ninety four which I've
not I've set against but it's
raise so much discussion higher
education instruction in general
are PS piece unfunded mandates
and so I think the committee
because we're on the right track
run right after the interim I do
think Senate bill two zero two
is the place to really do this
because.
You can have a little bit more
my time but we won't drag it out
some of those things like well
let's we talk to the session we
don't get to it this process is
are you and removing and that
that legislation that we support
would be the perfect deal to get
it done along with the LFC hire
its subcommittee as well so
those are my comments I
appreciate that Sir Campos Mr
chair members committee thank
you very much I hope I was able
to find some it it it helps to
clarify some of the issues that
that are going through my mind
Mr chair if I may if there's one
or two others that would like to
comment on this process again
because the inclusivity is going
to be very important in the in
the conversation is going to be
important to us if if we're not
hearing from you then I believe
the feeling is that this is a
good way to go and if it's a
good way to go without having
some of the other questions or
concerns raised will then
you know Soviet will we'll we'll
take that into consideration so
if there's one or two others if
not Mister chair I I you'll the
floor okay thank you.
Madam president.
Well.
if I may Mister chair members of
the committee in Tracy hearts
are present central New Mexico
community college of present
thank you rally has not had
another obligation this
afternoon otherwise should be
here representing the New Mexico
public the New Mexico
independent community colleges
as Mr Senator said we want to
create the committee looking at
these line items we know that
over time I remember some of
those reviews about a decade ago
looking at many of the projects
in the priorities of the
legislators legislatures put
forward as priorities to help
students and their local
communities I appreciate the
effort that this committee is
asking us to look at a great
deal of work has gone into the
work over the the of the last
weekend more will come forward I
think it we we all benefit from
a little bit more time to look
at these when you roll them into
I. Angie whatever criteria you
put together you want to know
what reporting requirements you
have for us going forward if any
you want to know when that rolls
into the Judy what happens if
the funding formula
redistributes the base that
changes the money.
and can possibly move that money
from one institution to another
so there are some longer term
impacts that you may want to
consider
that does mean you don't
consider them it means direct us
is institutions with the
agencies with many of you with
LESC you and with others that
would be absolutely glad to look
at this and make a release.
I'm more maybe a little bit more
deliberate a review of these
lines because again many lines
are very different what you see
for seeing them very
specifically with women the try
to help grow some of our
programs no question is very
important probably goes into an
I. N. G. line that's our
difference in the bureau of
geology I don't speak for a
president wells are others but
that's very different than a
state agency so we know the
urinal finds criteria that there
many reasons to combine line
items but as this bill goes
forward and as the house
considers it as junior bill
comes through and you look at
all of those lines I think a
little bit more time in the in
the in terms can really bring
forward I thought full
comprehensive way of for all of
us to look at those lines so
again I don't mean to.
Say we never get to this but I
think we provided is a really
strong
Process and some guides for us
to move forward and very clear
ways so Senator some of your
questions and give you a little
bit more thank you very much Mr
thank you very much madam
president is there one more just
and and what I'm trying to do is
to go and get a a feel for how
how the responses have been
developed as a result of not
only the bill if you will the
projects but also the concept so
that's that's basically what I'm
trying to gauge thank you very
much Mr president Mr chair
Senator Chantal presentation at
school university Roswell on the
president of the New Mexico
associative community colleges
the branch campuses right now
when we got the word of a
ceremony just last Friday that
we needed to put this work
together all the campuses
started in we've got the
guidelines what I can talk about
specifically to Roswell if that
will help maybe illustrate a few
things we have some special
programs on our campus one is
for special services it's for
young adults who have
developmental disabilities and
they're coming out of the school
districts to residential program
on our campus and we have
funding through our PSP for a
couple of the faculty and staff
that work program so it's a
special program we also get
funding for the youth challenge
program and the youth challenge
program as you know is there in
Roswell so we have some special
populations that we serve and I
think some of the.
Purposes of our PSP is to
address as the former president
has would and so you just said
that it has to go to the campus
specific areas what's going on
on that campus we also have an
aviation maintenance program and
so we use this money that we get
through our PSP for salaries and
much like nursing expansion it's
the same type of approach where
we know that we have to pay more
than regular faculty member for
those aviation maintenance
technologist to come in and work
and teach versus being out and
one of the aviation maintenance
organizations us up here center
so everybody answering questions
of him some that that's fine so
Mister chair I just to I want to
applaud your efforts to to bring
this forward I know that in the
past as we're dealing with our
PSP's the intent was over a
period of three years to
establish if you will not only
the guidelines but also have the
outcomes measured and in doing
that if a program in our PSP was
was doing what it was intended
to do then after three years we
consider that to go ahead and go
on for for future years we got
away from that has already been
mentioned but the other part of
this then is how do we establish
or reestablish if you will the
full accountability for these
processes so again Mr chair
that's all I have but again I
thank you very much for bringing
this forward thank you thank you
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the presentation and a lot
of what I was going to ask about
for some of the comments that
senator Campos made and so
Mister chairman and madam
secretary really liked what you
said I just wanna make sure I
understood what with the
understood it correctly so are
you looking to reconfigure kind
of weird dollars let me shrink
it's I think it's the were used
I think that's not a I don't
think that's a bad idea it seems
like when we do the junior money
exercise that we've done the
last couple years
I think our minimum buy into the
game with seventy five thousand
or something I mean is that even
gets out of the parking lot to
get somebody to manage the
project coordinated to all the
different things you need I mean
pay them their employee benefits
and their retirements in their
vacations and this is so if if
we're sending you seventy five
thousand stating UNM for
something it just seems like
that doesn't even get to the
programming this is that kind of
with where you're going with
this I mean do we need to
reconfigure and and rethink.
A minimum base dollar amount
that we would even send to a
school as an example because
isn't isn't just higher
education we send monies to
different programs all over the
state for different things and
I'm just wondering if we're kind
of spinning our wheels with some
of the smaller allocations Mr
chair Senator thank you for the
question potentially would be my
answer because sometimes we
already have programs that have
funding that can use that
funding for FTE such as some of
our federal programs and so
sometimes you'll see something
with a really slow allocation I
think the substance abuse center
Indian and native American
suicide prevention it's a very
small location however that
supplement some of their
outreach and media campaigns
that they do in tribal
communities so therefore there
are some that have a needs that
are very small that I think we
should consider and it's not
necessarily tied to a high
ticket program FTEs at times I
do want to touch on something
that you said really fast
Senator if I could in FY twenty
two we had a hundred and sixty
RRPS fees in FY twenty three it
grew to one hundred seventy five
in FY twenty three plus the
junior bill our PSBs have grown
to two hundred sixteen R. P. S.
P. line items as we sit today
with FY twenty four we're at two
hundred twenty two are PSP's so
there is cleanup necessary we
may want to re look at those
smaller allocations but taking
into fact what they're actually
paying for well that's kind of
where I was going yeah I think
so what you gave us those
numbers madam secretary and I'm
thrilled that you have on right
at your fingertips understand
that way.
I am very concerned that you
know we're we're allocating a
lot of dollars that just you
know I'm not even sure that
they're meeting.
The third meeting expectation
with the individual legislators
trying to accomplish so it just
seems like there's just there's
an awful lot of frustration on
our side I'm sure there is
frustration on on the school
side because all the sudden the
legislature had some wonderful
idea was the most important
thing to me I know I've had
along the way and and then
suddenly the university has to
the school Haskell make that
happen to make that that occur
are you when you say that you're
maybe looking to and I want to
put words in your mouth
obviously but I know you would
never let that you know but are
you would be looking to do act
like any sort of a framework on
what this might look like.
Mr chair I actually think the
Senate finance committee in
coordination and collaboration
with the higher education
department and the legislative
finance committee has developed
a pretty strong structure as we
speak we definitely need to make
a couple adjustments to that to
really incorporate our pilot
programs across the state
agencies and other things but I
think we have some good phones
that we can expand on during the
interim and so Matt Mr chair and
answered so are you looking at
schools also to reconfigure how
they're set up and so I mean
it's for the university
presidents that are in the room
are you comfortable with that I
mean you can fund raiser
internet but are you comfortable
with sort of reconfiguring.
Ninety programs into maybe ten
swim lanes to get some real
dollars put in places you can
really get things done.
Of anybody wants to comment on
that
Nobody likes cuts.
I don't either but I I I feel
your pain is what I'm you know
thank you Mr chairman and Sir
for the so that's what we ended
up having to do during the
recession we had to make those
decisions as I said there is a
process that no that we can work
on and and help do that I'm just
not sure right now in terms of
such a short period of time and
money that was almost anything
you want to do such and such a
quick turnaround but I'll give
an example just here talking to.
Agency Lopez because she was a
you know when I was at UNM as I
need to go to examples that and
aposs let's created by the
legislature the southwest Indian
law clinic.
I never been created for wasn't
the presenters soci at the time
and that project is doing
incredible things and probably
should continue to say in our
PSP many other programs that are
study programs that were created
legislation that that started
because it was ten as a start up
project and then should have
been moved up on the line.
They're not actually cutting but
you're just making a decision
that you need to move it up
often and then just be absorbed
into the instruction process I
think that process is a healthy
process to recognize those
programs there's programs like
health center that I think that
was created it's in statute that
the legislature put in statute
yeah programs like that that
were there that created some of
their for their identity there's
a history component there
because of things that happen
over time with the university
thank and so those sometimes
like want to be there to still
have to be really want to be
recognized then there are
programs I'll I joke about this
but when I was at UNM I had a
guy shut the office the one it
is check for a mural I'm not
gonna say we're the murals was
to be at and we had to say that
doesn't work that way okay we
come along with programs we
don't see that anymore and I
think there's a way to look at
okay can we like the senators
trying to push in the staff is
an excellent job is sort those
in line G. we don't see this
cutting we see is moving up and
then if planning into the I.
Angie it goes towards the
overall energy at that time so
that's how I would look at
Senator is not necessarily
having to cut but move those
part of the TI NG and and and we
go into the overall pool for the
instruction job that that yeah
and so Mister chairman madam
secretary them and thank you
mark for that you know we're big
boys and girls and we need to
get that guidance to and but it
just seems like you know this is
my eleventh year here in on this
on this this team that we're on
and it just I feel like we have
this conversation almost every
year about kind of what we so
let's get something done here I
mean that way we we have better
guidance for the schools and
we're using our dollars in a
much more efficient manner so
thank you thank you you know I I
if you as we talked the whole
time and and we do budgets we
all here all we need more nine
G. we have in the qualities we
have equities over here we have
no balance and and I'm gonna use
western because he says I have
any quality from.
From the lunar and forget the
school other school in North and
so we hear this all the time and
they get more than me they get I
don't I don't have the quality
at I got different and so you
look at this and you talk to
hire and they said we want more
I NG okay well if we took a
hundred million cuts in just
this scenario right here and
added that to I NG right they
would get seventy million so
that's a ten percent increase or
more in I. N. G..
More like fifteen percent
increase in I. N. G. will does
that stave off of tuition
increases and fee increases
right if we increase I NG a
certain ratio just by shifting
things around then we have
fought off tuition increases and
so when we do opportunity that
we're not saying oh we got doing
tuition increase over here
because we don't have enough and
I need over here we got we got a
charger students more that's the
reason I really want this
exercise to see what really
matters to the universities what
does it matter to the
universities right and and how
these dollars come together and
and I think we kind of
accomplish that I think you're
correct during the intermittent
during LFC into the study and
maybe with the
The minute but I knew what the
state auditor that we pick about
ten or twenty or thirty these in
schools and state okay.
Going there in audited is that
people really doing this where's
the money going how's it
functioning in the school is in
another program the rolled up in
a program right you look at UNM
and and I think can.
It marks it about southwest
Indian Laughlin a great
we know that programs important
to get people into the law
school so how how should that be
rolled up and I need so it's not
just sitting there right so that
thank that gets used correctly
disabilities what what is the
difference in the disability in
student services and what's the
difference is it being used for
is is being used for
transcription in the classroom
is it being used for sign
language a lot in the classroom
those are some of the things
that I look at when we look at
disabilities and so is that a
special stern need that we need
to leave in our PSP's so that
they have accountability in
there but if you look at it and
they come back with about twenty
million dollars in cuts of
twenty million dollars is three
percent I. Angie and so does
that stave off student increases
in tuition
This is been a really good
exercise for me the because I
think it's taught the
universities yeah we need more
money more inequity we're in a
quality we need more over here
anymore we are but are you
really doing you a favor by
giving you an additional.
Two hundred thousand dollars to
you
economics department you do are
we really doing that writer or
should we just put that and I.
N. G. and let you guys do your
job at the end of the day and
say here's the economic
development it's an eye and you
go ahead and do what you need to
do I mean that's the real issue
is yours legislators.
Think they have good ideas and
they're probably there are great
ideas in here right
you know a launch and and some
of the native American studies
because they're not available in
other situations.
Senator Padilla.
Mr chair the only thing I would
add and wherever possible it
seems like it would be a great
idea to have I know every school
is different as a different you
know sometimes a different
mission wherever possible have
sort of a uniform kind across
the the C. so we know we're
dropping money into a bucket we
know kind of know what we're
gonna maybe get out of that
money so that be helpful.
The history at the strand in
know about that they they put in
there and and three years of
programming works and it went in
to record that's what we should
be doing but that's not what we
do we're doing today and so I
think we need to review those
add that to that state for the
program's working and it's there
for three years in reoccurring
in in R. P. S. P.'s then let's
rolled into I. Angie at that
increased I engine trust that
the universities will continue
that as we move forward but
that's really an exercise and I
think
It really alike in this
committee and hopefully in the
light higher ed and the
secretary is going to help us
get through these as we move
forward but
I think we need to state auditor
look at Google these and say
notes thank you sampling however
you want to sample on state
right of the people show up to
work are they doing what they're
supposed to do or some money
just sitting there and count in
the university at the end of the
day moves it over here to.
A parking lot for light fixtures
or something and is that the
intention and purpose of the
with our PSP so I don't have any
more questions will we'll have a
few more discussions about it
among ourselves maybe is a
budget comes across in and see
how that works there was one for
fourteen thousand dollars I
don't even know what you can do
for forty thousand dollars or
more print paper and put a sign
up on the wall in state you know
here we are years.
It and nobody's there to answer
the phones.
I'm sorry mark.
Our family has that really the
correct way to fund Judy and and
that's what I really want to get
to you.
Two hundred twenty million
dollars if we put all that in I.
N. G. I don't think any of the
universities could increase
tuition in five or ten years
with that amount of money and I
need and we resolve an issue
across the board when we do free
tuition or free scholarships
that that students can actually
go to school and not have to
worry about anything but going
to school.
So thank you guys.
reducing our Lopez she's going
to be like two minutes Senator
you.
The other is mostly.
I don't think so.
Senator going to start could you
can be.
Thank you Mr Mr chair this is a
of an important bill to a lot of
people this would just
designated April tenth of every
year to be at no has the lotus
with that day it is not a state
holiday
it is is just an opportunity for
people to remember or I should
say remember to honor her
because she's still alive and to
to express the the vision that
she shared she was born in
Dawson New Mexico and that
amendment was added by Senator
Ivy Soto in it didn't cultural
fairs.
That I'm available for any
questions a motion on this bill.
And motion for two passed by
Senator Campos second by Senator
Rodriguez
let's call the roll or quick
because I.
Both yes.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill is excused.
Senator Padilla.
Excuse Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Munoz yes.
Five to three.
Thank you etcetera etcetera
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Center we do have an amendment
for this yes yes Mr chairman.
It it strikes the appropriation
of.
One I could if I could interject
something in conversations with
Mr Abbey and is it in your own
staff the the couple of other
things we would like to amend in
the bill are you want yeah we
just did it right before this we
we just had a conversation so
the virtual foot striking the
appropriation or are they can be
verbal equipment.
Yes because we're gonna strike a
couple of sections thank and as
long as you know them very well
we'll try to track them but.
It's a great center you want
explain the billing I guess but
there's yes bill as originally
developed with the original
appropriations to counties
should rely on their opioid
settlement money to do that.
The problem is the counties.
Each county makes its own
decision and so what we what we
need to do in the bill it said
they would by a certain deadline
CPIO have things done so we need
to strike those sections of the
bill that require them to do
that I think they're going to
keep doing it but we can't very
will require them to do it if
we're not giving them any money
to do this and so.
Is there anybody in the audience
and support anybody in
opposition anybody on.
Share you have.
We do have a few people in
doing.
let's take to one.
Hello my name is start driving
Barrett I in the physician who
is calling in today from
Albuquerque and who practices
addiction medicine and much of
my care as I in the last
eighteen years in New Mexico has
been in the care of people with
substance use disorders and I
would like to speak very much in
favor of of urgency at this
being adopted and implemented
very briefly to ensure that we
have the same level of
understanding that when we find
medications for addiction
treatment that are approved by
the FDA to people who are in
jails and prisons are in that
setting that what we do see is a
discover risk of death decreased
risk of death from overdose
decrease costs that are due to
the infections that result from
induction injection drug use a
decrease decrease costs that are
due to an extra health care that
is needed because of infections
like hepatitis C. and HIV and
also critically for all of us
and for something we're talking
about a lot we see decreased
rates of crime and recidivism
what ends up happening is that
when we can treat people for
their substance use disorders
that will the end up having less
drug seeking activity so there's
less of an illicit drug trade
within that setting and so with
that in mind that's one of the
reasons why the majority of
medical stations across the
country support this including
the New Mexico chapters
including physicians who have
been representing the American
The New Mexico chapter the
American society of addiction
medicine physicians were in the
New Mexico tapping American
college of physicians the
society of hospital medicine and
also that one of the signatories
from the American medical
association had on that task
force recommendations convened
on this topic at the New Mexico
Medical Society was one of the
groups that had signed it over
arching ascertain addressing the
opioid crisis at task force I do
hope that we are able to adopt
this to save lives decrease
crime decrease costs and then
also lastly as the daughter of a
police.
Officer that one of the things
that this ends up doing is that
we're when we treat people.
Where their withdrawal by the
medication the real problems and
so it becomes easier to be the
person who works in the
correctional setting thank you
for your consideration and I
hope that were able to adopt
this thank you also to center to
subpoena for your leadership in
this area.
Representative Emily all back
from drug policy action Emily
are you there.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you drug policy
alliance stands in strong
support of this bill I'm I'm not
gonna take any more time I just
want to highlight that the LESC
had published a report in two
thousand nineteen that indicated
that the US savings for engaging
in an eighteen correctional
settings could be in upwards of
twenty seven million dollars a
year so I think this will also
be a great savings to our to the
state so thank you very much and
thanks for the sponsor for
bringing this important
legislation for.
Senator Ortiz and and amending
your substitute bills hasn't it
thank you senator and and of on
page two.
We would delete section see the
entire section extends over on
to page three throughline I.
And then it turns out in our
conversation with Mr Abbey that
when we deleted the two million
dollar request because we were
told there was two and a half
million in the state budget for
Matt that's going to go to the
health department and so we need
if the corrections department's
going to do anything at all they
need some money and and so I
would like to re insert but we
just deleted the section be.
Reinserted as a in section four.
Leave a so it and this is all
we've done is stricken the first
paragraph of the appropriations
let the second one remembered it
is a and change the dollar
figure to one million
and Mr Abbey indicated in and
your your associate
Staffers
Adrian indicated that we might
be able to do that with other
state funds Mr Chairman just to
clarify the conversations with
Mr of the look the pandemic
consider it as an other state
funded item and house bill two
not necessarily in this bill
okay well then no we don't need
to leave that back in the.
Thank you Mr chairman so we
don't need the second section be
on page three we extract that so
if if the corrections department
Mr chairman can access the other
states of million dollars into
the state funds through house
bill two the least get them
started the issue is really the
the counties there's no point in
the counties doing that if the
people are seeing for a few
weeks are going into prison for
it's not available so the point
is to started at the prisons and
then when the presence of
programs up and operating then
at the county so it it works.
Over this again on page two line
nineteen through page three on
the line I I we are striking
that section that's the motion
amendment hello Mr chairman a
motion by Senator second by
Senator Campos any objection to
that amendment.
I will get with you and make
sure.
It's a it's pretty simple it's
districts to line eighteen
following through to page three
line I were completely striking
that section three that correct
exactly.
Six.
No we're we're not taking all
the section for only striking
from line eighteen.
On page we are no the the
original of of the.
What are the regional approach
to this do the whole thing or
just.
Constructible section didn't.
Yes Mr chairman sure it the
protection for his entire to
yeah we are taking the whole
thing up.
The first.
No the amendment you you already
passed.
Sgt already struck section for.
I think what council this month.
Address the dream but I think we
can conserve there's a little
more to section to that section.
Well.
The second page is that was the
amendment that was proposed you
want to maybe just step away and
and get with a ring or something
so we have the correct he did
correctly and then we'll bring
it back to you etcetera etcetera
Hollywood's right behind you.
So we'll here is bill and and
then that I will be right we'll
bring you back to the company
that makes Steinborn.
We all the.
Hey Jamie I do have some
questions on the bill but we we
can do it when they come and
come back to the bill we're
gonna make sure that we're doing
this correctly and then they're
going to come right back to
where I need you.
We have the service to the
markup for so we can follow.
Yes.
As if.
Senator Pirtle.
So Senator we have an amendment
strikes appropriations
Second.
A motion and a second injection.
The amended bill center for.
Thank you Mr thank you members
of the committee for doing that
they were gonna do that in
education and I suggest to the
proper place to do that was here
so doing it on the fly there so
I do appreciate that Senate bill
four fifty simply adds a new
section of the public school
code requiring that all coaches
employed by school district and
CPR training and ADD training
we're seeing a lot especially in
our lives of cardiac instances
and the if you have CPR
administered quickly I think it
increases your chances of
survival by so somewhere around
six times so I think it's it's
of very important thing
currently in our level three
coaches have this training where
the majority of our coaches are
wanted to most schools do have
athletic trainers but what they
will tell you that they can't be
everywhere all the time there's
always a coach nearby and so
they get the CPR administered
quickly we can save lives it's a
fairly inexpensive training I
believe it somewhere around
forty dollars to do this for
coach and if it saves a life I
think it's forty dollars well
spent if needed we do have Mike
McMillan on soon that can and
answer any of the technical.
Anybody in the audience support.
Anybody in opposition millions
and.
Second chairman have a motion to
be passed by Senator share
second by Senator Campos.
The bill.
Mr checking to make sure.
Yes
Any objection to do pass motion.
Center.
Structure thank you members of
the committee.
Maybe they give haircuts CPR.
I don't know where Senator
Shendo is but.
Registration I don't want.
News motorcycle Bill.
Thanks to EMNRD we're
secretaries here.
Others.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino comes back
in we're gonna do him right
after you.
Remember to tell us what House
Appropriations dated on the
back.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Scott
Sanchez of the LFC analysts for
natural resources today were you
looking at agency code of five
twenty one the Energy mineral
Act resource department
if we are comparing the HSC
action to the LFC recommendation
we had a total of one point six
million dollars to the general
fund appropriations mainly in
the state parks and in the
energy conservation management
division and the oil and gas
conservation division
digit in adding cheeses well as
of the funding for positions and
those programs so with that I'm
happy to answer questions about
the secretary.
Right now.
Secretary Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to here again in
front of you a house bill two as
it passed the house as you just
heard did add some additional
funding in F. T. E.'s for many
of our priorities that includes
two new State hot shot crews for
wildland firefighting staffing
to improve solar and sustainable
building tax credit profit
fitting and energy conservation
and management division and
funding to reduce vacancy rates
in state parks and we support
everything that the house added
we have a few technical
suggestions that we've worked
with Scott on for that will
share with Adrian on the
language there the key remaining
needs for EMNRD compared to the
executive recommendation our our
modest I am in the oil
conservation division that would
be three FTEs for a total of
three hundred sixty thousand
dollars recurring that would
bring us up to ten new FTEs for
FY twenty four across the
division
and then one F. T. E. in the
mining and minerals division of
four hundred twenty thousand
dollars recurring that would be
to to work on water data act
implementation at which as I
understand a priority for for
the legislature and it's
consistent with the fifty year
water plant and recommendations
I would know that there's a
special appropriation to
actually to the department of
finance and administration for
the Western Interstate hydrogen
hub that would benefit our
agency as well as and we support
adding that back into
with that Mr chair Senator
question.
Russian from committee members.
Thank you Mr and madam secretary
you you're asking for more FTEs
and I would come and look what
kind of vacancies do you have
right now.
Mr chair Senator Woods
particularly in the oil
conservation division we have
about a ten percent unfunded
vacancy rate and we're really
bumping right up against that
we've had good we we make good
progress in the OCD's so I'm
confident that if we're
authorized to have these
positions we could fill them
at hopefully that that that
that's the main area where us to
add.
I'm I'm joined by Matthew lots
are it is the director case
there are more questions there.
So you're confident Mr chairman
and madam secretary you're
confident that you can fill
those FTEs yes Mr chair Senator.
And of the other is
Your hot shot crews.
Have you got those.
In place here are those are
expected to be commonplace Mr
chair Senator this would be new
so each hotshot crew is actually
twenty two FTE ease their unit
they have all you know but
they're all or nothing for the
twenty two and part of what the
house did originally LFC has
supported one hot shot crew and
we've reallocated between
federal and state dollars in
order to do the two hot shot
crews of the executive had
recommended but you do do it
with a different mix of fun and
hopefully have our cake and eat
it too so if there authorize
this will be for FY twenty four
to stand up we do not have any
right now.
Okay.
Okay.
No other questions.
Thank you madam secretary in
your and if energy efficiency
and conservation block grant
program I know we put money
there last year how much of that
money has moved in and how many
people live for that.
Mr chair we have been working on
setting up the rules for that
fund setting up the fund and
then doing the rule making for
the fund I don't believe that
the money has gone out yet
perfect for.
The we have we have a fund set
up we have
everything ready.
Approved a have plans in place.
Mr chair that should be done
within the next month so we can
proceed are a few at that time.
And that was done last year so
you're saying that the current
fiscal year yes Sir.
Current fiscal year right ten
million was appropriated last
year setting up the the the
funding the operation of the
fund yes and you can use a ten
million for fifteen percent that
script it may be able to be used
for rats.
I
don't see any other questions.
Other questions sure you want to
send that to DFA.
Mr chair Stacey.
If they see over there the.
But let me tell you.
Just checking Mr chair thank you
for the committee's time to
create the opportunity to break
your sure the DFA secretary of
the reviewing our cameras seja.
Thank you Mr.
You want to jump up there real
quick.
Four we kill your bill.
Thank you Mr.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and the.
Members of the committee the the
Senate bill three ninety six
basically what that's doing
is increasing the registration
fee for two and three will the
motorcycle from fifteen dollars
to twenty dollars and part of
the selection of the money will
go into the motorcycle training
funded deal team.
So with me here is Franklin
Garcia keep cone Frank but the
action rose name Franklin and
the with the motor vehicle
division if there's any specific
questions.
we have an amendment.
Appropriation is certain we have
a new membership please thank
you Mr chairman a motion on the
amendment
for discussion purposes second
by Senator Woods
any questions up on the
amendment districts
appropriation.
we had any objection to
the amendment.
The scene amended bill Senator
Shendo let's go to the audience
explained the bill anybody in
support.
Anybody in objection.
The the.
Nobody on.
Questions from committee members
students you have a question.
Still the general questions.
Any questions.
Mister Mister chairman how much
is allocated HB two for.
As if any.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
Senator Diamond of turnover
Franklin this is a so.
Mr chairman members the
committee is considered Diamond
Franklin Garcia with New Mexico
D. O. T. Motal division we have
oversight of the motorcycle
training program under our
traffic safety division this is
actually a user fee so it's when
you register your motorcycle
there's a fee that is added on
that's included in that that
goes towards our morals a
motorcycle training program so
it's actually a user fee in the
previous committee we did have
our advocates are industry
veterans support of it as long
as the trading money goes
towards the motorcycle training
program there in favor of that
so there's no carve outs going
anywhere else I see that okay so
looking closer were increasing
it by five dollars it looks like
so you would get the five
dollars in the original two
dollars are getting seven seven
to go towards the program.
You madam chair Mr chairman
members the committee and the
indictment yes we we would
receive the the full amount of
the increase so we're increasing
that and it would generate about
three hundred thousand dollars
per years while regenerating.
What the new amount would
generate.
Thank you Mr chairman looks like
you're averaging one hundred
ninety five so we wanted to
cover with expansion thank you
Mr.
Any other questions Senator
Campos thank you very much Mr
chairman of course center thank
you very much for bringing this
bill forward a couple of things
in terms of the resources going
directly into it's purpose will
there be additional resources
that you're gonna be generating
to expand the programmers is
just to go to keep up with the
current cost through a growing
costs of providing the training
thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman and committee of
center Campos yes the this is
this funding will help us
enhance worker training program
and will cover any expenses
expenses that we're currently
seeing for currently subsidizing
it with some state road fund to
help with some security to help
with the the offset of the
increase in the amount that
we're paying and so it's going
directly into that and we will
maximize that will utilize any
other additional funding whether
from federal funding or other
state funding that we might see
that we would put point out more
cycle training program to
enhance.
I really appreciate that thank
you Mr chairman that's it.
Question hello the new products
second Mr Chairman most of the
past by Senator Padilla second
by so called.
Junction passed motion.
Sen.
Sure junction to the fast
motion.
And then.
Thank you thank you I don't.
Yep.
Student enrollment department
secretary.
In a block you from Twitter for
the next forty two days.
This.
In the budget.
Very very good afternoon Mister
chair members of the committee
my name is Scott Sanchez and the
L. stands for that for resources
within days environment
secretary James Kenny and my
counterpart from DFA Mr branch
tennis
HFC at a two hundred fifty
thousand dollars to the LFC
recommendations this was added
for vacancy rate reduction of
the environmental protection
division
overall the.
The HSD recommendations so comes
at about the executive
recommendation and beyond that
does stand for questions.
The.
Over the that correct
I think the early childhood
secretary got a hundred percent
increases under fifty million
dollars I would run out of the
room.
Goodness.
Mr Chairman if you're saying I'm
getting a hundred fifty million
dollars
but we almost that in that
house.
Mr chair I don't have any
prepared remarks other than to
say
you know.
I am a I definitely am
appreciative of this body is
starkly as well as this you're
putting more money into the
environment department of the Mr
chair members of the committee
it's really crucial and I know
our budget is complicated and
you see us for a very short
period of time as compared to
the the budget that we then live
with for the rest of the year
and I can't stress enough that
the increase that we're getting
from the house is in
programmatic areas that will
undercut our federal spending
and our permit revenue spending
and to that point Mr chair
members of the committee
I'm asking that we put that
general fund increase into the
areas the executive and I have
recommended such that we can
continue to spend federal
dollars and special revenue
funds meeting our permit fee
funds in a way that maximizes
and optimizes the use of the
dollars coming through my
department to communities.
And.
Mr secretary that's what we're
trying to do with some shuffling
of language and dollars and will
probably gonna see that and
languages it comes for to this
committee as as you shuffle that
around as you need it
and we're in that conversation
so soon as we know exactly how
you want to do and I think we'll
be good to go anything else Mr
secretary Mr chair members of
the committee I appreciate that
very much so and I think last
year we in Senate finance you
give us a really big help by
giving us Pico transfer
authority it was huge and that
saved us in many different ways
it I will also just make one
more plug given that we are a
major term employee agency I'm
very appreciative as are my
staff of the seven percent raise
last year the five percent raise
that I understand is in house
bill two however if the two
point five two point six million
dollars we're going to need to
make our employees whole we're
only going to be allocated five
hundred seventy seven thousand
of that money because we have so
few Perm positions and so many
term positions so Mr chair
members of the committee we're
if we're looking at serious
regression of the money coming
into our department.
That let me rephrase we're
looking at
about a five million dollar
deficit that we've had to make
up by on funding.
Positions travel inspections
contracts at such a just to make
our employees whole
and Mister chair members may I
just ask that you revisit the
house appropriation dollar
amount the appropriation it's
coming through section eight of
the budget for employees and
make appropriate more money to
make that agencies like mine
holes that we can continue do
the good work as opposed to
inflict those cuts on ourselves.
you Mr secretary for I think a
year and a half we've been
pushing the issue of pay Maez
what it takes to hire this exact
issue you're talking about we
met with executive I think
September October with spal in
the room and said come up with a
plan and tell us how to fix
these paceman's levels in the
executive came back to us and
said we'll just take the
percentage increase and so it's
hard to fix those for one agency
and other agencies in the same
place I know you have
flexibility on on FTEs to make
those adjustments in vacancy
savings that are funded FTEs us
have you done that before Mr
chair we don't have that
flexibility because the if I was
a hundred percent general fund
had one one federal grand I
could do something like you're
saying but I can't I can't make
my air folks whole.
and my hazardous weeks waste
folks whole
because I can't transfer.
My twenty four special revenue
funds and eighty eight federal
grant funds crossed purpose.
To a different FTP so if I may
vacancy savings Mr chair in my
drinking water program I can't
apply those to where I need them
in my air water waste radiation
food cannabis have other
programs were two species it it
Mr chair it's my goal to come
back in the thirty day session
with a bill that that someone
helps alleviate this problem in
my department but for this this
year without addressing the
raise issue we will continue to
cut services and I'm already
looking at a number of offices
around the state that I might
have to close as well.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
Senator Steinborn thank you.
At that and the secretary
welcome.
Question I know a few years ago
you were struggling with the
satellites funding and and it
was really harming initiatives
and we were able to give you
some flexibility to move the
funding around do you still have
that authority or is that
something would be helpful if we
we gave you language on that.
Mr chair Senators I'm more thank
you for the question the Pico
transfer authority has been
really helpful and that applies
to general fund of the issue
about moving drinking water the
seeming I'm trying to hazardous
wastes money that I have
available to a drinking water
program is not covered by Pico
to thirty.
So we're talking about Mr chair
deficiencies and programs that
you need increases and do the
job because you're having to pay
people more.
That hurt effect I salute you Mr
chairman and senator that is
exactly right that.
Mr chair I tell you what I know
of no department whose mission
has expanded so much in the last
two years through COVID food
security cannabis all these
things go through the department
of the environment and that's
and that doesn't even account
for all the contamination issues
that have come up through all
parts of our state from P. fast
in Clovis to chromium in Los
Alamos to the gold king mine
spill and the northwestern New
Mexico.
Not to mention other issues and
you keep rising to the occasion
the best you can which I so
appreciate about you and your
staff but it's just we got a
fund you for the work and it's
just one of those things when we
you know there's there's
luxuries and then there's
necessities and the way I feel
about is if we want clean air
clean land clean water and we
need to we need to fund it this
is.
That simple and you know clearly
there's plenty of bad actors out
there who go out Leigh
contaminate New Mexico their
land water without that vigilant
so.
you know we have taken more of
your money through pay increases
which is great as it was the
right thing to do for workers
but we need to continue to allow
you to do a bigger mission self.
I hope that we we step up to the
plate and provide you with what
you need to do your job well
because it's so important for
all of us our communities so
thank you for that and do you
have Mr chair secretary I have
this handout from LFC.
Do we have a kind of a one pager
for you with some of those
things the pandemic out already
Mr Mr chair and centers I'm or I
apologize we did not prepare
anything I've been.
Quit running around so I didn't
have a chance to repair anything
but Mr chair and Senator
Steinborn and I I would also I
just add one more thing to the
list of things you mention which
I appreciate you spew
highlighting that list and that
is our the the capital outlay
that we administer on water
infrastructure projects for for
this body on top of our loans
and grants that we administer
for under the clean water state
revolving fund which is
fantastic we have a tsunami of
money coming to our state Mr
chair and and senator but I am I
am.
Honestly concerned about getting
that money into the communities
and I expect Mr chair and and
Senator to the extent that we
don't invest in my department's
operations today that for the
next five years we're going to
not get money to communities in
a way that we're that and
reverting it losing it and and
falling further behind on the
critical infrastructure that you
all know from your communities
we need to put out there
first let's talk about that for
one second because I remember
this you talked about last time
you were here I think it was a
talented hearing but it was like
that like two million or four
million in increasing your
business operations and mobile
applications and things like
that that you needed that didn't
get funded yet Mr Mr chair and
just to be a little bit more
transparent Senator we put a
contract in place with the
consulting firm to do four
million dollars worth of work
for our department over the next
few years including things like
optimize the way in which we get
money and to keep into
communities and how we optimize
ways in which we get money into
communities means that we have
to switch from a people paper
meeting process to an automated
Act based portal based
Representative electronic
transfer of funding to
communities Mr chair members of
the committee I can I can my hot
water heater tell me if it's
leaking my doorbell Tommy of
somebody's there and yet when
we're dealing with millions of
dollars to get into communities
you you have to come to an
office you have to submit an
application you have to in the
talk to a whole bunch of people
that's helpful in many instances
but it's also not necessary in
many instances these are
sometimes just buying a piece of
equipment that takes a long time
Mr chair and senator that we can
really eliminate the amount of
time things are.
Turning in our department but I
can't get there without an
investment.
And so Mister chair secretary my
hearing you said do you think
that this technology will reduce
hours and hours the payroll
costs basically and automating
the state for putting more money
or whatever Mr chair Senator
Steinborn out a hundred percent
yes.
Well Mr chair of this the I hope
I hope we can really look at
that center I'll just give an
example my twin brother you guys
and others maybe Dawn I have a
twin brother was busy this how
did the world out of he has a
really successful technology
company and it's an online
company and pretty pretty good
size company and his whole
company is made up of nothing
but technological innovations I
mean aside from the idea but I
mean it's automating things that
then remove.
The necessity of someone having
to move paperwork around and so
the the difference and.
Well I mean it's it's everything
and so I appreciate what you're
saying secretary and with the
amount of paperwork you have to
move around how important is
that people are able to
communicate with government I
think it just makes the dollars
and cents to fund this
technology well we have the
money to do so to make that
investment in the project so I'm
thank you for explaining that
more.
That's all I have Mister.
Agencies some.
That on the first page we'll see
that we gave them four hundred
fifty five thousand flexibility
we added other flexibility money
right there in the keep going
down each is a specific division
by division right the language
that we added.
Us Mr secretary why don't we use
other state funds to make those
adjustments.
Within your agency.
Mr chair I'm not first I don't
have the the paper you're
referring to but secondly I'm
not.
Senator yes
the.
Mr chair of the needs that just
a second but but your your your
question when you say other
state funds Mr chair what I'm
are you saying my other state
funds there in my department in
my budget already.
Senator.
One is to that other states.
Out of the.
The.
A little bit of the defeats.
Yes so the role of for other
state funds you'll see on
Thanks for your packet.
Which is a this is the defeats
for the business unit as a
whole.
So soon.
Mr chair
let me see if I'm interpreting
your question correctly.
It I have
like if you look at my air
quality permitting fund there's
a half million dollars in there
today we spend that on an annual
basis on payroll if you look
look at my hazardous waste fund
there's about seven to eight
million dollars in there and
we're using that for things like
P. five solution.
Those two funds in particular Mr
chair I can't develop a clean
water SRF fund Act out of our
pay a contractor to do it
because under the legislative
intent of those funds they are
for the purpose in which they
are received permits inspections
at such a is in my getting to
your point Mr chair
I think so but Mr sent some
other state funds rate of other
on page four.
That is a category where you can
move money around.
In any place correct not
necessarily most of the special
revenue funds and other state
funds and NMED users are very
restricted in what and what they
can be used for.
Question you mentioned the
contract but that contracts
already been laid out for the.
Mr line the Parma yes Mr chair
that contract was issued with a
four million dollar ceiling we
have two hundred and sixteen
thousand dollars appropriated
into that contract right now so
I am short the balance to
continue with that work.
They would sign of that work yet
two hundred sixteen thousand
dollars in funds to do that
Senator four million dollar
contract.
How could you buy in the state.
Of the money being in place
if we didn't do the money out of
the I don't think cabinet
secretaries of the governor
anybody can find a legislature
on a four million dollar
contract with only two hundred
sixteen thousand dollars in the
bank
knowing that may or may not
come.
how did you do that Mr chair.
No other state funds I I
appreciate now I appreciate the
question
It's it's when we get we have a
ceiling and it's conditioned
upon appropriation and technical
direction so we can't we can't
assign work and issue a
technical direction or procures
services in the amount.
In in any amount above the funds
that we have so is there and
available for us but we can't
exercise authority under it
because we don't have the
funding for were not found to
spend four million dollars we
have the ability to spend four
million dollars.
But
we signed the contract in have
four million dollars in the bank
the contracting company is gonna
say twelve.
No yeah I missed Mr chair it's
it's it I I am no procurement
specialist but we have both our
our CFO and our certified for
procurement officer who oversee
this process and as well as our
our legal division and it is not
uncommon to issue a contract and
incrementally add work to it
when you get your appropriation
where is not it's long as we
have the revenues to pay for the
work we're good and there's no
presumption that the full
ceiling of the contract will be
exercise.
As
part of this is that Mr chair
thank you members the committee
it is because it's purchased
through a state grant agreement
and some of the GSD has of
course remained with a list of
you know.
Salaries that can be utilized so
one of the contract but it's the
the way the contract was written
there's a ceiling on the floor
so you know again if the two
hundred thousand dollars they
had.
You know twenty twenty three is
the only money they have for the
contract and there will be no
further work done and that's
really what the the question is
I believe that the the secretary
Schardin answers you know with
an additional special
appropriation or re purposing
other funds to do this they can
accomplish a lot more the number
of funds they can use for those
purposes I was somewhat limited
although it's not you know out
of the window there are there
are some that could be used.
My question the other questions.
And let's also thank you Mr
chairman thank you Secretary
economic staff for your for your
presentation I I don't every
time I read this I think about I
I just know we're missing
something here because obviously
you're needs are great and while
we transfer some funds here and
there it seems like you're needs
are much greater and I think we
need to look at it with that
magnifying glass we can see the
reality of it here for years
we've been hearing about hello
you are because the it is low in
in in your revenues but because
the executive did not request a
certain amount doesn't mean that
you don't need it I you know I
think that you run the
department you know what you
need and we don't know what you
need we only see requests and
and numbers that I tell you what
I have lots of lots of faith in
you and in your work and how you
approach what you do and I
believe that you do need some
some more funding let me ask you
this question when you mentioned
about them was I hearing this
correctly how really old
fashioned your systems are like
you we just to work with paper
in areas you clearly as Senator
Steinborn was mentioning you
clearly need to digital
digitized and use digital
services and up to date I. T.
Quitman in transporting
equipment for communications on
how long is it means is that
gotten worse do you have
anything new are you still
operating under that because I
thought how could be that behind
in the state Mr Mr chair and
senator thank you for that
obviously Twitter works for us
but that are.
Mr chair and centered in are all
seriousness what one of the big
efforts that I've been working
on in the department is is to
try to use our on R. restricted
fund the funding for their
intended purpose meaning.
I I I.
This department when I came in
was paying IT professionals with
air quality fund corrective
action fund so we were diverting
money away from.
Your communities to pay for IT
professionals.
That's wrong we shouldn't be
having an I. T. professional
asked the question are you in
the air unit you're the only one
I can work on because that's my
funding source so I'm pulling
the general fund into our
program support so that if you
call the help desk in our
department anyone can properly
work on here I. T. equipment
and I'm putting the funding that
went for the purpose air water
waste food cannabis it's at your
back into the programs so we're
fixing a lot this will be a
continuing problem going forward
but to answer your question yes
the I. T. the the air program
had more money they were on
Microsoft three sixty five when
the rest of the department
wasn't they could you share
point when the rest when I
couldn't because I'm not paid
for out of the year program
so so there's pockets of the
department that have advanced
individually and there's pockets
of the department like our
construction programs which does
all the capital outlay that has
not advanced and I'm trying to
fix that by putting general fund
in the right place and putting
our special revenues into the
right place that's that's the
the connection here that I think
gets lost because you you you
see so many agencies and so many
different people have needs but
that's what I'm trying to fix.
Thank you thank you very much
for explaining that and I know
that there are various areas
that you're responsible for that
have been really unfunded
mandates for many many years so
hopefully we can work with you
on that thank you Mr chairman
thank you said one more thing
because I have a bill in the
committee you just mentioned
that you had the flexibility.
Fund other so you do have that
flexibility
the other thing is you got about
thirty five million in special
appropriations for your
department and then how much are
you coming back with four we us
to the in in that we all bill.
In in our Mr chair using how
much re right asking for right
authorization of our existing
special appropriations correct
our capital and informs that
think it's spending your asking
for the US I know Jonas is a
little slow.
Yeah I know Janis I have the
answer the.
Mr Chairman centers we have a
list of those appropriations
that we're asking for extensions
on and can definitely provide
you with the current balance of
those appropriations if you'd
like the ones that are in house
bill two right now.
In two engine Mr secretary John
is to know the dollar amount I
don't know those off the top of
my head but we can pull them
from share our but is here.
The.
Got you don't have that with you
but but you're gonna get thirty
five million specials in this in
this budget I mean that's that's
a large chunk of specials and
You may have language
For you in the house bill two
that banned you from what it.
in the we didn't see.
I think Senator Rodriguez again
Sanchez I got to go for a minute
Senator Rodriguez chair and
chair center which is on the
last in the in in a
State engineers next thank you
thank you so all right US
secretary can if they were going
to go to Senator Woods thank you
madam chair Senator of yeah I'm
a little bit confused because
from what I remember the
previous conversation was that
you needed people to to then
your construction type
management jobs and that.
Add up I thought we put money
into that kind of.
There is.
In my medicine.
Something here.
Mr chair and madam chair I
apologize and and Senator Woods
our construction programs bureau
is the bureau that administers
the the loans grants and capital
outlay.
That program is not funded at
all bye General Fund that
program is one hundred percent
funded by corrective action Fund
the money that we're supposed to
be using the cleanup leaking
underground storage tanks is
paying their salary
So.
Madam chair Senator Woods I'm
not but we I believe in if if
I'm recalling house bill two
correctly I believe there was
three hundred to five hundred
thousand dollars put into that
program for contracts.
But not for staff and we are
contracting out a lot of that
work at this point because each
of the five people I have there
is managing a hundred and twenty
six projects of peas.
So that the the there's just a
proposal madam chair and senator
would support of twenty million
million dollar appropriations
for a water project near
elephant Butte into our.
Into our budget.
That's just one of many other
capital outlay projects loans
and grants that work up that
those five employees are going
to have to add to the one twenty
six projects already working on
each.
So we need.
Contracts support there and and
you are correct Senator Woods
that there is a fight for I
think it's three hundred
thousand if I'm not mistaken as
was put into contracts for that.
Contracts is also the three
hundred so two to three five
hundred in the three thousand
three hundred or three hundred
thousand three hundred second so
the LFC recommended and HSC
approved three hundred thousand
dollars for contract engineer
for project management and that
additional two hundred thousand
dollars in the two hundred for
vacancy rate reduction for water
resource professionals total
okay thank you and that was
madam chair that was general
fund money that's correct okay.
Okay.
That's that's what I've been
read in this book here that that
that's the direction was trying
to go with a lot of this was to
be for up that part of your your
your game so to speak because
you had so many projects that
needed to be.
And and at he are Senator member
you making a statement that.
Your your regulation part of
your your agency.
Is what you.
I had a pretty good handle on
venture your management your
project management part of your
agency is where you were pretty
deficient all.
Okay well chair and and Senator
Woods your memories correct that
that's that's what I'm saying
that.
And and I know not at not one
size fits on that's I know that
makes this confusing The
appropriation into the cut
construction programs bureau for
staffing contracts exceptionally
helpful exceptionally helpful.
Date that the.
Putting funding into programs
that affect federally funded or
that have their own revenue
source like permits that is not
construction programs.
Those are the ones in which we'd
be better served putting that
money into our operations that
the Pico known as five six
seven.
So madam chair so you're saying
that you have plenty of a
matching funds already for you
federal program.
So madam chair and senator woods
owns a plenty but I we're we're
we you've got adequate we've got
adequate funds for for match if
if that changes with peco
transferred thirty we can move
general fund to make that happen
but to put it solely in drinking
water or air and hazardous waste
or somewhere else.
Under cuts my ability to use the
federal funds as well as the
permit fees.
And I don't have yeah so just
leave it there so you get.
And that's not a problem you
can't more transfer general
fund.
Madam chair and senator woods we
can but we can move we can't
farger General Fund between you
because without.
The legislature giving us the
authority to do so but we give
that authority to DFA to do
that.
Madam chair and and Senator
Woods last year was the first
year the environment department
had P. fund transfer authority
since I've been here okay
Yeah I know more for a lot more
about this than I do I'm not
going to I think yeah okay okay
well thank you very much and
Michael at a know that it's it's
a.
To me it's a pretty confusing
thing but I assume that you know
your your agency a whole lot
better than none of your agency
we just had some people come in
earlier and you know very high
dollar agencies that get lots of
federal monies and you know the
state with your when we put in
general fund monies to them or
other state funds and I know
that.
A lot of these other state funds
is what you've collect and and
penalties and and different
things but and I'm assuming
they're pretty restrictive as to
you can spend those.
Madam chair and senator was
they are very restricted and by
the way the penalties we
electors or to the general fund
we don't keep them.
if chair Senator would you want
to work on it with us to keep
those penalties in the in the
department I would love to work
on something like that with you
but you are correct madam chair
and senator was that those
factors that we collect for air
permit for air penalties are
very restricted to the air
program in those penalties go
back to the general fund I have
no as the secretary I have no
ability.
To do anything with those funds
other than work on air issues or
river.
Okay.
Okay well madam chair that's
that's all the questions I have
thank you very sure thank you
secretary yes thank you very
much I don't have anyone else on
the list for but I'd go ahead
and say so you want to speak
madam chair thank you I just
love we're we'll get an answer
to the question that the the
chairman asked the re off
balance for the special in the
language only you know we offer
this next year the total balance
is three point nine million
dollars as of the thirteenth.
Thank you I'm so sorry I was to
somebody was we requested so
that the remaining balance on
those three offs that they're
asking for for this next year is
three point nine million dollars
as of the thirteenth of
February.
I say that's in the re
authorization.
Okay all right yeah well you
know we have we've heard over
and over about the needs in your
department and when you when we
see that you're having to move
from one fund very necessary
fund into your operations just
to keep going as a department
that is more than a flag that's
a reality there's a deficit and
we have to own it and we have to
step up to the plate Texas
when we have a fund for example
that we we established by law
for a certain purpose we
shouldn't be raiding that fund
we should be using it for the
purpose that this legislature of
voted for and we have a lot of
those in your department that we
we did it and then we just
ignore.
And we require you to use us
just to survive and sustain the
department this is not
acceptable and I'm just talking
to acquire because obviously you
you know you need that but I
really believe we need to take a
serious look at this and do more
for this department
I don't I cannot believe that in
this day and age when there's so
much technology so much
advancement that you're still
not being able to consolidate
and and even corroborate one
division or bureau or section
with another because you have
such a break can fragmented
system that we can't put it
together I just want to give you
an advanced information
technology for you to do your
job but we do require you to
communicate with the public can
get these funds out and get the
information out and get your
your requirements and
responsibilities out to the
public and if not here we are we
ask why you don't do it you keep
telling us why we keep doing the
same thing and that's not good
so secretary know that you've
got my support and I know you've
got a lot of support and we will
do all we can to help augment
your budget to help you do you
work thank you very much for
that and I don't have anything
else unless you want to say
anymore before and J. I just
really do appreciate you and the
rest of the committee and and
your interest in our budget and
I I welcome during the interim
if you're interested in learning
more about our budget I am happy
to sit down with all of you
would.
I I.
Very knowledgeable about our
budget at this point thanks to
the gentleman sitting on both
sides me as well as the folks in
the room and I'll just leave you
with this Madam my HSD team
that's here today informed me
that for the next four months
between the office of the
secretary general counsel our
budget staff our HR staff every
all the operations we have
twenty five thousand dollars
left for anything related to
travel contracts anything so
which is a were pinching pennies
and thinking about a big so
would be an understatement.
Thank you thank you for that
information into the I didn't
see anything on Twitter I don't
do Twitter much so I didn't see
any of yours but but I still
believe it so thank you very
much and that's all we have for
today we're gonna move on to the
state engineer because of our
time we're getting it's five
twenty and as for is our state
engineer back there's my okay
great thank you so much thanks
to our staff also.
Well we're gonna have Sanchez
again thank you for your work
you're always there with us.
It's a good call for about.
This.
Again I interview him.
Good afternoon all right we can
get going so we.
Chair members.
Just taking on the.
Let anyone know it was snowing
evidence chance to.
What do this for years.
Our recent.
Yes.
So.
Here at much.
Thank you thank you very much
engineer can we start.
Senator members we call you
excuse me we call you Sanchez
yeah I know you have a first
name to practice what is that
Scott I thought yes of course
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Scott
Sanchez on the LFC analysts for
natural resources I'm joined
today by our state engineer my
camera my counterpart from the
department of finance and
administration Mr branch have as
overall the action since we last
saw us the HSC recommendation at
a hundred and fifty thousand
dollars to the water resource
allocation program in the state
engineer this was to give the
funding for that positions for
cannabis permit staff and beyond
that the recommendation health
counselors will be presented to
the February.
Thank you very much in these
executive ours was saying him
before we go to state engineer
alright thank you proceed with
the members of the committee of
the the maybe the more we talk
about drought the mortal do it
is to an outside today but the
the that is so one of the one of
the good news is for for the
season so far is very arsenal
packs are building even as we
anticipate debate there are our
budget here today.
So the she the that's been
handed out really is it is a
separate sheet of of our section
for expansion requests the
Senator Sanchez talked about in
terms of the the status of of
that funding
That and then we have section
five and seven special
appropriations in our city ICAP
capital of the the forward to
right hand and America columns
are the house numbers and then
the difference between the house
to the exact and then the four
right hand column is really the
notations from the LFC regarding
certain actions taken and then
in the yellow we mapped out
against some of the.
Differences between the exact
request and the
And and the house bill two of
numbers mapped out the possible
bills that are being considered
for
water projects the and and and
if maybe some of those bills
could cover of some of those
those a potential gap so so
that's that's how we put the the
sheet together and and secretary
for our expansion requests we
were we we put forward a very
bones requests for eleven staff
members of the house bill two
has six
and and the the area that we we
still would like to
presume is of some of the tional
staff for the lower Rio Grande
Texas V. New Mexico Madam
implementation there's three
positions that we would need
their
in in the of in our water rates
of the program and then another
additional position and the
Interstate Stream Commission to
form a lower Rio Grande
bureau to all of the issues down
there that we know we need to
get started on that we know we
need to prepare ourselves for
going forward so and then also
there seems there's been a lot
of discussion about addressing
our our of deficiencies in our
dance statewide we we will get
into a discussion on that here
in a minute on our specials and
in our capital however I've I've
heard the the key a keen
interest of the this body and
and and the and the LESC staff
of of of interest and
appropriating some some them
funding for us to begin chipping
away at the seventy some odd of
them that we have listed in our
deficiency report and some of
them are very serious dam safety
problems and need to be
addressed and so we would
request to go along with that.
Of probably within the capital
program some funding to begin to
build a dam project management
team within our or our
organization because will be
asked to do that the something
we don't currently do now we
have our them safety program
which is strictly regulatory
that monitors a private dams and
Pueblo dams throughout the state
to make sure they're in
compliance with them safety
standards we do not have a
purpose a project management
team within that group but they
would look they would work in
tandem to make sure that we work
with all of them owners across
the state to make sure that
those projects were completed
appropriately and and met the
amendment safety requirements so
that that that's really an
important program that we know
where we're going to be us to
move forward with them we'd like
to be prepared to do that as
well.
in our section five and seven
special appropriations line
you'll see some differences we
we've put in funding request of
four of moving forward with our
our lower Rio Grande.
settlement as well as the middle
Rio Grande of improvements that
we need that I see as a tandem
effort we need to be able to
deliver our compact delivery
requirements in an efficient
manner to keep the middle Rio
Grande other profit from
problems but also make sure we
efficiently and get all the
water due to the lower Rio
Grande elephant Butte
proficiently down there so that
they have more surface water to
work within a year to year basis
and that the Miller Graham with
the other debit and therefore be
able to operate more efficiently
in the middle Rio Grande to meet
your vision needs as well so our
commitments under the biological
opinion so we've put together a
request of a a thirty million
dollars in the in the in the
middle Rio Grande line item to
address the child conditions
down below CENIC usher them
the houses provided ten million
which is great we certainly
appreciate it the the gap
remaining would be something
that we would hope we could get
in the future and we also have
some recommended documentation
to that effect the of maybe some
line item of documentation that
would address that future need
that's also true of the next the
line item which is a seventy
five million dollars
executive request and those
bills to the the put that up to
thirty five million dollars
from the LFC request leaving
that the forty million dollar
gap which again would be a
future need that we would need
to to make sure as well
understood because the those
funds will be let leverage
against federal dollars and it
also sends the right message to
the the department of justice
and the lower Rio Grande water
users the the state is serious
about moving forward with the
settlement as well as having a.
Sufficient funds to leverage
federal dollars that we know are
available to us to move forward
with a proactive Madam program.
We have a the you know other of
items that were funded
four of the water litigation and
avoidance in the Colorado River
but if you know if you take note
of the LFC notation on that is
that they they would roll those
funds of up into the lower Rio
Grande the component and make it
kind of a compact related of the
funding mechanism for both the
Colorado River litigation and
and integrations there as well
as the lower Rio Grande so
that's that's how that was
handled.
We have a couple of other items
the the needs of but for the
most part we're pleased with the
house bill two funding for
The so water reserves the
statewide with the hickory Water
lease of there's there's a.
The possibility of acquiring
Water of through the senior
water rights that the group
pagination has to help us
knowledge within ASA issue on
the San Juan but but also to
begin to build a reserve in the
event that there's a priority
call shortages on the Colorado
River compact so.
there's a few other items in the
year of of a big one that the
that that the
the executive requested was
seventy five million to leverage
against all available federal
dollars a may be out there just
kind of a general fund to be
able to do that for water and
water related projects in the
LFC no you'll see that many of
of of the of funds allocated in
house bill two would would be
utilized appropriately for
leveraging federal dollars so
that's limitation there there's
also some bills being.
Opposed along that line
make SB twenty five and SB fifty
seven
that would be potential sources
for federal every the region
dollars has as we look at that
at those bills moving through
so so the community and the
second ditch infrastructure fund
of five million the executive
put forward
we believe that maybe Senate
bill of one seventy six what
address this is as it moves
forward
there's a brackish water
The reduce exploration Fund of
five million dollars the SB four
eighty three of of the sponsor
manuals would put forward to
build a brackish water
exploration and development
program within the office of the
state engineer and concert with
New Mexico tech and and naming
weary down at of the New Mexico
state
so so so so the that that's kind
of a cross reference that we
have in this table to give you
some idea there's also a twenty
five million dollars a request
for them.
It's and and to address our
backlog as I mentioned earlier
my understanding is it is a
priority of of of perhaps this
committee to to Fund dams and I
know our executive who's really
interested in this the governor
really would like to see this
begin to move on on fixing some
of the the most important and
pending dams to cross the state
for numbers of you know of
twenty five million combined
between capital and and and
possible specials of being a
negotiated right now I believe.
there's an additional request
for forty two million five
hundred thousand that would be
shared between our agency and at
NMED to address significant
drought impacts and and and
The problems that our our our
rural communities are having
with their water and wastewater
systems.
Then the we we have of our
capital requests as well on the
sheet you can see the
differences there but we're
we're we're pleased with the
allocations for the lower ground
water out acquisition program as
well as of the ten million
dollars provided for
river maintenance and habitat
restoration in the middle Rio
Grande so with that madam chair
of the conclude my presentation
to the committee.
Thank you thank you very much
for your presentation in your in
your information that you have
submitted it we do have it here
one thing we were commenting
about is that it's probably me I
don't know but he was so tiny I
was trying to move it around
with the lighting maybe we just
tired could be our eyes or
perhaps a light that I was
having a hard time seeing the
numbers so but I did follow you
know which is that I think that
he Karia water lease was is very
very interesting very important
to follow but before we go on
let me up just ask if any
members have any questions on
your presentation and your
information you submit.
Do you have a question thank you
senator yes please proceed thank
you thank you and welcome to the
committee yes having just couple
questions number one you have
money for habitat restoration on
the middle Rio Grande.
Do you are you able to habitat
restoration a lower risk
ranchers that really of on site
for lack of better word the US
international boundary waters.
Commission.
Madam chair you that Senator
state where we've we've we've
participated and and some
habitat restoration programs in
the Sheldon can can in area
the combination of but your
reclamation funds Interstate
Stream Commission bump up
primarily for will flake catcher
habitat but you're absolutely
right most of it is within the
purview of the internet
international boundary and water
commission yeah.
Yes one of those interesting
things about how we manage the
Rio Grande is treated different
depending upon where you're at
you know in northern New Mexico
it's part of a wild and scenic
river in the middle Rio Grande
it's.
Gotten millions through the
years from Santo Domenici
previously and now the lower Rio
Grande is manage for water
delivery as of now and that a
range is so important
discrepancies there but a few
technical questions do you have
enough money in your strategic
water reserves I'm I'm much how
much of a balance you have in
the.
Mr.
Madam chair of the senators were
not to refer questions to see.
We do have a.
Two thousand.
Yeah a small amount the Senator
two hundred thousand.
hundred thousand what is it you
have to forego purchasing some
water rights recently because if
you don't have any money
That's correct the Madam chair
Senator Steinborn we we have an
opportunity to move forward with
the the the longer term
acquisition and report table to
do it.
Do we have any legislation this
session to give you more money
for your strategic water
reserves of.
Yes there is the executive
requested the ten million
dollars.
for that purpose
and in the house bill to their
seventy seven point five million
and then there's also those as
centers to phonics bill moving
forward I think with the twenty
five million dollar request.
That and then my phone chair I
want to ask you a bit about
practice practice what waters in
your jurisdiction.
The opera for brackish water I
know we have some legislation
involving brackish waters do you
have jurisdiction over that
resource that water.
Chair Senator Steinborn we do in
the context of the issuing of
the committee but yes we do and
in the context of issuing
extraction permits of you know
the the well permits
as far as the water quality
component of it that would be a
joint you know management effort
that that was recognized by the
of those Senate bill four eighty
three that would provide the
resources to NMED to come up
with the the regulatory
environment for treatment and
reuse of of that we're we're
strictly the the development of
it from from the deep.
I see and and forty three with
that produced water actors for.
Thank you have regarding that
water do you have jurisdiction
very with produced water after
using that water for those
purposes.
Madam chair Senator Steinborn we
we we do not regulate produced
water the what we do not
regularly produced water right.
Okay.
And is far as the freshwater
tackle pro active for.
Does your.
Is Your thirty different.
This year thirty different I
mean with with salinity for.
The words you're talking about
production permits allowing
gas or whatever but as far as
like fresher water aquifer
resources is that a different
authority that you have
regarding that relative to the
salinity of the water in the
aquifer.
Madam chair of the Senator
Steinborn so we you know for any
of acquisition of any water in
New Mexico the the state
engineer needs to issue a permit
for that purpose fresh or
brackish.
Is there a a practice facility
right now a water facility that
you are trying to acquire the
state is trying to acquire.
The rebels too constrictive the.
Madam chair the Senators time
where we we we we know of only
one of so the that's actually
working for of delivering water
to community and that's an hour
or so and and and we're not
involved in that.
If there are legislation to
purchase that are.
Not not to my knowledge of that
at thank you all thank you
friends.
Thank you senator Senator Woods
you're next.
Thank you madam secretary.
You know you you the laid out a
pretty good list of things here.
The state engineer and a lot of
this I was brought up in several
pieces of legislation.
And I know we're trying to
figure out.
Which one of these pieces of
legislation is going to go
through so we can get some
language to figure out kind of.
What.
Is the priorities of the
legislature this is what kind of
the way I look at it.
I know some of these projects
you have told me that we need
some.
I don't know how to use a better
word than than what the gamblers
to help we need some flash money
to the to the feds to show on
that were we're in the game with
the.
On on some of these hello
especially the lower Rio Grande.
situation and I know it's it's a
pretty good amount of money I
think it's that forty million or
so.
Figure and and then some of
these others are more of a multi
year deal that you know the the
middle Rio Grande we need to
definitely spend some money to
on riparian type projects so
that we can keep the water
flowing where that river gate so
flat.
And it it just tries to spread
out all over that river basin
there and we need to keep that
in a narrow track and I know you
have to constantly negotiate
with different groups to to try
to.
Get some agreement on those
areas and and I don't know if we
can get a long term agreement
on some of that stuff or not and
I know that that's Interstate
Stream so job to do that and.
I guess sooner or later we're
going to have to figure out a
funding source for this and and
some is general fund no doubt
but you know I've been looking
at the.
At the.
being of the.
The of the different permanent
funds that we have and the I
know that Senator.
Campos is is looking the same
way or looking different ways
you're trying to figure out how
we.
To do this and and
How we can.
Take some of this.
Severance tax bond capacity and
and move it to.
And an.
Idea was is is to kind of keep
funds towards that water trust
board and maybe.
Expanding the duties of that
water transport we've already
got a board set up.
And.
You know.
It expand the duties of that
fund and try to figure out.
Maybe a a bigger car van out of
some of these others realizing
and I want this to be heard by
everybody that pay attention if
we start carbon and stuff out of
this deal it takes away from the
legislative capital outlay.
So listen up.
This so what you're not gonna
know that that
Any time we do this is gonna
it's gonna directly affect some
of the things but if it's a
priority if water is a priority.
And we need to do something like
this this is a one way to do
that we can also take some
general fund and the.
But
That's one of my ideas on that
it's still.
Concept you'll deal the the.
Senator Pete and I have talked
some about this stuff and how we
we right these programs to do
this and the Senator Padilla is
been in on this stuff to talking
about these these water projects
and how we do this and and and
Senator crystal diamond is also.
The meeting with you but.
You know this when you start
talking you know two hundred and
twenty four million dollars down
here.
We can't take that back maybe in
one year.
But we could not be able to
figure out how we can take that
but over a multiple year period
so that I I don't have anything
other to add on on your question
marks here
lots to legislation moving
through.
And we need to see what the
these are the legislature is on
page one of these.
Funds in projects that they
think is important.
Because the essentially we need
the language before we can do
anything else.
So that for that month what's.
On your projects.
So Madam.
Chair I will take send it back
to you because of the run out of
words thank.
Thank you and I think it's pry
because it's a little late but
we have beautiful thoughts thank
you thank you so much all righty
then we have Senator Campos next
thank you very much madam chair
and I'm not going to take up too
much time but in terms of where
we're headed is of I've referred
to this anyway as the US the
next generation session along
with that to also use the phrase
the year of water and within
that as the state engineer has
so eloquently outlined so many
aspects of this with the moving
parts whether be a pieces of
legislation whether the the
request for additional FTE ease
or whether it be of the full
concept in terms of the fifty
year water planned the whole
issue then becomes what are we
definitely ready to to undertake
and so with that madam chair
what I'd like to do is to again
defer to the state engineer to
specifically
give us your thoughts in terms
of with what we're talking about
how do we plan for this how do
we support those pieces of
legislation that definitely will
make a difference and then
thirdly as we move forward
Department of environment and we
heard if you will the eminent
issues that are plaguing that
department it's a it's a very
serious issue and we're down to
the last days of the session and
the priorities definitely need
to be outlined so madam madam
chair
Mr state engineer maybe you can
just allude to some of those
things very briefly in terms of
what it is that we still need to
do in order to ensure that
people of the state of New
Mexico and all that we fully
address our water concerns and
issues and that we're laying out
if you will a template for the
next years to come in terms of
how we're going to address these
the serious issues thank you
madam chair thank you senator
engineers can you respond to
that thank you.
Chair of the Senator Campos and
it's been a pleasure working
with the Water of oversight
subcommittee over the past
couple of weeks the to discuss
this matter and and we've we've
we've taken a look at and that
was the kind of the point of of
of the yellow highlights on the
she was there's there's several
places where bills that are
being I have been introduced but
really haven't to begin to move
through the process yet that
could potentially be of put
together in a way that this that
sets the agenda for for both the
legislature and for the
executive because of of of of
share the same information that
that we shared with with the
water so committee that there
are some key pieces of the
could you know could we could
prior to is and then to get the
executive support on
to try to put the water and
gender together here the closing
you know two weeks of the the
session and and hopefully set
that the that the fundamental
priority going forward we don't
have to solve all the problems
the session assessor really but
just to just to set the wheels
in motion for of the longer term
solutions and and the amendment
you know in the inner processes
and and subsequent
the legislative sessions we've
already set the the foundation
from which to build going
forward and one of one of the
bills that was proposed you know
why Senator who knows
and the Senator sure what this
is you know Senate bill two
forty one and it's got a lot of
really good components in it
that that really start to set up
the the funding mechanisms and
the and the income sources of
going forward and and ten key
areas and.
And two of them relate to you
know water and water related
and and and in the categories of
water there was a categories up
for storm water management the
than re use and and and and
recharge to make a better the
use of that resource we we have
a lot of work we can do there
particularly in the lower Rio
Grande and other parts of our
state where
that that storm water of the re
use could be of quite quite a
huge benefit to the aquifers
and also on the water quality
front watershed
and of you know maintenance and
restoration due to the planning
for catastrophic fires and
recovery from that so.
And and obviously rural New
Mexico needs a lot of attention
both on the drinking water and
with and the waste water
treatment side of that would be
a in partnership with my
colleagues at the moment Mexico
Environment Department
as well as a my colleague that
that that EMNRD on the on the
watershed Representative river
health components so so that
that's so we've worked together
with through the task force
recommendations and how we
believe it would be critically
important for those three or
four agencies including
department of ag and and even
the game and fish of who who are
in our natural resources for the
group to actually plan
in a comprehensive way with the
legislature to build have these
building blocks with the session
starting it off and and moving
forward I know that I know the
executive really
that is interested in that
approach as well.
madam chair I made it and it
really goes back then to the to
the proposed budget and talking
about the the FTEs the positions
that you need in the various
departments in order to begin if
you will a stronger efficiency
to to provide the services and
and if you can just briefly
comment in terms of that because
as well over the last several
years we've tried to add the
additional a person to your
departments but again just as we
heard with the the previous
presentation
your short your were your
underfunded in those areas and
you need these positions but the
in context what continues to be
included to us anyway is that
the person aren't out there to
hire and and I would like at
least a comment in that regard
because if we are going to move
forward with a lot of these
areas we definitely need that
expertise and so I hope that
you'd be able to at least
respond to that as well thank
you madam chair thank you
senator yes you may respond
please thank you madam chair
Senator Campos the.
Yeah we're right we think it's
it's a good fit the building
block process both of them both
on the the funding of and and
capital the side of the equation
but also in the building years
your of your human workforce
kick capacity and I think I
think it needs to be done at all
levels of government we know
that of the New Mexico
environment department has has
has a the course work available
for water treatment plant
operators and others the the
community college based we have
we have to be and there's
another proposal down in the
southwest New Mexico associated
with of the western university
to do the very same thing but we
got a bill the water workforce
from the bottom up with our New
Mexico students are we're we're
in the process of of looking at
the the expanding our
recruitment capabilities the the
the right here in New Mexico as
well as bringing in in terms of
building our workforce
internally and we've quite
frankly right now madam chair
we've reduced our
our vacancy rate significantly
in the last year and a half and
and I think there's going to be
more interesting government
employment given the nature of
things in the private sector
that year about now so there's
the folks are looking more of
that at a government service so
I think we're we're going to be
in a better position in the next
year or so in that regard and we
are making great progress on
recruiting and hiring within our
agency as well.
So madam chair and I'll just
close with this I hope that
there are members of the media
that are paying attention to
this to help us to get the word
out to the general public that
the initiatives that have been
brought forward by a these
various agencies that deal
directly with our land our water
in is Senator Steinborn
continues to mention the quality
of the environment that that we
live in
this is this is eminent this is
this is crucial and I could get
into start to talk about if you
will dollars and and in
different divisions but that's
not where it's at right now is
how are we going to put together
the organized pieces are to flow
during the last couple of weeks
in hopes that the initiatives do
go ahead and move to the next
level if they don't I believe
that we're going to be missing a
great opportunity so thank you
very much madam chair thank you
Senator for your worst and
I so yes Senator Steinborn.
Thank you and I just wanna thank
you Senator Campos for what you
just said I think that's really
important you know and an
important leadership.
thing that you just said about
putting it together and
recognizing there's a lot of
moving parts as I sit here and
learn about other moving parts
and other ideas for lots of
money allocations on water.
For facilities robin
universities for.
Wreckage water for example and
things that might be helpful but
we want to talk about dam safety
communities at risk of.
Yes Representative of flooding.
Or you're talking about
protection of our drinking water
so I just think it would be
helpful to put all these cards
on the table have some
transparency and have you know a
thoughtful approach if that kind
of those kinds of resources
excess or somebody needs out
there it would be a missed
opportunity if we don't
thoughtfully put together you
know in any.
And that over you know given so
much to one thing and maybe make
lacked frankly pennies
comparatively to something else
that could be in so much for New
Mexicans so I hope that we do
you put the pieces together in a
transparent way.
And are you working on that
particular ship on.
Thank you for.
Those comments thank you Senator
Campos for that with the words
of wisdom okay I don't have to
have anyone else here in on the
list no I don't but on this
matter but I want to thank you
so much for all that you do in a
you know as I was looking Nation
he Karia water lease I was
thinking you know that
correlates not only that but I
recall so clearly the Almont
settlement how long that has
taken and how much work is been
involved and when I see you
requesting FTEs for different
programs that you have I need
for a late them to all these
different needs that you have in
the responsibilities and and not
only that but the deadlines that
you have to meet this is just
amazing but we did hear your
request and your concerns and we
appreciate you very much rest
assured we will look at all of
this as we continue to work on
the budget thank you very much
madam chair yes thank you.
Thanks to the staff and before
we go on I think Senator Burt
want to make and I appreciate
that manager I'd I just of.
Maybe a vote earlier today that
I am questioning a little bit
and I guess my only point is
that you know we come in here
we're going ninety miles an hour
we don't see paper until we get
in here and I'm just cautioning
my colleagues to make sure that
the keep up of what's going on
and and they are prepared to
make the votes because every
vote has consequences and we
want to make sure that we're
we're doing the right thing by
everyone who comes to the
stabilizers so is caution my
colleagues to to be be aware and
make sure that you're making the
right votes before we cast that
vote thank you madam chair thank
you senator Byrd for for those
words and we will certainly take
that and he to that sometimes we
just have to stop for a moment
and and listen right instead of
just doing all the talking or
continuing to move move move so
thank you for for that process
appreciate that all right and
then let me just mention that we
are not going to do the specials
because it's late we run out of
time at six o'clock but until
tomorrow morning but and were of
somewhere in the agenda but I
would think in the morning first
thing but let me just read out a
few things we have for tomorrow
subject to change but for most
the most part they'll remain in
at nine thirty we have an
economic outlook for New Mexico
and we're gonna have Nicholas
slightly the economist and debt
Denver branch executive the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
city that ten thirty we start
hearing bills and now we have
Senator Ortiz Pinos bill that
was heard today and we sent him
back to work on that Senator
sure you remember on the
amendment Senate bill twenty
four twenty five a committee
substitute then we have Senate
bill three thirty four black
fire recovery Senator Diamond
Senator Hemphill Senate bill
four thirty mac bride fire
recovery senator Byrd to centers
to fan X. then we got Senate
bill two fifty one as amended
metro Development Act changes
Senator.
Hamblin the Senate and
Representative Ortez and then
one more and that is committee
substitute for a Senate bill two
seventy three health insurance
mental health coverage Senator
Hickey and Senator Hemphill then
after that that's all in the
morning then in the afternoon we
have agency hearings do we have
the department of transportation
to tourism department department
of information technology and
economic development.
Then.
Eight thirty nine thirty
tomorrow I'm sorry.
All of this was just brought to
me from the secretary pardon.
Yeah I they just brought it to
me nine thirty yeah and yeah
that's what is yes so just
wanted to make people informed
and you all know what bills will
be done so that is where a
little prepared and we're not so
