But we had three amendments that
we had already discussed in the
committee and the committee
suggested the amendments and
they were accepted into the bill
so now we have it's a substitute
to give the final approval and
if I may Mister.
Senator Padilla here I will just
mention the three amendments
just for simplified terms one of
them was to split the increase
of the regal registration fees
for two years to expand into two
years is that all at once and
and of course to we added
electric vehicles to the bill
and then the last one was we
added the electric vehicle
surcharge to the bills which
were all amendments already
approved so that's where it's at
Senator did you want to say
anymore chair thank you hit the
nail right on the head I did
look the committee secretary
provided to me a little while
ago I I scanned everything looks
like it's in order the only
thing I would add that you
didn't mention I would say is
that it encompassed all electric
Types of vehicles while also
have trucks tractors road
tractors and electric buses so
that everything is now included
as member I'm going with that I
think we're in very good shape
to adopt it okay fine so then we
if it's our members can we just
go straight to a motion since
we've already discussed the
amendment and the bill and of
course we need to do not pass
for Senate bill two seventy five
and a due pass for Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill two seventy five.
Okay.
That we have most of the second
all in favor signify by saying
aye opposed past thank you
committee so thank you one more
motion on the substitute no
we're not I think this is it
because we moved it do not pass
on that and the do pass at the
same time on this I think we're
good thank you Mr I keep con you
Mr Chairman out there but the
arms.
Yeah this is great thank you
yeah thank you all right so now
we're going to move on to
The full committee hearings that
we have scheduled and we had
rolled over the the children
youth and families department
and that former justice and
current secretary V. hill is
here with us on your staff so if
you can come up we will hear you
first and then after that we
have have the public education
alright so first HSD six ninety
department six
thank you Secretary thank you
madam chair.
Okay thank you.
Is here we have Eric Eric Sinead
gonna be here with us also.
With the CYFD yes if you would
like yes.
We know it's a presentation we
got to hear from the department
but just in case there's any
questions immediately you can
ask them directly right there
thank you and then we have the
general Dennis Moore is going to
be here about to get a first
name.
Madam chair and continue yes No
but I'm talking the other lady
the analyst MaryBeth dentary
Beth there we go he can't be
with us okay and I think that
point no worries the workaholics
yes that's fine thank you I
think because this is only a
presentation is not like we're
acting on any legislation we're
good so all right thank you very
much then we can get going Madam
do you want me to go through the
budget or you can go briefly
what we're gonna do is summarize
some of the budgetary things
that work we've talked about in
the past and then get to the
crux of the department itself
house that works thank you all
right chairman members of the
committee I I'll keep this
pretty short there was very few
changes between the LFC
recommendation that you heard
before
couple weeks ago and the HFC
but thought that substitute for
House Bill to.
some of the changes if you look
in your packet is here you'll
have a on the second page we'll
have a high level summary
general fund summary there.
You'll see on line seventeen.
HSC added about three hundred
thousand for personal services
and that was just to bring up C.
YF to bring up L. C.'s wreck
equal with the executive.
I'm sorry Eric can I go back
just to hear here tell me your
online seventeen of your
presentation of your sheet okay
this I didn't see the three
you'll see sixty field support
FTS online seventeen yes I see
that I don't see that there was
an increase of three hundred
thousand with HDFC madam chair I
get yes thank you so much.
and then yes.
We've discussed it thank you
very much Senator madam chair.
The other change you'll just see
it down there at the very bottom
the bottom line there HFC added
F. fifty F. T. to protective
services.
and then we changed a little bit
of the town of language just to
kind of make it a little more of
a the town of a little more
useful for CYFD
and that was the the summary of
most of the changes there if
just to take a kind of a step
back madam chair and members of
the committee at all remind you
that just the children's
families department they're one
of those legislative agencies
that we did with LFC during the
interim period
and those those Legisla-
hearings are for you know to
kind of do a deeper dive into a
agencies you specific policy
areas for those agencies
Our deeper dive with CYFD was
more into how can we reduce
repeat maltreatment.
and then also how can we improve
person how can we bring more
people on board
more trained and licensed staff
for those frontline positions
and so you'll see if you're
looking at this high level here
you'll see a lot of different
items in there that kind of
address other male treatment or
those salaries.
you know for one example is
line number three you know we
included for FTE for that beef
Committee behavioral health
clinician teams.
we included online for four
point five.
Appropriate placement
compensation adjustment and
behavioral health services.
If you jump down to
Again line seventeen we we did a
big increase their line eighteen
there's also funding in there
for appropriate placement
compensation adjustments for
all those frontline staff there.
and then we also included money
to transfer to HSD twelve
million dollars from the early
childhood education and care
funds straight to HSD for
children's behavioral health and
other items I'm sorry Eric
excuse me just a straight to H.
as decreased to HSD where is the
executive requisite of
They would have transferred it
from ECT they would actually
just taking general fund and put
it with CYFD and then they want
to transfer that money to HSD so
we kind of so HSC adopted that
also with that madam chair all
all of pass it off for two
secretary she has for the
comments and then thank you
thank you for that because I I
do understand the necessity to
do a straight to HSD since we
can leverage the funding doing
it in that way so thank you very
much all right secretary or did
you want to say something then
before our secretary.
Having.
W. secretary thank you Secretary
hell you're listening thank you
madam chair members of the
committee a good afternoon we
ask for additional resources as
mentioned by Mr Shinde in the
form of funding for staff
primarily building up our
workforce so that we can
properly manage the difficult
cases and the work load that
comes before the department.
we staff and oversee complicated
very very difficult cases that
arise throughout New Mexico and
we want to ensure that we have
done everything we can to
minimise the risk of harm to
children that touch our sphere
of care.
We take our responsibility to
protect our children who are at
risk very very seriously the
number of referrals that we have
managed over the last ten and
fifteen years have gone very
very high much higher than we
expect we receive approximately
forty three thousand referrals
of abuse and neglect per year
and in twenty twelve seventeen
thousand of those cases were
investigated today in twenty in
twenty twenty two ten years
later we are investigating
twenty one thousand cases per
year that is an increase of four
thousand cases per year than it
was ten years ago.
Our professional workers are
dedicated and committed across
New Mexico and they're faced
often time with hostility from
families from people who do not
want them to succeed or to find
out what's occurring within the
household and are uncooperative
in the community.
But there are a host of
challenges that our workers face
every single day however I'm
continually impressed and
surprised and proud of the work
the fine work that our children
youth and families workforce
does day in and day out
Secretary manner up to for just
a moment if I may thank you I
know your mind is right on it's
terrible when somebody
interrupts when you right into
it but I need to ask a question
do you have any handouts that we
missed your for your or not and
no I I wasn't quite sure exactly
I did make a a power point
presentation to you a few weeks
ago and it I was didn't think
that that you wanted to go over
that again but I'm happy to
refer to it if you wish I didn't
prepare any anything okay I'm
I'm fine I just want to make
sure we didn't have the staff
there we didn't have some hours
and thank you so much you can
proceed thank you I just want to
say in response to Mr Shamir's
presentation that we are in
agreement with the House
appropriations and finance
committees recommendation we
have to relatively minor
requests one is in house bill
two there's a provision for
allowing a million dollars out
of the out opioid settlement
funds it's on page two thirty
seven of house bill two in
section eleven
that million dollars is the
language says that it is to be
used for.
Let me see if I can find I think
it's for grants to hospitals to
improve reporting and adherence
to plans of safe care as
outlined in section thirty two
eight three eight thirteen we
would ask that that language be
changed to enable us to better
execute on the care of program
that we you've heard much about
there are two bills currently
making their way through both
chambers to address in improving
our care programs we would ask
that that language in house bill
to be changed to allow us to
transfer from that opioid
settlement directly to
department of health and that
language would be something to
the effect for activities
supporting implementation of
care of plans of care of
relatively minor change from
what you see before you from the
house appropriations and finance
committee we also have a bill
that we've introduced it is
house bill four sixty one that
does have an appropriation this
house bill four sixty one is
designed to really address much
of the concern that's been
raised by the public in our
partners about having more
accountability transparency of
the department and it's a
comprehensive bill that
addresses of various ways that
the department can be better
about reporting out and being
accountable addressing
grievances and so on that
particular bill does have an
appropriation of a million six
hundred thousand that we would
ask if it does make it it's way
through both chambers and and to
the floor both houses that that
would be funded.
So with that I I think the best
thing to do would be to make
myself available for any
questions any concerns that you
have about the work of the
department
and I I just again want to
emphasize that the number of
cases that we manage in the
number of cases that we
intervene with we have a
tremendous percentage of success
of well being it's unfortunate
that we take very seriously any
child maltreatment or harm that
is done to children particularly
when they're in our care and I'm
happy to answer any questions
that you may have with respect
to any aspect of our work so
with that madam chair all stand
for questions thank you
Secretary
Eric for anyone do you have
anything else to say before
proceeds okay thank you any
questions from committee members
we have Senator Woods and
Senator Padilla.
The question I have is about the
one point six million you just
referred to.
Explain to me I'm sorry that it
didn't bring the budget down
here apologize to you for that
what was that for.
As written.
And you said you wanted to use
it again for what so madam
secretary if you would thank you
madam chair and senator woods
the one point six million is
attached as an appropriation to
Bill number House Bill for sixty
one for sixty one is a
comprehensive bill that
addresses various aspects of
child children youth and
families department and let me
explain what those are the first
is to codify into law the work
that is being done by our child
a children's rights office our
office of children's rights
currently we have an office of
children's rights in CYFD that
addresses complaints and
grievances that that children
and teenagers families may have
with respect to how they're
being treated or any aspect of
the care that they're receiving
from CYFD while in our care the
office of children's rights
would review those grievances
and resolve attempt to resolve
those grievances and of Mr
Senator Woods they may very from
a relatively minor dispute that
a youth has with his caretaker
to a very serious systemic
problem.
Madam chair I don't mean to
catch up.
secretary.
Why did not participate.
Are we making a new department
here we're madam chair and
senator would snow we're we're
codifying the work that that
particular unit within CYFD does
and the reason we think it's
important to codify it is that
we want to ensure that that work
continues beyond any
administrations I understand put
it in statute in some way
understand that but the question
I had madam chair and madam
secretary.
Is why didn't you put that in
the budget I can understand run
and legislation to to put it in
all but one and you put that in
your budget.
Yes ma'am my question Senator
there's other aspects of this
bill that if I may also address
that may answer your question
why we didn't put it in our
budget to begin with the second
aspect of this bill is to create
a provider advisory committee or
council one of the things we've
discovered is we're not getting
information in any meaningful
way from our providers the
people out New Mexico who are.
Consult a treating our our
families in are you we'd like in
this bill to create a provider
Advisory Council to give us
feedback on what they're seeing
out in the front lines across
New Mexico on what families need
and so forth the third part of
this bill is to create a child
welfare innovation center this
is an office that we would
propose B. associate either with
the school of social work or
nonprofit agency that would look
at best practices look at system
improvement and to be able to
provide to CYFD meaningful
neutral approach to improving
our public child welfare system
this center would run also up
for the
community
citizen review boards that are
required to occur and and take
place under federal law so this
center would wouldn't and the
fact substitute in as the
substitute Care Advisory Council
that we have in place currently
it would it would operate to
oversee those local boards who
are charge of volunteers who are
responsible for looking at
ongoing basis but we've also
added to the bill that those
local boards that would be to
specialized point one would be
to look at Indian child cases
and cases involving Indian
children and make sure we're
complying with the echo of the
Indian child welfare act as well
as the Indian family protection
act the second specialized board
would be to look at child
fatalities and child of serious
child harm that occur for any
child in our care and to provide
an assessment through this.
Sander to back to CYFD of ways
in which the system can improve
so this omnibus bill it's a
pretty extensive bill was was
negotiated and prepared after
the session after we submitted
our budget under house bill two
and that's.
Was not included in our and our
budget request then
Representative secretary and.
Madam chair.
New Mexico state had someone
that had some relationship.
With those.
Local boards yes local boards
and I'm pulling back from the
memory from several years back
when I actually had some
dealings with legislation for
this.
And.
Is New Mexico state still
involved in this some way yes
they checked madam chair and and
senator the substitute Care
Advisory Council that is
currently in existence has been
perhaps not not as robust as.
Is it probably should be to
provide the meaningful feedback
but yes technically speaking
it's still in long it hasn't had
a quorum it's been
Struggled with respect to
operation being able to operate
appropriately to get the
feedback we need on these cases
and enable us to respond to
whatever findings they have for
system improvement so while it's
in law to be honest it hasn't
been very effective the last
several years we're hoping that
through this bill
that we can enable it to be to
to get an ingestion of resources
and administrative support these
are volunteers that serve on
these committees and we really
need to a way to supported in a
way that they can function so
that they can give us the
feedback they need and and
that's not one madam chair and
and madam secretary is set.
That seems like we create stuff
and it falls apart or it falls
it falls like you know by the
side didn't quest being used are
everybody.
All of a sudden side just not a
good idea even though it's in
law we just kind of ignore it
so.
I understand what you're saying
and what what you need the money
for.
But we what was the original
purpose and supplemental that in
language and supplementals what
was it for their.
The I think madam chair and
senator woods I'm not sure I
understand the question and that
was a million and a half and
supplementals in the house bill
two.
And and from what I understand
you wanted to change the
language in house bill two
supplementals to what you're
saying what was it you you made
that statement earlier not just
it went out for the year and
lost so madam chair just quickly
on that Mr chair Senator Woods
I'm glad I'm not the only one
that some.
Right but on the on the other
language in house bill two it's
the opioid settlement we wanted
to change the language in house
bill two from language that
reads that it should only be
used for grants to hospitals to
improve report reporting in and
hear ants to plans of safe care.
The the safe care program that
that care program we want to
change it to
for activities supporting
implementation of care of plans
of care okay and and with that
and I don't mean to touch up the
chairs will get very mad at me
for taking all this time so
madam chair and madam secretary.
What do we do about those
hospitals and those care
facilities in reporting what.
What we do about that now know
that in thank you madam chair
and senator that the money can
be used for a broader purpose it
doesn't mean that it would not
actually make it to the
hospitals there are two my
understanding to care a bills
making their.
Through the Senate another to
the house and the idea is to use
this million dollars we could
really needs our care program
really needs some support in
resources to have the navigators
to follow up with the families
who we refer out to service okay
but all in all you're happy with
the the jeep came up and and the
only thing that was in question
is how some of these ten of of
funds were used and you thought
they were brought in the to use
in that line item and so we want
to general fund there and then
with that kind of fear in a
different place.
This madam chair yes Sir okay
thank you madam chair thank you
senator all rights and secretary
before we go on the this is the
language also that you mentioned
in that show would allow you to
transfer the funds directly
right so we can hopefully
leverage that that funding so
just wanted to make sure we
madam chair and members of the
committee as we work on their
care of program and an
understanding a lot of concerns
been raised rightfully so about
it we want to work together with
the O. H. and CYFD and ECECD to
ensure that those plans of care
being followed and families and
kids are save the children the
infants this would enable us to
work together and have more
resources to do that follow up
work that so necessary all right
great thank you never get a move
on to Senator Padilla that we
have Senator Diamond.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary thank you the
analysts and
Excuse me madam secretary can
get rid of this Kaufer
legislation
so is there you said you need a
language change and care is
there a bill already or is or
are you able to do that in rural
or are you letting us know our
house is going to get done by
the what we're all here right
now madam chair and
Senator Padilla the language
changes in house bill two okay.
Yes I handed to the it's just
just so you're comfortable I
just want to make sure that
you're getting what you need
what we're all up here because
if you need us to do something
which could you know something
put together and with
So the governor announced in
executive order with quite a few
items in it about a week and a
half two weeks ago I I want to
underscore how I think that was
a great move it was a suggestion
in a conversation that she and I
had done on a number of subjects
but
We I just want to know I want
you to have enough time to
actually implement all of the
things that were in that
executive order have you had an
opportunity to maybe put
together at I mean I I called in
tiger teams in my company for
from we have big massive things
that we're gonna be doing can
you give us an update kind of on
planning design implementation
where are some of the.
Initiatives that were rolled out
there sure thank you madam chair
and Senator Padilla
we have been working diligently
with members of the governor's
office as well as other cabinet
secretaries and specialized
directors from across the state
agencies to come together to
work it very carefully around
CYFD and look at it's number one
it's organization how is it is
it is structured in ensuring
that whether we need to really
modify the the structure of CYFD
so it's more responsive more
effective has better outcomes
for our children and youth
looking at at person and
positions we are also in the
process and I hope the
governor's soon will be
appointing a policy Advisory
Council and names have been
submitted to court for
consideration those folks those
seven members will come from
different walks of life and
really be able to consult and
advise of children youth and
families department on best
practices and and areas of of
system improvement we're also
looking carefully about how we
how we serve the public how
we're more accountable we're
having an audit there will be an
audit of the process to assess a
bass line up what are outcomes
are and how we can improve it
over time that's in the
executive order and I didn't
bring it with me we're also
creating an emergency behavioral
health office within CYFD to
create the most critical
behavioral health services for
the children and youth who who
are most in need of desperate
intervention at that aren't.
Yes Representative for
intervention and support so
those are the main aspects of
the executive order we're well
on our way working very hard
with the governor's office and
with other of cabinet
secretaries around how do we in.
Forward and it's not soon enough
the governor's very and.
Significant changes to be made
to children youth and families
department so we can improve our
outcomes immediately start
working at the ground running
and improving our system of care
which hasn't really changed it's
a thirty year old agency and it
hasn't changed much we've been
just adding on to the house and
we haven't looked at that
foundation and that's.
Straight away thank you madam
chair and madam secretary so I
think the reason I ask that is
do you feel like this is
configured in a manner that
supports all of those items that
you just mentioned that because
if not I want to know what I
want to champion it for you to
get you what you need for the
very serious in your now charged
with this innovation center
seems like it it's a phenomenal
idea but I want to make sure
that it's funded and you have
the money to be able to do all
that.
Yes and and that's and and madam
chair and senator put it you're
correct that there's also an
innovation center that's created
in the executive order as well
also in many respects it's moved
it mirrors the the the house
bill four sixty one but yes the
answer to your question is I
believe that the the
recommendations from Legislative
Council Service through of the
house Appropriations Committee
in finance committee are
adequate for us to continue the
work the fine work that we're
already doing within CYFD with
respect to
Of funding the this innovation
transformation work we can
always use more resources we
haven't identified separate
resources within the agency to
fund that so I guess my answer
would be yes we could use more
resources to to help us do this
transformative innovative work
that we need to do.
Thank you madam chair because
you know this is squarely in the
Senate finance committee now the
entire budget and all that so if
if there are things that are
missing I really want to know
what that is so we can help you
get all that you know put
together and stuff
but I also want to kind of take
a deep breath and know that you
know this executive order was
implemented and there was a lot
to it and I don't expect for you
to have it all implemented in a
week and a half I think we need
to be fair to you unfair to the
directors and all the different
people that do the different
things within the department to
give you an opportunity to get
it all together essentially
you know I I honestly feel like
I'll say it again I think you
took this job with the an
airplane that was still after
thirty years not completely
built out and was on fire so the
fact that you've been able to
keep the playing they're flying
I'm I'm very thankful for that
and I just want to remind my
colleagues here that we've got
to give this department enough
time to get all this implemented
and then budgeted out and
whatever and heck maybe we need
a special session at some point
just on this topic I don't know
to make sure that we give you
all the resources that you need
to get this work done
and then just you know full stop
I just you know they say you
should never recognize an
individual because you're gonna
forget somebody but I just want
to thank all the directors and
all the different folks to do
all the different jobs here that
you've done really really great
work they were with me
presenting the fostering
connections expansion bill the
other day and it was just
incredible how they were all
just right on the spot to help
me with that so I want to thank
you you know for for making your
team so available to all of us
thank you madam chair.
Thank you senator all right we
don't want to Senator Diamond
you're next.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary for being here I first
want to start on the LFC handout
that we have LFC reports that
you have two hundred sixty Bacon
FTEs requesting an additional
sixty HSC recommendation has an
additional fifty if we went off
of that.
If you are having difficulties
filling two hundred and sixty
vacancies what's your plan to
fill three hundred ten
vacancies.
Madam chair and senator time and
I think that and numbers the
fifty additional so we do have
two hundred sixty six as of.
January twenty seventh I think I
got you numbers
two hundred and eighty eight in
protective services vacancies as
of Friday February twenty
fourth.
the total and we're asking for
fifty additional positions and
the reason we need that is to
build a couple city we we lose
as we may lose one in one part
of the state and I'm not
articulating this is clearly as
as it's explained to me but as
we lose a position from one part
of the state we may need one or
two other positions in a
different part of New Mexico and
I can give you an example that
it's a very fluid process we
actually need much more than
that even though we have the two
hundred and sixty six or two
hundred and eighty eight Bacon
positions the fact of the matter
is that as positions are filled
other P. other positions become
vacant and so the fifty having
funding to fulfill those fifty
position have new funding for
fifty more positions enables us
to to work that system so that
we support the local offices and
have.
I can give you an example just
this week we've had job fairs
and and so on I think this week
we we made thirteen offers for
frontline workers so it it moves
very fluidly but yes that's
that's my my madam chair and
secretary I understand the need
for it but we haven't been able
to fill the report said two
hundred sixty you just reported
that now it's two hundred eighty
eight vacancies so what the
additional ones what are the
steps that the department's
going to provide to identify to
recruit into higher person.
The thank you madam chair and
and Senator Diamond that's
that's our number one priority
is to
implement our workforce
development plan we've been
focused on this this is part of
our lead just at
outcomes measures what are we
doing to recruit retain and keep
our workers we have done pay
differentials for frontline
workers of ten percent of we
want to reduce our our caseload
to national standards over three
year period we are updating and
expanding our training and
mentoring of for all of our
support staff to increase
retention we want to strengthen
our employee wellness and
address secondary trauma to
improve their well being and
their psychological safety at
work we're developing leadership
at all levels we are partnering
with university with
universities with their social
work departments we have
lecturers from across New Mexico
from CYFD who go out to the
universities and lecture to the
social work course work and
we're working with the social
work task force to expand
recruitment I'm happy to share
with you our comprehensive
workforce development plan so
you can see in depth all the
different things we're doing
that that in in that show is.
Retention of our workers if I
can madam chair before we leave
this page I'd like to this is
probably a question for for LFC
actually.
Sen here that HSC included in
million dollar transfer from the
early childhood trust.
What what other entities with
other parts of the budget
include include money from not
early track childhood Trust
Fund.
And to CYFD I'm happy to see
them as a beneficiary are there
any other areas that's just a
side note here on preventative
programs is there any other
dollar amounts that were using
from that trust into.
Madam chair and
Senator Diamond no there's a
twelve million that's going over
there we did in earlier version
of this budget have one million
that was coming from the early
childhood trust.
To
the department but that's now
been changed from early
childhood trust to that opioid
funding that we were talking
about earlier.
Notice that last time thank you
madam chair back to talk to the
secretary the last time you're
here before Senate finance you
mentioned that the agency will
be introducing agency bills that
we send sent what what are the
bill numbers that the agencies
have introduced the two bills
are and house bill four sixty
one of the madam chair and
senator house bill four sixty
one that's that the bill that I
explained in detail to Senator
Woods we've also introduced
house bill four thirty four
which we believe is
is a is a good approach to the
Carroll program and what we're
experiencing with the care
program and not being able to
follow through and make sure
that children and and and their
Mamas are safe after they leave
the hospital with drug addiction
and so forth so those are the
two of primary bills since we
spoke at the the other two bills
are fostering connections bill
and I'm trying to remember the
house bill that Senator
Padilla.
House bill one three twenty
eight and then of the hello
Senate Bill
For the interstate compact on of
children and that is.
Three sixteen thank you Senate
bill three sixteen and those are
the four bills that we have
introduce the session Senator
Diamond okay and and and H. B.
four six one your primary one
that is to address complaints
and grievances that the child or
parent may have with CYFD right
and is that office madam chair
housed inside or outside of CYFD
we madam chair and senator time
and we think it needs to be
outside of CYFD well there's
there's two aspects of it the
office of children's rights is
currently within CYFD and we're
codifying in this bill we're
codifying their work they will
report outside to this a child
welfare innovation center with
that will be outside of CYFD and
that group of will prepare a
report of their work and their
how they're examining the
department and they will prepare
a report every year at the end
of June and then of that report
will go to the legislature to
the governor and to the
Department the department will
respond to it within I believe
sixty days and then we're hoping
that that will provide the
legislature with some really
good information that they can
use to enact legislation the
next year but we need that lead
time to give you some really
good info about what's working
what's not working within the
agency that innovation clarify
madam chair and secretary of if
I could just go back to this is
the office of the child advocacy
with in CYFD so if the child has
a grievance or complaint about
CYFD the office is still housed
within the agency correct that
is Madam chair Senator Diamond
yes however it's independent in
that it is not tied to any
particular division.
It's separate they look at the
work of the other did protective
services for example of a look
at juvenile justice they can
address any any grievance that
comes up in any of the
operations of CYFD and they they
keep track of those grievances
they must report on how the
resolved and report back to to
the center and then to CYFD
about what they see in trans if
there's a particular complaint
let's say from resource parents
where resource parents are not
getting support they identify
those trends and then that.
For the department to address.
Madam chair secretary what.
Would you not agree with all the
push back that we're getting
that it's difficult it's
difficult to imagine that the
agency is going to be able to
monitor and provide the best
feedback to themselves the
complaints and grievances of the
HSD art are handled within the
agency the complaints that are
coming to the agency or about
the agency and so the
frustration that people are
having out there is that the
information is not leaving the
agency so there's been
conversations that perhaps
perhaps oversight needs to be
and the attorney general's
office some sort of outside
oversight which continues to get
pushed back from the agency but
it's hard to believe that we're
going to court for it fixed an
address all the CYFD is problems
when we're letting CYFD identify
which problems they want to
bring forward.
Thank you madam chair and sent
Senator Diamond that's a very
good observation but let me let
me address it in this way
the grievances that come forth
whatever they may be would not
be controlled by by the agency
it would be this independent I
say it's in inside CYFD but it
is independently under state law
separate it has its own
independent statutory authority
to receive those grievances and
resolve them so in that way yes
it is independent it lives
within the agency but the
secretary or anyone under the
secretary does not have the
authority to interject or
influence the outcome of any
grievance.
The reason it's important that
that occur within the agency
because often times if you have
an outside entity trying to
resolve relatively simple issues
it can become it's own
bureaucratic nightmare or
bureaucratic barrier and so the
idea is to have this office of
children's rights that yes it is
within the agency but it's
separately authorized under law
your law to function without
influence without
any sort of interference and
then to issue that report back
to the center and the center
back to the state legislature.
If you have an outside entities
such as the Attorney General
investigating internal.
Grievances or grievances that
arise within the agency of.
From my perspective it puts that
oversight on a creek on a more
about criminal type of approach
and I believe that that would be
a deterrent to enabling us to
attract workers to come into
this field for fear that somehow
they're going to be prosecuted
for doing social service work
for our families so for those
two reasons Senator Diamond I
would urge you to really think
about this office will be yes
within the department but
separate separately authorized
by law to function without favor
or in.
Part of any person within the
agency thank you madam chairman
secretary very briefly what is
the office reporting directly to
do it reports under program
support to the secretary to the
secretary of CYFD is to the
office with continue to report
to.
According to the bill it would
bill is it just your well okay
yes if that that's the case it
would report to the secretary
yes.
But findings and the dysfunction
within the secretaries agency
would report those findings to
the secretary madam chair and
and Senator Diamond it is the
role of.
This office the office I sit in
to find ways in which to improve
our public child welfare system
so.
Finding.
Fault or weaknesses or
challenges or a lack of of
A best practices is something
that not only the secretary but
others must also embrace.
It does not serve any one
particularly the secretary to
have
conclusions that are not.
Based in in fact in that that
will improve the system that's
our job is to provide
improvement that's my job and as
part of this to have a cherry
secretary if I had a complaint
or grievance about the ten year
old that was sexually assaulted
in your CYFD office just
recently what I take that to
this particular office for
findings to make sure that we're
following best practice in this
case.
In in this case
Critical incidences madam chair
and senator critical incidences
of such as the one you referred
to must be not only addressed in
the office of children's rights
but under critical incident
review any serious harm to any
child in our care must be
examined and that that you must
be peeled to the very core to
find out why that happened who
was responsible was there a
policy or purpose R. or a
practice that allow that risk of
harm and how do we address it
not for purposes of blaming
finding fault but for system
improvement and madam chairs
Senator Diamond we are doing
that as we speak with critical
incidences and this particular
case not only has are critical
incident review but it has three
another independent I asked for
an independent investigation
into what occurred so that is
happening thank you madam chair
secretary I appreciate that.
The discovery of this particular
recent rate case and and the
CYFD office was also discovered
that since two thousand since
the governor came along we
thought that we had ended the
practice of allowing children to
sleep in on force within CYFD
agents we didn't realize this
was still taking place and so
this was alarming to legislators
as well because we didn't think
that that was still happening
certainly not addressed practice
tell you that I Representative
the border communities and we
have an influx of of migrants
and so we volunteer to put up
shelters in our fair grounds to
take care of them and I promise
you that the shelters that we
are taking place in the sleeping
facilities for migrants are far
better than the photographs that
were shown or where children are
sleeping on the floor the CYFD
offices we thought since the end
so that the governor since two
thousand of this practice was no
longer being used how how do we
just recently find that brexit
best practice had not been put
in place.
Madam chair and Senator Diamond.
No one.
Particularly CYFD workers ever
wants a child to have to spend
the night in an office but I can
assure you today that every
office where that is required
because a child for example runs
away in the middle of the night
and the CYFD worker intervenes
and takes takes that child into
their care
Requires us to keep number one
to keep that child safe.
We're not going to refuse taking
custody of that child in the
middle of the night because we
have to take them back to an
office the blues anything except
to go back with their case
worker or to run away to keep to
date the to have placements
where either it's foster
families with specialized
emergency skills to deal with
that child in crisis or to have
other types of placements not
necessarily group homes get a
report every night every day I
want to know every child there's
a child in an office I want to
know why they're there what's
the circumstances why can't we
get them in a safe and secure
setting and our teams come
together like all hands on deck
to deal with that situation so
it is not a practice that any of
us want but at some point
sometimes it's the only option
it has to be the only option
available to keep that child
safe in the middle of the night
or or we can not find.
Family that would take that baby
or that child at that moment but
all of our offices have are very
well presented for that
situation if need be
I was given this we are we're
short on time so so madam chair
and secretary I think what we
can say is this is been a broken
HSD long before he took over the
difference that I see now is
that legislators and both sides
chambers in both sides of the
aisle are sick and tired of
opening up the newspaper and
seeing this and it doesn't seem
that money's going to fix the
problem so you can come to us
again and again and ask for more
FTEs or more line item.
And.
We don't seem to still be
identifying a long term goal and
taking active steps to really
address the repeat.
I'm at now treatment that's
taking place in New Mexico and
so it's hard to get excited
about finding these because
we've never seen a return on
these investments yet we are all
very quick to throw money at
because we'll do anything to
keep kids from dying and yet
they continue to die the
frustration this session was
that the agency brought forward
very little propose solutions to
address it.
What sixty jobs with sixty jobs
when it prevented this and being
the real work that's being done
this session is bipartisan
legislation that's been
introduced and has to travel
through the process the
frustration is we don't want to
have to legislate and put rules
in place for this agency to work
correctly I understand you're
doing you're just this is not
personal two and newcomer
takeover but the it's not the
legislators job to spend so much
time to identify the gaps in the
break in the system by learning
about these horror stories
because what's happening is
we're very reactive to the
horrors of CYFD.
We must we must identify every
cracked that these kids are
falling through and fix them and
it is frustrating for
legislators because there
doesn't seem to be a real effort
from the agency took to one of
to want eyes on them to identify
the faults of this agency so
together we can move forward but
what what I want to say is we
are here to support to this
agency in any way that they
identify we can't and it's
frustrating that they don't
provide suggestions of how we
best do that and so anything you
bring forward we are going to be
quick to support anything but
nothing we've seen the session
is meaningful that's that that
leaves me confident that we're
going to save anyone's life
other than to particular pieces
of legislation to continue to
travel through I am very
optimistic that the governor's
stepping and I appreciate her
executive orders I think that
the legislation that's been
introduced compliments that I
think it's because you're not
but she shown interest this year
but but we are here to work with
you and not against you and and
you have been you have been
great there's there's members of
the team that seem to work
against legislative efforts to
fix this broken HSD so I look
forward to to working with you
through this session I hope we
can come up with some meaningful
changes and say yes I thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Senator Diamond and I
don't have anyone else on my
list I know it's getting late
but as I hear all of this I
can't help US secretary but to
feel deeply about the case that
I just read and I'm sure many of
us did that just happened in
questa.
And it's.
It's just so troubling to me.
It I know it's for everybody I
can't imagine anyone not
thinking about this and and it's
staying within you but I just
have one question I can't fathom
please help me understand how.
A family such as this who
apparently had three children
already had been reported to the
CYFD for abuse of these
children.
But then within a short period
of time but then here comes the
fourth child that apparently
they were taking care of in some
way the child this impaired and
four years old the little boy
had been severely abused and
he's still in the same home with
the family that had already been
reported the the quote for other
abuse for other kids for their
other three the question that I
have is I'm trying to visualize
how that could have been for
this other child that was
impaired was placed with a
family that was already forty
abusing their own children and
how long does it take or does it
does the department have a a
system by which they can go back
and and.
The investigate or visit or
whatever you call it at two of
families home after they've been
reported like this I know it's a
long question but I I don't even
know how to phrase that I just
know what I feel so thank you
can you tell me a little bit
about that secretary and madam
madam chair members of the
committee
I I don't know how to say this
but every.
The harm to any child in New
Mexico is it is we take very
very seriously is just a tragedy
we want our children to be safe
and happy and thriving in New
Mexico we want.
New Mexico to be the best place
to be a child to be a kid.
Now I wanted to touch on a
couple things one of the I
cannot comment because of
confidentiality laws that
actually there's a bill if I may
House Bill ten that is really
looking at a number of things
around confidentiality that I
would urge you to look at
it's a bill that would open up
our responsibility to comment on
to answer your question about
why why is this child in this.
In this home when there's a
history and so on so I I I have
to say that I wish I could
comment on that case as well as
the other cases that were
mentioned today to say this is
what is going on this is what we
did this is what we our
approach.
Confidentiality does not allow
me to do that and.
It it's frustrating because I
think the public then believes
that perhaps we're not doing
anything.
With respect to the issue you
raise and this is an issue
raised by Senator Diamond that
yes we can and should and must
do a better job.
Of following through with
families that are high risk.
That are at that touch our
system and we send them on their
way and we've got we've got to
go back to the home and make
sure that family is okay and
safe and I have to tell you
today I don't believe that we do
a good enough job in that aspect
of our work and we're assessing
that as we speak through not
only through the house bill of
four sixty one that we hope we
would get enacted to do it but
also through the work that the
governor's office has charged us
to do and that is how do we
identify weaknesses in the
system and do something about it
not six months from now or a
year but right now and we are
doing things to go back and
check on those high risk cases
and making sure we're caught
knocking on that door three
weeks after the referral three
months after the referral six
months after the referral and
checking to see if the family is
safe and that is not right now
our system of care is not
enabling us to do that in a very
effective way so yes that's one
one area that we can do better
at and we should for the safety
of our families thank you for
that information US secretary
and I realize that because of
confidentiality matters you
can't disclose information and
and I certainly did not want to
request any information that is
in detail about the case I'm not
even sure I can handle that much
detail on this case it was
pretty painful and still just
but but I wanted to see what the
department does when you hear
about a complaint the department
goes back to check on these
children and family even though
despite was unsubstantiated you
know is there follow up for
example because perhaps you
didn't find a substantiated at
the time but maybe there was a
reason for the initial complaint
that you can follow up with in
the future that's all I wanted
to know.
Madam chair hundred percent I
couldn't agree with you more I
think that just because we find
a certain situation on one day
doesn't mean we shouldn't go
back and check on that family
not as a to to to be of of some
sort of kind of investigation
we're we're going to remove the
but to check and see if they
need help and sure that they're
safe and and just to say in the
tens of thousands of cases that
we manage every year.
Most of them are good and okay
unfortunately we hear about that
functionality that tragedy that
touches everyone's heart and and
and is important to minimize but
we serve tens of thousands of
families every year.
To their budget and I just want
to leave you with that thought
that yes we do.
One eliminated can we look
eliminated one hundred percent
perhaps not because it involves.
People who do harm however how
do we minimize the risk of that
happening and we will do
everything we can to minimise
the risk of child.
New Mexico all right thank you
so much in this Center Dimas
said we know you inherited a
department that has had major
problems for a long time and in
many times so we see cases like
these we we just want to see
media changer and we never want
to happen again either but
sometimes it does take time and
we appreciate what you're doing
to try to get there but that's
all we have for today with the
children youth and families
department thank you secretaries
staff and we are falling behind
here so let's go to are at
public Education Department HSD
nine twenty four.
And just to let anyone in the
audience of that may be
interested in the next item
which is a higher education
department research and public
service projects part we know as
our PSBs that has been moved to
tomorrow morning at so we will
hear the last Department here
and that is public education
thank you thank you thank you
for being here today and for
waiting patiently as you have
both for the acting secretary in
our staff and governor staff.
Okay you can proceed shall we
start with the sunny.
Share madam chair members of the
committee my name is Sonny
within the public schools
analyst for LFC I'm joined today
by.
Acting secretary Mariana Padilla
from PED.
Simon Miller from the department
of finance and administration
and our.
Secretary designate Arsenio
Romero behind me we're gonna be
talking from this worksheet says
public support I just to go over
briefly the HSC substitute for
House Bill to largely adopted
the LFC recommendations that are
presented
some major notable changes
however include about two
hundred two million dollars for.
Instruction our requirement
changes which is recommended by
L. E. S. C. another fourteen
point five million for
increasing educational system
salaries in the SCG a forty
million dollar and forty million
dollars appropriation for create
technical education initiatives
recommended by L. E. S. C. and
shift in the public's cap out
late distribution for schools to
increase the security
distribution from twenty five
million to thirty five million
in the back if your packet there
is a sort of high level
comparison between the major
policy differences for K. twelve
plus an extended learning and
notably you'll see on the HSC
called that the amount that was
appropriated for the SCG
accounts for an increase in the
formula weight and you can see
that on the form the formula
funding factor road they're
raising that way to point zero
two two four schools that
provided more than one hundred
eighty days of instruction and
point zero three three for
schools are providing over one
hundred ninety days of
instruction.
There's also some discussion
about how to count instructional
hours and that but of course as
you're well aware those bills
are still sitting in the house
and the becoming over to you
shortly happy to turn over to
the secretaries DFA the and
comments and stand for questions
thank you sorry all right Simon
you're next did you have
anything else to add chair
members of the committee again
my name is Simon Miller I'm with
DFA.
I just wanted to touch on a
couple of budget items that are
currently not in house bill two
that were recommended by the
executive so the first one is a
it's an appropriation for
attendance improvement
initiatives so implementation of
the attendance for success act
the executive recommendation
included seventeen million for
that purpose attendance is a big
problem in New Mexico the
chronic absenteeism rate last
school year was forty percent
meeting forty percent of kids
are missing ten percent or more
of a.
Of schoolbased so that that was
the first one seventeen million
for attendance improvement
initiatives
the next item I wanted to talk
about is health benefits the the
HSC
the adoption has funding to a
line the employer contribution
for health benefits with that of
a state agency employers they
get their insurance through GST
the governor's proposal
went beyond that amount and an
increase the employer
contribution on the on that
agencies employers so it's
pretty significant gap in the
budget
for that purpose.
And
with that I'll pass it over to
for cabinet secretary
This should have more items to
discuss thank you yes are at
Madonna thank you thank you good
evening madam chair and members
of the committee thank you so
much for having me here tonight
as mentioned as Sonny mentioned
we do have our new at secretary
designate just like for him to
stand up Dr Seneal Romero his
first day is Monday so this is
my last week as your interim
cabinet secretary of PED so any
tough questions you have for me
and will direct him over to our
city and tonight so the hand out
that will be using is just this
one she.
I think will be able to go
through this pretty quickly and
I'm going to start with our
agency budget.
our agency budget is very
similar very close to the LFC
recommendation the budget that
came from HFC there's only a
seven percent difference in
those but in the budgets the
primary difference is the
difference of funded FTE so the
executive budget requests that
fifteen of our FTE receive
funding
PED has some critical positions
at the department that really.
Need to be filled to be able to
do the work that we need to do
with the department
our current vacancy rates for
funded FTE is only four percent
so we are very effective of
filling the positions that are
funded this these positions
include those that are in our
our health these and safe
schools bureau these are the
folks that deal with their
social emotional learning
within schools our fiscal
division these are the folks
that make sure that we get our
funding out quickly to school so
that they can put it to good use
with our students our
accountability bureau these are
the folks that ensure that all
of our student assessments are
being done and we're meeting all
of those federal and state
requirements and that we're
getting those inferred that
information out to you this
request will also allow us to
address re classification of our
current positions this is really
critical for us retaining our
talented staff at the department
like other departments we see
our staff leave for for higher
paying jobs and so being able to
have some funding to reclassify
positions makes a big difference
for us the only other aspect of
our agency budget that we did
not receive funding and
in the LFC recommendation is for
administrative costs to for our
I big data projects that we have
been working on are and are on
schedule to complete they
include our longitudinal student
and teacher data system allows
us to track students across
grade levels as they move
through our educational system
our educator practice prep data
system allows us to collect data
from higher ed institutions that
have colleges of education so
that we know.
How many students are coming out
what are their during degree
concentrations that we can best
place them within schools are
grants management system again
that helps us process our
funding and get it out quickly
and are open book system this
system is important it allows us
to provide financial
transparency in terms of what's
happening at the school district
and charter school level so
these projects again are on time
however we do need some funding
for administrative costs for
these projects so next I like to
move over to the right side of
the sheet
and talk to you about public
school support sunny and then
Simon already talked about some
of these items but I just want
to share with you that since the
last time we were here in front
of you we went back and looked
at some of our federal as for
money and we identified some
funding from from that source
that would allow us to fill some
of the gaps that we're not
funded AGFC so this list on the
Rhine is shorter than when we
came to you last time.
I'm so the first item there is
two hundred and fifty thousand
for the dash software this is a
software that allows us to
Receive and look at our and
plans that schools submit to the
department this is required by
statute based on legislation
that you all have a past the
next thing is one point one
million for micro prudential's
R. Michael micro credential
system is extremely popular
among educators this allows us
to go a bit faster this allows
teachers to race through their
tier levels their salary tier
levels and increase their pay
we've got one three point see
for our native American language
educators we passed legislation
last year to make sure that
they're paid at just as.
Level one teacher this is
incredibly important it's part
of Yazzie Martinez is something
that's important that gets
funded
we need two million dollars for
the menstrual products for
students this is a huge aspect
ensuring that our our a young
girls are attending school at it
is a barrier for attendance the
next one is our standards based
assessments our initial request
was fifteen point three million
we are at this point only have
two point five million left this
funding is essential to
actually implement our student
assessments that were required
to do we have seventeen million
dollars that Simon had mentioned
this is tied to the Senate bill
two th I'm sorry three sixty
seven this is for students
attendance interventions which
is incredibly important to make
sure our students are attending
school every day.
Just over thirty three million
for special education learning
enhancements and other supports
twenty two point five million
for our universal high quality
meals which is legislation that
Senator Padilla is caring we're
short sixty three million for
our health care insurance for
educational person now and four
point seven million for
transportation required for
extended learning programs and
then the last is forty two
million for educational
technology this is the funding
needed to purchase devices and
provide connectivity for
students around the state.
Thank you so much for for that
quick explanation we do have
them here but I I requested to
to go a little faster to make
sure that we got a chance to
hear all because we're trying to
get a hard stop here pretty
quickly I wanted to make sure we
heard all of the request sure so
do we have any comments from
committee members questions we
have Senator Padilla and Senator
Steinborn and senator what's
thank you madam chair and I'll
be very quick so yeah I think a
I think we're.
Close to getting where we need
to on the twenty two point five
there that's left on the
universal I quality free and
healthy meals madam chair and
madam secretary in the Mr
secretary doesn't regulations I
could be more I'm a lossless
high school graduate so I just
you know if the whole town's all
excited for you by the way the
whole town I'm telling you right
now so.
but with madam chair that the
other question I had is is just
around the
The teacher
prep and stuff the programs like
like a golden apple foundation
and work that's done by those
types of organizations with that
wind up being in the in what
that went up to getting in the
in the budget this year.
Your programs and I know they I
called out golden apple but
there's many others that do it
but.
Sunny can you answer that madam
chair so last year's budget
included one million dollars as
part of the fifteen million
dollars in the teacher
residencies appropriation that
was for.
Program similar to golden apple
of that language is still in the
substitute currently as it
stands so twenty million dollars
in the twenty two twenty one
million dollars in the fifteen
million dollars appropriation
for teacher residencies okay so
it it's state that just one
million dollars and madam chair
center yes it's the same
language are there any other
questions of the budget that
would would support something
like this also.
Any other sections.
Madam chair Senator there's
several probation if you turn to
page two on your high level
starting online.
One thirty seven there's various
appropriations really into
teacher residency pilot
principal counselor social
worker residents pilots paid
student teaching teach up.
A lot of teacher pipeline
programs that the department has
wide latitude to use for various
purposes.
So which ones then madam chair
would be of a golden apple type
foundation type of work with
which ones would apply to those
organizations if they were to I
know they have to go through in
our P. and all that stuff and
which ones would apply to the an
organization like that.
Madam chair Senator I believe
the one that smells real once
again is on line one thirty
seven which is the teacher
residencies pilot.
you really need to buy some
glasses I just having a chance
to go get on the set fifteen
point five is or what which what
what is the amount that one up.
And madam chair Representative
Senator let me also point to so
it's thirteen million from the
public education reform Fund
online one thirty seven and then
if I could turn their attention
back to page one there's another
divisional two million online
seventy so all together fifteen
million dollars.
Thank you thank you very much
thanks for the help on the
universal free meals your
department is been outstanding
helping us thank you all right
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you madam chair and madam
acting secretary and Mr
Secretary thousand that
congratulations for the city of
so much on your appointment and
So I have a question I'm I'm
concerned still about the health
care disparities issue madam
chair and I want to I want to
ask a question about that and
sunny maybe they got to table at
answer the question for you miss
madam acting secretary which is
you know I understand the house
did what they did and they
called the parity but my
understanding and tell me if I'm
wrong is that it doesn't affect
teachers making about fifty
thousand dollars a year.
That it's just for people making
below that they got the increase
so that in reality this parity
didn't do anything for people
making over fifty thousand
dollars a year in house bill two
is that correct.
Mr Irvine are yes Adam chats are
a Senator Steinborn the it.
Employer contribution tears a
GST are if you make below fifty
thousand dollars the employer
covers forty percent the make
between fifty and sixty the
employer covers
Sorry I got that confused below
fifty the employer covers eighty
percent between fifty and sixty
the employer cover seventy and
then above sixty thousand
dollars the employer cover sixty
percent so if the PSI tears were
statutorily modified to match
that then it level two and three
teachers to make above that
sixty thousand and they already
it have sixty percent of their
health insurance covered by the
employer so I've I believe
you're correct in saying that
that those level two and three
teachers wouldn't wouldn't see
any savings.
In is that and so thank you for
that answered does that also is
far as so the word parity really
depends how much you're making
right that a fair statement are
they.
Is that across the scheme for
all state employees if you're
making of of sixty thousand or
fifty thousand that's that the
state pays sixty percent.
That the case madam chair
because Senator.
This would.
The HSD proposal would bring
parity in terms of the employer
contribution
because then you have the same
contribution levels
based on income just like Pat at
GSD but but you are right in
saying that only those making
below sixty thousand would see
some sort of benefit from that
proposal okay but the ones thank
you madam chair but the ones
making above that amount the
amount that the state is
contributing is equal to what
other state employees are
getting their posture with the
state is that what you're saying
madam chair center yes that's
correct the ones who will below
that amount that work at parity
is that saying that correct
Madam chair center yes that's
that's correct okay all right.
Well let me ask you this funny
how we done any research on how
important this issue is into our
recruitment of teachers since
that's a critical issue we're
trying to to confront is
recruiting new teachers how we
look at this issue of pay.
Hey insurance costs shares on
other states we're competing
with.
Madam chair and senator we
haven't done an analysis of this
and several years and LESC but I
will say that with the recent
pay increases and movement
towards in developing a pipeline
you seen an influx of teachers
going into the colleges of
education and you've seen a
decrease in your vacancy rates
so there is been a.
Noticeable it adjustment in
response to compensation related
appropriations.
Thank you for that and I'm just
curious about that as we
continue to move forward and.
Tell present those answers thank
you mentioned all right thank
you Senator what you are
listening to you madam chair not
to make a pretty short of.
When I read this seventy.
The objective.
Recommendation.
Was essentially flat one percent
and the House recommendation was
eight point six percent.
Is that right is that
essentially.
You know not trying to to get to
while here but essentially the
house recommendation to HB to
with more than the executive
ask.
Madam chair Center that's
correct for general fund
recurring okay so we're.
I see some more ask here.
That of of this.
Mr thirds madam madam chair.
Representative.
Yes the Senator my apologies are
really pushing this
The lady today the executive
recommendation was lower in the
SCG but it has to do with where
that funding is directed so the
executive recommendation
directed more funding towards
health benefits but didn't
recommend if any funding above
the line for extended learning
beyond one thousand one hundred
and forty hours there is if you
look at the HFC recommendation
here aside HSC adoption they
have up almost was that a
hundred and nine million above
the line for
extended learning of the on the
one thousand one hundred forty
hours so
So yes you are right in that the
the recommendations about the
act or sorry that the adoptions
above the executive
recommendation but just has to
do with where that funding is
directed so so madam chair so
what you're saying is.
One recommendation.
Adds ours in days to the school
year any other recommendation at
state health benefits.
Is that somewhere close Madam
Senator both recommendations
increased the the minimum number
of hours to one thousand one
hundred and forty ansible did
add hours it's just the funding
for extended learning even
beyond that care that the big
difference was okay okay it's
not quite that simple house bill
one thirty a pretty complicated
but that's I think.
The general understanding yeah
I'm not a Education Act so.
Keep it pretty simple because.
So madam chair.
When we get to.
These at.
These are above this.
Madam chair.
madam chair and senator yes
that's above where the current
house bill two is right as it
stands I will say that if you
look at line one hundred twenty
two.
this is your general fund
nonrecurring ask.
For the executive which is about
two hundred four million dollars
so I would say that their
requests here we're already part
of their initial request except
that the nonrecurring piece here
was not part of house bill two.
As a came over from the house of
that clarifies that these are
not necessarily New York
requests the which is not
included in the house version.
This may however it a little bit
on that Senator correct me sunny
but some of these requests were
partially funded in the house
but the difference that you see
here are for those things that
were not fully funded and let me
for example maybe this will make
a little sense here in that and
I'm thinking specifically about
the two million that is in there
in this last for the Mr products
to support student attendance
there was an amount and I don't
remember if it was how much is
requests I think was Ford four
million or something like that
or two more minutes three men
and and there was yes and there
was one million apparently that
was appropriated but it left a
deficit of two million dollars
so it's that two million that
were seen in other words they
requested a certain amount got
funded some and all of these I
think and the balance that they
didn't get from their requests
were seen here so it is above
and beyond the the initial
requests my madam chair you're
absolutely right except not all
of these received some funding
some didn't get anything yeah.
Okay so we need to make up for
Monday this stuff.
Is the sense of what you all are
saying that if we want to add to
what has built to did this is
where you're requesting us to
add to yes madam chair Senator
Woods that's correct okay thank
you madam chair.
Right.
And I don't have any further
questions I have no one else on
the list but I think for the
sake of time we're gonna stop if
I do have any after reviewing
this I will call you and I
appreciate the fact that you
stepped up to the to the
position during this change and
and also I want to welcome our
new cabinet secretary designate
in that we look forward to
working with you thanks again
for all thank you Sonny and
Simon also you you know we can
do without you our staff my
goodness it's amazing how we do
so much but it seems like as
soon as we're without our staff
and we really don't know what
you're doing.
Thank you so much for your kind
words really appreciate the
support and if you have any
questions please don't hesitate
to reach out and be happy to
give you some additional
information thank you for your
consideration.
