Social affairs department
secretary Deborah Garcia
Adriatico I'll let her introduce
her team and Dr Andrew Miner
from the state budget division
of the department of finance and
administration.
Okay very quick overview of the
difference between the executive
and LFC recommendations over all
the recommendations were pretty
close both provided some modest
increases for person and easy
and services of the biggest
difference in the
recommendations that was in the
expansion of the agency requests
about thirty FTE for a cleaning
staff which I will let the
secretary.
Go into further detail about the
executive supported about twenty
one of those positions into the
LFC supported about eight of
those today.
AGFC did hear this agency
yesterday and the preliminarily
adopted the LFC recommendation
of a with some further attention
to get the recommendations for
those janitors a little bit
closer and unless Dr Meyer has
anything else to say I will go
ahead let the secretary make a
presentation thank you then the
good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee and I'm
Andrew Miner on the W. state
budget director and the analyst
for the department cultural
fairs it did a great job I will
just point out a couple other
differences so there's the
expansion request for janitors
twenty one recommended by the
executive a by the LFC there's
also some museum increased
museum costs in the museums and
historic sites program the LFC
recommended a hundred fifty
thousand for those costs however
as the executive recommended
three hundred twenty nine
thousand and then in the New
Mexico arts program the
executive recommended a ninety
thousand dollar increase for
increased funding for the music
Commission where the at which
the LFC did not recommend that's
all and also in a nonrecurring
appropriations there's one big
difference to point out and
that's that the executive fully
funded the agency's request for
eight million dollars in general
fund to improve visitor
amenities and museums and
historic sites whereas the LFC
recommended five million dollars
for exhibit development that
concludes my remarks alternate
over to the secretary.
But then secretary Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you for having me here the
south.
I will try to keep my
presentation brief but I do want
to acknowledge that with me
today is W. secretary Michele
Gallagher Roberts CFO Greg
Geisler You Like It may who is
the state librarian and chair of
education and engagement Patrick
Moore who is the director of New
Mexico historic sites and chair
of history and heritage we also
have various division directors
and Department leadership and
most importantly we have many of
our friends and supporters for
more boards commissions
foundations and friends groups
with us today
I will move through the first
part of my presentation fairly
quickly on page two is just a
reminder of what we do we
provide services and programs in
every county and tribal
community across the state we
are best known to the public for
museums and historic sites which
offer exhibits performances
lectures and more we also care
for thousands of objects
documents photographs and other
items of cultural importance to
the state we make these
available to researchers fellows
and students but we also
actively participate in research
ourselves
we operate book mobiles Fund
arts events statewide guide
historic preservation activities
around the state undertake
archaeological monitoring
research and present a variety
of a robust education programs
on page three it's just an
overview of our mission and
vision these are our in our
stars for everything that we do
and we focus our work around
four goals access and inclusion
collective impact stewardship in
partnership with our rural and
tribal communities so regardless
of the focus of the division its
geographic location in the state
every division is responsible
for actively contributing
programs and services that move
those four goals forward.
Moving to page four is just a
highlight of the some of our
performance measures from the
previous fiscal year I would
just point out that our
attendance numbers are are
recovering post pandemic
closures at of over six hundred
thousand a year we serve over
three hundred and fifty thousand
children a year and we had over
four hundred and twenty eight
thousand individuals participate
in education programs page five
is just overview of what the
analysts have already gone
through in terms of the
difference between the LFC
rocked and the executive
director of page six highlights
with for the agency or the key
differences those have been
conveyed by the analyst
appropriately our number one
priority really is more
janitorial FTAs we also need
increased funding for operating
cost although we are very
grateful that our agency budget
has consistently gone up over
the past ten years increases in
increases in staff costs have
eaten up the majority of those
increases so I did for the
second time I did not include
the gruff but if you look at the
agency budget by the two hundred
three hundred and four hundred
categories over the past ten
years you will see the budget
for personal steadily increasing
well the budget for up operating
cost has remained fat flat and
in fact gone down that is
becoming increasingly in
unsustainable as we see the cost
of living increases dramatically
impacting things like utilities
and also or do it cost
continuing to go up.
if you turn to page seven
I just want to explain a little
bit more about the janitorial
issue I'm it is a strange thing
I admit for the department of
cultural affairs to be up here
talking to you about janitors
please take that as how critical
this issue is for museums and
historic sites so we maintain
approximately one million square
feet of publicly accessible
space so these are areas that
the public goes into their not
officer years they're not
storage areas their areas of the
public comes into.
Currently we have a total of
eight janitorial FTEs for the
entire department for the entire
state there are seven janitors
in Albuquerque and one janitor
and Alamogordo so on a per
square foot basis one janitorial
FTE at DCA would have to claim a
hundred and twenty thousand
square feet in a eight hour
shift to keep it clean.
This just as a point of
comparison the state capital
which is also a very heavily
business visited public building
has one F. T. E. report for
every fourteen thousand seven
hundred square feet year round
additional staff is brought in
during the session GSD house one
FTE for for forty three thousand
square feet so these include
office spaces we are not
Management Agency we manage our
own facility so really we need a
total of twenty three FTEs to
even be compatible to DST's
forty three thousand square feet
per FTE.
The LFC recommendation provides
us eight additional FTE ease but
that is simply insufficient.
Fifteen more are truly needed.
You again these are heavily used
facilities you saw by
performance over a million
people come through these doors
every day we are open six to
seven days a week and in some
cases we are open three hundred
and sixty two days a year.
We have a very limited contract
janitorial that is mostly at
Alamogordo and farm and ranch.
and we do use some janitorial at
natural history and an agency
just because of those facilities
tend to do private rentals.
Lack of janitors and lower
levels of cleanliness affect
employee morale every division
director behind me will tell you
that I'm clean facilities make
it more difficult for private
foundation partners to raise
money and volumes three you will
see that last year the
foundation's brought twelve
million dollars and private
money to the state and this
issue is impacting their ability
to do that.
Janitorial staff are also
critical in identifying
maintenance issues early on
things like leaky faucets dreams
that are not being cleared
lights that are continually
going up and the lack of them is
creating ongoing maintenance
issues.
Contact editorial services are
not cost effective down of farm
and ranch that director pays a
hundred and thirty seven
thousand dollars a year for a
contractor contractual
janitorial service that would
give be the equivalent of two
and a half FTEs in janitorial
services we're paying out to a
third party.
And so I think I've talked
enough about janitors hopefully
I've made a compelling case
about why they're needed and not
a luxury and so I simply asked
that this committee consider
adding thirty three three
hundred and thirty seven
thousand dollars.
Realty's another hundred and
seventy nine thousand to cover
basic operating cost in museums
and historic sites and I will
say that the LFC recommendation
does not fully found The New
Mexico music's commission's
request sixty five thousand
dollars would allow them to
continue reestablishing the New
Mexico music commission which
was on funded for over a decade.
Up quickly the doctor minor
explained about the difference
in the special appropriation
request we had to ask for a
hundred thousand essentially to
I'm sorry it million to
celebrate the twenty fifth
anniversary of the department
increase our visitor amenities
do more marketing and do a
season of events of the LFC
recommendation just five minutes
five million for exhibit design
and while normally exhibit
development is funded by a
private foundation partners and
is on a three to five year time
line we can certainly put the
money to effective use of the
nation.
I hope I have been briefed Sir
and I am happy to.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary.
Myself Senator Padilla and
Senator Diamond center Rodriguez
volunteer to be janitors.
We're done with the session Mr
Chairman after we clean up the
loan terms.
Thank you questions from
committee members since time.
Okay thank thank you Mr chair
I just want to ask a question
Purcell Mr chair madam secretary
good afternoon your the
janitorial issues so right now
there's a deficit of these
positions are we contracting out
for it for we relying on
insufficient.
Employees to do the work Mr
chair Senator members of the
committee we do some limited
contracting out of janitorial
Fuhrman ranch because a hundred
thirty seven thousand a year for
janitorial
we essentially have in areas
that we have no generators such
as all of the Santa Fe museums
and all of the historic sites we
have security guards Rangers
instructional coordinators
cleaning restrooms on in
addition to the rest of their
duties so for instance at a
Santa Fe museum the cards will
come in at seven thirty they'll
do a sweep of the Russians clean
it up and then go on to do their
very important guard duties and
at the end of the evening I'll
come back to do a second sweep
so if it's a busy day for field
trips are are pretty you know
Indian market weekend those
restaurants can get pretty bad
and and trash can build up in
lobbies and other areas because
we just Wirth we're stretching
our staff to do additional these
in almost every facility there
so Mr chair and colleagues I
just think.
This this is part of our brand
this is part of what we DO and
we have to invest in it we have
to build this up and.
we have to have a good product
for me you know fancy reading
here it sounds like it's
affecting morale boost so
hopefully we invest more and
listen to the LFC listen to you
and help fund that.
So I just want to say that and
and you know also if if if we're
needing support for a.
Displays in order to use with
the exhibits then you know now's
a good time with with all the
one time money that we have now
to make this infusion to take
your product to the next level
and help you sustain that
quality product that we want as
New Mexico so I I just wanna
give a shout out to my friend
Billy G. Garrett I so often
don't have County former chair
of the Dona ana county
commissions and Raul Garcia
cultural preservationists thank
you Mr.
What is that in the Senate
finance Bible in his next
question.
Thank you Mr chair appreciate
that.
A notice unnoticed to.
And to tell you the truth I
don't know a lot about your
agency except that I listen to a
lot of few books and I
appreciate that very much.
if it passes the time away.
And I appreciate that own your.
See the rural library endowment
fund.
I notice it's you started with
the balance of thirteen point
two million and you awarded.
I ran six hundred twenty four
thousand four fifty two eligible
libraries.
And your requested fifteen
million more.
You tell me a little about that.
Mr chair Senator members of the
committee I will take an initial
pass out it and I'm happy to
bring up you like in a the state
librarian and or Gregg Isler the
CFO to visit more so the with
the thirteen million that is
currently in the role library
endowment has not generated
sufficient return to actually
pay out grants out of that I
believe the six hundred thousand
you're referring to is from a
different source of funding
secretary
Mr chairman Senator Woods we
basically took a guess of what
we might be doing
okay so I think we're working on
a distribution for the very
beginning of FY twenty for this
point in time for the eligible
they've completed the rule of
having to hand it out and so
we're looking into the
distribution very soon that's a
maximum but it only came.
Mr chair Senator.
The the six hundred the payout
on the endowment is based on the
return at the end of every year
and so we in the first three
years are in the first year
there was three million dollars
in the account which did not
generate enough to pay out of
last year this body put in ten
million more and so that amount
is projected what will be paid
out in the upcoming fiscal year
the fifteen million dollars
special will add more to that
time for rate on future years
that's my understanding from
constituents that when that fund
reaches fifty million it will be
provided I believe around forty
thousand dollars a year to every
role library which would be a
significant game changer for
those rural libraries so that's
where that fifty million dollars
special this year is deeply
appreciated.
Okay.
At fifty million Mr chair at
fifty million you you're
expecting to pay the fifty two
eligible libraries forty
thousand a year.
But that was it does your those
are libraries that are currently
eligible for state grants.
Okay so we're talking about
thank you gonna come up to the
microphone as well on the World
Wide Web another I. twenty Texas
a we can't hear we don't know
what's going on.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
Senator Woods a state of library
I can A. will collaborate the
six remember these we already
have a state grant program so
for example we Clayton would be
getting requests already from
that two can carry this is for
much smaller ones that have been
eligible so
Mr chair Senator this would fund
fifty two of our hundred
libraries so it's all of the
libraries three thousand and
under if we were to add fifteen
million which is what we're
requesting and the executive and
is also LFC budget that would
get the principle that.
Which will pay outs a maximum of
twenty five thousand dollars per
library per year.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino has a bill
in to get the maximum I mean the
the total principal up to fifty
million which would pay out as
the secretary was saying a
little over forty thousand a
year at that at that level then
and Mr chair the gentleman.
How many libraries we talking
about at forty thousand a year
Mr chair in senators would be
about fifty two by the current
definition in the current
population levels.
And that's out of the a total of
a hundred libraries out of those
fifty to twelve our tribal
libraries.
I'm just trying to get this go
down of what you're doing and
with this money.
Are the strings attached what
what can they do that money Mr
chair.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator we have an
imac in place now that defines
that it follows closely with our
state grants in aid so it's for
books computers professional
developments and even staff
salaries so quite a few
operational costs operational
jobs yes No capital discovery
strict.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
the legislature approved for the
voters to vote on another
general obligation bond issue
and we have heard from
Department FISA ministration
that that bond sales about to
happen so that's another six
million dollars it actually went
from four million dollars six
million dollars for library
needs and I can they use that
for some capital some capitals
love okay and then there's
another million for a travel
libraries and rice correct so
much like geo funds this year
Bonser defacement sale that's a
sense of capital money right G.
O. bond issues all capital money
not operational at all.
But that's I mean I'm just
trying to figure what the.
Mr chair thank you very much
appreciate the opportunity thank
you senator Byrd thank you Mr
chair just not necessarily
question but
There's no saying if you take
your your stuff your stuff will
take care of you.
And.
In today's world in this.
Legislative session we're gonna
pass a nine point four billion
dollar budget.
And if.
Four of those left.
Anyway at least that much.
If we can't afford three hundred
thirty seven dollars three
hundred thirty seven thousand
dollars for janitorial staff to
take care of the museum's the
protect the culture of the state
of New Mexico which is the
foundation of who we are and
what we do not put money in the
wrong place we've got a fund at
least the janitorial staff on
this thing
in I've spent.
Way too many years of marketing
and public service.
And customer service the number
the all that is true to hear you
never get a second chance to
make a first impression.
You walking to one of our
premier facilities and they're
all beautiful facilities.
And there's cops on the floor
the floor sentence when you go
in the bathroom looks like
indigents of men in the bathroom
I don't mean to offend anyone
I'm just saying that if you do
that they will come back in to
get a bad rap for all the good
stuff you got on in their you're
going to get a bad rap.
I just encourage this committee
to and this legislature to early
support cultural first to the
janitorial service and maybe
some of the other basic needs
they have.
This agency does not get enough
money to run as it is and I
think we just need to look at
we're putting our money to
protect the culture.
That is New Mexico.
Thank you Mr president Mr
chairman.
Distancing Mr chairman and I
remain calm and president.
Share.
Madam speaker thank you.
What.
We're so confuse.
For.
So I.
I don't I want to disagree a
little bit with senator Byrd
but.
Clearly we have to have the
clean facilities note about that
and I'm just trying to figure
out you said a hundred thirty
seven thousand dollars for the
farm and ranch museum.
If we had two people that work
three hundred days a year at
eighteen dollars an hour.
Plus forty percent budget.
That comes two hundred and
almost a hundred twenty one
thousand dollars.
I don't know how many folks they
have working eight hours a day
they have wanted to have I I
don't.
But but that's what it would
cost the state.
Versus hiring somebody so so
truly if they have for people
that work that many hours wells
and then it's it's better to
contract maybe what we need to
do is put more money in
contracts maybe what we need to
do is renegotiate contracts.
But I know that.
Businesses that are very big
have contract janitorial staff.
This if it works for.
For other businesses it should
work for us as well and I only
say that because.
The
Of the benefit package that will
then.
That we will then have to pay
for it's paid for by the real
employers which are out there
paying taxes.
So.
Yes the place SB claim
absolutely irritates me when I
go in the restroom it's nasty
where is.
But
But I would just throw that out
there is it is this is something
that needs to be a state
employee or is it something that
needs to be contracted better
thank.
Your question.
Chairman.
To follow up kind of closely on
what Senator share was I had
many of the same questions first
of all on page seven I like that
you compared your facilities to
the capital because this is also
an area of high traffic should
be you know the building
establishment of pride of New
Mexico and there's someone
always in the bathroom cleaning
the bathroom the into my office
trash can three times a day it's
not in full so you know how
embarrassing that we have your
super cleaners that are by the
way are doing a fabulous job
here and then you're coming to
us telling us that you're not
even have someone the cleaning
basic needs for you are is an
embarrassment my concern is
important to ensure its museum
also expressed very similar
concerns and in fact allocated
junior money towards it because
they articulate it well they're
paying a hundred thirty seventy
year you're asking for three
hundred and thirty seven which
doesn't seem to be enough for us
for to it to increase an agency
of letting you know back here in
the LFC reference to increase
positions of thirty FTEs
executives recommending twenty
one LFC recommended eight.
You're going to have
difficulties filling those FTEs
and I'm scared they're going to
remain vacant so to follow up on
shares would you would you be
more inclined to increase your
contractual services to see if
we can it seems to be to me to
be an emergency in which our end
to provide these cleaning
service Mr president Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator members of the
committee I'm yes I mean it is a
problem it can be worked either
way I I point taken but we would
certainly need a fairly
significant increase in our
contractual budget that would
have to go up year over year
accordingly to can track those
services out so fully loaded a
janitorial staff salary you know
it's maybe forty eight thousand
a year
I will say that there are some
advantages to having contract I
mean excuse me person that is
it's in the janitorial capacity
as we see with many of the guard
Center facilities there are
actually the frontline visitor
service people you go into any
one of our museums and it's
going to be that guard that
probably welcomes you and says
hello and knows you know the our
guards know more about the
exhibits often times and you
know other people working the
cashier at that don't get to be
in those exhibits all the time
the other thing is you know our
facilities are specialized so
you can train them to the
particulars of of you know it's
a museum and how you say claim a
plexiglass for training you can
certainly have that conversation
with the contractor so you know
there is a certain level of I
would say employee loyalty but
certainly if if if if the state
legislature wants to give me
twenty you know two million
dollars to contract out
janitorial that is the other way
to skin the cat and keep you
know they they've facilities
claim and and you know there's
at least one division director
City behind me that likes to
have a mix of
Just a contract and staff
janitorial particularly when you
have a fence in the evening then
you know you're not ended up
having to pay over time you can
have somebody come in so the
point is taken but we would need
an increase in the contract
budget in order to accomplish
that with the knowledge that
just as personal salary and
benefits go up every year the
cost to the company that we're
buying services from will go up
year over year in those those
service announcement have to go
up as well yeah well Mr you know
best and so I just want to kind
of echo what my colleagues are
saying here the LFC
recommendation is insufficient
and if you're asking for basic
cleaning services and then I
sounds to me like I joined my
colleagues and saying what we
will meet your needs whatever
those are so you know just make
clear on what those assets are
but thank you for bringing this
to our attention and and it is
embarrassing I apologize for you
having to go through but I do
hope we right that wrong thank
you.
Thank you etcetera thank you Mr
chairman and trying to
comprehend all of this Secretary
half see you of course thank you
to our staff just real quick I'm
trying to comprehend how eight
janitors are doing all of this
work it must be having to do
work over time and probably not
even getting paid for it but
somebody's doing it in if
there's only eight it's
inconceivable to me how they can
only they can do it in eight
hours this doesn't seem right
question how do we ever get to
eight was that the way it's
always been or is did you get
caught at one point or what
happened can you answer that for
me thank Mr chair Senator
members of the committee this is
the situation I inherited
frankly four years ago this
seems like the appropriate here
to make the us some other
critical issues have also been
Matt I do not know how it came
about but I would suspect it was
in previous budget cuts that
janitorial the decision was made
that guards could clean
restrooms I suspect in some
cases for instance historic
sites my guess is they have
never had a janitorial.
C. okay and I guess you know all
I support contracting now many
times it's good but I think I
primarily it or first I should
say would support having
employees our own employees
working full time there a lot of
people that may be looking for a
job in may not mind being
janitor so given in full time
work
permanently with budget and so
on as we have in the state may
be good for employees anyway but
I fully support increasing this
it doesn't seem right at all and
and I appreciate you being
resources and all that you do
and you're doing a great job
thank you.
Thank you.
Let me ask some questions and.
I didn't have to wear glasses
when I first got here.
We are currently have thirty
FTEs are permanent janitorial
correct.
That's what's in there Mr
chairman members of the
committee that's the request is
for thirty FTE and I will know
if you're looking at the volume
to it dies mistakenly say that
currently DCA has eighteen but
it's supposed to be eight I put
one in front of their the
request is for thirty currently
there are eight the man in the
what did they have in twenty
nineteen or twenty seventeen.
Mr Chairman eight.
Eighteen since no eight eight so
let me ask madam secretary why
don't you come and do some F. T.
back filling with vacancies and
hire those janitors to give him
in place.
Mr chair that is a very
reasonable question
but the fact of the matter is
with the vacancies that we have
our positions that we are
actively feeling right now the
agency is actively trying to
fill every vacancy that we have
and it does not make sense to
take say a curator supervisor
vacant position down closet to a
janitorial position and then the
the curatorial side the
programmatic side we do create
and funds terms using other
state funds and occasionally
vacancy savings in four years
we've created eighteen storm
positions but it's not feasible
to use vacancy savings to create
and make it positions to create
janitorial it does not make
sense in the long run we've and
cut our needs partner sells off
at the knees and other areas.
Thank you.
So it doesn't make a whole lot
of sense because you can still
come back to the legislature
state we do classified those
deals and back fill those FTEs
for janitorial slots and that's
an efficiency that and right now
I'm not picking on you this
happens in every agency and they
don't do it because they they
think we don't lose that
classification when there's a
need.
And you don't fill that need and
then show the legislature will
add to do classify this position
and moved to FTEs recognition
total staff hired it doesnt
clarify that the room was really
in need to do that I mean.
And that manages an agency
lectures every department can do
this and and you could also went
for barber request in state I
need bathroom any janitorial
services or contractual service
is some places please work some
places contractual services
work.
But for cultural affairs for
this to be the number one
request right doesn't make a
whole lot of sense when you
could resolve the issue
internally in Canada before and
shown us the real need and fix
the problem.
in in fixed earlier so.
Let me ask you some other
questions so if you were going
to places where would they be
placed.
Mr chair members of the
committee the the allocation
requests would allow us to place
one janitor at most historic
sites frankly I even at these
numbers
for instance Lincoln and send
may have to share a janitor we
would also put janitors in each
of the Santa Fe facilities we
would have aged we would have
janitorial staff and New Mexico
farm and ranch there would be
under this scenario the national
Hispanic cultural center and the
and natural history museum would
continue to operate with four
and three positions respectively
so we would play some of the
historic sites and museums that
don't currently have either
janitorial staff or contractual
staffing.
And and madam secretary was a
conversation in the house
yesterday about this.
Mr chair of many of the
committee members spoke
similarly to to this committee
understood the need and as was
noted by miss Patty the state
approved the LESC recommendation
with a note that they wanted to
continue looking at this issue.
Thank no I think we can resolve
that I mean you you and I am
talking other sectors may be in
the room you have the ability to
fix problems when they occur
he's got to take the initiative
to figure it out with more
requests and with moving those
FTEs and then coming back to us
saying I had to move the safety
in order to fulfill that
janitorial needs and really I
needed to get done so agencies
need take that upon themselves a
little bit
So that I think that's more my
questions thank you
Your presentation.
We're going to hear
Health and Human Services or
Human Services Department.
I I don't think I have.
Thank you.
Re and you are going to start
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee at
RubyAnn Esquibel with the
legislative finance committee
and we have with us acting
secretary Kerry army hall and
also miss Mary Beth din's more
from the department of finance
and the ministry.
You guys leave the room quietly
please so we can.
But thank you Mr chairman this
is the Human Services Department
and
I don't think you guys have
books that are I think everybody
has their hand out yeah cool
perfect okay thank you so we're
just really go over the whole
length of relatively quickly and
then turn it over to the
department Mr chairman so for
the Human Services Department
HSD on the revenue
recommendations so overall this
is that a large budget it's that
approaching the state budget
it's a ten billion dollar budget
for FY twenty four when you add
in all the federal funds that we
leverage with the Medicaid
program and through the tenet
temp temporary assistance for
needy families and first that's
not program the supplemental
nutrition assistance program or
food stamps but when you add in
all those big federal revenue
sources this becomes a pretty
large budget so on the revenues
from your bullets here
the difference between the LESC
and the executive for general
fund is the forty six million
dollar difference with the LFC
being lower however when you
look at all the other revenue
components of this budget then
that really makes a difference
adjustment and then the LFC and
the executive are up for
Medicaid and overall are really
off by only about twelve to
fifteen million which is pretty
it pretty close pretty amazing
for at the agency of this size
ten million so that's the
difference on the general fund
and then in the other transfer
revenue the LFC recommendation
includes an additional eighty
one million greater than the
executive for the Medicaid
program and that includes thirty
five and a half million from the
health care facility fund and
thirty four point three million
from the health care
affordability fund and almost
twelve million from the early
childhood education and care.
Program fund additionally in
other transfers.
The executive recommendation
also includes
twenty four and a half almost
twenty five million from the
tobacco settlement program fund
and in their fund balance for on
the Medicaid program as well so
you see some assets there in
transfer revenue and then lastly
that we have when you look at
the different sheets that that a
number and federal funds it
looks somewhat large it's about
eighty million but really that's
just commensurate with these
matching levels and there's
eighty million with the
executive higher Medicaid but
then in Medicaid behavioral
health the LFC is hired by
twenty six million in federal
funds so basically we wash out
when we do the final
calculations so that's not
that's easily addressed now
regarding the at appropriations
and the basics managers this is
based recurring we have just a
few high level points we wanted
to make for the committee
I think it really important
factor in.
The request from the Asian as
well is that both
recommendations is Medicaid
provider and facility rates so
this is something I think many
of you heard during the interim
about the LESC program
evaluation that they did the
secret shopper and it was
showing that it was hard to get
access to care and I think we've
all experienced that in one form
or another so recognizing that
the department did a a rate
study and recommended through a
supplemental appropriation that
eighty three million be used to
to fund provider rates and then
afterwards in suing both the LFC
and the executive
have recommendations in for both
providers and for facilities of
facilities including hospitals
that kind of thing so the LFC
that seventy seven million and
the executive is that seventy
nine point four million so again
they're almost the same for
provide a range where the
difference lies and then
somewhat the approach taken and
it's just slight so the LFC
recommends targeted increase for
providers for
at a hundred twenty percent for
maternal and child health
behavioral health and primary
care excluding non medical cost
and the executive recommends a
hundred ten percent for those
exact same things but just
including some of the non
medical costs so it's almost the
same when you look at the two
pieces there additionally Mr
chairman and members of the
committee the LFC does recommend
ten million in federal tentative
transfer of funds Kenneth funds
federal TANF funds to increase
the tenants maximum benefit up
to fifteen percent so that's
something that different of
folks have been interested in in
the department requested that as
well but they were.
Quested it in a special a
nonrecurring appropriation for
an amount of twenty seven
million so it's in the LFC
recommendation based recurring
for ten million at the end of
funds
also the LFC does recommend
twenty point three million in
federal ten of fund transfers to
the public education department
for the grads program
reinstituting that for the
higher education department for
adult basic education and for
the children youth and families
department for an array of
programs there.
also the executive recommends
three point six million in
general fund and three million
in federal funds within the
income support division and this
is to support the operational
costs there again this was as a
special appropriation requests
that we shifted into the base
recurring
And I'm with into the backside
of the bullets here
for the child support
enforcement is division of the
same thing occurred the
executive recommended base
recurring and mount of one point
four million in general fund and
two and a half and fed funds to
support items for operations
that were in the special
appropriation request and move
that into base recurring this
agency is one of those agencies
I think you all have been
hearing now for awhile from than
the others the issues with
nonrecurring special
appropriation requests and then
the base recurring budget this
agency I have twenty seven
special appropriation requests
and then put a chunk of those in
the base recurring so that's we
see some of the shift occurring
here.
regarding expansion items both
the executive and the LFC
supported.
I want an expansion for the nine
eight eight crisis now mobile
units however the executive X.
and supported one point four
million additional in the base
in general fund support for this
as well as one point four
million in special LFC take that
one point four million and
supports it in the specials
so that's the expansion and Mr
chairman regarding language just
real quickly the LFC has
language that really specifies
more about those provider rate
increases and how they can be
expended
and also add some language
around the ten if it can't if
benefit increase can't of
transfers and the different
multiple funds that are
recommended the executive has
additional language specifying
its use of that fund balance
from the tobacco settlement a
program fund of twenty four
point five million
performance we had differences
in performance those have all
been worked out so we're we're
there's nothing of note there
and then Mr chairman we've just
noted here for the committee
some key performance issues that
are pulled from that FY twenty
two fourth quarter report card
just at a very high level we
have some lag in Medicaid data
that occurred and because of
that we we're not really able to
show some of the up to date
information and much of the
information that we would
normally see from other agencies
on a quarterly basis is only
provided at an annual basis or
maybe one to two years lag which
is problematic with we're trying
to do oversight and then
secondly Mr Chairman regarding
performance for the income
support program there's
requirements from the fed
because we get so much federal
funds they're for tennis
enforcement and expediting cases
and doing the than timely
manners for both workforce
getting folks back.
To work and also for getting
folks eligible and receiving
their benefits some of those
performance measures have lagged
as well and in the behavioral
health Services Division we have
the behavioral services division
and the behavioral health
collaborative that was created
to
kind of separate all the
behavior health funds across
departments and sometimes that
doesn't always.
Aimless fashion although strides
have been certainly been made so
those are some areas that we
noted some performance issues
Mary Beth did you have anything
up sure RubyAnn thanks not Mr
chair members of the committee I
just want to take a minute
RubyAnn mentioned these items
from a nonrecurring that were
rolled into the base but I just
wanted to emphasize for you
really quickly just because a
few of these things are really
critical I know this agency is
obviously everybody's very
focused on Medicaid needs
clearly a huge percent of the
budget is Medicaid but in income
support in programs support in
child support enforcement all of
those have needs that were
requested a nonrecurring their
operational needs critical
administrative support needs
that that the agency has and
it's it's in terms of HSD budget
it's really not too much it's
about a million dollars and
program support a million
dollars in income support and
about three and a half million
dollars
in the child support or unable
neglect but regardless about six
million but I wanted to call
that to your attention just so
you're aware of those needs that
the agency has I think acting
secretary army who is going to
go into more detail for you but
those are in the executive and
they are very critical for the
agency so thank you with that
I'll turn it over to acting
secretary of health.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee
Kerrier me hello acting
secretary of the Human Services
Department I've this is my
seventh day on the job so I
appreciate your patience with me
and your grace I have this
afternoon
I have with the Human Services
department for twenty three
years us that's half of my life
the boom stuff so you can do the
math on that one but the past
three years I've been the deputy
secretary of the agency and
before that about twenty years
with Medicaid and so actually
one time share an office with
I'm very and we worked there
together
so I want to thank you for the
opportunity to be here this
afternoon to present and talk
about agencies executive
recommendation and I'd like to
thank and recognize Director
Abbey in RubyAnn for their
partnership and communication on
the budget we as a team as
leadership of the HSD we
recognize how close we are and
that's really remarkable
seeing and so we we do want to
acknowledge that they are just
going to really be focusing on
those key differences that
MaryBeth mentioned and really
highlighting where those issues
are critical for HSD I also want
to just take a quick minute to
acknowledge the departure of
secretary Scrase his retirement
I know some of you have
expressed concern about you know
what that means for the agency
but I do want to reassure you
that he has been preparing us
for his retirement and for this
moment for the past year or so
knowing that you know he would
be this point sort of moving on
after having run two agencies
and so I think I just want to
introduce this amazing team
we're taking up about three rows
I can't unfortunately in the
interest of time introduce
everyone but it's a real honor
and privilege to be asked to
lead and work alongside this
amazing group of public servant
leaders and there are a couple
of.
I'd like to just really call
your attention to because
they're in new rules for the
agency so I'd like to ask Alex
yes you Smith to just please
stand up and just so you all can
recognize her she's at state
this stepped up into an acting
to W. secretary role been really
incredible through this budget
development process and then I'd
like to ask a lawyer like hello
also to stand she's are acting
Medicaid director with the
departure of Nicole Comeaux and
then finally caroli Graham who
is our acting CFO on I just like
to recognize of those three is
really being critical for the
budget and you can talk to you
can find the entire team on
slide twenty five twenty six
with our cell phone information
we're all here for you but and
you'll see just walking around
to taxis further sectors go
through this presentation we
need to ensure highlights okay I
will do that on senior Monday
morning want to.
I will do that Mr chair thank
you
I will promise but before we
start on slide two the Human
Services department we always
acknowledge that we are on this
beautiful land in New Mexico the
C. unceded ancestral land of the
original peoples of the Apache
today and public past present
and future and with gratitude we
pair respect to land the people
in the communities that
contribute to the.
The state of New Mexico.
On slide three I just want to
encourage everything to our
mission which is really what we
are here to do which is to
transform lives I'm working with
our partners and that includes
all of you to design and deliver
innovative high quality health
and Human Services that improve
their security and promote
independence for New Mexicans in
communities and everything that
is in our budget is designed to
advance these goals of helping
New Mexicans communicating
effectively making access easier
and supporting each other.
On slide four I just like to
say that with energy
intelligence imagination
integrity and love HSD service
fifty one percent of your
constituents
secretary Scrase really taught
us encouraged us to bring these
values to work every day to
inform the actions we take as
policy makers and so I just
wanted to acknowledge that and
thank him for that work on this
slide you can see that we have
four counties with two thirds of
which have Medicaid as the
primary payer for two thirds of
the population and ten counties
where we are serving more than
half and that is why it Medicaid
as the largest peer has such an
obligation to see to serve
support the health care system
and our providers through our
rates.
So moving into the
recommendation you can see that
we have our executive
recommendation is ten point six
billion dollars that's fifteen
point seven percent of that
comes from general fund
eighty nine percent of the
budgeted growth is really
attributed to Medicaid and you
you all are familiar with why
but we do we are losing some
enhanced federal funding that's
really critical to understand so
right now we're getting four
dollars and seventy three cents
for every dollar we spend on
Medicaid and we will be getting
three dollars and sixty four
cents of a dollar and nine cents
loss and so that is really the
big driver here and Medicaid
growth
I also just want to call your
attention to the fact that for
HSD for ten point six billion
dollar budget our administrative
costs are one percent I really
think that amount is way too low
you are entrusting us to
administer a ten point six
billion dollars for New Mexicans
and to do that we need
additional investment on the
administrative side.
Okay so many go right into the
T. codes and cover the
highlights Mr chair so for
Medicaid I'm gonna call your
attention to slide eight
we as RubyAnn mentioned we have
some differences in terms of
prior rates however it's great
to see that both sides are
really investing in the provider
network and I think they're
strong agreement between the two
and that that is what we need to
do but there are some
differences and some concerns
that we have so the executive
takes it our with our
recommendation is to take rates
two hundred percent of Medicare
for many providers third about
seventy five to ninety percent
of Medicare now and then go to a
hundred and ten percent for
child and maternal health
primary care and behavioral
health we're Medicaid really
covers a disproportionate share
of the population and so if you
could go to the next slide on
slide nine
if we are because as RubyAnn
mentioned the LFC recommendation
does not include the federally
required non medical costs that
have to be built into the range
that is our to cover things like
taxes if we are held to a
hundred and twenty percent of
Medicare then the LFC
recommendation is insufficient
because of that difference and
so that's about twelve point
eight million you can see that
in the table here to sheet and
read it puts the agency in the
position of having to dip into
our base to either cover that
cost to get to that benchmark or
not hit that benchmark at all.
Moving on to child support the
goal of our recommendation is to
improve performance so we can
get more money to children so
they can live happy healthy
lives and just worry about the
kids I want to thank this
committee and the legislature
for investing one point seven
million last year so that we can
deliver eight million more to
New Mexico's children we do have
entry increased contract costs
they want to call your attention
to about a million dollar
difference there contractual
costs with the courts have
increased this cost is really to
pay the courts to help us
establish cases for child
support if we do not adequately
fund the courts we will have a
backlog in child support cases
and we will fall behind on our
performance you all know that
contractual costs
We probably would have to close
an office in order to make sure
that we can keep supporting
child support and the courts and
have them do what they need to
do for us if we don't get that
funds those funds we are also
trying to really remove all
blockers that make it more
expensive for New Mexicans to
pay child support and so you can
see some additional amounts in
their that are really to cover
fees that we charge to low
income families today that make
it more expensive for them to
pay child support and so when
someone is trying to pay child
support we want to make it easy
for them to do that and get
those dollars over to those kids
it's that's the those are the
main differences and concerns
for child support.
For income support you'll see
that there's a three point six
million dollar difference in
terms of expanding the capacity
of the field office workforce
just a reminder that the income
support division is our critical
division that helps us meet our
most important goal which is to
provide services to New Mexicans
and make sure that they can get
food shelter and healthcare so
income support they have as we
go into the maintenance of
effort on mining for Medicaid
which you've heard about
they have three years of work to
do and they have twelve months
allowed to do it there are a lot
of federal rules that govern how
we do this and winding effort on
and that is going to really fall
on the shoulders of income
support division so we are
asking for additional support
just so you know that there will
be compliance penalties from the
federal government if we fail to
keep up with those cases and
those will amount to about three
million dollars in general fund
per month so I think asking for
three point six million dollar
annual investment to support the
staff is very reasonable and
keep keep those penalties at
bay.
we also have a big campaign I'll
talk about that in a minute to
about the whole and mining
effort renew New Mexico and why
that is expensive we're trying
to get the word out about that
and make sure that we're
adequately funded to communicate
with our customers about those
changes.
The last thing I want to call
your attention to is that the
LFC recommendation under funds
HSD I to support adequate
security for our offices just so
you know from the year twenty
twenty one to twenty twenty two
we've had a sixty six percent
increase in safety incidents at
HSD offices and just a couple of
examples of that so you know we
had one suicide at an agency
office we had a sexual assault
we've had several instances of
drug overdoses we have actually
had to offer counseling to our
employees who found a dead body
at our offices and we had to
relocate our staff to enter
offices because there there were
bullet holes when they showed up
at work and the windows were
cracked so we really think that
making an investment to keep our
employees safe and our customers
safe is critical.
Okay mom Senator promise but I
am going to make a pitch for
behavioral health Mr chair
I just want to note the
incredible work that we've done
to build the provider network in
New Mexico we've had a hundred
four percent increase in the
Medicaid behavioral health
provider network and in eighty
six percent increase in the
number of Medicaid
psychiatrists this number of
psychiatrists who take Medicaid
patients there are a couple of
things that really are critical
for us to advance our behavioral
health goals here in New Mexico
we are asking for funding for
community certified community
behavioral health clinics to
support that there is some
reason that staffing is really
critical due to the federal
rules of it those behavioral
health clinics offered their new
opportunity that's offered by
federal regulation to increase
the work force here in New
Mexico they can pay therapists
better because of the funding
formula and they are the
foundation for our ninety day
crease a crisis now system they
will offer twenty four seven
crisis services and you can see
the communities that we are
targeting
in the slide here in that third
row so rural and urban parts of
New Mexico will benefit from
this opportunity it does need to
be adequately funded because
there is robust to state
oversight required and so those
five staff that is what they
will be doing is making sure
that those clinics that will be
serving New Mexicans
and actually integrating primary
behavioral health in these
communities are doing that the
right way the other thing I want
to note is that the LFC budget
proposes cutting our base budget
for mental health and substance
use disorder services by one
point seven million we know that
there is a huge rise in the need
for behavioral health services
across New Mexico and substance
use disorder services so any
cuts would endanger our ability
to provide access to those
services for New Mexicans there
are a couple of new initiatives
with we were targeting us as
those now sort of thing to be at
risk we have we were gonna be
the first state to provide
online.
cognitive behavioral therapy for
anxiety online and then we were
providing good planning to
provide online census you
screening and working with the
department of health to make
sure that that is available in
our public health offices so
those are the kinds of things
that are at risk if we're not
adequately funded for behavioral
health and I know there have
been some concerns expressed
about staffing but I do want to
note that the behavioral health
services division has really
focused they've got a tiger team
focused on staffing and they
have a total of fifty one F. T.
in that division and they have
hired thirty three in the past
year so remarkable progress
there
finally in New I'm really close
to and
I just there's about a one point
one million dollar difference on
slide fourteen difference
between the executive staffing
recommendation LFC staffing
recommendation and I just want
to remind you about that one
percent administrative right
that we're using to manage this
huge budget we have fourteen
staff for office of human
resources that's one staffer
person for every one hundred
staff at that work in HSD I'm
and we need to really make
investment so we can optimize
federal matching funds all of
that takes work on and we really
want to do as much leveraging as
we can
it's a smart thing to do and
it's the right thing to do but
it takes a lot of work and
there's oversight involved in so
we can't do that with adequate
staff and happy to give examples
of things that we haven't been
able to do because of that.
I talked briefly at on slide
fifteen we I just want to call
note that we are working very
hard on addressing our vacancy
rate there's a lot of strategies
at play right now we have a
thirteen point six percent
vacancy rate that is going down
and we're really proud of the
progress we've made to sort of
address would have been some
pretty big staffing challenges
over the past couple of years.
Okay I'm gonna go ahead and do
you want me to wrap it up so I'm
gonna just go quickly to slide
eighteen and remind you all that
snap emergency a lot are
scheduled to end there's a
student changes in federal law
those will end on March first so
about almost actually pretty
much a hundred percent of New
Mexico snap cases are going to
see a huge reduction in our food
budget for every one dollar that
we spend in snap we generate two
dollars for New Mexico's economy
is about loss of food budget is
going to hit pretty hard across
the board and slide nineteen you
can see that for a family of
three they would be losing about
four hundred and five dollars
per month and food benefits and
food supports that's going to
hit pretty hard starting next
month we also as I mentioned
have the Medicaid unwinding
getting ready to start we have
about eighty seven thousand two
hundred and ten thousand people
who will likely lose Medicaid
coverage because they're no
longer eligible for working with
other coverage sources to
transition this folks to the
right place but as I mentioned
there's a lot of requirements
and not work really falls
disproportionately on income
support division to get to do
all of that correctly.
In the last thing I'm gonna say
today to take you to slide
twenty one it's just a call to
action this is really our renew
New Mexico campaign we love to
partner with all of you we've
got a statewide campaign that
really is focused on this
renewal effort and making sure
that people know that they need
to update their contact
information so we can reach them
at we've made it really easy for
them to do that the need to keep
their eye out for a turquoise
envelope we are wanting them to
pay attention because now they
will have to redo their Medicaid
and how to do that in three
years and submit their renewal
and we are you're going to see
more about this coming up we've
got billboards media campaign
and things going on with that
and would be happy to share our
social media tool kit with any
of you who want to get the word
out here constituents about
those changes and with that Mr
chair I'll rest.
For the
job seven days.
Senator.
Thank you for that I just have a
couple of.
So.
The that you have so much
federal money.
Do you start your hobby starter
calendar.
Tober first to September.
The state Mr chair Senator the
state fiscal year we follow the
state fiscal year which is you
know July to July the federal
fiscal year is October October
first to September thirtieth and
so are our funding cycle is tied
to the legislative cycle which
is the C. fiscal year.
Lundstrom so with that do you
have an overlap of full.
yes Mr Mr chair Senator hi you
know there is some overlap
although the drawdown of the
Medicaid funds it is that I
think those federal medical
assistance percentages that
federal match changes on a
fiscal year basis
and I would defer to one of the
experts to say when that occurs
when that you're just not change
is that if you would like to
school here physically.
In the federal here Mister
chairman says Mister chairman
Senator college you're exactly
correct on changes it is on the
federal fiscal year and he and
and a lot of ways we're in this
program you're balancing all
three kids insurance runs on
cycles of calendar years a lot
of time so when you're working
with this moving folks over
they'll be dealing with that
although they'll be some
exceptions and then there's the
federal fiscal year in the state
fiscal year some time.
To the last part of so do you
get to have a carryover.
Of the Mr chair at want to Mr
chair Senator with your
permission all of Connor chief
financial officer to help with
that question.
Senator can you elaborate just a
little bit more about what
you're asking for lower when
you're coming to because of the
two calendars
so do you carry over for some
from the prior year.
No I reimbursement rate is based
on our state fiscal year
spending so we will only drop
based on the federal drug
federal funds based on those
state fiscal year expenditures
and so that we don't we don't
drop beforehand we try this on
reimbursement rates so that
we're not we don't have money
before half.
Mister chairman Senator Gonzales
I think the issue you're getting
to is if these are all balancing
how do you close out the books
and all so what typically
happens they they are they
revert just like all the other
agencies however if they have to
go back and adjust a reversion
based on claims like just like
miss Graham said based on the
reimbursement because with
Medicaid claims you get almost
two years that were you can go
through a reconcile claims so
what we do is just go back and
adjust the reversion and do of
prior year adjustments so that's
that's how that's handled.
Thank you thank you very much
thank you chair Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you
Chairman thank you madam
secretary designate.
Acting secretary there you
welcome just a quick question
there's a lot of issues you
raise which are all super
important and god knows here's
agency does super important work
that.
New Mexico Mexicans who are
dealing with so much adversity I
want to highlight one slide that
is a particular concern to me.
Mr chair secretary which is on
that page thirteen the
difference in behavioral health
services division funding.
And I'd like to just ask there
is a one point seven million
dollar difference in what the
executive is recommending and
and what the LFC is
recommending.
And I'm wondering.
What services programs will be
cut for what will not happen if
we do not fund at the executive
level.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn
that's a that's a great question
all cue it up and then it would
like to ask doctor bow in the
director for behavioral services
division to weigh in as well
as I mentioned I think there are
several new services that we
were hoping to bring that but
this does endanger those it kind
of puts those at risk at a time
when we no people really need
those mental health services and
support so
Mr chair
Mr chair Senator Steinborn.
Members of the committee that
thank you for the question and
basically the one point seven
million dollar cut would most
directly affect access to care
people who are seeking services
and need services because the
reducing the amount of money
available for giving those
services to people at secretary
army who made a very good point
eight we've been trying to
increase access in innovative
ways
especially by making sure that
people can get care without the
state having to go through the
doors of the clinic thank you
I'm online and those services
are innovative and evidence
based.
And and the the study funding
for them would be at risk this.
Mr chairman and secretary and
that phone are you providing the
services now or the services
that we would be rolling out if
you have the funding.
Yes we are in we've contracted
for there's actually I programs
we contracted for three of them
already and we're in the
contracting process with the
other two right now.
And Mr chair it is this funding
that you need in order to
execute these contracts for the
coming fiscal year.
Mr chair members the committee
at it's it there's not a one to
one relationship there but it
would make it more difficult for
us to maintain the the quality
of care that we're offering sure
and since I'm on ruby had
something okay fair enough I
don't want to interrupt if you
still have the go ahead please
okay Mr chairman Senator
Steinborn I'll direct your
attention to the different she
packet let's look at the numbers
page twenty two in your packet.
All right.
The more.
Right here in this call of the
LFC number over under over the
executive General Fund the
executive higher by thirty one
thousand dollars over this LFC
so there's really no difference
in general fund and then the LFC
recommendation the general fund
support here within the Levin
point seven percent increase for
this division.
Secondly if you go down to the
expenditure part the personal
services employee benefits
contractual services and other
numbers you'll see there's a
difference of about half a
million and that's primarily and
personal services employee
benefits and I wanted to let the
committee know that the LFC
recommendation funded and
increase for personal services
employee benefits of four point
two percent that that fifty
eight percent fifty eight point
six percent increase over FY
twenty three actual the
executive funded a fifteen point
six percent for FY twenty four
that that seventy six percent
increase over FY twenty three
actual and then we also Mr
chairman if you look down here
to expansion that's where the
differences come up so this is
expansion that this growth so
the first.
This is primarily the funding
issue right here so for the
ninety eight crisis now you'll
see a difference of one point
four million last with the LFC
being lower that one point four
million so that we have that
issue between the special
appropriations and that the
three current so that one point
four million that were often the
ninety eight that one point four
shows up in the LFC
recommendation for special
appropriations so that's where
that difference life there Mr
chairman so and then there is an
additional amount in this part
that does affect the budget some
of the LFC is additional a
million dollars in general fund
support recurring in the faith
that was added for the linkages
housing program I think you all
are aware of the housing issues
and in special non recurring the
executive has put in it a
request for twenty million in
non recurring for the linkages
program the LFC had the million
in based recurring general fund
support for languages so those
are some of the differences
there but you can actually see
the numbers here we look at this
page thank you Mr chairman
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
thank you for that review some
aftermath of follow up questions
just educational for my part but
also on some of the topics so so
even though the overall funding
is very very similar the fact
that we're finding that
particular line item or LFC is
recommending a lower amount with
that means that in order to
sustain the programming that
they have that they would have
to use birth already from
another part of their budget to
take from to fund that at that
level are you saying that they
have.
Mister chairman Senator and now
the typically there's not the
buyer Authority for
Program transfers across the
purpose here so
if there if we wanted to expand
for that what mainly what that
expansion pieces it's for FTP to
put in place the mobile crisis
units is not for support for
mobile crisis unit so if this
and that's what we gave you the
number at the numbers on
personal services employee
benefits that there was an
increase in both recommendations
and if it's dental increase over
what their current offered
currently operating at now also
Mister chairman the HSD had
funded vacancy rate of twenty
three percent so that another
thing to take into account and
one more piece on Medicaid on
behavioral health if you're
looking at behavioral health you
can't ignore Medicaid behavioral
health so when you look at the
Medicaid behavioral health
recommendations for both the LFC
and exec you see in there
basically a twenty percent
increase that that stance only
increase in general fund so
there's a large investment that
continues and has been on in
place for three years thank you
Mr chairman.
So and I'll just close by saying
sounds like what you're saying
is is between the funded
positions and funding for person
that the resources are there to
fund these positions but I can
see the secretary would like to
say something Mr chair and
senator I do I do think there's
a disagreement between the
executive and the LESC on the
budgeted vacancy rate you can
see our position on that flight
thirty four I'm we actually have
a very different thank you
vacancy rates that may be a
source of some of this confusion
we are actually can see rate is
thirteen point six percent not
the figure that assessed could
always using so I think I just
wanted to call your attention to
that we don't agree with the
figure that's uses are budgeted
vacancy rate and don't agree
that their savings to be found
there Mr chairman that's why I
think what happened some people
this is the figure the LFC is
that on all of the agency's
personal service calculations is
based on a September estimate
and actually did go back and re
run the numbers and six
positions have been funded since
then so I ran the numbers that I
think there is that we can
certainly look at this and we
visited necessary thank you Mr
yeah this is just something that
I know we all share the same
goal which is how the parent LFC
is made significant investments
and we're all moving in the
right direction so hopefully we
just released out of reach a
place where we can from this
important work thanks that's all
half.
What.
Thank you Mr chair.
Okay Medicaid enrollment.
Reported to nine hundred eighty
six thousand eight hundred and
thirty individuals in role in
the September of twenty twenty
two almost forty seven percent
of the state's population.
An eighteen percent above the
pre pandemic enrollments level
of February twenty twenty.
And the department projects a
total of nine hundred and thirty
five thirty seven will enroll in
Medicaid at the end of twenty
twenty four so.
Under the federal.
Patient protection and
affordable Care Act.
The annual income of individuals
at a hundred thirty for thirty
eight percent of the.
The federal.
This section.
Yes.
Eighteen point eight thousand.
I got a good and it's kind of
confusing and I keep reading.
And see that.
We are going to have a decrease
in the federal matching rate.
For the federal medical
assistance right.
The decrease of rate from
seventy three point two six to
seventy two point five nine
result in an additional
additional general fund costs to
fourteen million.
And then a right over here.
That when we talked about
coverage incentives when we talk
about the health care affordable
fund.
Which was passed in twenty
twenty one.
Then it's supposedly to lower
the out of pocket costs for
people purchasing health
insurance on the hills States
health insurance exchange.
And.
That fund is generated.
By an increase of two point
seven five percent surcharge.
One health insurance premium.
And initially fifty two to fifty
five percent of the general
fund.
Revenues are distributed to the
health care affordable fun and
decreased in twenty twenty four
to about thirty percent at this
time.
Expected in the balance of that
funded B. two hundred and twenty
point five million.
But FY twenty four.
Now this superintendent of
insurance as appropriated fifty
eight million.
From that fund in twenty three
in a question another ninety
million in twenty four.
Partially to waive the first
month's health care insurance
exchange premiums for the same
forty thousand former Medicaid
enrollees.
Expected to be eligible for the
exchange.
After their distro at the end of
the Ph.D the phone will also be
used to subsidize premiums for
people enrolled in the health
exchange with incomes up to four
hundred percent of the federal
probably level about fifty five
thousand annually.
And substance ten percent of the
health insurance premium costs
for small businesses offering
coverage through the exchange in
the substance premium for un
documented individuals covered
by the exchange.
The of the state.
There was an it just one that
I'm getting to my question I
want to give you a little
background because I'm sure you
read there Sir.
But this is what I'm getting to.
The request to use the H. C. A.
F. fund revenues is based on
full participation by all the
different groups.
What do you think are we going
to get there with full
participation of all groups Mr
chair.
You want me to.
The greeting from our.
Please
bring this up Mr chair is
because at.
You heard what they present and
I'm sorry for.
But it was just is confusing to
me in New what they presented
because it's so complex issue
here so many working parts.
And I was trying to demonstrate
that here.
That.
I was reading respite of the
book are trying to.
And yet it's so hard to
understand how this works
together.
We have to we have to study this
a lot before we make decisions.
We can pick up the since I all
I'm for that.
But then you get over here that
fees changes over here.
And.
It's not simply.
A hundred dollars here in a
hundred dollars out.
I read through here about
different funds and have the
hello the change
you know.
How you how you put things in
non reoccurring appropriations
one to me they should have been
in recurring appropriations that
might make settle budget look a
lot different.
Yep so Republicans vote for it
what is not such a high
increase.
It's a not counting.
I would say fraud but it's an
accounting nightmare.
On how you get funds from here
and there and everywhere.
The balances so that's my point
Mr chair.
Who understands this is a great
magician.
And I would expect there's one
person.
Thanks a small section and
become an expert in.
But I expect.
And to expect our providers.
To hire enough people to
understand this.
Is also on unbelievable request
for them and you can see one
they don't want to provide
service because of this very
thing.
So that's my only point Mr
president I ask for no no way
for any of thank you Sir.
Thank you Sir what's not or get
a presidential seal one of these
when they call me Mr president.
Senator Steinborn we know we're
going to have you back when
house bill two happens right
this is a very complex
department that all of us to
probably have nightmares at two
in the morning about ten F. and
F. map and all the other morning
wake up and setting company in
that incident Sir what is going
to price the but that but
tonight.
And but sinks in but it's a very
complex issue each and everyone
of us because none of us in this
committee or the health care
read that right and if we're not
in that arena our minds don't
function in that way because
they're sure you had some
questions.
Mr chair I'm not sure that I can
pass and I think.
My capacity to understand
numbers was just burned out.
But it does say the LFC
recommendation supports a total
of nine hundred ninety eight
million billion dollars
insistence that.
Which is a thirty one percent
increase in yet I thought we had
people.
Total number to decreasing.
Read the whole paragraph should
help.
Mr chairman I believe anybody
actually.
As we write that sound like here
we are working on like no one
ever reads this well I am so
interested and I'd be happy to
explain it to you Senator Wirth
believe it or not we do try and
put all the pieces together and
look at all of these because in
this budget and with the health
care on you really do have to
look at all of these pieces to
try and make make it all fit
together so
so I'm not quite sure about the
snap the increase of by on that
note but I will give you the
that exact amounts Mr chair
Senator share if you look at.
Thirty seven of your your
different she.
We have for you all for the
committee and what we call our
tentative map our tennis and.
Spreadsheet and online
Matt the federal snap numbers
line sixty one on page thirty
seven so basically showing that
for the current year.
A past FY twenty two actually.
We were at about one point eight
million and that was because of
the influx of on all of those
federal enhanced snap funds that
we got during the pandemic in
the current year it's been
reduced to you know about eight
hundred million and then
and then there's looking at like
a slight uptick in the projected
numbers and this is the new
projection to about nine hundred
and ninety eight million so you
can see the numbers there so
that's the slight change however
it's not anywhere near that one
point eight billion dollar
figure and that was what
secretary acting secretary army
how was referring to so that
definitely a big big client big
drop off.
Mr chair and senator I just sent
point those are those are
entirely federal funds this is
the snap dollars are all federal
just to clarify on that piece of
it.
We received more than it kind of
in the same.
In the big picture on the first
budget summary in two thousand
twenty two actual general fund
was one point one five billion
dollars.
And then you ask for one point
six.
LFC one point six three four LFC
so one point six one six that
also has a huge jump when you
say people are coming off.
Mr chair Senator that is largely
driven that increases largely
driven by the decrease in
federal funding that we are
going to get when we roll people
so that the federal at the
federal level we have been
receiving enhanced federal
dollars for Medicaid for the
duration of the pandemic for the
past three years we've been
getting an enhanced federal
funding right that is going away
in just a few months and so that
is really what's driving the
difference here that the eighty
nine percent of the increase of
four agencies all all really
attributed to that loss of
federal dollars so the I
remember is I mentioned earlier
for each dollar that you spend
on Medicaid we've been E. been
getting four dollars and sixty
four cents from the federal
government that is going down by
more than a dollar I understand
that.
But but at the same time wasn't
the population covered by this
post reduce thus the funding in
the population we're going in
the same direction.
But this appears that the
federal government got us hooked
on their money and now we can't
yeah we need we have Mr chair
Senator were only projected to
lose about a hundred thousand
people from Medicaid so the the
we are covering nine hundred and
eighty thousand people today we
expect to lose about a hundred
thousand that isn't enough to
make up for that difference so
we're not gonna see a
precipitous drop I don't think
in Medicaid we're really we're
still anticipating you know as
sort of a leveling I decrease
and then a leveling off of
enrollment
Hi Mr chair.
I can't read anymore this book
Act.
Senator shares Center once maybe
can.
Together.
Thank you Mr chairman.
This week we're gonna try to
wrap up
we know we're going to have you
back before when asked to comes
over because we're gonna need
ruby and you may have to give
the committee an Adrian we
probably need to.
Health and Human Services one oh
one to really bring us up to
speed and in understanding
comprehensive stuff.
you know I I think if this we
should my biggest gripe is we
spends almost a billion dollars
in behavioral health and there's
nothing I see in New Mexico this
accomplished anything may result
in zero you go to any community
go to any school go to anything
it's behavioral health and we
spend almost billion dollars
seven eighty nine million I
corrected my head.
In in their zero.
Zero.
Mental health services in
communities that is an alarm to
me and and we're gonna dig into
that pretty deep.
And performance training you
know you say we rank forty or
fifty or for states and spending
on Medicaid right but I mean is
that because our provider rates
were too low.
And why hasn't that are a P.
been awarded because we're
sitting here waiting for
providers to get out in those
communities now what's happening
with that but that things get
done everybody in the state's
waiting for.
In reviewing correct me if I'm
wrong and house bill two how
much is this agency and House
Bill to in general fund is that
the ten point five billion
Mr chairman overall legislative
agencies about one point six
million in a house bill two
general fund.
When you have an agency that has
a budget as large in the state
of New Mexico can you come in
here and you say oh we need
three million more here three
million more there and nine
billion dollar budget you need
to learn how to create some
efficiencies.
And and start getting those done
especially in expansion programs
right you want new programs but
we can't control the programs we
can't officially do what we're
doing currently
so I mean we're gonna watches
dollars hard if the house
doesn't give you the money we're
going to give you the Senator so
what is going to probably have a
stack of books on Medicaid
asking questions and see if you
pass the test before we spend
anymore money in this agency.
but I I think.
For the amount of money we spend
in this and the performances
that we get.
it's very hard pill for me to
swallow that a three million
dollar difference a message to
million dollar difference in
that that you can't find that
money and fishing season your
agencies and they only been
there seven days I love Dr
Scrase.
Other and knowing tries to
invest but.
You know you're not there we'll
figure from there not I think
that's something that once we
get in there because everybody
gets confused I mean two in the
morning I'm gonna wake up
thinking about tentative snap
and other the trying to get my
money to shut off from the day
the legislature because we do so
many different things it'll
bother me throughout the weekend
and then but but when we don't
have efficiencies we don't have
provider rates which I think
causes to be the lowest and you
guys are shaking your head so
when in those provider rates
they better be done the way the
legislature wants.
Or and we're gonna put in
statute are going to put it
where it can't be changed or
will go to court over.
very simple I've learned that
the legislature can win in court
a lot of times as long as they
have the purview in in and fix
problems but my number one gripe
is and I don't care what who
where you go what you do in the
state from grade school to
college to and whatever the
behavior health issue since the
prior administration crashed and
burned the whole system has
never been to being able to be
rebuilt the way it should be and
with COVID I it increased what's
happening and with that amount
of money we should be able to
fix some problems that pay
providers a higher rate to bring
those mental health services
back to New Mexico so we're not
seeing that every day and so I
don't know it's nothing personal
I just.
Hey grant the money in in it's
time to to get a hold of it I'm
gonna have this amount of money.
In their second state in the
newspapers a legislature spill
and bending William million and
the well they should listen to
hard work we're looking at
agencies for you to perform so
when they get the money and
taxpayer money that you guys
perform and you get the services
out so.
We'll have you back of house
bill two million plan a
Medicaid.
One or two two or two oh seven
depending on level of education
sometime
Violate your lower level
classes.
The.
She said it not me.
So thank you guys.
Thank you I appreciate ninety
five is the and thank you for
your work you work very hard and
this is a very tough Agency.
Just.
The.
Race
to decide there's a there's a
you we found that.
As.
We don't know what that's for.
We had a.
With the.
Raul.
There is here can we keep it
over the we.
I'll put in my office yeah so so
members.
I'm telling
is.
Well guarded with their life.
In some members here.
K..
We don't get paid overtime so.
Get ready members there's a card
for secretary Scrase that year
it's gonna be in my office of
the want to sign a personal note
secretary Scrase in the
cardboard in my office that's
what that was for we didn't know
what it found welcome and Miss
Vigil secretary
In the.
Kalyana stars of the
presentation and that is not
what that House rex who are but
the doctor thank you Mr chair
Kelly Clark with legislative
finance committee for your here
with secretary Alan and merry
with dozens more from DFA and
there's lots of years the staff
up to each staff both the table
in the audience for the
secretary to talk to I know you
guys want to go quick so I'm
actually it's probably going to
be two to three minutes six
point inferences it looks like
there's a large differences in
the US Department but there's
really not so
on page.
Two of your two and three of
your hand up.
You can see a general fund
summary high level and that just
gives you the difference in the
general fund I program in the U.
H. one of the major differences
it looks like it is these.
The school based health centers
however
that it that's mostly because
DFA asked put in the general
fund for school based health
centers four point eight million
four point five point five five
point eight million.
I miss is this today to.
Of which one thousand just for
personal mail to use transfer
from the early care trip early
childhood trust one of three
million and one half million in
non recurring general fund to
purchase school Google
schoolbased health centers so
it's really not that large of a
differences as you can see going
down through the programs
general fund is pretty similar
but across the rest of the
programs the only real major
differences in these two
recommendations are actually non
general fund revenues the first
is the executive recommendation
reduce federal funds in the
epidemiology in response
program.
And the second is the executive
recommendation also reduced
other revenues in the facilities
management program now if your
member facilities management is
were all of the state run
hospitals are under and that of
revenue source that was reduced
by the executive is mostly third
party billing medical revenue
for those facilities as many of
you remember we've been down a
capacity those facilities are
only about fifty percent for
several years now since COVID
began so what that means is all
of those patients that those
bills are not having patients
and we don't have billable
services so we're not bringing
in those revenues.
There's a couple things that
DFA and executive and LESC
worked on together to kind of
improve that situation one being
a targeted out of cycle
compensation increase for CNA's
like Textio which has already
implemented that and there's a
special recommendation both are
involved budgets to back fill
that money and we've already put
that together and then recurring
funding in the LFC budget to
continue those raises going
forward and nonrecurring in the
DFA so other than those two
major revenue sources that are
non general fund it's pretty
close rack the HSD her this
yesterday and they took the LFC
rack obviously there's some
conversations about some
additional changes that may
happen depending on different
conversations so what that'll
turn it over to MaryBeth for any
additional comment.
Thanks Kelly Mr chair members of
the committee I don't have too
much to ask Miss Vigil eight her
summary was was spot on I'll
just elaborate just for science
that you know the reductions on
on the executive side of the
federal revenues and that to me
ology response program was
simply to align with what
they're actually bringing and
so that was that was why we at
that and with the same thing
with the other revenues in
facilities just to try to get a
more accurate picture of what
they are likely to bring in and
likely to be able to spend as
Kelly said we've been working on
this over the summer LFC is well
aware of this issue as well so
I'm sure going for will be able
to collaborate but just just to
clarify that's that was the
executive position on those in
the recommendation but I don't
have anything else so I'll turn
it over to secretary.
Great thank you very much too
many of them to the committee
Patrick Allan secretary
designate of the health care and
also the equally brief as you
for there's very little
difference between these these
budgets I feel a little bit like
an old hand after secretary or
me I've been on the job a month
today but that's four times
longer than a week.
it just quickly I've met some of
you but not all of you I I come
to New Mexico from Oregon where
for about a dozen years I ran
two different state agencies
that were in the in the health
space over that time of been
responsible for health insurance
regulation running the state
health insurance marketplace
high risk pool of been
responsible for Medicaid
behavioral health public health
health policy regulation
delivering them the public
employee health benefits as well
as running out to campus seven
hundred bed psychiatric hospital
so a lot of the things that that
I'm dealing with here in New
Mexico I'm definitely still
drinking from a firehose but
it's maybe not quite on full
because I've I am a little bit
familiar with some of the some
of the issues are you have a
document in front of you from us
we're not gonna go over a power
point in these are presentation
back in December from not gonna
try to reiterate any of that any
of that material what you have
goes over I think some of what
we believe are the are the more
key differences between the
between the two recommendations
I'm not gonna go through that
section by section there are a
couple of issues that are not
dealt with their that I do want
to raise quickly for you I know
there's a concern about
vacancies across state
government and the at our agency
our vacancy rate today is about
thirty percent which is
extremely high however as of the
into that getting into the
agency I think I think there are
a number of factors that that we
can try to address right away
and and Germany as you touched
on this a little bit in the in
the HSD discussion one of things
I'm I I'm finding is that we
have a lot of positions that for
lack of a better phrase are kind
of fandom positions positions
that are vacant that haven't
been filled for sometime said
this week we put in place a
process to basically clean those
out we're looking at at
positions that have been vacant
for all and for an extended
period of time particularly
term term positions that you
know typically would go funded
projects and those kinds of
things and so a budget first we
expect have a large number of
those on filled long term
positions cleaned out.
That that'll give us a you know
a better picture of what is our
actual vacancy rate and then
that'll boil down into two other
factors one is just the
difficulty of recruiting any
anybody for anything anywhere
which is a challenge not just in
state government and not just in
health care but everywhere in a
particular problem for us along
along with another a number of
other agencies that have I have
lots of federal or other funds
which is the round of salary
increases that occurred over the
last couple years where their
state funds to to fund those but
not and of course funding
increase in the other funds and
we're not talking about a
supplemental state that we've
got some supplement
supplementals to help deal with
that so we have programs that
don't have the money to be able
to to fill positions and that's
that's an issue that's a that's
a piece of that.
Second thing to talk about is
reversions we have about a
hundred and five million dollars
in reversions that sounds like a
lot the overwhelming majority
that is what I guess I would
consider as I understand it plan
reversions that they're in our
developmental disabilities
program similar to Medicaid
there was enhanced.
enhanced the federal medical of
Medicaid medical assistance
program match rate that goes
away when the federal Health
Emergency goes away we've never
known when that would be and so
we were never able to really
build that obviously permanently
into the budget so the
expectation was as was as that
federal money displaced state
money you would sweep
legislative money back out of
the system and that's about
ninety five million dollars of
the hundred and five million the
total in terms of reversions
last thing I'll talk about
and this one touched on touched
on it in her a report around the
the the the way that the
recommendation puts together
funding for school based health
centers really appreciate the
creativity in trying to get
close to what the governor
recommended in in terms of five
point eight million dollars to
expand the program of the one of
the one marker I guess I want to
put down as a piece of that is a
transfer from the early
childhood fund of a of three
million dollars and the rest
than being a being a a special
for million half I believe and
the governor governor courses
expressed her her concerns if
not outright opposition to
transfers from the fund as I
said yesterday in the house I
would imagine that's a topic
that's going to get the best out
of the table I will be at and if
you're at that table you know
what I what I hope is that in
resolving that circumstance we
don't simply lose that three
million dollars to that to that
issue and then not factual
because that would really leave
us with just a million and a
half of short term money for for
student be a school based health
center expansion and that would
really be a significant hit to
our ability to be able to
deliver that program with that
I'd be happy to answer questions
that you have that are easy and
I have staff here who can answer
the hard ones.
Thank you tell with the way.
We can get a.
Take a.
Mr chair members the committee
thank you so much for the
question so we're talking about
the super allocation process
eliminating the wait list now if
you remember part of the federal
plan.
during the COVID gave us much
chance federal matching rate
which also happens in Medicaid
right so the DD waiver money
goes to HSD to be mass of
Medicaid money so that enhanced
match rate was also being
applied to the DD waiver program
and so it's just like a savings
that we weren't really we're
saving about seven million
dollars a quarter general fund
that we didn't know whether it
would go away or not it didn't
make sense to reduce the general
fund knowing that the F.
settlement was or was not good
and it any time and so now the
F. math is going to be ending
and that's just going to
continue to pay for based
programs.
In your volume three on your
side just in front of you
there's also the DD waiver
financial planning out years and
what is going to cost us to
completely.
from the super looking for
process needed but I would have
had this page open but you know
we also learned in just remind
me to put on LFC correct before.
In their discussed the bill we
don't really need general fund
this year because we're still
able to use that federal
matching rate
There is recommendations in both
the LFC and exec to do you a
provider rate increases but next
year probably need about thirty
million dollars and then we're
going to need to go out two more
years after that.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez
thing Mr chairman thank you good
afternoon to everyone here today
thank you Kelly let let me just
mention our **** about the
reverting language a few years
ago I had introduced an
amendment language amendment at
is that now currently non
reverting language or is it
reversion obviously there's some
reversions taking place that
because he's working so
differently now with federal
funds and so on I wasn't sure.
Mr chair Senator we do not have
non reverting general fund for
duty waiver in that we we had
it's a little bit complicated.
For this process so we have some
language at HSD that allows them
to keep some other money because
in arpa there was an additional
matching rate of ten percent
that allowed us to match a match
which is never happens I know
and so there some language in
there but it's not traditional
non returning general fund
language and in general the
legislature doesn't.
Recommends non original fund
because it really ties your
hands it out years when that
money is put aside in an account
in the executive converted
instead you to usually like it's
river and so you have a pot of
money to make those decisions
you have to make every year and
legislative session when those
allocations are available.
If you chairman well that's
alright thank you just just real
quick on on track
there was one piece of non
reverting language that fed into
the super allocation plan and it
was just to allow the department
to use some prior year fund
balances that they had when they
did get non reverting language a
few years ago but it was very
Just to feed into several
locations so it wasn't like a
broad you know non reverting of
of all TV waiver Monet's but
Thank you third pages eighty two
on volume three so you can see
the non inverting the ten
percent matching enhanced map
all of that you can see is that
in this financial.
Okay thank you at just a point
here before because I know a
little bit already tired you're
but let me just just this when
we know that and and this is
every year we know that we're
going to need more funds for
this program very specialized
program for people severely the
most severely impaired I think
throughout the state we always
know that we're gonna need to
add additional funds especially
now because we for see what's
going to happen what we expect
right less funds for the federal
government in so because we have
that we're going to be short
unless we allow them in other
words we gonna be sure we're
gonna have to come back here and
re appropriate to fill in the
gap and so my point is why do
that first programs the
specialises why can't we just.
I appreciate the funds and the
non reverting knowing they need
on and and just let it be it's
more efficient easily easier to
reach these individuals are so
needy can't we do something like
that the recommendations for
example and we were looking at
that Mr chair we don't actually
need it yet so it wouldn't it
wouldn't necessarily the.
Be an advantage to earmarked
thirty million dollars right now
because we have enough federal
money and federal dollars and
state dollars to cover what we
need for this fiscal year the
next fiscal year on year you're
from now is when will probably
need that thirty million now
making nonrecurring is it's it's
an option but it does have a
side effect of that is non
recurring money and so if you
were to give a non reverting
language and they were to build
up a fund balance of twenty
million or ten million that's
still not enough and they could
bring it in and still be short
the next year so if we're gonna
fall the plan that we all of
talked about it's going to be
thirty and everyone's been
widely prepared for that number
the next time we're here next
year.
Thank you for that explanation I
just love final point to many
and here is that this is the
program Mr chairman members of
the committee that we have heard
for years that people have had
to wait up to twelve years for
services these are the most
severely impaired that the
twenty four hour care a lot of
them do we put them in different
programs to get a personal care
different kinds of cares and to
wait twelve years for services
the list grew to six thousand
people on the list waiting for
purpose it's called the DD
waiting list more than D. D.
waiver list anymore but either
way I'm happy that we finally
came up with a way to reduce
this list through our I funds
and federal funds however we did
it
but they're still a lot of
people without services and it
continues to grow in so I just
want to make sure we never allow
it to get to the point where
it's been in the past.
I'm gonna say this shame on us
for not taking on this program
in the way that we've been few
of us have been begging to
finally take it on get it funded
once and for all serve these
people that are so desperately
need help and so I know you were
gonna say something Mr chairman
and right here thank you Kelly
this is you know the waiting
list is being eliminated Justin
Cornwell the directors here but
I think he reminded me that the
last letters go out fourteen
Valentine's day happy
Valentine's day so doing this
will be a limited that point
so we don't something that's
pretty incredible in the state
yes it is we just want to make
sure it doesn't get built up
again we don't want one person
in line waiting not even free
here and not for a day can help
it.
I just wanted to make that thank
you Mr chair Senator Woods.
Four.
chair.
I read through this stuff
several places we start an
effort using federal money.
And the strings tied to it is
maintenance of effort.
Is your any idea if we.
Could get a grasp on what the
cost of that maintenance of
effort is annually.
Mr chair on page eighty two of
for this particular argument
just the waiver from particular.
But.
Every once in a while allowed to
see the additional and in these
programs when we were cutting
back programs from from the
pandemic times and it refers to
a maintenance of effort and I
will I will fund the specifics
and ask you later but I just
want you to realize Mr chair
that we are required to keep
some services up to state monies
that.
You know I know that it's in the
budget.
But I just wondered you know we
think we're getting free money.
But it's not free because we
have to maintain effort not say
it's a bad thing to maintain but
it would be nice to know what
that future cost is going to be
is what I'm getting at.
Mr chair for this particular
program from DD waiver alone
and I talk about other federal
programs but the financial plan
is built out to the FY twenty
seven.
In volume three and we look at
this once a year in
collaboration with HSD DO age in
DFA to kind of because you know
changes on who enrolls in what
services they look and so we're
estimating now thirty.
Less million next year possibly
forty million each year for the
next two years after that would
maintain people not having a
wait list and being able to
enroll in the waiver as long as
they are age eligible.
as soon as they walk in to do H.
is store.
Can
Mr chair Center which is real
quickly I'm disappointed about a
maintenance of effort
requirement
typically I believe the
maintenance of effort
requirements if there is one on
this program
They are usually calculated by
the the three previous fiscal
years spend an average of those
and in this specific program
there have not been costs in the
past I don't even know how long
and so the maintenance of effort
should be safe because we are
continuing to put in the same
more more you are continuing to
put in the same or more every
year meaning should maintenance
of effort you know need to be
If they need to make sure that
they're hitting it I don't think
that would be a problem with
this government this is cool as
long as we have huge revenues
coming in and increased revenues
annually but you know we have
been in a time when we've had
budget shortfalls that we had to
call back in and when we reduce
federal funds coming in it would
be nice to know on each one of
these programs kind of what the
maintenance of effort would be
to keep these programs going not
that it would probably influence
us taking federal dollars but it
would just be kind of nice to
know the strings that are
attached with bills and I don't
know if that's possible our
weather there's a.
Particular place on one of these
drafts that you could kind of
say we need to maintain this
amount of money in this program
to maintain our maintenance of
effort.
And and so in the budgeting
process for I would assume LFC
that would be a a pretty good
thing to know that we had to
have this amount of budget just
to be in compliance because if
we don't then we're liable to
have some fine to bonus.
The if we don't do it the other
thing I'd like to to talk about
is the the veterans home just a
minute.
And I know that we've got it
says we've got sixty five
residents and we could survive
a hundred and forty five no
we've got one quality that we
have one quad built down there
right now or is it under
construction.
The still under construction so
we have no body in that at this
time Mr chair Senator Woods we
expect those of small homes to
begin opening in September okay.
Are we having people applying
for residents and this facility
as we have it right now our is
are we maxed out that's about
all that wants to come Mister
Mister chair Mister president Mr
chair.
The Mr chair Senator Woods and
as you heard an agency plans
presentation of our facilities
on balance are running at fifty
one percent of their license
capacity similar to the
vacancies to this is one of
things that I.
Again to fairly early on because
that's clearly not acceptable to
the people of New Mexico made
significant investments in these
facilities and we need to be
using them to the maximum extent
we can to be able to serve
people's needs the individual
vacancy rates vary a little bit
across the across the facilities
one of things I discovered is
that we had an operational
capacity that we were looking at
it really wasn't what it sounded
like it was and so that we were
you know pretty close to that
you know that the most we could
have in our facilities was
pretty close to that fifty
percent right as of this morning
we for we've now read done how
we calculate that to really
figure out with the staff we
have how many residents can we
manage and on that basis we're
sitting at about eighty percent
capacity across all of our
facilities again it varies from
facility to facility that helps
us really I think drill down
into the to the issue that you
know is pretty straightforward
but it wasn't what we were
managing to any agency which is
we've got some pretty serious
staffing problems and that's not
surprising because our
facilities are across the state
often in rural communities is
sometimes a little bit harder to
to to recruit certain kinds of
of staff to in those kinds of
things but I think now we can
really dig into trying to deal
with those issues so that in the
case of the veterans so we can
we can maximize the investment
in that facility the investment
in the small ones and be able to
serve everyone who's eligible
that we can and make sure staff
to be able to do that okay.
Mr out so that thank you thank
you guys for your presentation
I'm just kind of burned out
health care.
We'll be back with house bill to
come.
hopefully the house does
everything you need to get kind
of cleaned up over there and
only much but we're not far
apart that's and that's an
important thing in sometimes you
don't need everything we can
give you because you can
accomplish your goals and and
we'd rather give enough money to
be successful and not enough too
much money to be a fader and
then you get hit by even harder
because of the failures of the
behavior health system is not
fair to me one billion dollars
seven hundred eighty nine
million spent Senator Rodriguez
and I were talking and I don't
know anybody in my district
anybody talk to saying that I
got behavioral health services
and I think in appreciate that
I've never heard that it's not
happening in New Mexico and
we're going to get a handle on
so thank you good luck you got
thirty days looks like you're
pretty well tuned up.
Pretty efficient so don't let
this war you down because we
