Of it looks like this.
Should being I don't know if
you've got your books.
Thank you for all your.
He has this okay so staff is
going to get that for you.
Big picture there's a
significant differences in what
in the LFC recommendation from
the executive recommendation
primarily centered on Medicaid
and why is that the LFC
recommendation was back filling
anticipated loss of federal
funds in a very significant way
to the tune of you know almost.
You know two hundred million
dollars.
Why is that we've been getting
as a state and enhanced federal
matching rate through the
pandemic
and at the time of the budget
development in the fall we
expected to be moving out of the
pandemic staff is getting you
the the packet Senator Rodriguez
thank you
At the time we are still both
budget initiatives and budget
development for LFC we're
anticipating that we will be
moving out of the public health
emergency
and that the enhanced F. map
would be winding down in ending
in fact when LESC was was
conducting its work
there was a bill the build back
better act was winding its way
through Congress that in fact by
law would have ended it this
spring and and started to step
down process.
That bill obviously is not
moving through we have another
quarter of federally approved
enhanced federal F. Matt so
there is no longer a need for
Medicaid to get a supplemental
for this fiscal year the current
FY twenty two fiscal year and
there's a possibility that
the department to get a even yet
another quarter depending on how
this pandemic plays out into
fiscal year twenty three we just
received a new Medicaid forecast
last week that the department
stated they need about three
hundred million dollars
Assuming that the public health
order ends July first
and remember what's causing a
lot of the the cost increases in
Medicaid is that during that
public health order any enhanced
F. map one of the the the
strings that came attached with
that is we can't kick anybody
off of Medicaid even if they
don't qualify anymore so we're
carrying you know upwards of
almost a hundred thousand more
people on the program even
though we're getting the extra
money from the federal
government they're not going to
roll off the program very fast
into the next fiscal year and I
think Dr Scrase will probably
he's got some good slides that
will we'll go over their
assumptions.
So the LESC was trying to back
fill the loss of federal revenue
we've got a a higher General
Fund need from the department
now we think that the department
still needs this recurring
revenue the executive approach
the the department's budget into
an of significantly different
way they did not back fill that
revenue replacement with
recurring general fund they used
a bunch of non recurring funding
and that's really important
because that allows you're
hearing all these agency budgets
are much higher than LFC yet the
the the executive budget
recommendations overall is
slightly very slightly less than
LFC how is that possible it's
possible because frankly they
low balled that Medicaid budget
recommendation and use
nonrecurring for that purpose so
that's the the big difference
so.
You know the the LFC
recommendation is trying to
shore up the base recurring
budget for Medicaid which is
needed the executive budget has
built in more uncertainty when
it comes to using those
nonrecurring because we're not
sure if they're going to get
additional federal revenue or
not HFC is sorting through this
budget right now they've got a
subcommittee that's going to
really dig into it more
and we'll see what they sent
over to you but those are the
that's the biggest difference in
these two budget the other
differences
when you get the packet you'll
be able to see our and and
income support
the department has
a request for more
Staffing
of funding for vacancies they'd
like to be able to fill more
positions in income support
go back going back to Medicaid
the rest of the Medicaid budgets
between LESC and the executive
or the same both of them funds
things like extending postpartum
care which is currently limited
to three months to twelve months
so when when mom delivers baby
right now they're they're they
exit Medicaid after three months
of they don't otherwise
qualified this would extend to a
year to be able to get
post partum Services so on
everything else within the
Medicaid they're the same it's
just how we deal with that back
filling of the federal funds on.
The mother
Things to note.
On child support both
recommendations are the same on
behavioral health services there
some differences in expanding
the the nine eight crisis now a
new lifeline for individuals to
call with behavioral health
issues.
The LFC fund some of the start
up costs with using nonrecurring
the executive funds of nearly
the full agency ask.
there's also some differences in
expanding
evidence based behavioral health
care for LFC is a little bit
higher than the executive as
well as LFC being higher on
provider rate increases for non
Medicaid services
And you'll be able to see that
in the packet that you're
getting after the bullets
that's the easiest way to see
the the high level differences
in general fund between the two
agencies
Mr chairman I turn it over to Mr
Mrs Moore to talk about the
executive recommendation and
then after that
Dr Scrase.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Charles good morning everyone so
Charles gave a good overview I
think of the biggest differences
between the two recommendations
so I I want to mention much time
on it eyes as he mentioned the
biggest difference of course in
the recommendations is the
approach to funding Medicaid
as he described the executive
has increased I the Medicaid for
that for the department by about
two hundred fifty seven million
dollars but half of this you
find in the base and half of it
is recurring in a special any
touch on some of the reasons the
uncertainty you know especially
with the fell back better bill
continued federal support so
what this does from the
executive approval hold on one
second either sure either you've
got to get closer to your might
we need your volume a little bit
you got a little bit of an echo
and so it's not coming through
that where in our TV speaker is.
I'm sorry to hear that.
I think my limit here.
Thank.
If I was a little better that's
much closer yeah thank okay
great let me give me just a
moment to move that up and and
you guys will be closer to me
but.
If you can hear me better.
Okay all right I hope that that
are
what is your recap quickly what
I was what I was saying before
so Charles brought up you know
the biggest difference between
the two recommendations is the
approach of funding Medicaid so
the executive
recommends a total increase for
Medicaid of about two hundred
and fifty seven million dollars
but half of this you find in the
base budget half of this is a
special so
So what this does again it's
kind of just reflects the
uncertainty that that we have
right now surrounding all things
pandemic related the federal
support to build back better
bill you know we just don't know
exactly what we're going to need
going forward and so what this
does is it allows the agency to
access the entire two hundred
fifty seven million dollars it'd
be needed but you give us a
little bit more time to put it
in the base until we're more
certain about what the actual
need is going to be going
forward so that's when the
executive approach overall I
think it says in the public.
You know you need to consider
these recommendations in total
recurring and non recurring and
there's an aspect in the LFC is
recommendation as well because
this it's the nine eighty
funding so the executive has put
about four point one million in
the face the LFC put
a smaller amount of basic and
about one point five million and
then funded on two point three
million in non recurring so when
you add them together.
You get a much closer
both of them much closer on in
total for the recommendations so
I'd like to stress that that is
here we're really focusing on
the big picture the base and the
specials so please the bottom
line is here and you're
listening to Dr Scrase but with
that I think the the rest of the
the differences are relatively
minor so so with that I'm just
going to be handed over to the
secretary allow him to to give
you
Hopefully the information you
need so thank you so much
doctors.
We got a new reduce echo Mr
chair can you hear me OK.
Mr secretary you're going to
your even lower volume than she
is.
Read about now this is better.
The low it may be out of this is
that our TV screens.
Yeah we're on maximum volume
which tends to cause distortions
if you can turn up the speaker
on here and that might do the
trick.
Well we may not want to do that
may not want to hear what you
have to say but while trying to.
Well I've been yelling a lot
lately so I'm used to it so I
can I can certainly speak up.
Give me a second in the mall get
started I think I mean I am
going to share my screen it it
always does that make sure that
works well.
On the volume can you see the
slide here yep we got we got
your slide print value slide
presentation and so let's let's
let's try this while we're
waiting for them to figure out
so whoever's in the audience and
this try to keep in the room
this try to keep our our noise
to a minimum so we can figure
out our volume issue and and
sells Mr secretary why don't you
go ahead and proceed we want to
hear about the meet some
potatoes and Senator Rodriguez
and we this morning to start
asking you questions about that
and so we want to make sure we
get to the ball of points on the
differences and what you think
the differences on the racks in
your priorities.
Presentation.
I will do that you know HSD as
provided
money to our customers to snap
and other programs sufficient to
fund purchased or preparation of
over half a billion year meals
last year so I suspect that will
make Senator Rodriguez even more
hungry
this is our customer count the
number of people in Medicaid the
Y. axis is not zero I always
like to say that just wanted to
see some of those areas that.
They're just trying to protect
my tissues okay.
We are beginning of the pandemic
is here
Mr Sally described of gradual
increases in my up in certain
about the audio issues I failed
to recognize a couple people I
like to do is like when we have
our whole team here today you
can see other pictures and the
appendix we passed out last time
and I hope we still have it the
what's now the health and Human
Services data book we got a deal
right most of the health
departments have contributed
significantly to this and I
think in your free time which I
know you don't have page through
this you'll find a lot of very
County specific information
similar to what you're seeing on
this slide about the counties
Representative it's a great
source of information about many
many different things not just
the HSD programs but health
issues children's issues hunger
I income all those things that
we put into the equation as we
try to figure out the best
budget we can come up with each
year to best serve the people of
New Mexico these bombs here are
the PDD program the months for
the feds gave us money to
provide supplemental payments of
this these are sort of
retroactive here but this was
for school kids who couldn't get
a school lunch because they were
learning from home and so we
were able to send that money
directly to families this is
been very helpful during the
pandemic that is you're going to
see in the coming slides other
some challenges are facing even
right today I I do want to thank
director Avid draws Sallee
RubyAnn ask about yep he's here
today John Courtney from the LFC
you know we really enjoyed a.
Intense and productive
partnership with folks in the
LESC I think.
The close watch we keep on the
Medicaid budget and just remind
you we meet every month that HSD
with folks from the LFC to go
over key issues with our budget
in every quarter we have a three
hour meeting with the leadership
of LFC to go over in detail are
Medicaid projections so it's a
lot of money we think it's
really important to watch it
closely and I think most notably
this year I think the
partnership that has existed
between ages state and LFC and
now D. O. H. really is what
actually produced this plan to
take everyone off the waiting
list for the D. the waiver and
so if I were on a legislator I
would really be expecting and
maybe even demanding that I only
do state departments work with
each other W. efficient safe
cost a little better services to
customers but also that
that are departments work
closely with the LFC particular
budgets like this in issues like
this so I want to point out the
budget this year total is eight
point two billion thirteen point
nine percent of that comes from
general fund that is a new all
time low you know we've been
focused on
leveraging federal dollars as
illustration arrived in January
of.
Twenty nineteen we have brought
in more than two billion with a
B. dollars per year into the
general fund of additional
federal funding and we can and
in part due to the pandemic
that percentage that we are
paying to leverage all of our
goods and services that we
provide to customers is now down
to thirteen point nine percent I
think everyone went over the
differences in the budget
Mr Sally outlined the LFC
recommendation
understands more outlined the
governor's and I think on the
next slide which I'll just go to
page you slide number four the
overall difference on Medicaid.
Despite the two differences all
in your overall difference over
here is only eleven million now
I know saying only eleven
million a some sort of shopping
that most of you but you know
that is a very very small
fraction of our budget and we
believe that least in principle
and as a result of those
quarterly meetings where we hash
out the details Medicaid
coverage were I think that's why
we're as close as we are I'm
gonna highlight the things in
red today you already mentioned
differences and LFC and
Executive recommendations around
support for folks in Medicaid
to manage these programs and
leveraging federal dollars
income support three point three
million dollar difference across
the a line which is due to
differences in recommendations
as the executive feels there's
an incredible return on
investment to getting I just the
of the full staff same as
Medicaid and then I'm gonna take
a little bit of time to just
talk about the ninety eight
system but it within behavioral
health but we're very close on
that at the present time as well
the race may I interrupt you for
just a second this is Senator
Rodriguez if you can get just a
little closer to the Mike now
it's and for some reason it just
went like further fading away so
a little bit closer and will be
fine thank you.
thank you very much Senator
Rodriguez and please no one
should has a date
of interrupting being let me now
I can be a more effective
communicator even if it's just
volumes so we get together every
year in April and think of all
the different things we could do
to improve the lives of New
Mexicans and better serve them
we came up this year with eleven
items and while there's a big
red box around one of the
numbers here I just wanted to
take a moment to think better
the LFC staff for their efforts
in really matching and are
coming very close or exceeding
the executive recommendation in
almost all of these items is
only one we have a different
time today I'll talk about that
a little bit at the end so I
think the overall messages
despite a dramatic difference
from Travis the general fund
budget perspective I think
another perspective on that is
incredibly close closer than
we've been since I've been a
secretary and I attribute that
to the partnership with those
indication in the chantry apt to
have through some of these
issues I would there's one last
thing we've asked for a special
appropriation and I will comment
on this and in the garden of
the.
A supplemental appropriation to
settle our hundred and sixty
three point seven million
dollars finally from FNS we do
have a new number of transfer
that to the LFC it's three
hundred thousand last but I and
this number is changed pretty
much every week but now that
we're closing in on the final
negotiations I think we have a
pretty good production so we
would be asking for this
analysis special to and I'll
explain more later
The other thing just as a
reminder very busy slide all you
have to look at is the red boxes
but because of this unique
situation or an image as the
general fund only accounting for
thirteen point eight percent of
our budget.
Every time we caught general
fund dollar we lose four dollars
in not federal funds or more and
so you can see the just in the
two because the area is a Mr
Sally outline is being and if I
want to resolve the differences
that results in a loss of almost
eight million dollars of federal
funding coming into the state to
support low income New Mexicans
to support our health care
system to support our our
response actually
This to the pandemic and support
the low income people who've
been most affected by that.
The other thing I think I I talk
a lot members of the committee
and you know there's always a
wonderment of the message State
even more so on AGFC at the size
of these numbers like how can we
be so far off for how could this
be a hundred million dollars
that the budget when we
submitted it and on September
first we had on eight hundred
ninety five thousand nine
hundred ninety four clients in
Medicaid on seven one.
And our projection of first
projection meeting of the LFC
that was up to nine hundred
sixteen thousand change because
of the delay in the start date
because of an extension of the
public health emergency so you
can see that here now we know
we'll have an additional quarter
that was announced last week and
so now we're up to much higher
correction that PED three
thousand five hundred people
more we anticipate to be
enrolled in Medicaid on July
first then we had in our
original budget projection and
you don't have to be an
insurance executive in your
career to to understand this map
this number of people times the
general fund contribution per
person per month times twelve
months of the year is a
difference of a hundred thirty
four million now all of those
people are not like we're
sincerely hoping they won't all
be on the Medicaid rolls because
that means the pandemic as we
know it all severity will
continue for for another year we
need to all these people lot but
there is a significant cost here
and the sooner we can roll
individuals offer no longer
eligible for Medicaid services
when the pandemic of the public
health emergency of the
maintenance of effort Anne's and
I'm I'm sure all three of these
will be different dates so when
the maintenance of effort hands
then we will actually
begin just and rolling and we
need to be fully staffed to do
that
that gargantuan three hundred
million dollars Mr Sally mention
is due to us because they happen
in the budgeted twenty twenty us
on some but not complete our
reinstatement of some of those
bonds in twenty one for FY
twenty two our current.
Here and then and then just
ongoing changes to the pandemic
and expenditures but.
If you want to know if I were
you I would be asking me so I do
what some of the just answer the
question now how on earth could
we be three hundred million off
and and basically it's the
decrease in that F. may happen
yes ma'am which is the federal
match we will see from where we
are not ready yet four dollars
and ninety cents from the budget
for every general fund dollars
we invest down to three dollars
and fifty seven cents again you
multiply that by twelve months
and almost a million people and
you can see how that a shortfall
that we haven't feel back in
continue to exist now this is a
really really difficult concept
that I want to go over with you
but extremely important and I
want to let you know in advance
that I I'm gonna tell you
everything I know about it and
if you ask any questions I will
immediately refer you to call
come on who's really the person
HSD understands is very very
complex federal provision and
not.
In our budget was passed last
spring for home based community
services this are part of the
bill is what has enabled Agency
in generation partnership with
the legislature to create a plan
and execute on the plan to
remove every single person from
the waiting list so are I don't
recall what I called once and
once in a millennium of currents
I think we all should be really
excited to be able to be part of
this what happens in according
to the bill is that we keep
track of home based community
services R. four year from April
of last year to March of this
year.
The good news for HSD is the
definition of home based
community services is very very
broad so we believe we're going
to be able to capture a lot of
expenses in the past year what
ever we spend in this time
period.
The fans give us ten percent and
then we can spend that ten
percent any time between now and
the end of March twenty twenty
four so we have our work cut out
for us we're gonna be able to
spend a fair amount of that
money now the thing that's sort
of americana I don't know once
not to millennium.
Aspect of this program yes.
The ten percent they give us an
I've never heard of this ever
happened before this federal
money which usually is not in
never be used for a match can
then be used to be W. mass so
get ten percent credit for
everything we spend in this
period broad definition it goes
into a pool that we have to keep
safe ready and I'll explain that
in just a second and we that
would result in us having about
seven hundred eighty million
dollars in additional money to
do things like take people off
of the waiver expand home based
services
for adults in Medicaid.
Even more we have got a
significant waiting list of
people looking to get the
services you can also start
moving them off and lots of
other things
we believe that the language in
the bill and interpretation
we've got S. is very specific
that we have to keep that money
within the agency and have it be
non reverting I am not a fan of
non reverting language I don't.
Almost never asked for it and
and and because this is so on
board we have a meeting I think
it's Tuesday the call with I LFC
of your ship and staff to go
through the law itself and get
really clear on this but this
will be are not over in language
we are proposing to be included
in both in house bill but house
bill two thank you HSD section
and in the D. O. H..
And Colby happy to answer all
your questions later.
I'm.
I'm the Medicaid budget and the
one point two million difference
between the executive
recommendation and the LESC
recommendation we've really been
charged by you by LFC leadership
to to get every single general
fund dollars we can leverage
through federal dollars and
actually that was a really
important part of why I took
this job is because I thought I
had some insight on how the
state could be more effective
doing that I mentioned though
two billion dollars we've had
increased federal funding as a
result of that leveraging but
you know about four hundred
seventy five million of that
which is difference between
these two numbers is actually
coming through other departments
were working with aging and and
and.
ECECD D. O. H. many different
divisions state to tap into
their programs and.
Multiply if you well the fishes
and loaves to get four and
seventy five million additional
fishes or low part with
apologies Senator Rodriguez
this additional expenditure on
the legislature's part one point
two million divided into the
four hundred seventy five nine
it's about four hundred to one
return on investment biggest
line I've ever seen and anything
that I was at the privilege to
help lead and so out really I
encourage you all to do that to
to there's a lot of work it
takes to maintain the
documentation to help other
departments maintain the
documentation help other
departments submit proper forms
we're very used to doing as they
aren't and so it does take
additional budget dollars to do
this we think pay off of very
very rich investment.
Another budget difference is
what's going on in I. S. T. and
right now we've we've been
talking and focusing extensively
on Medicaid and the end of the
emergency and people rolling off
Medicaid and we do that because
you know twenty percent of that
budget comes at a general fund
on the other hand snap budget
doesn't necessarily come out of
general fund it's a federal
program funded by the feds and
they put in place waivers at the
beginning of the pandemic of all
we applied for waivers and
receive them and then they just
some general things as well
where they decided to pay
everyone basically at the
highest snap
then it right up sixty three
hundred a year plus an
additional overage to cover up
pandemic related stress everyone
regardless of income up to I
believe it is thirteen fifty an
hour.
What happened in January one is
that benefit went away that we
ever went away and so we just
think the minimum wage family
for you here our family and
believe it is about three parent
into this making eleven fifty
last month
they were receiving at five or
nine dollars a month initializes
to the seventy three ninety two
as soon as they go through re
enrollment and we we re enroll
everybody on a on a
every three to six months
basically as soon as they go
through that benefit will drop
on one thousand two hundred
eighty one dollars which is is
very close to whatever that is
one hundred and six dollars a
month and so that's a big issue
and that is happening now and
we're sort of caught in this a
difficult situation with
insufficient number of
employees and I just the and
we're asking for additional
funding we've got a drop of over
a hundred eighty people and that
was okay during the pandemic as
part of the maintenance
agreement.
Maintenance of effort agreement
with CMS was that we needed to
keep people on Medicaid so
there's well we still are
updating income numbers so ready
at any moment to be enrolling
people law it was less intense
work but that work is back in
full force now in staff likely
be back the beginning of the
next fiscal year in Medicaid and
so we are asking for that the
time it takes for us to roll
people off
you know we talked about those
eighty three thousand five and
sixteen extra members as to to
take an example
you know basically this is I
brought this up last year how
many months are we going to get
to do twelve months of work so
in this scenario with xcelerated
automation plus additional
legislative funding or asking
for the Representative
difference we think we can get
these folks off in about five
months in the in in a setting
where we're short twenty five
percent of our workforce.
individuals that would take
about twice as long because
remember there's lots of other
work to do and that ends up
potentially we have to pay a lot
more general fund to keep
individuals on Medicaid because
we can't accelerate that process
now there will be federal limits
we don't know what they are but
how quickly we can go all.
It's not like we can drop
everything we're doing and then
and then just doesn't roll
everybody overnight so about
twenty to one return on
investment and then I think it's
really important understand too
that we have very rigid
requirements for timeliness and
accuracy ninety five percent
processing of all applications
within a set time frame here
different for Medicaid and snap
of the different for expenditure
versus regular and so I want
Those those failures to meet
those timeliness and quality
standards actually result in
additional fiscal penalties
additional reason to fully fund
our income support division
these are the people in our
thirty six offices to bring much
every county of the state are
out there face to face with
customers every day during the
pandemic use the votes are
standing in parking lots you
know enrolling people in
Medicaid when our office lobbies
were closed because of the risk
of spreading I guess the offices
agency this is an open
throughout throughout the entire
pandemic
in less we have to close them
for an operate for a day or two
we've maintained services to all
of our customers during that
time Senator my son little
passion about this I don't want
to be back here next year asking
for fifty five million and
supplemental appropriation I
don't want to see increase the
number and our income support
division because of the workload
is just overwhelming and so
please help us with that.
Hi and they were getting the and
I mentioned the two more things
this event as agreement
I think that will be it's is now
being routed for final legal
review so all the eight months
you think that will take but the
negotiations are over
It does.
An interesting way there's a up
front cash payment and then
there's a out
there's re investment that we
have to do in the program and
the problem of that re
investment as we general fund
dollars that aren't maxed like
they normally are for three
years and so the some of the
cash payment plus the first year
reinvestment works out at the
present time I to be eight
million I earn seventy thousand
and
the trick about the contract and
how and finance works these
reinvestments because they have
experience with agencies like
are not ours but across the
country losing interested in re
investment projects as other
priorities come up for
administrations change is if you
don't invest the full amount
we're simply going to charge the
amount you don't invest as a
cash repayment so we're sort of
like to do this we did review
the initial plan LFC we continue
to work.
View our progress with LFC I did
get permission to show you the
slide today of resin as you know
we I'm very lows to talk about
negotiations don't have.
Are on their agreements but we
think we have an accurate
estimate lower than what we
originally asked for but still
important to fully fund because
it's it's one of those like the
on commercial you can pay me now
or you can pay me later and then
finally I know that you all are
very interested in enhancing
behavioral health in the state
we appreciate that the you're so
interested in that and of really
happy to see the legislature
step up on a ton of a lot of
calls from you and others about
how do we support behavioral
health if we get extra money how
would you spend it in so here's
the first one you heard about
India weight the suicide
prevention program.
And.
And the importance of that
purpose of the state cause us
being one of the highest
prevalent states for suicide and
with a special focus on teen
suicide were also ranked
unfortunately it's not really a
good to be at the top of this.
and they are what goes hand in
hand with this is crisis
response and a new national nine
eight eight number that replaces
nine one one for behavioral
health emergencies.
And so if someone has a suicidal
you know ideation and is
seriously considering taking
their own lives
as happens here in New Mexico
ten times a month
but then all host of other
problems depression anxiety
PTSD major and psychosis major
behavioural disorders this is a
number that people can call and
get connected to experienced
clinicians and other folks who
can actually support them get
them connected to the right
service like either online right
budget a suicidal issue or in
the next couple days be seen and
evaluated for their behavioral
health disorder other countries
have done hasn't seen a drop in
on.
In suicide rates as well as much
better even here we think it's
time with again New Mexico we
don't leader in behavioral
health issues as well to step up
and fully fund as of today we're
here establishing the project
funding green means that we're
on track and right up to speed
with all the things we should be
doing here is today and then of
course you can see that we're
doing really well the project is
generally
up to up to speed some of these
things are on track to be
completed but not completed yet
they're in orange some of the
mark scheduled to start but some
you can see here it accomplish
some of them that are actually
already done that before we're
even scheduled to start so we
believe this is one that we're
on top of we can do and get a
really good results for New
Mexicans were here today you
Stallis project funding with you
try to.
The the year that help us help
New Mexicans I think the one
thing about behavioral health.
That I find interesting in the
halls of the capital and
elsewhere is a pretty much
everybody every state person in
our your Senate chamber in the
LESC room everybody on this call
has someone in their family with
the behavioral health disorders
can just the statistics about
thirty to forty percent of
people who experiences sometime
in in their life means the all
of us about that I have a son
major greater officer he's doing
extremely well and we're very
very thankful for that there was
a very very dark period in his
life in the early part of this
millennium where you moved to
New Mexico because he really
couldn't function function all
got appropriate treatment but
you know I was is case manager
I'm a doctor there was a three
digit number we could call time
around him three things an ideal
every day without any Senator a
lot of them who are struggling
to access the system and need
our help and so I think this is
a great investment for the state
I think it's a great investment
for the people of New Mexico and
I think in the end I help your
population means a better
economy as well and I am pretty
sure that my last slide Mr chair
members the committee to thank
you for your attention I
apologize for any audio
difficulties that.
Are you my raspy voice today are
at my computer speaker and we're
open for questions and you can
expect me to refer a lot of
these questions to all these
experts I have with me here
today from our department thank
you.
Thank you Secretary trials you
want to not feel anything.
Just one thing Mr chairman
secretary Scrase talked about
the non reverting language
that's not in the LFC
recommendation we are planning
on meeting with the department
to learn more about that because
the way that we sit today as a
staff we don't see a need for
that but we are open to working
with the department to better
understand it the LFC
recommendation is on board with
the executive and we work very
closely with them during the
fall to
On a plan to eliminate the
waiting list for DD waiver
services using federal funds so
will will be meeting with them
on Tuesday to try to sort sort
those technical issues out
that's all I wanted to to follow
up on Mr chairman thank you and
members will look in their
volume.
Spiraling following three the
look at the reversions I'll see
that they ask for a bar and then
they came back and reverted a
hundred thirty nine million even
on the bar judgments so just be
aware of of language we did this
for the waivers last year in the
governor be to the language and
and they didn't expend all the
DD waiver money in I don't know
where they're at today there may
be a good question for the
secretary to questions from
committee members let me go to
June first Senator Steinborn the
manager and the Serbia then
Senator Hemphill.
Sure.
Representative and thank you.
But if I money on that point Mr
Chairman on the DD waiver we did
work with the department there
was a an artful veto of that
limitation for the reversions
and we did work with the
department and got that sorted
out that was consistent with
what the legislature passed and
that our trip are from leaders
of the smiley face or a frowning
face depends on.
Which side of the R. forty two
here on Senator Steinborn is is
on so let me try to get to him
so that way and we're not out
some back and forth.
Senator thank you looks thank
you Mr chairman I really
appreciate it this few questions
so Mr secretary good morning
Are are we fully funding the
line eighteen line.
Jack and if so what other tweaks
are needed.
It's not what what other tweaks
needed yeah thank you Mr chair
Senator Steinborn I think at the
present time on nine eight eight
eight
the executive recommendation is
full funding at four point one
seven million LFC
recommendation is one point five
million
and that that that difference if
there is we are I would
recommend it would be adding the
two point six seven two million
difference between the two I
think there there are there's a
believe perhaps are concerned
that we're not gonna be able to
get this one across the finish
line that we're we're treating
this like a nine one one.
The project have already put
resources in and I did show that
graphic that shows that were
pretty much on time or ahead of
schedule you all the different
aspects of it so that's the two
week because
putting back in that two point
seven million okay and then tell
me if I'm wrong Charles but I'm
looking at looking for all the
budget documents we're provided
it seems like we were financing
in a different way and the only
thing separating the executive
and the LESC was three hundred
thousand so I might be missing
something.
am I missing something or Mister
chairman Senator you're correct
the LFC funded some of the cost
through a special that we
believe were some of the start
up cost and then also to get a
sense of where the the full
recurring cost would settle in
the future through next session.
Thanks so in total we're very
close Mr chairman and senator.
Let me ask you this Charles
Water there Mr chairman what why
are we.
Where are we giving the thank
you so much the one time money
into this is supposed to
recurring funding from LFC
recommendation.
Mister chairman Senator the
department at the time had a
number of other priorities and
and request in there
September first budget
initiatives and the LESC found a
way to to balance out funding
many of those including the a
private for the provider rate
increases that were requests for
non Medicaid and felt that some
of the because this is a new
initiative and it's an important
initiative sent there would be
one time start up costs to
getting it going and and that's
why the LFC recommended using
some nonrecurring funding the
special appropriation with those
nonrecurring start up cost if it
turns out that the the cost to
implement it on a recurring
basis is higher than the next
legislative session you can deal
with that and their base budget
under the LFC recommendation.
Mr Chairman Charles so is there
is there a big discrepancy right
now and I understand the one
time money for start up costs
but is there a big discrepancy
right now for appropriations
recurring funding that the
executive is requesting and what
we're providing.
I need to get with our analysts
missus Development sitting in
for today to give a more
detailed breakdown of the the
the estimated costs that the
department has again this is a
new initiative and it's kind of
a little bit no about what that
might be but I can follow up
with you after I I speak with
her Mr ginger sure what I would
just say that I think this is a
really incredibly important
program for the state I know
it's incredibly important for
Dona Ana County it's a huge it's
great that the that the
department has taken this on in
Dona ana county we have a crisis
hotline that was was impacting
thousands of people in.
Being great
for de escalation and
psychiatric intervention and
avoiding having to get law
enforcement involved because
that's who gets that call
otherwise often times and so I I
just this is a priority for me
and I would I would very much
appreciate LFC working with the
department to figure out what
kind of funding the need it
sounds like the project is on
track
so I would love to put him on
track financially to build them
towards towards enabling the
full breadth of the plan that
they have the other thing we
have going on and on and county
I don't know about the rest of
state is we have a crisis triage
center which is a center that
has been built as a jail
diversion kind of law
enforcement jail diversion they
definitely need more
professional values because
they're kind of on the cutting
edge of working out what that.
How that works
but
to the extent that this line in
a program is going to be leading
the way on more of that type of
stuff I just think it's it's
what we need and it's what the
people want and so I just hope
we really.
Into that and and work out those
budget request I have a few
other questions quick questions
Mr chair which is Mr Secretary
priest funding in the budget for
treatment.
Drug and alcohol treatment.
Mr chair and numbers.
And that one off the.
What
in your race injure because in
my view I can't see them but
And they are the one of the more
we or both need to be promoted
to panelists and while that's
happening I can just say that we
are a you know the bureau of
collaborative has four goals
we've got the network which
would make an amazing progress
on two thirds increased second
is develop more services for
kids and their families which is
happening big time in CYFD an
existing partnership four is
managing
the Ralph needs people who are
incarcerated transitioning in
and out of incarceration third
is is developing more effective
programs for substance use
disorder that's a big issue
another list we don't want to be
on the top of in New Mexico and
says I see doctor mon is been
promoted and you'll speak up and
get closer my thank you.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn and
members of the committee thank
you so much for this the
question the answer to the
question about whether we have
increased rates are payments for
services for substance use
disorder is is a qualified no
and and what I mean by that is
we did ask for ways to increase
the payments for those folks who
do not qualify for Medicaid or
for services that Medicaid
cannot cover and there is and
attempts to the the home
community based services include
some funding for a temporary
rate increase for Medicaid is
from I don't thank you Adam
interrupted I guess what I'm
looking at is you know like
residential treatment centers
and have increased funding for
capacity to expand the treatment
provider base.
This is the state thank you for
that clarification I apologize
for the misunderstanding the
question and the the answer that
is also no there's we we've been
and leveraging existing monies
that we have to increase that
that ability but we we we did
not ask for your everything
granted to expand.
Well Mr chairman I'll I'll just
say that I've got a bill to
designate a certain percentage
of the excise tax from Canada
sales towards treatment which is
what's there some states that
this is largely what they use
the money for like word and
they've gone back on that
increase because it's been so
successful you know we leave the
nation and.
And alcoholism deaths and some
other things I mean we're we're
the top in the nation and and
certainly why there is so I
think this is a real area of
need more and treatment services
so hopefully this is a bill the
Senate finance committee will
here and will consider that's a
bill that entries thank you and
I just have one other question
Mr Chairman secretary which is
the governor
dropped kind of a really
important idea into our state of
the state about paid family
members to be providers.
Home health care providers to
their loved ones where we're
gonna see that particular
funding where's that proposal
show up in our in the budget.
Can you tell us yes Mr chair and
Senator Steinborn members of the
committee great question and
couple things if you want to.
Just one last thing in your
previous question you mentioned
residential treatment centers
one of the things we do at
is early in the administration
decided anybody who is providing
on Medicaid services to folks
also had to be a Medicaid
provider and in so doing brought
all the residential treatment
centers under Medicaid
certification got the federal
match for those services and
save eight million dollars a
year so we are working on that
and in terms of the funding for
home based services are up and
that off to the call that is
done through a partnership with
aging secretary term Lopez but
not the call can find the
details.
Members of the committee we are
here we are and usually fairly
long
so the question I am really
grateful for the
The disabled and the individuals
who take care I'm we currently
pay for family caregivers and
the community benefit programs
is really targeted more towards
the elderly population.
And during the public health
emergency we exercise we are
Cority you also allow legally
responsible individuals to take
care of minor children or
spouses on the desired
reimbursement for those services
when the public health emergency
comes to an end we would
certainly be looking to explore
continuing at option as we know
it provided a lot of relief for
those families and then in the
individuals that they're taking
care of.
Okay this Mr chairman the
governor kind of spoke about it
is if we weren't doing it right
now but it's something new she
wants to do.
It did I hear that wrong or.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn we're
exercising not through what we
were already right now so when
that goes away under the public
health emergency we would have
to implement it on going so I
think that's the way the
governor is seeking to enter
into.
The state projects thank you Mr
chairman this come up I'm sorry
to pronounce that come up yeah.
If we have do we have money in
the budget or is the money in
the proposed budget to continue
this once the waiver expires.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn right
now we have this unprecedented
opportunity that the secretary
spoke you to utilize federal
funds to continue that activity
through twenty twenty four so we
will be able to apply and how we
community services face time
percent dollars that the
secretary I with their own I
will be able to use that for
twenty twenty four then we would
come to also look to build that
into our on going as well so for
these federal funds is live in
Washington these funds have been
appropriated to us we now need
to appropriate is the
legislature.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn this
funding although it outlined as
a section in.
I statute that you all are very
familiar with it doesn't come as
part of that and appropriation
and said these dollars come to
the Medicaid program centreline
enhanced match so you always
hear us talk about normally
getting about three dollars and
seventy five cents under our
percent eighty will be getting
almost eight dollars and ninety
cents for every investment we
make sure it doesn't quite work
in the appropriation I.
Way that you all are used to
using our for these funds okay
really helpful getting here
thank you for your answer Mr
chairman that's all I have thank
you very much thank you Sierra
I'm born members make note of
the Senate really passed
yesterday that you have to be in
business entire on zoom
Cymbidium a lesson are him so
he'll go first because she may
have some questions because
we're going to go to committee.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you for the presentation
secretary and for us for the
information my question is
regarding the proposal to
increase the postpartum care for
women I'm just curious what the
standard is for it surrounding
states for other states that
find postpartum eligibility for
women.
Mister chairman Senator I would
defer to the Department on the
benchmark in other states.
Secretary Mr.
Go ahead.
I'm gonna have Nicole answer
that.
Mr.
Senator Hemphill thank you for
the question at so there is
actually only two states that
have that fire extended their
postpartum coverage for women to
twelve months prior to the
passage of our product how to
use what's called an eleven
fifteen demonstration waiver
authority which is fairly
administratively burdensome
Christine I find that coverage
now with the passage of the
American rescue plan act we're
able to use the lesser federal
authority to just build that
into your how we operate our
Medicaid programs are given that
that that easing burden I
believe that is almost every
state in the country now looking
to to exercise this authority
and finds that for women in
those really critical months
after their pregnancies.
Excellent thank you Mr chairman
for that response I'm just
curious if does the post partum
care include all.
Medicaid covered services like
behavior mental health and and
other health care issues as well
or is this related only to like
postpartum care
that would be related to giving
birth.
Mr chair Senator how how and why
it is really exciting about this
is that we will be able to
extend all Medicaid budget for
these women through the twelve
months postpartum and why are so
critical the New Mexico maternal
mortality review committee has
reviewed the deaths in the past
two years and and not data they
found that about seventy eight
percent of the doctors Torrez
remains to be preventable and
the causes top causes that in
not preventable group for mental
health conditions cardiac
condition I'm militiaman have
ranch so all things very
treatable out particularly under
the robust Medicaid package that
we will have available to these
women.
Excellent that's exciting and
how many women do we anticipate
this impacting.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill we
currently cover about twenty
seven thousand pregnancies
annually and this.
I is going to allow for a
portion of those moments have
extended coverage some of that
twenty seven thousand and that
at the end of the pregnancy
related services average
dropping into another category
of eligibility but we believe
that this could affect up to ten
thousand or so women with that
ongoing coverage our numbers are
are very large right now is you
all are aware DTV I think it's
about her requirement and so
that's why I'm having a little
bit on the numbers but ten
thousand is is we believe.
Excellent thank you for that
response my other question is
related to the DD waiver care
provider rate increases I know
Charles we spoke a little bit
about it and I think it was an
LESC meeting I know that there's
a request to increase those
provider rates and I'm just
wondering if it's across the
board for all providers like
respite providers home home
based service providers and
community support providers
right now there's a difference
in what those hourly rates are
is there going to be an increase
across the board and if so what
what is it going to be.
Mister chairman Senator the LFC
recommendation doesn't specify
which providers would get the
rate increases it provides a
lump sum amount and I believe it
with the department and and they
can correct me if I'm wrong
would follow the same schedule
that they've got mapped out to
to meet that three year provider
rate increase of that study that
they did
so it would it would very
depending on how the department
decided to do that the general
fund appropriation for that
would be in the department of
health budget
and then the department of
health since that money to HSD
to match the federal funds and
pay the providers so HSD has a
role in
And how that money flows but the
policy decision primarily is
going to reside with the
department of health.
Excellent thank you Mr chairman.
Secretary did you have something
that yeah I just want to comment
they do you waiver program is
really a combined effort to
between ages do you H. Mr Sally
is correct about the funding for
the provider rate increase it
was either seven or seven and a
half million I don't mind you H.
notes in front of me right now
Mary Beth.
How much.
Thank you very Mr chair sort and
it's ten point four million
disease or in end I'm it it
isn't goals that
they DO H. I'm sorry both the
executive and the LFC
recommendations for the
department of health but I do
want to note the LFC
recommendation was taken so but
it was in both recommendations
thank you and then just to add
that the history of that is I
think it was twenty nineteen a
rate study was done on that that
said rates were far below what
they needed to be and so I'm two
thirds of that I think was
funded leading about one third
of providers without a rate
increase so
Mr chair Senator Hemphill and
answer your specific question
about all that money is going to
be distributed the O. H.
allocations and million is
directed to those people who
didn't get a rate increase that
brings everybody up to the
benchmark right and then that
benchmarking is done in the O.
H. every couple years and so it
the most important first step is
getting everybody up to where
they need to be and then in
future years will continue
judges psych cyclically and
every two years do that study
and make more fine tuning
adjustments.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you secretary and my last
question is right now we're not
able to kick anybody off
Medicaid and secretary stated
that that was until the end of
the pandemic is that what is the
definition of that.
Mr chair and Senator Hemphill I
I Sir use three different terms
and Representative tried to
desperately correct myself there
you're the and the end of the
pandemic will be when the
secretary of health no longer
calls a public health emergency
the end of the maintenance of
agreement which actually has
four parts which I learned this
morning can be separated into
the maintenance of the Green of
effort agreement that we have
with CMS is an independent
decision I have and so there
were some.
Some indication through the belt
Act better be all
Those two would be disconnected
and that and so that really
comes from CMS so it's it's very
possible and I would say better
than fifty percent chance we'll
we'll we will see an end to the
maintenance of effort agreement
it keeps everyone on Medicaid
before we see the end of the
pandemic the problem is that the
six point two percent that we
get extra doesn't go with the
pandemic because of the
maintenance of effort so as soon
as that maintenance of effort
and then of that agreement ended
we would begin re evaluating
everybody for Medicaid taking
people off we don't qualify
which is about eighty five
thousand
people and and
At least the way things stand
right now have no additional
funding to support our those
people are still receiving
services until we get to there
valuation.
The C. thank you for that
response secretary thank you Mr
chairman and thank you Secretary
for your good work
just trying to get children off
the waiting list and expanding
the services to those most in
need right now during the
pandemic I really appreciate
that the emphasis on behavior
mental health as well we need
that more than anything right
now so thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
We're going to.
Committees committees I'm gonna
ask the secretary one question
it's kind of been
on topic for me your ninety day
number.
I see everything the structure
all there but I don't see the
services.
We can put a phone number up and
there's no one to go to provide
the services how is that handled
and then my big question is
you're asking for a hundred
forty eight FTE for three
million dollars I don't know how
again higher hundred forty
people at three million dollars
could you explain that to me.
Mr chair and members of the
committee thanks for the
question we love talking about
the new behavioral health
initiatives within don't have
huge impact I'm gonna let
doctor mowing talk about the S.
T. E. P. so that and even the
services as well and then I'll
come back at the end to the
answer the other segment of your
question I talked about.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for that the
the services are the design of
the services is to be delivered
through the existing system
internet expansion cystic system
so we're looking at reinforcing
the call center is the existing
call centers that we have that
already respond to the national
lifeline to to find that part of
the ninety day response and we
are we are a expecting today
that's pretty heavily in
increasing our capability
because we expect about a twenty
percent uptick in the number of
calls that come through nine
eight eight as opposed to the
existing lifeline system.
that the other aspects of the
crisis now system we we do have
some mobile crisis teams across
the state but we need we need a
large expects that says that the
the work plan is for how we work
with existing providers and with
the counties to develop a new
new mobile crisis response
system so that's again fielding
on existing systems similarly
the safe place to go the third
and final aspect of of the
crisis now system.
Will build on the crisis triage
centers that we have Senator
Steinborn mentioning employment
again accounted we don't have
enough and we will need some
slightly different structures in
number one frontier counties for
that to be sustainable one of
the things we're exploring in
order to make sure that we have
capacity for that is bringing
the certified community
behavioral health clinics into
the state in order to facilitate
the workforce to deliver those
services thank you for that
question Mr chair and members of
the committee at we were
requested to be as brief as we
possibly could which is always a
challenge for me is he now but
out in the preamble to the
budget information we would have
talked about some of our best
accomplishments and one of the
ones that I'm most proud of is
our over the past three years
the number of behavioral health
providers that now participate
in Medicaid has gone up between
sixty six and seventy five
percent depending on the type of
legislative now I understand
that doesn't represent that
growth into the state Medicaid
is the frontline we're we deal
with the a significant majority
of Abramoff issues in the state
but the serious ones so bringing
all those providers back on
board and I have to credit Dr
Bowen for his outstanding
leadership in this effort the
rate increase you all
legislative support for in the
twenty nineteen session to bring
favor all providers
substantially all to at least
ninety percent of Medicare was a
key factor in that and I think I
don't want to belabor the
lawsuits and putting all the
past behind us also help thank
you.
Well Mr secretary you guys did
good at not answering the
question about how you're going
to hire a hundred forty eight
people on yeah Mr up third three
hundred million but let me let
me let me tell you.
Behavioral health is an issue
across the state in and you made
a right everybody has in someone
in their family or know someone
or see that
we're gonna hold your feet to
the fire on this one and we're
gonna start the the pandemic
frying pan it in here to see how
you're gonna do this I do have
to go to another meeting but if
you explain how you can hire a
hundred forty people for three
million dollars I I might hire
you it as my H. R. person.
And so could you tell me how you
gonna hire hundred forty people
for the million dollars.
Yes we can Mr chair I I should
note the of we've already
ordered custom fitted asbestos
shoes for our entire leadership
team so that was our feet are
being held with the fire of the
still able to work and not have
to take time off hundred four
eight FTEs is not a problem it's
in I just see and up we've had
incredible success just this
month in job fairs now I a day
hiring thirty people these I
guess the jobs actually are plum
jobs in rural areas and you know
all of our frontline workers
have friends you want to know in
one of those jobs is available
so critically in rural areas of
things will be up successful
hiring and amp different plans
in Albuquerque that is the
incremental costs these are low
paid workers generally which is
why that number up comes up the
way it does and in the budget
difference and if you want more
information Janet can dissect a
permanent financial point of
view Mr Santa or colonel
Martinez R. I. C. director can
talk about the recruiting
efforts.
Thank you and and you know I did
the salary difference so that's
twenty thousand dollars that's
almost under the poverty line
for an employee but again this
is an an issue across New
Mexico's I I imagine everybody
in the room can say the same
exact thing they know somebody
or family member that committed
suicide or something happened
within their family and so how
do you get those services more
you're focused on urban and you
keep pushing off the rural
aspects but in rural areas
sometimes that issue is even
harder I know it is in my
district to get those services
and so
I just want to make sure that as
we stand up this mental health
stuff that we have the correct
funding because I don't want
people saying oh we miss this or
we didn't have enough funding to
hire those employees and then
it's a person's life.
And it really doesn't matter to
people until that happens with
in their life or within their
family and then they have a lot
of care and compassion the same
way with crime it doesn't matter
to people until it happens to
them this is one of those things
that we want to make sure we're
on target your funded correctly
in that you can get this up and
running across New Mexico
because it's very important to
of us in the Senate and it's
very important to the people in
New Mexico so I do have to go to
the meeting Senator Rodriguez is
gonna chair of Mr secretary
thank you I'm sorry I didn't
respond you Texas morning we'll
chat a little later in in if
there's any follow for or
anything we need to do so thanks
and Rodriguez here all right
Yes Senator with permission
if I could well drive.
Senator Munoz is we've acted
just mentioned we got a fifty
fifty match on those folks are
higher mentioned we're getting
matching those folks higher at
on those folks I did watch
detainees by body language maybe
six to one match is annoyed that
but out that's how we end up
being able to do it like
everything else we do in HSD the
general the federal budget
matching your support for us is
what enables us to get a hundred
forty eight thank you.
Thank you thank you very much Dr
Scrase all right we have Senator
Padilla next and then after that
we have Senator share thank you.
Thank you madam chair and the.
Mr secretary and
And Charles thank you most of my
questions and so madam ranchers
just dig in real fast so we can
keep moving here on the DD
waiver and hearing it out in one
year so that's just one year
what we do next year.
So madam chair Senator I don't
think they will be able to clear
the waiting list in one year
they will have the funding to be
able to probably do that we're
in our discussions with them
maybe over a two year period
and.
Funding wide funding is not
going to be the barrier to
clearing the waiting list
there's gonna be a lot of hard
work that's going to need to be
done by the department and
providers to
Move people from the waiting
list into the services a lot of
the initial service costs are
going to be probably low because
individuals that are on the
waiting list our kids and
possibly receiving services are
ready through Medicaid or or
some other form so we won't see
a bunch of people coming off the
waiting list that cost the
average of you know seventy or
eighty thousand or ninety
thousand dollars in the in the
first couple years so I defer to
secretary Scrase about some of
the logistics because his
department's going to have to do
the heavy lift to be able to
match individuals with the
service delivery providers.
Grace thank you madam chair
thank you Senator agri
professionals there is a really
detailed spreadsheet was co
created by HSD dealing should
not see that walks through the
funding streams each year it
involves that relatively complex
CCV has funded a in the ten
percent of re investment leader
in everything else involves
taking the fund that's been
accumulating in the waiver is in
that span in out years and
I don't have this virtually
right in front of me what we get
basically a couple years funding
we are already bringing four
hundred people a month off the
waiting list not and that's our.
Maybe four and a quarter will
bring for her
wondered if you're referring
people off the waiting list
right now number one and that
with initial funding that we're
getting through CMS and so on
the plan in the out years is
that the state benefits from
this.
Norma's federal support for two
years and then gradually starts
picking up the tab general fund
and so that I think maybe
Five years out that group of
people
Expenditures is in the ninety
two hundred and ten million
dollars per year.
It says and madam chair Senator
you can see that finance plan on
page ninety five of your volume
three.
Thank you for when we were
developing this the build back
better plan.
Would have extended that
enhanced F. map that secretary
Scrase has talked about.
And the federal government with
a fully financed
Eliminating the waiting list but
we've got a back up plan for how
the general fund since that
doesn't seem to be moving
forward how the general fund and
it in an affordable way can back
fill those federal funds that
would be spent to to get them
off of the list the next couple
of years Mr chairman madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Charles and and Mr Secretary
I'm glad you're being proactive
in thinking about this because
yeah and I'm thrilled that we're
gonna be tapering that list down
it sounds like to virtually zero
waiting I just wanna make sure
that we don't then have to pull
the carpet out from a bunch of
people and and then what they do
you know so so I'm glad that
you're being proactive in your
thought process there and I will
study page ninety five thank you
for joining our attention to
that.
so full stop on to Mr secretary
on to the slide twelve in the
schedule that you have there to
the right under ECECD.
The dollars that you have
outlined there with the match of
the committee that's fantastic
so are these is the service
delivery of both of those items
on ECECD are they through your
department or the through the
ECECD Department
How does or did did they do it
then bill you how to set the
funding work.
Madam chair and and and
Representative Senator Padilla
it's not interesting
Way it's done we've done it with
the waiver for many years the
department the state funds the
department they put up the state
share the transfer cost
documenting the amount of
Medicaid clients are being
served we get the federal match
send it back the service
provision is arranged by the
apartments in really everyone of
these arrangements right you can
see on the ground and so we tend
to be if you well where the
insurance company in these sorts
of situations that I find.
Okay thank you madam chair and
Mr secretary I thought you might
say that assertion on the home
visiting piece I just thought
that would be a lot larger is
there other other other funds
going into the ECECD department
to deliver the services and we
don't have to give them exactly
what they are now but I know
that we had a huge waiting lists
there for multiple years what's
the waiting list now for the
home visiting components anybody
now.
Madam chair and not
Senator hi I do know that Nicole
Coleman has some information up
to date of before you ask about
how many people on the waiting
list so then turn it over to her
and then maybe one of my staff
know that answer but of course
there's a lot of general fund
funding it's going directly to
the C. to support this program
and and Mary Beth stands more I
think is the analyst for
apparently every department in
state government and she she
probably will have some details
on the call first and MaryBeth.
Madam chair.
Madam chair for the question.
So the way that we are operating
home visiting program out of
Medicaid is a little bit
different than it's not creating
in the state over also and.
A different agency right now B.
C. ECT at and run the home
visiting program through a
number of different models some
evidence based and some
promising practices and they've
been doing that for years and
years decades in fact very
successfully on serving families
and really reducing some of the
committee that we would be
without program available to
women during their pregnancies
and postpartum and we I had an
opportunity through again the
waiver authority that I
mentioned previously that allows
us to kind of experiment or do
demonstrations to pay for things
that are normally payable
through Medicaid and the state I
did do that and not a Levin
fifteen demonstration that went
live in twenty nineteen but we
started operating out of the
pilot program so it was only in
I believe four counties at the
time that we then apply to
expand further we also been
working closely with ECECD to
try to also look at some of
those other models that they
operate the MSN ahead and expand
further to other counties really
bad incrimination getting
for new providers are coming on
board training providers I'm
sorry we're coming on board to
expand those services I'm not
sure actually you going to play
for the new agreement I hear
this coming July that will help
ensure that kind of longevity in
this program also funded through
Medicaid when we have a higher
federal match available.
However the promising practices
that are currently operates on
ECECD ECECD side.
Well this we couldn't expand on
through that model and so that
is a large number of their
recipients working to there so
we'll continue to work to expand
through the Medicaid I but some
of those that you may be
thinking about are really
operating and not Medicaid alone
but also three separate sources
of funding and forty.
List Senator I'm I am actually
double checking on the number
and at if we have an opportunity
to get that in time I will bring
that back to you all and I don't
know that off the top of my head
impacted it to anyone.
And madam chair Senator page one
of seven of your volume three
will have the early childhood
budget breakdown in Medicaid
home visiting and in our view
and the LESC recommendation
assumption is really and
untapped revenue source and
we're thankful for the this
administration has done a much
better job than previous
administrations in trying to to
leverage those funds with the
the LFC recommendation assumes
bringing in you know fourteen
point seven million of federal
funds assuming we can get people
enrolled in the program for a
total funding pot of about forty
three million for home visiting
and you can you you recall when
we first started you know
funding this I'd like to point
three million seven hundred
thousand you know in the
Richardson administration we've
we've come a long way in terms
of making resources available
the as the Medicaid director
just talked about
the federal government is not
allowing our biggest home
visiting program that does have
reserves of effectiveness just
not that top tier of research
first born to be part of the
program and so that's that's a
challenge for the state and
we've been working hard to staff
with the department to try to
change the federal government's
minded apparently that that just
hasn't happened yet and so
that's a major
very here for the state to be
able to better leverage Medicaid
funding for more families you'll
you'll recall that Medicaid pays
for.
You seventy five to eighty five
percent of the person the state
depending on the year so it's a
to us it's a really
important resource to to package
again with that new initiative
that the department has to
expand
post partum services for up to a
year for women as well.
The madam chair so on the
firstborn questions Charles that
you mentioned does the ECB trust
fund disbursement that that is
they can use it however they
wish so they could back fill
that component for the okay
because the disbursements are
are expected to grow quite a bit
and then.
Yeah I would like to have the
weightless number just to see
where things are going I mean I
you know I'd created by was the
sponsor and and a lot of people
on this committee helped us get
you know the department created
when I sponsored that bill we
got it down one of the critical
elements was also going to be
consistency of service delivery
across the continuum but I don't
know how many I'm just to said
that nine hundred times that
session madam chair you might
remember and so we are is LESC
looking at the consistency on
the service delivery across the
continuum of state each
component home visiting the
whatever yes madam chair Senator
we put out a early childhood
accountability report usually
every August that does a more of
a deep dive into each of those
service levels I'll double check
with our analyst but I don't
believe there is a waiting list
for home visiting services in
fact it's we have a little bit
of a lift to to get families to
know about the imminent enroll
the resources are there
the resources will vary
depending on the community the
department does have an exciting
new initiative for more of a a
universal
Type of approach for home
visiting using up a program and
and effective evidence based
model called families can access
where every family could get the
opportunity for a handful of
visits that for some families
that's really important and all
they need and then leave the
more intensive home visiting
models for other families that
would need it for a a one to two
year period and so they're
working through how that service
delivery component would be part
of that Medicaid is going to be
important financial aspect to
that effort as well thank you
madam chair Mr Sally so yeah I
mean again I want to remind
everybody the major component
there was consistency across the
livery across the continuum
there so I'm really happy to
hear that
Madam that's kind of that's
really all I had I didn't know
Mr secretary if it's somebody
else to comment on on the topic
for the issue I think it another
person you wanted to have speak.
Because she's analyst also
offers ECECD I got very bad and
also for me I know it's for the
OAG HSD I thought she might shed
some light from on the DFA
perspective as well sure thank
you thank you Secretary madam
chair Senator Padilla Charles
pointed out the page I believe
for you in one year volumes that
house the breakout but I just
did want to one moment you
mention the easy trust and I did
want to share there's three
million in the current year
budget for home visiting with
easy trust and it is going to go
up to five million again not
that request was supported in
both recommendations that went
forward for this coming fiscal
year so the easy trust funds are
being used in a in a really good
way to support those programs
thank you.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
secretary and and Charles for
your your the excellent work
that you're doing in this area I
just want to close madam chair I
spent an awful lot of time this
past summer for five months
providing free services from my
company to the workforce
solutions department because
they had a dramatic issue with
the contact center the call
center and we we literally fixed
and we we literally fixed a lot
of the problems they were facing
just a skill set that me and my
company have when you're
building this nine eight eight
contacts and I will make the
offer to work with you as well
in full disclosure completely
free were happy to just consult
them give you some ideas and
thoughts we've done this for
almost thirty years and
call centers are not easy to do
so I can I can help you with
that if you're interested so
please reach out any time thank
you.
Thank you Senator Padilla in
thank you to the staff for your
answers we have Senator share
next.
Thank you madam chair so is it
posted going through these
numbers specifically here I've
got some broader.
Questions for you so you know
we've got half of our or
population on Medicaid and other
assistance.
To me that that shows that we've
got some underlying issues or
problems that we've got to deal
with and I know you
bureaucracies just want to grow
that's just the nature of
peroxynitrite you specifically
or anybody else everybody.
Is it possible to identify why
half of New Mexico needs
assistance versus New Mexicans
being more independent in I know
that the Twitter people are it's
only wants to cut Medicaid know
what I want to cut for the rich
people that need this so do you
have any insight on why so many
people are on.
Secretary respond first thank.
I'm sorry.
Chair Senator it's hard not
being in the room to see who's
being looked at so I think it's
fine to just re directing
whenever necessary I'm you know
the reason I mean I I I'm not
being that all but the reason
we're in the situation we're in
is because of poverty.
And and New Mexico as I think
the third lowest average per
capita income in the country
which by the way is exactly the
same reason we have such a high
match rate as well and so in so
then the next why we will why do
we have so much property and you
know I think up we're seeing a
lot of great growth and economic
opportunity and jobs in the
state of the job creation will
be helpful we have several
programs within HSD both in the
child support part of our
department Indian and not in our
income support division that
retraining people for work in in
in our transport Division update
on that that shows that if we
can train and noncustodial
parent and get them back into
the workforce the amount of
money they contribute up to the
campus.
Of course skyrockets but I think
it goes way way deeper than
simple things like that and I
think actually the discussion we
just had on home visiting is
probably where it starts and I
think we have some of LFC
leadership the new PC the CD
Department of governor's
leadership to really focus on
those first three or four years
of life that they can make a
tremendous difference the
attitudes no we all grew up we
all left our homes at some age
with a set of attitudes and
values and if you grow up never
having anyone say a kind word to
you for eighteen years thank you
to opt.
A certain set of attitudes about
of course get all understand
would make it harder for someone
to be successful in life so I
think up at I would get asked
doctor mon for a psychological
perspective but I think on the
one hand we have to really help
people when they need help the
most I think little kids I'm
even more barns are great
opportunities there and then
just for helping them and and
getting to the point where they
can then enter the workforce we
want to be sure that were we
have opportunities for than they
are in the mission statement of
HSD madam chair Senator share
increase that the mission of
agency is to transform lives and
goes on to talk about the fact
that providing high quality
health and Human Services one
prove the security and promote
independence for New Mexicans
that's strictly you know an
improving security and promoting
independence we believe both are
necessary to get New Mexico out
of the top
out of the bottom ten states in
opportunity in COVID and move
our way up and so we think such
Human Services has a huge huge
role in that and we are trying
to point our efforts in the hive
new budget interesting for in
that direction thank you for the
opportunity to really address
that.
Mr Lee.
Madam chair Senator I would
concur with a secretary Scrase
high poverty rates Dr some of it
policies policy decisions that
the state has made to basically
use Medicaid
to insure people who were
previously uninsured we've
dramatically reduce the number
of people in the state that are
don't have health insurance
Many of the individuals on
Medicaid are in fact working so
that's relieving a sort of a
burden from employers to provide
health insurance and that
turning it over to the state
there are definitely a.
Policy differences that can
exist over whether that's a good
idea or not I think one thing
that I would encourage you to
take away is if we're gonna be
covering nearly half of the
state with this one program what
are you getting for that money.
Are you you Medicaid has the
opportunity to influence in a
substantial way the health
outcomes of New Mexicans and it
has a substantial impact on the
type of quality of health care
that you can receive even if
you're privately insured if you
know hospitals are getting a
third to half of their income
from Medicaid that's going to
influence of their ability to
deliver care so I think those
types of questions should also
go hand in hand and I I think
that if you wanted to to lessen
the need for half the population
to be on Medicaid should be
looking towards what you're
getting for your educational
investments because you've got a
lot of folks that are low wage
and employment because of their
educational attainment levels
don't allow them to move into
higher wage jobs as this that
this administration and previous
administrations of work to to
make higher wage jobs more
available you got to have the
people to in order to to meet
the needs of those employers at
the same time so it educational
investments and that's frankly
what the court told the status
that the outcomes that the state
is getting from our educational
system are dismal and therefore
you should be focusing on
investing in things that
actually work to improve those
outcomes
in order to be in in compliance
with what the court was talking
about madam chair and senator.
So.
And madam chair but I don't
disagree with any of that I
think that the the the problem
is is that.
A lot of our help is
counterproductive to the greater
picture yes it helps that person
right then helps their family
right then in in.
And if they needed help that's
important.
but one of the things that I see
here is especially with with the
would would you called
maintenance of effort where we
have to continue doing with the
federal government so we had to
do even though.
That there are people there that
don't need that today.
so we took COVID is a bad thing
for everybody of financially but
there are people that are doing
quite well today that we're not
doing quite well before COVID
they found niches in the world
in the in so one of these people
the is the is the the lady that
delivers groceries to my house
now and so she's talking to my
wife and so whatever job she had
before comment she actually was
laid off.
But she says now she's making
more money now delivering
groceries than she ever made in
her life.
But I bet you she still on
Medicaid thank you she still
gets ten.
What she's making more money now
than she ever made her life and
so I think.
The.
That we're not.
We have this one size fits all
program.
I also think that is as we as
people start to progress it make
more money.
They're worried about the the
cliff effect so you get to some
point of order you're cut off
well if we could figure out how
to to to lower it.
So that it wasn't just cut off
because the I think the cut off
is a huge disincentive.
For moving yourself out of
poverty.
At least the the financial lines
we've drawn for what we call
poverty.
Third lowest or third highest
poverty rate in the nation.
I don't dispute that.
But somebody in New York City
making eighty thousand dollars
here is poor.
Somebody in Farmington making
eighty thousand dollars here is
definitely upper middle class.
So we use these federal numbers
that I don't think are relevant
to hear when with specially when
we're doing that and so when I'm
looking at this fifty percent
it's I think that we on not
necessarily of cabinet
secretaries for LFC madam chair
but we need to figure out what
are we going to do.
To to move people out of that
because I do think that also a
place something on on your mind
okay I'm poor I'm always going
to be poor I can never do
anything else.
In so you are.
But if you've if you've given
yourself permission if we have
given other people permission to
give themselves permission to to
change then then they can't I'm
convinced of that.
So one of the things that Dr
Scrase said was a is that the
mission statement is to
transform lives will.
I think transform lives is a
much bigger picture than getting
them on Medicaid we're getting
them on to and if we're getting
them on what or snap or whatever
this.
That's not transforming lives
that's that's temporary fix for
a problem that they have.
And I agree that you know there
are people that need help
there's a lot of people who need
help but how do we in a greater
sense help them.
Into you know all the hospitals
now we're trying to get
everybody on Medicaid and I
understand that because the
option is no insurance at all.
What that means.
The two so again this is kind of
counter productive because the
more people are Medicaid
Medicaid does not pay as well as
private insurance to the
hospital so this weird game that
we have played in that most of
us ignore even though some of us
know about it we can lower it so
we raised the insurance private
insurance to cover the gap.
With Medicaid.
And as we do is we do that the
more people fall off of private
insurance because you can't
afford it anymore in on Medicaid
eventually we completely
destroyed the system while we
might claim that we have
universal health care at that
time.
Nobody will have health care we
might have a universal pay or
the pay so poorly that nobody
can go to the doctor.
In Medicaid already pays poorly.
So
I I just want to put that in our
in our minds I also see here and
I forgot about this to this read
it the children ages two to
twenty one enrolled in Medicaid
managed care who had at least
one dental visit during the
measured here two twenty one.
I was the United States Army
airborne ranger.
Shortly shortly after my north
nineteenth birthday a couple of
days after my eighteenth
birthday I was nineteen if my
eighteenth birthday I was not a
child age twenty one.
If we talk about we need people
to vote at age sixty work all of
children at twenty one.
I think that's counter
productive to the overall
picture of what we're trying to
do to transform lives.
Something more specific you're
not I'm sure this is for Dr
Scrase and I'm I'm confused by
the the.
Read the report infants in
Medicaid managed care who had
six for more well child visits
with a primary care physician
during the first fifteen months.
Do we need.
Fifteen months six six times to
the drive in fifteen months is
that.
This this practice standard of
care Madam chair Senator
probably didn't go to the doctor
six times until I was twenty
one.
Okay but we also say there's no
reporting on there's no report
on several of these are compacts
mothers but I would think that
during the COVID issue we would
actually want more reporting.
More in this case because of the
the the situation would have
given us as policy makers better
information but yet we went
through and it's not just not
just.
One thing throughout the state
government we just didn't report
anything.
I think at this point now we're
making decisions based on either
two or three year old data or on
wild guesses.
There's another one that I've
just question so temporary
assistance for needy family
recipients in eligible for
Kasich's cash the systems due to
work related income one point
four percent.
It says it's red means that's
bad.
What would we what would we want
to be at in this that is that
people it came off because they
didn't have it is that people
that are still on with so only
one point four percent of people
came off in twenty twenty one
actual.
Correct madam chair Senator we
would want people to move from
welfare to work and that their
income would disqualify them
from welfare.
Right that's what we want I just
wasn't sure by that.
So those are my comments madam
chair is is I believe it's it's
our job to try to figure out how
to help people truly transform
their lives by truly moving
themselves.
Out of the poverty level.
The in in in what we're doing
here while we need to do it here
today.
Is not a solution.
This is a bandaid and probably
not a good band thank you.
Thank you Senator all right we
have Senator crystal diamond and
then we have Senator Woods.
Thank you madam chairman Charles
we saw a significant increase in
the number of unemployment
claims that went up when the
pandemic first started and then
it was it in LESC meeting when
when
When LESC came forward and
dropped a bomb shell that there
was
terrible mismanagement of that
two hundred fifty million was
expected to be you know
incorrectly paid out maybe up to
a hundred million and fraud my
question is here we also see a
significant increase in the
number of Medicaid patients that
we have here how is Medicaid
fraud identified and
investigated.
So madam chair Senator the
department has quality assurance
individuals and contractors that
look it payments that are seem
out of whack and investigate
those if they suspect fraud they
will refer them to the Medicaid
fraud unit over the Attorney
General for further
investigation that's what
happened with that behavioral
health shake up was that they
noticed
payment issues that they
suspected were not accurate and
fraudulent for that to the AG
once there is an allegation of
fraud at the time for that
behavioral health there is a
a freezing of payments that's
required by the federal
government and that's what
caused the the major issues for
those providers so it is
something that that the
department works on a regular
basis
I know that we've done work in
that area in the past as well
the
I can't say today how widespread
the issues are that they're
finding are referring over I'd
have to defer to the apartment
on if they've seen an uptick
with you know an extra hundred
forty thousand people projected
to be on the the program than
they had before the the start of
the pandemic whether they've
seen any issues with that or not
thank you and madam chairman
maybe that's a question here for
the director of Medicaid but
what is is there is expected or
suspected number you know of of
potential fraud cases that were
investigating and I also just
want to clarify Charles is that
LFC although you guys
investigated workforce
unemployment claims you will not
be doing one on Medicaid that
would come directly from the
agency is that correct.
Madam chair we don't have one on
a work plan it's not to say that
we couldn't make that a priority
this next interim to take a look
at the status of Medicaid fraud
detection activities and might
be a good idea for us to to put
that on the work plan for
consideration by the committee
thank you madam chairman and I
would like to see that only
because as we look at this New
Mexico spends an awful lot of
money on public existence
Medicaid you know being being
the number one and Charles as I
look here looks like we reported
you know over nine hundred fifty
thousand individuals that's
expected to reach million
dollars and much like senator
Here said forty five percent of
New Mexico's population is is on
Medicaid here's where I get a
little confused going over the
numbers Charles is I'd like to
take that you know nine hundred
fifty thousand and divide that
by what is the total amount we
spend on Medicaid and I see a
lot of different I'm person here
on charts I'm sorry but what are
we paying on average per person
per year for Medicaid expenses
in New Mexico so Senator
I can get that number for you in
aggregate but think of Medicaid
as multiple health care programs
it's it's a fairly complex
health care plan so you've got
Medicaid is broken up into a fee
for service component where
providers directly bill the
department and the department
pays for their services these
are individuals that have chosen
and been able to choose not to
be and managed care primarily a
native American population most
of the population is going to be
in managed care and they're
going to be in a couple of
different managed care programs
one is just you know if you've
got I'm a mom and two kids that
meet the income threshold
they're going to be in the in
the regular managed care program
if you've got somebody who's
disabled and elderly they're
going to be in a long term care
managed care program that pays
for maybe some in home services
or if they're in a nursing home.
pay for the nursing home cost
those individuals per member per
month or per year cost will will
total twenty one to twenty two
thousand dollars for your normal
kind of health care for
low income individuals you know
like a
an adult might run five to six
hundred dollars a month
it's so there's wide disparities
in cost per person on on what
this the status paying there's
big components than their big
and growing components of
Medicaid that are paying
for people who are on Medicare.
Their premiums like for Medicare
part B. the state is paying for
their prescription drug costs
because they're low income
that's another very very complex
aspect of the system that
doesn't get calculated the per
member per month let's cost but
we've got some of those
breakdowns and we can get that
for you on on what that looks
like a depending on which health
care plan there in within
Medicaid thank you madam
chairman and I and I don't doubt
for a minute that a lot of those
programs are very much needed
and there are a lot of people in
New Mexico who very much need
them but there seems to be a
desire to expand almost recruit
participants into Medicaid and
I'm assuming because there's a
financial benefit to to New
Mexico we mentioned that now we
can't remove someone even if
they're in eligible that's mind
boggling to me that then we
would continue to pay with tax
dollars when that person's not
it doesn't even meet the
eligibility at that point and
and put the burden on those that
are having to pay for people and
really what it does is it it it
discounts the need of those who
really do need programs like
that and and and I find that
shaming I don't believe that
extending postpartum budget once
again I think that that's an
incentive for people to stay on
the incentive then would be
continue to have child after
child and you never have to be
concerned about leaving and
losing any health care benefits
I have one more question along
those lines is what is New
Mexico's residency requirements
to be on Medicaid.
Madam chair etcetera I would
defer to the department on that.
Dr Scrase.
You madam chairman the for your
call comma but with your
permission I'd like to come back
in just touch on some of the
issues are mentioned briefly
explain why some of the things
that seem
Not self evident maybe coming
from the federal government but
first director come all.
Chair members the committee the
residency requirement is just
add to the current resident of
the state thank you some
residents here.
Thank you madam chairman so if
we had someone who moved in to
New Mexico would they
immediately be able to qualify
for Medicaid system without
having let's say a six months
residency requirement there's no
residency requirement then they
move here and just register as a
new New Mexican.
Members of the committee and
that's correct you can
immediately access services.
Thank you and once again madam
chairman that seems like we're
almost just recruiting people to
come here to New Mexico and not
necessarily care taking care of
those who most need it but with
these beneficial programs
Charles if you could give me
some of those numbers that we
discuss I'd greatly appreciate
it thank you for your time and
chair thank you very much and Dr
Scrase you wanted to elaborate
some on the question having to
do with the investigations of
fraud for Medicaid are you still
there.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much yeah just just very
briefly before that you know the
the keeping people on Medicaid
when they're no longer eligible
is a federal requirement and we
get the money from the federal
government to pay for those
people so I true there's a state
component of that payment but I
am margins of it is a federal
are the federal response to the
pandemic on the front recovery
so I'm not at all familiar with
the two hundred forty million
dollars I know that senator
Munoz in a D. O. H. hearing in
July mentioned a report from the
Attorney General with forty
million dollars in the quarter
of fraud recoveries that report
title was in error about four
million of that was fraud
recoveries and the remaining
money that HSD actually took
back from our managed care
organizations because they had
and that specific targets in
addition we have a whole office
of the inspector general they
run an intensive fraud program
would implement a new software
this past summer all those
efforts are we have you covered
with the federal government and
other states in the Paris
program which seeks to combine
Medicaid data from multiple
states that we are border states
on and determine if anyone is
receiving benefits in both
states so that we can
immediately intervene there and
then just lastly on the number
of people in Medicaid I think
it's and I I these are all as I
think Mr Sally said quite wisely
the result of policy choices so
right now only fifty percent of
employers on you know provide
insurance for their employees so
one legislative option would
just be require all employers to
provide insurance for their
employees and of course we would
see a significant drop.
In Medicaid enrollment I'm not
proposing that we just it's
illustrative of the fact we're
making choices here on to figure
out what we want to do and I and
I do think that
The folks you know I'm a
physician I take care of folks
and and but folks I have run
Medicaid the need a lot of help
and I to terminals are
population but I think by and
large ninety nine point eight
percent of our enrollees at are
people who need help.
There are neighbors some of
America maybe in our families
over in our schools or churches
or places of worship and so you
know it's it's fifty percent so
nobody lives in a place where I
nobody is the dean and so I
think that's why it really is
that income this Dr Schmidt and
I I I would agree though that
our department needs to do
everything that we can do to
really get people back on track
and help them get employed in in
not need benefits from the state
and then last lastly them a
doctor and I couldn't stand it
if I didn't say something
you know Senator share back in
the when you and I would come up
coming up in the world and
youngsters they didn't have.
As they have now we just you
know we got uses of mumps and
rubella and chickenpox and every
and hepatitis or whatever was
everything else and now through
the advances of science we have
a lot of vaccines give kids
prevent illness to prevent that
even only other being a great
example on that we live longer I
happened so those six visits per
actually patterns have for all
of the immunizations a child
needs in order to be fully
immunized by ages fifteen months
and and so that that's what's
behind that and yes we really
want hi as many kids humanize as
we possibly can is it does
reduce health care costs and
those reduce the burden on
commercial insurance and then
finally we done a promise you
know we're talking about whether
we want people in Medicaid or
not and in the lower payment
that hospitals get for Medicaid
commercial insurance but the
hospitals actually are very
happy that we have Medicaid in
the state because for most of
the folks there treaty it isn't
a question of should they be on
commercial insurance or Medicaid
it's so that we have Medicaid or
do we get no reimbursement on
all so actually I've run a lot
of hospitals in the whole system
and typically for people who do
not have insurance we collected
about five cents on the dollar
incident ninety cents on the
dollar for against Medicaid
Medicare rates are let's just
say seventy cents on the dollar
gets commercial that's a good.
For the economy to get state in
my opinion thank you madam
chair.
Okay thank you Dr Scrase all
right so we're gonna move on to
Senator Woods
This question madam chair.
I I we had a bill that came
forward during the special
session.
That requests.
Three hundred twenty five
million dollars to build a
behavioral health department
that you any of.
And.
I guess not that is not my
question.
The question is.
Is there a big desire.
Of New.
People knew.
Practitioners new employees.
To go in to the.
Behavioral health field.
I mean there's got to be a a
huge burn out of these people.
madam chair one day I was
talking to previous Veterans
Affairs secretary.
And he told me that it was tough
to listen to go said storage
wherever.
And.
To me that would be a lot to
what this job would require is
to people to hear a lot of bad
things that happen to good
people.
And.
I guess my question is.
Are there are there the people
to go into the field.
Are we supplementing.
Those educations of those
people.
And.
I mean there's certainly
because of the all the
statistics to show us the.
The need is there to save lives
so.
If there's any of those
questions that we need to talk
about just offline madam chair
and know that that could be a
discussion for weeks.
Seoul may be
I could just have that
conversation offline its way too
big.
Subject to do in the short
period of time so.
I I worry about our society and
our society still in a specially
the behavior science on that.
Madam chair no further questions
thank you very much thank you
thank you very much for your
points in your question Senator
Woods now because of the for the
sake of time I don't have anyone
else on the list I just wanted
to make a few points and maybe a
question or to quickly is and
thank you Dr Scrase I'm looking
at your page twelve of your
presentation and I want to thank
you and your staff for being
resourceful and proactive in
generating the leveraging
federal funds by collaborating
with several departments at that
was a very good idea into
something you pursued and and
and as a result you you were
able to obtain additional five
hundred million dollars
by virtue of those actions so I
want to know we recognize that
thank you very much we all know
that this pandemic has
challenged us all beyond the Max
and so it has challenges to a
point where we have to work
above and beyond what we usually
do and also to do
extra things that in in ways
that we just sometimes don't
feel like we we can go anymore
and that applies to all of us
and our staffs and and people in
general so I want to thank
everyone for that just quickly I
just wanted to mention your
request for the language change
that you have made that least
one of them here for the non
reverting language having to do
with the home and community
based services I guess one thing
that crossed my mind initially
Dr Scrase is that home and
community based services are
huge it is away from to keep
those most vulnerable.
From being displaced from their
home it's bad enough to go to be
ill or to have very severe
special needs or to be elderly
and need help but to know that
you can be home at least and get
those support services in your
own home is huge and so I I hope
that we can look at this
language request and in honor
your request so that we can
continue to be able to have
sustainable funding that you can
count on for this so thank you
for that and I don't I just a
quick comment on the snap which
is on page six
for the for the nutrition
assistance there and I headed or
under supplementals
Thank you for pointing out the
the difference there we
appreciate that I think that at
the very least we need to do
everything we can to provide
people with that the food
assistance that they need so
that's all I have I don't think
I have any questions
specifically so do you have any
comments Dr Scrase before we
close for the day we have to go
into the chamber in just a
little while you can proceed to
respond and care.
Appreciate the generosity of the
committee giving us some time
today to talk about these
programs that we believe in so
deeply hi we will have no price
doctors bonus has been injured
back to Senator Woods of and I
need to about why we love
helping people in their time of
need so much and why that's so
wrapped up in our identity and
our mission personal mission in
life and the people we are we
appreciate your support we like
coming to SFC because you're
sort of the whole to the problem
solvers you're the one to dig in
deeply into the differences
understand and I feel like these
questions today were great ones
and all the comments were really
helpful and meaning that pick
pictures so very grateful for
your time your interest and and
and of course your financial
support for these areas where
the difference thank you Dr
Scrase Senator did you have
anything else senator Munoz no
thank you thank you Mr secretary
just remember you got to
cabinets and eight one just an
eight million dollar budget so
just remember we thank you for
doing all and we know it's a lot
of people know this but it's a
heavy left to run one agency
with a billion dollars that
around two agencies and do that
so I want to know that that I
appreciate it I think our
committee really appreciate that
what you're doing and what your
commitment is to the state
intended to the agencies and and
we'll try to help any way we can
and we want to fix problems in
New Mexico well we have money
not just seven down the road
like past history showing us so
other than that we've you'd go
by a frying pan so
We'll be glad to present you
that with the secretary so thank
you for your time today members
of the media center the and and
and if if somebody is not here
Senator Padilla and Senator
Diamond feel free to move up
another check from now I'm.
I just.
I'm I'm I'm not gonna be a chair
**** there's room there's
there's room there's just move
around members facing if they
come and they happen to come in
just those chairs are not the
greatest years in either of
these but they may be a little
bit more comfortable but feel
free to move around this
committee when we start hearing
you heard heard along this
agency took and this is a big
agency and that's why we
schedule some time for as we
move to other agencies we're
gonna start limiting some time
because we don't want to be here
till the sun comes up in the
morning we're told agencies to
start prioritizing their bullet
points get this to the what the
needs the meat and potatoes and
we can go to questions from
there
and so we'll try to move a lot
quicker we'll start limiting
members time as a ask questions.
So I want to make sure everybody
does that but otherwise for ever
and ever and ever in and we got
to kind of keep going through
these agencies because we're not
going to be tomorrow so gonna
play catch up and we're gonna
play catch up for some other
ones that we missed as we move
along because everybody have
questions important especially
when it comes to the budget.
And what's happening so I will
see you back at half hour after
the floor so.
One thirty at the latest.
Twelve at twelve.
Okay.
He's here.
