Let me just cleaning house bill
two the.
We have a chic Mr chairman.
We had some issues with house
bill two and some.
Bills that we think are not
gonna pass to fix that.
We have an option for technical
reasons
It's you want to go over trials.
Yes Sir Mr chairman
the first one is on line three.
There's a in the bill you have
before yesterday two hundred
fifty two million the
appropriation for K. twelve plus
was contingent on enactment of
legislation.
The strikes that contingency and
just says that the money's for
extended learning programs.
Line five for economic
development there is a leader I
appropriation.
this change would and Sir after
for economic development
projects including for energy
transition assistance to broaden
the use of that a thirteen
million dollar procreation.
The seven million dollar
appropriation of the game and
fish would have two million
earmarked for efforts for
species of greatest conservation
need.
And on line seven the
descriptio M. listed projects
for transportation would also
include a slender Boulevard
Bernalillo county Mr chairman.
Question on the changes.
Senator Woods.
But only the first one.
Now with is this essentially
saying we're extended days
instead of our explained a
little more Mister chairman
Senator it's the linking the
appropriation from house bill
thirty and any other bills that
would extend the school year.
Show it will extend it but days
or extended by our Mister
chairman Senator
it's silent on either of those.
So what did neither of those
correct Mr chairman I.
Of the.
I believe the intent is to de
link this appropriation from a
bill to extend the school year
by either hours or days thanks
so provide flexibility.
So it provides flexibility
because what I'm asking is
because we had statutes in place
on this stuff so it's not
changing an existing statute
because we would have to have a
bill passed through to change
existing statute correct Mr
chairman Senator that's correct
it would not change existing
statutes so if there's a school
district that's already provided
extended learning
my interpretation they would
continue to receive that funding
out of the two hundred fifty two
million.
Okay.
Phone number six.
In this committee two times.
This.
This has died for lack and
second why are we including at
now Mr chair.
Two times we have.
Agreed not to put this in why is
included now in their their
there's a lot of push on that
language and that's language
that came over from the house
and they don't like the.
A state team language out that
was there for them and that's
the push from the house.
We've taken that language out
twice in this committee or and
the committee would never vote
even put a second on it to put
it back in.
So you're saying that the only
reason or put it in so we don't
have to go to concurrence with
the house we're going to
Concord's me mean a conference
committee I think yes conference
committee.
Kind of like a conference
committee.
The letter of the letter coffers
Committee.
With the.
And I notice number seven this
is the one that Senator Padilla
was talking about just a few
days ago that was in in in the
bill is that right Mr chair
correct.
Well I've got a lot of concerns
about some of the things but I
didn't bring them up.
Simply because.
I believe we had a
of bloated budget already.
And I think that.
In particular that two million
dollars even the more.
Did the game and fish going back
to said one more time did the
game and fish ask for this
money.
I do not know because the two
million came over from the
house.
We had an additional five
because there are license
increase bill is hung up in the
committee and so they may be
short in the future so we added
five over here.
Never ask them if they ask for
this as for the language in.
We go above the overall thought.
That the legislator excuse my
hands.
I'll put them under the table.
greeter whatever.
The the legislature should pass
bills.
And it should be signed by the
governor.
One appropriations and we
shouldn't be putting this stuff
in here.
Without running it through the
process leading every legislator
in the house vote for.
Before we just stick it in the
budget as a personal piggy bank
Mr chair.
Center I'm not angry with you
one hundred percent and this is
the last year we're going to do
language this way and this the
last year and two budget this
way if people want to put money
in the budget on the backside in
different sections they're gonna
have to run a bill.
But I will tell you some of that
could get sticky because the
executive had nothing in for
DOT.
So they had nothing in the
recommendations for D. O. T. and
we had to add money to D. O. T..
Now that we've.
Etcetera Gonzalez's two bills
will give D. O. T. probably a
hundred and fifty million more
in twenty five correct I think
that's pretty close to the
number so then they're gonna pay
down the bond so DOT is going to
have another two hundred fifty
million dollars we may not have
to do that again but but we're
agencies and where the back of
the bill are concerned right
that's where it's the hardest
part that we do in and we've
done these this is the first
time I've ever done these open
that I know of we went to
language look at it and voted in
the open committee stating that
budget.
And we have to balance the books
but at the end the day this is
where everybody gets played in
house bill two.
As we try to read it we try to
scrub it but.
I mean and and then the to
change a whole lot of things.
Hello got a lot of disagreement
with this process right here.
When I HSD.
The HSD.
Public schools support.
If they needed this money two
hundred and fifty two million
dollars.
They should put it in their
budget.
And it should have went through.
The process of the LFC.
And then it should have been put
in House Bill to.
And then it should've came over
here all of a sudden we need
another two hundred fifty two
million dollars.
And budget.
Everyone of these items.
Should have been Mr I'm supposed
to be but I'll to a lease
because the walking.
Yeah we're here to help in.
I'm I don't waste Mr chair
apologize to you one.
Cannot you on yellow.
So.
J. Y. why didn't we.
Yet.
Number three.
Then the LFC budget chair.
Mister chairman Senator.
The schools
K. twelve plus was in the LFC
budget and it was endorsed
legislation there is a separate
spending proposal from LFC for
extended learning in a separate
Bill endorsed by LFC the
governor's budget did include
money for extended learning also
contingent on legislation they
did not file that legislation
this is not adding money to the
budget it's simply saying that
the earmarked that is in the
current
budget is not linked to any
particular piece of legislation.
So this is free money to public
schools this is money that that
if one of those bills fails if
you don't do this then two
hundred fifty two million would
go away and this keeps funding
in the budget for those
districts that are already doing
extended learning and gives the
opportunity that up more want to
do with the current statutes
they could so tell me something
something that maybe I don't
understand when you say this
money would go away Mr chair
when you say this money would go
way where would it go to.
It would go back to the general
fund it would be a failed
contingency so it would go back
to the general fund revert back
to the general fund correct so
this gives the school district
the flexibility to do are not to
do.
And they can apply for this
money.
And if they don't take it then
it if they don't do the project
as described then it will go
back.
To the general fund Mister
chairman Senator yes and then if
there's enough unspent money to
cover that other provision and
and that you've already adopted
above seventy five million would
go into the severance tax
permanent okay.
I was go to number six with the
same thing happened there.
If the if the if the.
Game and fish which I might add.
Doesn't take hardly any.
General fund money this is one
agency.
That operates offer users the.
They don't take general fund
money.
And I don't remember him coming
in here and asking for general
fund money.
If they do not use this money
for this.
Will it revert back to the
general fund Mister chairman
Senator yes that's correct.
I want a mask about is love.
But because I know of Senator
Padilla told me our kids made
statement in the committee that
that money was in the year
before.
And so this is just renewing
that project from what I
understand Mr chair.
That this this keeps it in front
of the state highway department
the DOT that says this is still
there to do is that right Mr
chair.
And and and panel.
Yes Sir Mr chairman okay.
throughout my rant Mr chair
thank you and center with touch
on something you know last year
in D. O. T..
We list of roads and set and and
we see the mailing which is
still there right.
And what happened is money got
shuffled around and D. O. T. and
nobody knew where it went so in
order for us to make sure that
D. O. T. we drive the road just
much of them if we changed a
bunch of language in that
section in that section nine of
the right page and so of.
Two quick questions two forty
four forty four.
Forty four and so then we made
sure that that language is there
for every section every corner
of the state.
Right.
Because we don't want to
shuffling that that money around
Senator Padilla I think we did
verify with the county within
the county came back and told us
something completely different
that that they didn't have the
funds so we wanted to make sure
it got on the list again.
So this is a County.
Project that paid through the
yeah and deal T. uses exquisite
the step.
Where they use a local match
ninety five percent state I.
Local and then.
So that the cities and the
counties given the DOT budget.
Question thank you.
Senator I'm thank you Mr
chairman we voted on it
yesterday after being here for
fifty days and everyone had
their opportunity put in or take
out what they wanted in this
bill and here we are the day
after with what looks to me
like.
Check your marks and I and I'm
disappointed because I think
that a couple individuals from
the governor's office a couple
from this committee to really
made a joke out of the process
and it undermines.
This committee in doing so I
voted yes yesterday with my
chair from the day I came on as
a freshman legislator you
explain to me very clearly that
we introduce bills and how that
works I appreciate that you
introduce a budget bill you cure
properly through committees and
then what seems to have happened
is is a few individuals for the
for the benefit of themselves in
their individual district have
pushed their way around
two and and I apologize for
staff I apologize to the chair
of how to go through this and
now we're sitting here.
Taking action on stuff that we
really already had I am a friend
of Senator Steinborn but but
Senator adding language on its
failed twice because we couldn't
get is a second is wrong.
You're marking projects in here
is wrong and I think it's it's
really undermined all of us in
this entire process is
expression for those of us who
have been trained and thought we
were doing it properly to get
stuff in this budget this is
what people hate about.
Texas with other legislators
hate about this process and
that no disrespect to my chair
at all because I think as of of
two yesterday we were doing as
best we could I'm I'm not gonna
vote for these additions in the
budgets and I'm I'm sorry that
people are pushing their way
around it have really made a
joke out of this process Mr
chair thank you thank you I need
a motion to adopt the amendment
to house bill two.
a motion by Senator Steinborn
second by.
The second circuit there seconds
Mexicans all as we call the
roll.
News.
Senator Campos.
Senator Diamond nope.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Yeah.
yes the DFA.
Yes yes there share share.
Senator Steinborn.
Of.
Senator Steinborn there was no.
So I I guess yes.
Health yes.
Six yes.
For now to pass.
And explain.
I thank you.
And I think my colleagues said
pretty much everything that I
want to say.
Not a reflection on the chairman
because I think the chairman is
done an admirable job at Google
job of trying to change the
process and bring it to be more
transparent.
The last man that owns
appropriating
money.
Eight I don't want to the lead
to the point but the process is.
Dramatically flawed the way
we've done it this year and I I
just pray that we can find a
better way to do it next year is
this is why the voters as soon
to diamond said the voters get
really upset with us.
We look like fools quite frankly
and and we've got to do
something better Mr chairman
because this process this year
was was not good I know it was a
good attempt
it needs to be refined
dramatically
in the way of money was placed
is a whole different discussion
I'm gonna go there but I think
we need to to revisit how we do
this process it's not good for
the voters not good for the
people who the syringe to make
this happen.
And so
I'll just leave it at that point
Mr chairman we've got to do
better we should be doing it all
and we're the appropriating
body.
Senator Steinborn Jeff
respectful to my friends in the
most biologically diverse state
in the nation one of them
threatened species are not a pet
project with all due respect
several of my colleagues on this
committee representative the
most biologically diverse areas
within New Mexico in the boot
hill in the LA not in Dona ana
county so at that you know
sometimes it takes multiple
times to pass bills and this is
another vote so with all due
respect appreciate if the
committee puts us back in I
don't ask for the amendment
process today but but I'm
grateful for the opportunity
correct what have you was in the
state.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Well you guys go ahead but but I
will take a.
Ever since I've been in finance
and ever since this was never
done publicly before right you
try it I made mistakes all that
we make mistakes right but it's
a learning process but the back
of the bill stuff has to quit.
At the end of the day we're
gonna budget and budget
correctly.
And LESC is going to take this
on the summer if people wanted
preparation you need to draft a
bill.
If people want language the need
to draft a bill in some way
shape or form to do that.
And changing the statute for
something but.
The problem is this is been done
in trying to get the old dog out
of the doghouse and teaching a
new trick is almost impossible
but this is the reason we end up
in these situations last year we
ended up in a conference
committee almost because the
same situation and then we had
to add more money well.
This I agree with you we need to
not have called for because
that's we think people forces on
the right.
And so if we in this.
Direction we're headed and
people want openness about
government and they say all
these are all agreed upon and
the dark corners well no filler.
And in those of us and then on
Senate finance for awhile now
how it was done previously I
didn't like it that way.
I don't think anybody like that
that way and house bill two is
been more open than any other
time before it would get done it
would go to the floor they've
been will bear out in the state
This and people run amendments I
don't know if you were here but
Senator was here people run
amendments on house bill two all
sides and and it just was a mass
so trying to with this amount of
money.
There should be no one
complaining today I'm I'm still
getting text messages and phone
calls well why didn't I get this
and get that and just like.
You know that's not my job.
Take care of lobbyist specials
for to make sure that things got
done the way they wanted it it's
the way we should do it so I've
been in this process and I'm
just as tired as anybody else
So.
Thank you.
Well then do house bill one
thirty we do have an amendment.
He.
Mr Chairman.
No we can yeah but we to vote on
house bill to help yeah thank
you all right.
David and then to Herrell thank
you for this issue this is on
house bill two as.
If you have.
We have
an.
All the real amendment now we
need to.
Thank you for making.
Second by Senator Gonzales.
This is house bill two Senator
was right that yes
Representative vote.
Campos this excuse.
No indictment of.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Yes have built yeah.
No yes yes yes.
Share.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn Jeff.
There was
no later this yes.
Yes chairman yes.
Do.
Seven three Senator.
Mr chair.
I am I am at least is upset
because my colleagues over here
about what we've done and how
we're doing it.
I know there's a lot of good
things in here but I believe the
process is just made me crazy
that's probably why I voted yes.
And I'm reasonably sure.
Something has to change before
anybody gets a test out of me
again thank you.
Right on house bill one thirty.
Mr chairman I don't it would be
okay if I get the amendment
explained the bill and then we
can.
I believe so it's.
Verifying.
Thank you.
So gonna have a motion to adopt
the minutes for discussion for.
Second Mr chairman the most
of the places.
On the amendment.
Between them and the
representative would you like
to.
Mr Chairman yes so it's kind of
hard to do it without some
context for the committee and
house bill thirty but this is
basically moving from sixty
invented on the amendment sixty
embedded
hours for professional
development in moving that to
thirty so it's thirty hours of
additional instructional hours
for middle and high school as
well as the thirty and that it
now I will say Mr chairman and
committee that house bill one
thirty two Senator Woods point
was the bill that the enabling
language that you all just
struck was for we believe that
the amendment should this bill
pass that it would still be
funded but to your point Senator
Woods this was the bill for that
in late in Ebeling language.
That's the amendment Mr lessons
on the.
The level
of care.
The motion by Senator yes.
No objections to the minutes of.
The house bill one.
Representative Alcon yes not
house bill one thirty as a.
Yes
Mr chair and committee a house
bill one thirty now as it's
twice amended as the Kate twelve
plus it restructures reorganize
and defines the requirements for
increasing instructional hours
to one thousand one hundred and
forty for all K. through twelve
and with the amendment it keeps
sixty hours of professional
development invented for
elementary school and thirty
invented and thirty beyond the
eleven forty four secondary
school middle school and high
school this bill was a consensus
bill it reflects almost a year
of study around the entire state
speaking to superintendents
school leaders and really
including the teachers in the
classroom it allows for
tremendous flexibility and help
people who need to add those
additional hours to do it and it
has two factors so school
districts the a local control
who want to add on days
depending on how many days they
add have a multiplier to cover
the financial
the fiscal aspect of that and I
will turn it over to co sponsor
a chair Romero to add some
remarks thank you Mr chairman
and committee so as
Representative Garrett mention
this was and I think this bill
is to the point that was brought
up by committee is is truly
honoring the interim process
we've gone through three house
committees and the house floor
with three no votes total on
three and House Appropriations
that eventually got to the house
floor without a no vote
we've had broad consensus among
many of the stakeholders some of
you that have attended our
legislative education study
committee meetings have probably
recognize the extensive
discussions that we've had that
gone in that have gone into this
bill this bill would repeal the
K. five plus extended learning
time programs.
And replace it with K. twelve
plus or allowing school
districts to add hours instead
of days and we've heard that
from a lot of our rural school
districts even urban school
districts that would prefer to
add hours instead of days so we
would set the minimum at eleven
forty instructional hours sixty
of which at the elementary
school level could be impacted
for a professional work so we
found that professional work for
educators intended in the day is
absolutely crucial because the
only time you can do things like
collaboration or mandatory
new teachers is a with in the
day when other teachers are
actively working so that you can
observe the process yourself and
provide them feedback with the
amendment that reduced it to
thirty hours for middle and high
school part of the reasoning
which is a compromise here with
the Senate side is that
the most impacted in terms of
instructional time would be the
elementary schools were as
middle and high school would
have to add very few
instructional hours or days the
amendment would bring up that
instructional hours for middle
and high school so again that
was a compromise in order to be
heard
So this again to Senator Woods
point earlier is the K. twelve
plus.
Program I'm so those schools
that are doing up to a hundred
eighty or a hundred ninety days
would get an increase factor for
adding those days but again it
would keep it optional as you
could add time or days into it
but this was a bill that and in
the enabling language was
specifically meant for but we
believe with the changes you all
just maybe that this could also
be funded
for school districts to opt into
With that Mr chairman we do have
director Perea Warniment deputy
director Santa from the
legislative education study
Committee to help us along with
this bill will stand for
questions Mr chairman.
Questions from committee
members.
There what.
Okay I appreciate you so much.
Mr chair.
Representative appreciation so
much.
The where with all to carry some
through the legislature and
explain it well enough to get
this many votes.
I'm not an educator so I don't
know.
You know I I hear better all the
time I hear about where we're
placed I hear about you know
thank god for Mississippi but
wait.
What happened Mississippi
disappeared what happened.
The first day I was in
education Senator Ingle put me
on the Education Committee the
first day they said we're number
last and I said what we follow
what number one does.
And become.
Get out of the last.
Well they tell me what not
sufficient I hope this is on the
road to something that will make
some headway because it's our
kids.
It's our kids that we are
losing.
Education is not the not the
answer for everything but it's
if you can't read you can even
harder open a box of cereal so
thank you for bringing this
forward and I will vote for
thank you
thank you Senator Diamond thank
you thank you Sanchez I would
echo what senator let's just set
when I heard coming out of
interim committee in the
beginning of the session how bad
this is and what we're doing to
our school districts and and
when you come in here and and
articulate exactly what we're
doing and why we're doing it I I
can't disagree I I will say I'm
not on L. E. S. C. and I don't
sit on any Education Committee
so I want to clarify just a few
things for people listening
first of all I represent a very
rural part of New Mexico and and
my schools are much different
than the rest of up there not
performing up to standards and
we see that across the state and
so when we push back I'm trying
to extend hours are trying to
extend days it defies common
sense because clearly our kids
are not rising to the point
where we needed to be at I often
in my area here well you know we
had summers off because we go
back and work the farms are
cattle ranchers we have a full
working cattle ranch and I can
assure you that my girls are not
the top top staff there you know
we can do without them in their
middle school buddies but I do
want to I do want to clarify a
few things you said that the
factor on here is still optional
correct we're incentivizing
schools to extend their hours or
days but we are not mandating
it.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Diamond correct they can opt in
just as they do now into the K.
five extended learning time
programs and yes they would be
compensated extra for that part
of the reason why Mr chairman
Senator Diamond is that sort of
funding consistency for those
districts who have currently
opted in because there are a lot
of districts who have opted in
to extended learning time or K.
five plus that are getting those
factors already that could if we
do not keep this factor in a
drop in their level of funding
okay let's impart to incentivize
those hours in part by the
factors are really there to keep
those districts who are doing
these programs they wish to
continue doing these programs to
continue that line of funding
okay Mister chair for the
districts that are not doing it.
How do we encourage them.
To do it if if we're keeping us
just a of funding factor.
Optional.
Madam Mr chair and
representative and I'm sorry
Senator.
It's really local decision this
bill emphasizes that what's
right for Hobbes might not be
right for Silver City so I think
as the C. successful programs
that will motivate some people
to expand their program thank
you I agree with that
Representative Mr chair on here
it also says we're repealing
statutes related to the extended
learning time for that K. to
five plus.
What exactly are we repealing
and can you tell us the
difference of what we're doing
here today so what that mandated
schools to do sure
Mr chairman and and Senator
Diamond K. five plus is a
program for kindergarten through
fifth grade to add twenty five
days into their calendar
aimed at instruction and again
it's optional and it comes with
the the added factor to pay for
that compensate the school in
the district for that extended
learning time is from
Elementary school to high school
that's an added ten days so
adding ten days on to the school
calendar and getting those
factors within it so we would be
repealing that House Bill.
One thirty would add a baseline
of eleven forty instructional
hours so currently instructional
hours is that
hundred thousand eighty four
high school and then nine ninety
for elementary school and bring
everybody up to eleven forty
however sixty hours of that at
the elementary school level
could be used for professional
work fourteen.
Now with the amendment middle
and high school can and bad in
that eleven forty thirty hours
of professional work into that
day thank you and Mister chair
of I'll tell you I think that's
important in an area like
attending an intruder
consequences a lot of our
teachers are on alternative
teachers licenses and so they
come in and they have never
stepped foot in a classroom.
One of my daughter's teachers
right now that that happened to
it but she's a good teacher
she'd never had any classroom
experience in more than I had
and she walked and so I
appreciate you guys adding that
in there so the least they can
get situated in the class and
and prepare for this so I
appreciate you guys explaining
this so much better than that
I've heard all session long
coming in here thank you Mr
chair thank you the.
Let me play catch up a little
bit here from and.
Is there anybody in the audience
in support.
In the state wanted to people
anybody in opposition.
Many others in.
The company and to spend money
come up.
There was a working on Mr
members the committee stand
around for the school
superintendents in the college
of education leaders want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this amended bill to you would
leave it gets us where we need
to be at on our next step Mr
regarding heard in your
questioning we're trying to
improve the educational quality
by doing two things increasing
time and increasing trying.
Also try to send a by districts
to go beyond that to go beyond
what would be closed on two
hundred eighty days to go beyond
perhaps was equivalent and
that's what it says your house
bill two by the way which means
hours of Mister chairman Senator
Woods
With a higher incentive to come
and do that we've been that's
how we will take the steps
towards improving education I
just want to point out Mr
chairman is as I know you have
continue to impress upon me we
have a process in this
legislature to bring things
forward which includes your
education study committee for
education policy this came from
there is the right to route
genesis we believe is the right
process to do so we urge you to
vote in favor of this the
superintendents fully support.
Thank you want to come up.
Something is going to change
anything but.
Good afternoon chairman Senator
is my name is Bonnie Lightfoot I
am president of the Supertest
schools so ciation incoming
president New Mexico coalition
of education leaders and
superintendent how schools and
for all the reasons you've heard
today we also encourage a yes
vote.
Mr chairman members of the
committee will auction from
superintendent for Silver City
and likewise extended full
support of the amendments as
they were previously mentioned
we appreciate the process and
support that this committee is
done to ensure that the best
representative for students.
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico
for all the reasons they've been
stated we support the bill just
want to thank the sponsors of
the bill this is a year long
process thing part time that
create this the last thing I'll
just add as a question I think
you know the answer already is
we just added thirty hours on to
secondary schools from what had
previously been contemplated
with this ammendment I think
your amendment that you just
made to the budget regarding
this gives the flexibility to
make sure that's funded
I don't know that and so I just
want to submit the question
okay.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee of it out of on
from New Mexico kids can't
really I would just want to say
thank you to this committee to
the Sanchez this is been a very
difficult process to follow for
everyone that's been following
be it teachers parents community
leaders anything the bill that
we have today is a very good
bill that does a couple things
obviously extended learning time
and the reason that we think
that is important which everyone
in this room knows is we are
last we are way further down the
Mississippi and our students
lost a lot of learning time
during the COVID and so they
need more time in classrooms
with qualified instructors and
so the professional development
time certainly helps as well and
we look forward to seeing that
positive impacts of this bill
thank you.
Okay we're back on the bill
questions from committee members
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman good morning to as
afternoon already thank you for
your hard work on this bill I
know it takes a lot to get a
bill like this to get consensus
for a bill like this you know
why you think that this is all
it is is just does this mean
that couple of different things
well it takes a lot of work
because it's important that we
vet these this these initiatives
with lots of care because as we
know you live this every day
representatives and you work
with that all the time and see
that not one size doesn't fit
all right we need some
flexibility school districts
have requested over and over to
have flexibility to adapt their
districts in the form of
education according to their
individual needs and this bill
here it does that and much more
and I just want to thank you for
your continued work and I know
Representative Garrett she had
to leave but just know that I
appreciate all your work and it
took a lot I was reading through
the process as you were going
through it in the house too and
a lot of a discussion took place
of course I think the department
to that's all I have Mister
chairman.
Thank you.
Senator.
But just just say something.
The process and we just you just
sat here and everybody knows the
issues.
The process that we had a man
house bill two should never
happen as a legislature.
And if we get rid of the
language process and house bill
two.
The executive is forced to take
built ups etcetera well finish
and then you can go.
The process that we and we went
through in order to do this the
time spent on house bill one
thirty with the superintendents
with teachers with educators
that know their job and know
their business that puts us in
this situation today is really
on call for.
we've had for five
superintendents meeting at
secretaries of pad I think in
the last three or four in the
last sixty days you keep count
in without stability in that
system.
What we're at where we are today
because
Because of the language process
and house bill two that's not
the way we write legislation
that's not the way we should be
doing things in the legislature
but we are where we are today
and so that's why the language
processing house bill two should
go away because at the eleventh
hour we're sitting here doing
stuff that we shouldn't be doing
because we should respect the
process and if we is a lot like
if you have a vote against.
Also should be the process.
Thank you always has the power
to veto that's their choice but
the house bill two issues of all
figure out a way to fix that.
So that the process balls to
questions.
The Thai area since that time
spent in the hard work does goes
in on bills and to get this done
and then I'll just washes away
in a matter of seconds and we're
trying to work in agreement
almost all day yesterday on
house bill one thirty
I spent probably five hours
moving around language talking
about language how do we get an
agreement on one thirty how do
we fall the processes and we can
get there.
And and that's very
disappointing to me.
I think it's very disturbing
very disappointing to everyone
the legislature on this we
understand that some people act
built differently some people
want their bill signed that's
the process that's of local
internal I fit the public cry
never understand he can explain
what the process what we doing
today is not the process that
the legislature when they put in
the constitution for us to
follow it is not what's
happening Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman I promise
next time I will stand up some.
I will note notwithstanding the
process on the language I think
you guys have done an excellent
job on trying to pull this thing
together
I I think we'll.
The direction is a great way to
go at ours in and hopefully keep
kids in school of the longer we
don't lose that that summer gap.
So I appreciate what you've done
and first and foremost making it
a local option is is the kicker
right there that makes the thing
in my opinion really work so I
appreciate that as well.
And I I appreciate the fact that
there are designated X. amount
of dollars out of this
additional hours for teachers
and one state prep but but but
education and and to better
themselves
I I just think all the elements
are there and I appreciate to
the direction should taken on
this
and I don't have any questions
or anything like that of the
state I think I think you have a
good deal here and we hope now
that it pans out because I
think.
I can't speak for all of us on
this of the panel and I can't
speak for the folks on the floor
on either house.
But we got to have results folks
and that's what all boils down
to that's the bottom line is
we're doing one money and
education will put all these
options are given training
programs to everybody better
themselves we have some results
we don't have results and we're
still forty four point eight
fiftieth and Mississippi's
kicking our ****
For me we secretaries will
process at that point on what
that that looks like but but I'm
just all the baking for results
out of public education I don't
know how else to do it we've got
to make that happen it's not
just the the administration the
state it's the local
administration who will or will
not apply this and is committed
upon us as citizens to push them
one but to make that happen
we've got to have results that's
the bottom line thank you Mr Mr
chairman.
Thank you motion the bill now
seven dollars.
Motion for to us as amended.
For a second by Senator again we
call the roll.
Ever yes yes.
BOCES excused.
Senator Diamond yes there
Diamond yes there Gonzales yes
for themselves yes Senator
Hemphill.
Campos yes Padilla.
Cervidae a test centre share.
This year yes Senator Steinborn.
There Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes Sir Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Rodriguez yes Mr
Chairman yes Mr Chairman yes.
In yes zero No do the past when
excuse thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you committee
we're gonna jump around a little
bit today Center Rodriguez has
often mentioned she moves to do.
So we're going to do the Senate
bill three oh nine that we ought
capital outlay real bills.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
I have Kelly here from LFC and
we've got the Senate bill three
oh nine to present to you this
is the annual re authorizations
bill for capital outlay that we
do and basically it has two
hundred ninety nine projects
that are being re authorized
either by date for the date
extension the purpose of the
project or just for a reason to
keep the funding in place these
are the members of the Senate
house and governor all are in
here Mr Chairman and that is all
I have.
anybody in the audience and
support.
The money in opposition.
Senator we're gonna get your
copy of the bill yes thank
Russians on the bill.
I think there's a couple of.
Senator was then sent.
When did we get this completed
bill.
To be seen when when was exact
date that we got to see this I
was watching for just wondered.
If I missed it a day or two
thank you Mr chairman Senator
was we just got the bill was it
yesterday morning or day before
yesterday we got the bill but
you had you had received on your
emails everyone what you're your
own the whole bill plus your
request for pre authorization
about a week and a half ago or
so.
Yeah I I realize that but I was
talking about statewide years as
to when we got that we got we
could look at it for Mr chairman
and for the re authorizations
because this is not the this is
not the capital this is for the
re authorizations bill to re
authorize projects so we don't
lose them and they don't expire
and we lose the funding yeah yes
all right thank well it just
totally numbers I didn't read no
problem I think you're thinking.
No worries yeah I think you were
thinking of the capital we're
good thank you.
Anything else more questions
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair so I'm I'm a
bit confused by some of these on
San Juan County that I'm
familiar with so we've got
farmers mutual ditch which I
was.
And we with them trying to get
things done pushing pushing
pushing pushing pushing finally
it came back into they spent the
money get it here.
Senator not spend it is Mr
chairman Senator share before I
go on you do have a list with
all the projects by county here
so just in case anyone wants to
see them but what happens in
situations like that Mister
chairman Senator share is that
perhaps the money has been
committed they think it's
encumbered already and they say
oh it's spent but then they find
that there's a little balance on
there that they haven't finished
using but they need it so they
request for it to extend the
date another year to until they
can finalize it so that's use
usually what happens in a
situation like yours.
That was not already obligated
and I would not have three
authorized I did not.
But.
We also could save hundreds of
dollars printed that at the last
second that we couldn't read it
thank you Mr.
Senator so if if you say there's
a result thank you we are on the
air was there another member
that was a partner at century
off obviously somebody did Mr
chairman that's what I was going
to say that sometimes there's
multiple partners.
And then they can only re off
Kelly correct me if I'm.
I can only we offer their
portion of that.
Mr chairman I believe that's
correct yeah the the statewide
projects go through DFA for
approval and the legislative
sponsor projects have to go
through the sponsor for approval
then I I know somewhere in your
box I'm just gonna pull one up
and and so in McKinley county
it's on page thirty this fort
defiance is in Arizona chapter.
And so how do we send money to
an Arizona chapter.
And then part of that chapter
boundaries in New Mexico but
isn't that a violation of the
state and.
capital outlay out of state.
In there and Arizona chapter.
To Mr chairman in we're gonna
look at that now to see if when
that project was was requested
and maybe give you more
information on that but it would
be if in fact this out of state
it would definitely not fit
within the the loss so can we
can help Mr chair I can follow
up with you on that the fiscal
agent is not showing up here
possibly I went directly to the
nation but we can look into that
more specifically.
And then what we what do we have
the dollar dollar but we find
the dollar amounts that were
transferred yes Mr chairman the
dollar amounts do not show up in
this particular bill because
they're re authorizations and
what happens is that they don't
have the full balance yet but
the situation why Senator shares
some has been encumbered
contracts are in place a
balances still laughed and based
to have perhaps another six
months to use it but this re
authorizes it to extend the date
so we don't know how much will
be used by the time the bill is
actually past in interconnect
your balance it is in the
capital outlay bill for those
projects but not here Kelly
would you like to elaborate a
little bit.
Mr chair that's correct the bill
does not specify the exact
amount that is re authorized it
just says the unexpended balance
so we don't have that
information on hand right now
but once the bill is enacted the
agencies administering it would
determine that so how does a
member determine if their money
got moved because it's not
expended balance but one member
want to move their member money
but the other member Dan.
And so how do we determine that
what the expended balances I
member for the procreation.
Mr Chairman the the staff does
everything they can to get the
accurate balances based on the
the test system that they work
with with the bureau at the up
to the capital outlay bureau at
the department of finance and
administration it is a very
difficult process for them to
keep up with every every penny
of every project for every year
or every moment actually cause
that numbers change the bounces
changes we speak.
Yet in that so I think that's an
issue because members really
don't know if other members are
moving amount of money and that
you're saying the unexpended
ballots and so
all just I think one just the
ones I know on that and ask you
questions like manually Toepfer
of vehicle right.
Should have been taken care of
but I think that I I sign that
that one but as a member know
that if I had five hundred
thousand in a certain place and
there was a million appropriated
how do I know that just their
five hundred thousand is getting
moved I think this is
transferring the whole chair and
senator I do recall that it's
been the chemical rules and not
a law but at that when there's
multiple legislators that
contribute to a project the
staff does all they can to get
each legislator that sponsored
part or all of that application
to sign off on a re
authorization sometimes it's not
possible but I know they do try
that I've actually seen it they
take the form around asking for
signatures so they try to keep
it together as much as they can.
That's going to be a big
question but I think the the the
chapter boundary in Arizona
that's in Arizona is a bigger
issue I think that may violate
statute because program money to
an Arizona chapter may have
boundaries New Mexico but you
can't do that maybe it should've
gone directly to the Navajo
Nation for them but I think.
Operating that is it is a big
issue.
How many Kelly do we know how
many times inside this bill.
that projects have been re off.
Mr chair we do not have that
information.
You have a gas and we talked
about capital early on in the
struggles we have with it.
Mr chair unfortunately it's hard
to ballpark that because with
our current tracking system it's
very difficult to track the
number of re authorizations we
are working on improving that so
We have a total dollar that that
moves
we don't currently I can tell
you the number of outstanding re
offs that we have in the system
already so projects that are
still active that have been re
authorize that aren't in this
bill that's about two hundred
forty projects that were re
authorized for about a hundred
nine million dollars and eighty
point eight of that is still
outstanding if you just average
that out it's about four hundred
fifty thousand dollars per
project so if if this is
following that sort of the same
ballpark we'd be looking at
about a third of men and thirty
five million dollars and the
projects in this bill again
that's just a very rough
estimate based on averages from
the past in in Kelly are any of
these we us statewide projects
for state buildings yes some of
them are Mr trying the one in
fifteen year.
You want me to provide you on
energetic center these are also
it's each the chamber and also
the governor's re authorization
so a lot of those of statewide.
Mr chair.
Actually sorry you have the
chart in front of you yes I
sorry one sec.
I like I'm looking on page seven
of twenty nine in the I see the
University of New Mexico science
technology innovation center
extend time is that Mr chair is
the.
The higher education ones in
particular I would say could be
statewide re authorizations or
could be provided so if you look
under Santa Fe County.
an example the ID number is two
twenty.
I have a different turns out of.
Well there's just Mr chair one
second I can not on page one of
six there's a list.
Says county statewide.
On page twenty six.
Mr chair yes so these would be
some examples of statewide
projects
You can see for example number
two twenty three this is a CYFD
appropriation from last year
as well as money to twenty two.
said those projects I believe
are being re authorized into a
single project
There are some statewide
projects that requests to extend
time us to change purpose to use
remaining balances from old
appropriations.
And so let's look at two sixty
one it says department of
military affairs for Galpharm
recruitments six
purchase install more to quit
and fitness center.
I would think that even using
that building.
For page county because of my
counters two fifty what's page
twenty seven to fifty one right
at the top.
Mr chair this project looks
looks looks like it is both
changing or expanding the
purpose and extending the time
for them to use that
appropriation.
I think they tried giving away
that filled in the last year and
then where we are and this is I
mean this is a continuing
problem.
I don't know how to improve this
but.
Any much tired of capital it's
prior to the junior bill because
it never really gets works
intended uses for not going to
do junior bill next year.
And this we are it's just
extending our any these gonna
put us in a situation where we
have to pay the penalty to the
iris for not using that money
because of bonds are sold.
Mr chair we don't believe so but
that is a risk professionals tax
funds projects but we don't look
at those projects and say we
should remove those because the
IRS is going to where to secure
limit of the bond the IRS is
going now penalizes.
We don't look in that when we do
that we all feel
Mr chair not currently although
you know it is up to the
Legislature to establish rules
and guidelines for re
authorization as well as to
review them and have a process
for that when they come before
your committees so that is a
process we could look into
enhancing in the interim if
you'd like to do that.
In in terms of like to not do we
us anymore.
And have all these.
Of projects have they all been
the bonds have been sold on all
these projects or some of these
projects the bonds have not been
so.
Mr chair there could be some
that have not been issued.
But I would say that the on
issued the authorized but
unissued projects are relatively
small portion of the overall
number an outstanding funds that
you have that you all have
authorized at around forty
million I believe is authorized
but unissued at this point.
so we would expect that would be
at.
Probably a minority of the
projects in their in here but
they could be.
Thank.
And so have that Miskito.
Sen agency members of the
committee I just like to add
that last year the line item
veto of numerous re
authorizations after the DFA and
board of finance did due
diligence to find that there
were no balances.
To
Continue to rise and also
because some of the language did
not allow for the severance tax
bonding use for that purpose
when it was changed.
Thank.
Any other questions Mr chair of
a question you may help me if
you recall much space part was
was in front of us I kind of
picked on them a little bit so I
want to move your attention to
page twenty five on here this is
by county so the first one is
Sierra County I did we authorize
that.
The other ones for spaceport.
Has not had provided we offer
approval is that because it
comes from the governor's office
Mr chair Senator Diamond yeah
that's we will not the
governor's office but that's
because those are statewide
projects so they were included
in the statewide capital outlay
framework when they were
originally authorized and those
re authorization requests go
through DFA for approval so
that's how they're included in
the bill I wouldn't know the
that we did include some
recurring funding to the
spaceport this year for and
infrastructure project manager
that spend their majors but
stumbling block to spending
those funds so we are hoping to
see progress on that money
hopefully starting immediately.
Mr chair I am too because it
looks like it's in because the
my County like we're not
spending money on the very next
page the same thing I assume is
happening at the state veterans
home.
That's me.
We ought through DFA and not
through legislative approval
right.
Mr chair Senator Diamond yes
okay thank you Mr chair.
Just on that point what we build
on or going past that.
Building a new.
Okay so that that maybe they
maybe for the new veterans under
the belt and in extending that I
just.
Almost done any other questions.
Through the interim committee I
mean.
Megacentre reason.
Four of us Senator Gonzales
slated to pass motion.
A second Senator Padilla the
call the roll.
Senator.
Of course.
yes Campos.
There Diamond yes ma'am and yes
Senator Gonzales yes it is also
Senator Hemphill.
Padilla.
Share.
Nope.
There share Napster Steinborn
yes if I were yes.
Yes
yes.
Yes.
Eight yes.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank.
We're gonna do of one more bill
and that's it we'll do this one
forty six Senator Shendo here.
Collection
of the.
I don't know if we want to do
that which means that.
Right now the representative.
We have an amendment for this
bill.
Thank you for the six.
You have a copy of a copy
amendment.
Thank you have a motion to limit
for discussion of civil.
On the we don't have a quorum
anymore.
The dresses you set that up for.
Can't.
For.
This.
Hello I'm ready for the bill
that would allow for me there's
only there's only five of us we
need one more for quality of.
We have the.
I want to go I've got another
bill to present across quickly
but I think another five minutes
on the state for the court and
they come right back.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And I will need a quorum make
motions.
Because.
This is.
Yeah is this does because that's
west is right.
yes.
Thank you.
We have a motion to adopt the
minutes of the motion second.
Senator Gonzales second by
Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you.
I
mean we don't have a quorum to.
All of this comes back at the
edges leaving so question one
explain the amendment castle
chairman committee members thank
you this amendment simply strike
section one into.
And this was in regards to
feedback we got in the Senate
Judiciary Committee.
I have explained rest the bill
but this bill does not on the
amendment yeah.
So that's what us have a motion
to adopt the minutes any
questions on the amendment.
To pass on the amendment for
the.
Motion FOR do pass on the
amendment.
Senator Rodriguez Sen Rodriguez
center Steinborn second that.
Thank you have a minute bills
Representative you want to go
through a force thank you Mr
chairman committee members this
is a bill that was presented to
the revenue stabilisation Tax
Policy Committee during the
interim this is a bill brought
to us by.
meant that seeks to clarify.
some items of property taxes not
just go through this very
quickly two minutes so you know
exactly what's in this bill.
All sections three.
current law requires that there
is an hundred eighty days from
the tax payer
submits information to
Department for a tax credit.
And the tax for it has to
approve it within that one
hundred eighty days if they
don't it's deemed approved right
now the issue is the often get
incomplete.
Locations and so they're saying
that clock doesn't start until
the application is complete.
And for that they're changing
the hundred eighty days to one
hundred twenty.
So that's what section three
does section one.
A section for this has to do
with zappers phantom where
software that basically cooks
the books
and what this does is says that
software that federal where is
illegal in the state of Mexico
many other states have done this
to.
thrust the sections deal with
property tax section five
clarifies that when property is
valued by county assessor if
there's a protest that should be
brought before the county
protest board.
section six very similarly says
of the properties where
classified by TRD is property
tax division.
That property that protest goes
before the the A. O. H..
section seven also property tax
so if there is a minute
announcements these are assets
there are reported by the
property owner the current
statutes silent on that product
protest process and so this just
clarifies that a minute
property.
and reported property they're
both treated consistently
when it comes to the process to
protest.
and then the last two sections
chairman committee members
section eight and nine.
This allows owners of
residential commercial property
assessed by the county assessors
the right to appeal and I.
That happens before the county
approach protest point.
It also allows property the
property owner to your do to
yield classification to a H. O.
so so this is really just
providing clarity as to where
protest happens depending on
what is valued by county or by
the state.
Use military sector thank you
that was never questions.
Nine one.
Thank you welcome to the
committee Representative
secretary secretary real quick I
just love to hear the bumper
sticker thirty thousand feet why
this bill is important to.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Steinborn every year it the
employees and tax practitioners
that work with the department
bring forward ideas they flag
things that aren't working well
in the tax code and the we we
make a list of those ideas and
bring them forward for cleanup
and so this is a big chunk of
that this year and so this will
reduce protests provide clarity
tend to reduce litigation and
then the section that
Representative Harper mentioned
having to do with the tax
evasion code and and phantom
where brides APRS that just make
sure it's very clear that we can
prosecute that in New Mexico we
would want to lose out on that
revenue.
Thank you for that thank you Mr.
Thank you for.
A lot of this.
And so on page seven.
So the person on the line
sixteen the taxpayer files for
the credit.
And he can we file for the
credit you're telling him he's
got to go to court on this
protest of the protest and then
you're telling in that section
of the bill the only place you
can go to court is in Santa Fe
County.
And I don't think that's fair to
the taxpayer.
I mean if the taxpayer lives in
Lordsburg New Mexico and wants
to protest a credit he can only
do it one time and then there's
other remedies right if you
makes mistakes that fixes it
here but you know and it one
time and then so limits in there
and then the only place that you
can file on a civil action to
get justification is in Santa Fe
County I don't think that's
right at all.
Mr chair if I may respond to
that
what is shown here is already
the case an existing law that
the the venue for these tax
protest is already Santa Fe
County in but in section three
this all the language or.
Language section three Mr chair
we're you're right it's new
language in section three but
for for other reasons found in
the the rest of the tax code the
venue is already Santa Fe
County.
To protest assessments and
refunded Niles and credit and
health and things like that made
by the department.
So I don't think that's very.
They're good people if they have
to file a protester.
It and then limit them to one
County well committee chair so
we know why why it wants to be
in Santa Fe County.
And then I understand that
because of the software and then
you're creating all these county
boards for property protests
right.
Mr yeah Mister chair the bill
doesn't change anything about
the process for protesting an
assessment made by your county
assessor what it does clarify is
that if your property is
centrally assessed by the
property tax division then you
follow the process of all other
tax programs administered by the
department so the property tax
code Mr written with the
assumption that properties are
County assess because the vast
majority are residential and non
residential and but the central
assessment applies to big
properties that crossed county
lines like railroads utilities
things of that nature and so
we're sort of carving out the
specific process that is
actually more applicable to us
and it's it's a small number of
properties but a fairly large
value of properties because
they're so large and so we're
just basically creating and
clarify in two different tracks
for central assessed and state
and county assessed but nothing
changes if your property which
is county assessed.
And then.
Isn't the duty at somewhere near
and representative mentioned
this isn't the duty of the
county to assess your assets in
less than.
Mr chair at I think you may be
thinking of the omitted assets
portion of this bill.
And it is the taxpayers duty to
self report but occasionally
through audit and and other
activities compliance activities
the department and the county is
assess omitted assets that
weren't properly reported by the
tax payer in in that case this
bill actually goes further to
make sure that those property
owners are afforded the same
protest rates as if they had
come forward and reported their
assets so to more full spectrum
protest right.
I mean that's an issue that.
The county assessor comes in and
then assess every desk every
computer every piece of office
equipment.
I mean when we moved to
computers every two years right.
At and in destin as in and so if
they can't then you can come
back and say your.
Cancel all right same thing
with.
You can do with cattle right if
you don't have if you have in
the you take the exemption for
livestock on your property tax
right and you don't have
catalytic for whatever reasons
to drive right in this as value
you come back and say well
you're not this is a protest and
what we're gonna get you for not
running cattle this estimate
when they don't really know the
reasons but and it's happened
it's happened in Silver City to
the monks.
You know that situation where
the assessor tried to call their
land it was in the church's name
no name and they said no that's
not part of the monastery in it
and it became a battle so
that that's.
An issue
So if you don't report it right.
Representative Harper buys a new
computer does it for the use of
force business but calls it is
personal laptop it does business
on it he's required to report
and if it doesn't report that
correctly.
Then he's in violation.
Mr chair to to clarify this bill
doesn't expand the property tax
base it doesn't make anything
taxable that isn't already it
just make sure if that happens
to a property owner that they
are entitled to provide.
Where is right now that silent
in the law and they could be
denied the protest right.
So it just allows them to
protest rates because what
happens if they don't claim the
asset.
Mr chair if if the taxpayer
claims the asset already they
already clearly have a protest
rates with this bill does is
make sure that that protest
right is extended in the event
that someone doesn't report a
taxable asset and it still gets
assessed so if there is either a
noncompliance if you know
whether it's intentional or
unintentional and then they end
up getting assessed.
They will have a protest right
where is right now it's it's
vegan and stated in statute and
and one could argue that they
don't so we just want to make
sure that it's it's fair across
the board that whether you
report your **** it properly or
not if you are assessed you have
a protest right.
When you protest something that
we always protest to the county
assessor now there's a board
I've never even heard support
before.
There is Mr chair at every
county has the county protest
board for assessor protests I
think the first the first step
is with the county assessor and
after that I can go to a County
Board of the sensor your.
here sensors your striking them
right.
On page twelve.
Mr chair let me go there but I
think we're just separating them
out create separate tracks for
county assessments to the county
protest board which is current
law verses centrally assessed by
taxed Rav going through the tax
and Rev protest process it's a
step that would or.
Yeah
it's one thirty.
We're going to go on the floor
to write.
I'll have a quorum
everybody Seneal so let's just
roll over this and we come back
this afternoon will start.
Not with their tomorrow.
Thank you the work that.
