Yeah. You want him to just heard
there on? I 40 between Gallop
and Albuquerque.
In those right hand lanes.
But seriously, I thought I'd
been good supporter and that
that right hand lane deal is is
still irritating to me and
Senator Shears, brother in law.
Senator. Go right ahead, Scott.
All right. Good afternoon. Mr
Chairman Name is Scott Sanchez
on the Loc analyst for Public
Safety. We're gonna be going
over the Department of Public
Safety Agency code. 790, which
you can find behind have seven
and your blinders. You can also
find information on the LFC
recommendation in L c. Volume
one bit Scott. Thank you. I can
barely hear you Pull out my
closer. Alright, There we go.
Um, you can also find
information on the budget for
DPS and the LFC recommendation
in Volume two starting on page
405.
There's also some helpful charge
showing projections for state
police force strength. Forensic
lab case backlogs and the
Mexico's primary history and
volume. Three starting on page
50, who with me today, Jason
Bowie, the Cabinet secretary for
the Department of Public Safety,
Diego Jimenez, My counterpart
from D F A
Try Whistler, the chief from New
Mexico State police and in the
audience. Sylvia Serra,
actually, Okay, the
administrative services director
for GPS.
Key differences between the
recommendations are that the LFC
recommendation included a 3%
increase in general fund,
whereas the executive
recommendation included an
increase of approximately 4%.
The in the law enforcement
program, which mainly supports
the New Mexico state police. The
wrecks are very close, with the
main difference being the
inclusion of 2.5 million for
body and in car camera
overhauls, which the executive
fully funds, whereas the LFC
recommendation instead, funds
1.5 million of this in the base
budget and provides a $1 million
special appropriation, which you
can see on page 12 of your
packets.
In the State Life Law
enforcement program, which
supports the work of law
enforcement agencies throughout
the state.
The LFC funds expansions
totaling approximately $2
million in the forensics
laboratory and it department
whereas the executive instead
provides approximately $1.8
million for vacancy rate
reduction and targeted pay
raises in the base and an
expansion of 617,000 in the law
enforcement records Bureau.
Finally in program support, or
SD.
The base budget recommendations
are identical. The only
difference is in funding for
expansions. Lfc provided 86,000
for one ft to administer the Law
Enforcement protection fund.
Where is the executive
recommendation Funds for
positions with approximately
376,000 from the General fund?
And with that, I'll hand it to
Diego.
I'm sorry. I didn't recognize
you with a haircut earlier, Mr
Trav been getting that a lot
lately. No, I mean, yeah. Sorry
about that. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. Um
Scott covered most of the
differences. There's a couple
other things that I just like to
briefly mentioned, Um
Scott mentioned the body and in
car camera overhaul that
executive fully funded the
request, and that is because it
is a recurring expense. Um, last
year, the LFC recommendation did
a similar thing with Tasers and
now we're coming back this year,
to finish funding what is a
recurring expense?
And so the executive proposal
just fully funds it because it
is a fully recurring expense.
Um, Additionally, in the law
enforcement program, the
executive recommendation
includes $11.5 Million and that
compensation appropriation, um,
that provides about a 14%
increase for the New Mexico
State police.
Um, Additionally, I don't think
Scott mentioned it. But the
executive recommendation added
$2 million in a transfer from
the Law Enforcement Protection
Fund. That is a statutory
distribution that the state
police may use for for overtime
expenses.
Um, in the statewide law
enforcement support program,
Scott mentioned briefly, just a
little more detail. There's that
1.3 million for the forensic
labs that is split about evenly
in the executive recommendation
between filling vacant positions
and, um
And paying for a
Or increase in compensation for
for the lives and their staff
pursuant to a study that spoke
completed a couple of months
ago. Um in the I T department,
the executive recommendation,
100,002 to appropriately placed
their staff and
The remaining 400,000 was for
two filled positions that are
currently vacant. Um
There was also another 400,000
for other I T equipment
inventory replacement. There's a
subscription in there, but that,
um, is important from the
executive perspective. Um,
particularly the inventory
replacement, which affects the
department and includes
Replacing I t equipment such as
you know the computers that
officers have in their vehicles
when when those go down
Lastly, Mr Chair and members of
the committee, the
Executive recommendation Scott
mentioned had more FTE in the
law or sorry in the program
support.
For the Law Enforcement
Retention Fund Administration.
You all passed the bill a couple
of years ago, and, um, it
requires a lot of work from from
the department and they don't
currently have this staff to, uh
To fulfill the needs as the law
requires of them. Um, thank you,
Mr Chair, Mr Chair. I know that
you prefer that were concise, so
I'll be brief. I do want to take
just a quick moment to recognize
all of my staff sitting here in
the room with me today. I always
get the privilege of sometimes
taking the credit for the
organization. At the end of the
day. It's all the people that
sit behind me that do all the
hard work and the heavy lifting.
Some of the people here have
driven as far as from Las Cruces
to be here today, in order to
support this, and so I would be
remiss if I didn't acknowledge
them and also lean on some of
them. For some of the questions
that we might have is, there
certainly are experts in their
division. Um, and they're here
for that support. Also like to
thank real quickly, um, just the
Legislature in and of itself,
not just for this committee
before all the support that we
get for the department public
safety from the medical state
police and all of our
initiatives.
I've always pleasantly surprised
by the support that we receive,
and so I'm very grateful and
thankful for that, Um, right
before I get into the slide. I
just want to remind everyone
just real quickly that the state
police always is the forward
facing piece of the DPS always
gets a tremendous amount of
support and recognition as a
secretary DPS. I have a
responsibility as well to make
sure that I advocate
For all the support services
that we provide across state,
New Mexico I won't mention them
all. But as you know, we have
domestic Law enforcement
academy. We have statewide law
enforcement support. Um, in a
lot of different ways. Our
information technologies. Every
police officer is out there
Getting data on a keyboard and a
police car comes through our
shop. Our law enforcement
records Bureau is 3030 units
strong at least.
We have three forensics labs
across the state. And so I would
like to remind everyone of that
as well.
For the reminder, starting right
into it with slide number one.
Um, it's our law enforcement
program Roll up, and, uh, for
all these slides pretty much
older, pointing out just the
variances.
Um, for each one of these are
starting to slide number one,
pointing out the variance in the
very first table that you'll see
is the officer pay plan. You
will see that it was funded by
the executive and unfunded by
the LFC and then near the
executive or the LFC recommended
funding for the New Mexico State
police longevity or step
placement for officers. And I
was just ask this committee to
consider
If you were not so inclined as
to fund the officer pay plan to
at least give consideration for
the longevity pay as well as the
step placement for our officers
would ask you give consideration
for those if you are not
inclined to fund the officer pay
plan on the second table there
has been pointed out, you'll see
a variance on the body worn
camera upgrade in transition.
Um, this is really this
strategic difference. The LFC
funded it in a special and
you'll see it right there in
table three. So I you see a
million dollar variants there on
the table to it is accounted for
in table three. The other, um
various that you might notice
is, uh, New Mexico State police
fleet purchases.
$7 million recommended by the
executive and none by the LSC.
We had some robust conversation
during House Appropriation
Finance Committee. Uh and we
were assured by Lfc they would
take another look at that,
considering funding for fleet
purchases to make sure that we
would have vehicles for all of
our new recruits, as well as
making sure that we stay on a
good replacement cycle. Also in
Table three.
I would point you to the
organized Crime Commission.
Special appropriation of $5
Million Organized Crime
Commission, As you know, is an
initiative by the governor to
address human smuggling human
trafficking, trafficking of guns
and drugs. The funding there
will be to support the organized
crime Commission with their
investigation purchase of
equipment funding travel, all of
those things that are earnestly
started working towards those
initiatives and having a
positive impact within the state
of New Mexico and supporting
Law enforcement in that space.
Eight point you to slide number
two Stay wide law enforcement
support. As I mentioned a moment
ago. It's the other part of DPS
that serves the entire state of
New Mexico. Through all the
other services that we provide.
Um, you will see. The first
table outlines are basing
increased request. The second
table shows the executive and
the L. C additional base
recommendations. The third table
on that particular shot slide
shows the special appropriation
request from the Law Enforcement
Academy. So, starting with Table
one, you will see a variance for
the Santa Fe laboratory
expansive positions it would
show unfunded by the executive
and funded at $1.4 Million by
the LFC.
As you can see the executive
funding it through additional
bass recommendation in Table two
is again It's just a difference
in strategy again. You can see
the difference there between
table one and table to in the
very first table. All of our I
T needs the executive funded and
recommended, um, was not
recommended by the LFC still
very much in need for the
organization as I mentioned
Provided tremendous amount of
resources across state in New
Mexico for in our criminal
justice Partners for criminal
justice information system data,
and we need to make sure that
you know we support all of that.
Moving on to slide three.
Hmm. Sorry SDI program. It's
probably our smallest request.
However, there are still some
variances there that I would
just point out for you. The
executive recommend fully
funding all three base increased
request. The LSC recommends
partial funding of the expansion
position request. You might see
their, uh $290,000 variants.
Right down to the last slide.
You gave us five slides and did
it in four. So
Um just to point out so it's our
final slide. It's our agency.
Roll up there. You can just see
the variances again. Um, there's
a 1% difference between the
executive recommendation that of
LLC 1% equaling about $1.7
million, so they're relatively
similar. The executive
recommendation is 4% increase
its total in LSC a 3% increase
with that, Mr Chair.
Would be glad to answer any
questions regarding any one of
these programs. You can take off
the amber alert for Senator
Stein born she didn't know
questions from committee
members.
I guess my question is anybody
hasn't raised their hand. But
you know, I I committed. You
guys be the top pain, right?
Correct. But then all of a
sudden, every city and counties
in my office saying you're gonna
pay state police the highest and
we're in this
Pave rate.
Pay arms race right the most and
who can get the officers right?
And everybody struggling across
the state.
I mean, in that recruitment
portion, how How do we get more
officers? Not just steep,
please, but across the board so
we can
Kind of level that off. I mean,
we've
Most doubled and salaries
I appreciate the question,
Senator Minnows Mr Chair members
of the committee. I understand
the concern and I and I get why
they get on the phone and make
these calls, But I'm not trying
to be competitive within state.
I'm trying to be competitive out
of state as well. And I think
sometimes people forget that we
have a lot of law enforcement
potential to recruit into the
state of New Mexico. They're
really not tapping into because
Arizona, Texas, Colorado, they
all pay more. And so that is
part of our interests as well as
make sure recruit from out of
state. And so we've had this
Russians about
You know, getting pension to
roll over and having buy in
within New Mexico. But salary in
my opinion is not the only
consideration for employment was
salary and salary Alone. Creek
Police Department would be full
is the highest paid, so it's B.
C s l and year after year after
year, they're always the highest
paid and they don't necessarily
always recruit just on salary
alone for me at the end of the
day, I think it's really
important for the agency that I
work that you're supported by
the organization.
That you have robust leadership
that provides support for their
police officers, and I think
that's always as strong as
recruiting tool. I always say,
you know, our people are the
best recruiting tool if they're
advocating for the agency, you
know, people will come and so I
just think those are points to
consider that some people
necessarily aren't thinking of
last year for the Metro State
police we recruited only a
laterals. We took eight laterals
for the for the domestic state
police last year.
If you would listen to our
critics in that space. A lot of
people seem to think like we're
just stealing left and right,
And that's not necessarily the
case. We took eight laterals
last year, and that's really no
different than with some other
agencies are doing. Um, you
know, recruiting from from from
each other. It's It's a pretty
regular thing in common amongst
law enforcement, so that there's
some things that I would have
the community consider further.
I have had some of those
discussions with people that
were concerned as well. I had a
robust conversation with many
sheriffs in the room, probably
more than 40 of them here
recently about two weeks ago,
and I explained some of this my
responsibility as the secretary
of the Advocate for the people
that are under my charge and
again the entire DPS and state
police as part of that, just as
well as their responsibility to
advocate from their county
commissions.
And City Council for for their
raises and to have them lean in
the same way, But I do
understand that the Legislature
and you have districts to answer
to as well. And you have
constituents. Answer to, um,
your
Uh, you would know better to
have a pulse, obviously on the
district and the things that are
needed there, I would hope that
everybody would be a supportive
of their jurisdictions as well
as an initial state police. We,
as legislators have a
responsibility to make sure that
we budget for our state police
officers. So again, I would just
sum up that we want to recruit
from out of state. And then I'll
say one last thing. There have
been a tremendous amount of
investments made another
agencies as well, which is
probably not being mentioned in
his phone calls.
HB 68 had a tremendous
appropriation had a tremendous
appropriation and support for
law enforcement, law enforcement
retention funding, and there's a
lot of agencies that have
benefited from that. Uh, I
believe it's house Bill 357 or
Senate Bill 357 as well, There's
an A, I think, $57 million
appropriation and a lot of
agencies have benefited him that
I was speaking with the sheriff
and I won't mention his name
recently.
He hired 13 officers through
through that initiative, and so
there there has been a
tremendous amount of investment
made in local agencies as well.
And I would just for the
Committee's consideration
mentioned them.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Chair and thank you,
Secretary and chief and you know
all the thank you very much.
And I didn't recognize you
either. By the way, so it looks
great. So, um, Just a quick
question last year was able to
get the land swap done for you
guys to move the land over to
you and then in Albuquerque and
then give that city of
Albuquerque, the
Or swap. The negative was no.
Nothing was given. It was all
equal to transfer. You have like
an update on where that project
is, And is that still on online
or on track, right there off of
the big guy for the, uh
Public safety installation that
we talked about putting their
Mr Chair. Let me turn to staff
for a minute. See who had the
best update on that for just a
moment.
Introduce yourself, Mr. Chair,
Senator Padilla Troicki, Angola
General Services director for
Department of Public Safety to
answer your question. We are on
track. In fact, we've you can
hold it up. It would be more
comfortable for you don't have
to lean over.
We've kept in constant
communication with, um Deputy
Cabinet secretary Ana Silva. So
she is on track. In fact, we are
just ready to finalize. I think
with the city of Albuquerque,
uh, the deed and then once we
have that, or once GSD has that
we are in preparation with a
request for proposal to have
that work done.
Have it started. Okay, and so
chair and Secretariat, Mr
Director. So what will be housed
there? Do you have any plans on
that just yet.
So we've had early feasibility
studies. Basically, um as a wrap
up is we have multiple
facilities located.
In the city of Albuquerque, and
what we're going to do is roll
up those bureaus and house them
all under this new metro
facility that would free up
nearly $250,000 in annual lease
payments that we we currently
have.
But thank you, Mr Chairman and
Secretary of Director. I'm
sorry. Could you say it one more
time? How much in lease
payments? Well, are we going to
free up currently? 250,000.
Okay. Excellent. I'm really
happy to hear that, because then
we start seeing a return on
investment on building that that
place out. I had. Just please
keep that on track. It was quite
a headache to get that done and
want to make sure that you guys
get what you need. Thank you.
That's absolutely sure.
Senator Bradley. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, gentlemen.
Um I've been very supportive of
the pay ranges for state police.
So has this body here but to
echo the same concerns as my
chairman, when we were turned
back many of my sheriff's every
In fact, every sheriff
department with all the counties
that I represent, had some
concerns, and mainly, is that
discrepancy and payroll? Not
only is there discrepancy, but
also they were losing officers
to state police. And when you
say, Well, there's a little bit
more than just
Pay.
While that would be the case,
right good working conditions
when you're making almost twice
as much for another agency, and
you've got a family to feed its
kind of becomes a no brainer.
And so if I could summarize what
I think your answer was to the
chairman is just
We'll pay them more to
Right. I mean, is to have some
sort of all across the board pay
raises, but in our effort to
wanting to support our state
police as we should
They're still there still is
responsibility on us is to make
sure that our municipalities and
counties are receiving enough in
salary. Maybe not. The same
amount may be the same, maybe
more whatever it is, but we're
going to have to also come in to
fund our counties with those
asked to make sure that all of
our law enforcement agencies are
supported. I will tell you that
while I'm sure you guys know the
difference, and there's healthy
turf wars or whatever it is
within law enforcement. When I
call 911. I don't care who
comes. I don't care if it's
state police officer
Sheriff. My door.
Um, I just want law enforcement
to come in. And so we need to
just make sure that when we're
talking about investing in our
in our officers, it's not just
state police. And so there's a
There's still a lot of work on
our end to make sure that we
narrow that divide between
agencies so that
When we call 911 at least
someone answers at some point,
so it's still a challenge for
us. And so I just want to. I
just want to reiterate his
concerns on that is it's a It's
a big concern is what we
understand that these are
certainly justified. Pay raises.
We've talked about how much
money we've been spending here
on ridiculous things and
supporting our law enforcement
is absolutely, you know, money
well spent. But there are still
some challenges to make sure
that we're supporting our locals
as well.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Senator Stain board. Thank you,
Mr Chair. I actually forgive I
don't have a budget statement. I
just want to thank Thank you,
Secretary and thank all the
state police that are here today
for the jobs that you do.
Um, shout out to the Las Cruces
officer I represent, but thank
you. You know when we see what
you have to deal with, including
the challenges, Um you have to
be a pretty cold person and not
appreciate.
What you do for us, So thank you
all.
I just want you to hear that
message loud and clear.
And hopefully we always do all
we can for our first responders,
and I know we'll we'll try that
here with your budget as well. I
just want to say thank you.
Thank you, Mr
Is that because of the amber
alert
So, Yeah, so that means I mean,
continue to ask them questions
on the organized crime
Commission that that is new,
correct.
That's correct, Mr Chair, and
that's the new organized crime
commissioner. I think we just
did some important on the floor
that you're standing up if I
could clarified not that the
statue is new, but it's been
restructured, Reappointed,
correct, Mr Chair, and I know
there's some. I think I have one
of those bills organized retail
crime, right?
So they're going to oversee what
laws should be passed or tell me
how they're gonna work
necessary. Like I mentioned they
will be addressing, uh, human
smuggling, human trafficking,
drug trafficking, guns, drugs,
border issues, things that are
coming up into the state of New
Mexico. Sex trafficking that
kind of thing. And so while some
of the legislation that you're
seeing does complement the
organized Crime Commission, and
we have
Worked with senators in order to
support their bills and to make
sure that they all complement
one another. The Organized Crime
Commission or is it focuses
primarily on those things that I
mentioned human smuggling human
trafficking, Uh, drugs and guns.
I mean,
I guess $5 million for a new
commission. Right? And you guys
have the laws.
I guess. Help me understand how
the commission is going to make
that more efficient.
Um, I can alright.
I can call up the director of
the Organized Crime Commission.
If that's helpful, um and I can
give you an overview is rob
here.
Because coming up director Rob
Hard from the Organized Crime
Commission can expand upon that.
But how we envision it would
help is one of the things that
we really identified within law
enforcement. Is that the
information sharing peace and
and some of the conversations
that we had between the
organized crime Commission
members and law enforcement was
really a robust way to share
intelligence and to have make
sure that we have, uh, analyst
in place that continuously
evaluate that information and
having a true fusion center for
the state of New Mexico that can
disseminate the information
where
It belongs.
So we have a lot of law
enforcement programs agencies.
They're out there. Actively
working, uh, having a central
node for that intelligence
sharing. We've really feel what
is truly necessary in this in
the $5 million will work to
complement that and to start
that process, But I would look
good morning to you give an
opportunity to the director. If
I may, Mr Chair. He's done a
phenomenal job and it's It's the
number one thing he's leaning
into. He's from D, a Sam
Bradman's office and he has been
doing nothing else but working
on this
And so I just want to providing
the opportunity.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Mr Chair. So just
very briefly. We see our role as
kind of being the glue for the
state making sure that law
enforcement agencies not just in
Bern, Leo County, but in the
rural areas, everybody is aware
of the bigger picture of what's
going on with organized crime.
Um, these, these organizations
operated a level that
Is indiscriminate of our
borders, right? They don't They
don't care whose jurisdiction
isn't that kind of thing. So
we've been going. We've been
going all around to the other
states. We've been going to
Arizona, Colorado, Texas, and
we're also we've been working
with Mexico and we see our job
with our investigators, and our
analysts is making sure that the
right law enforcement agencies
have the information they deep
They need to take down these
criminal organizations. We're
not trying to become
State police were not trying to
become a district attorney's
office. We're trying to be the
glue that helps connect
everybody together.
And what do you think your
operational costs are gonna be 5
million a year.
Um
Potentially, I don't I don't
actually see this commission our
staff of as continuing to
balloon. If we do our job,
right, we can be a small elite
team that continues to connect
information to who needs it.
And we don't grow to two large.
I mean, I'm not. I'm not trying
to shoot myself in the foot for
next year when I come before
you mr Chair, but just to be
clear, it's it's not the goal at
this time of the commission to
turn this into some massive
agency we we don't want to. We
want to just help the other
agencies do their job more
effectively.
$5 million is a lot for a
commission.
Agreed. Um Mr Chair if as we go
back and look through what the
previous commission did, though,
it's actually much smaller than
their operating costs. The the
team was
I know at some point they were
operating even back in the
seventies and eighties around. I
believe it was around 15
million. However well, we will
also be working diligently to
make sure we're getting grant
funding and doing everything we
can to not cost the state any
more than we need to.
Scott, did we do a cost analysis
on that commission?
Can we probably get that? And he
said, I'm think. Pardon my
confident 1.5 million in the
previous commission. Correct to
say that number? No. I believe
it was closer to 15 million. It
operated 15 million Previously I
I think it got up pretty high.
Mr Secretary here. I can't
verify one another here since
2021, sir. So don't have that
data This would have ended back
in the nineties was when it
stopped operating, and I think
it got pretty large.
Larger than it probably needed
to, which is some of white women
in the first place, even got
Diego's hair raised.
I mean, I guess, Let's take a
look at that, Scott and and see
right
$5 Million commission. I mean,
that's
It's a large commission.
In my eyes because I don't see
Other commissions costing that
much.
Annually. To me, it's the it's
the goal to justify it to me,
but until
We get to past explanation,
right?
Sure and where we're headed, but
I've never heard of a $15
million or $5 Million
Commission.
I understand, Mr Chair and I
think is that includes staff.
Yes. This is good staff, and I
think we we would operate maybe
differently than your
traditional commission. As we
see them now, it's not. It's not
meant to just be an annual
commission or sorry monthly
commission that meets and
discusses thing. We mean to be
operational and to actually be
assistant with investigations,
assisting with prosecutions.
And then, of course, his sister
with intelligence gathering.
Why do we have d a s and in
policeman then I mean they got
to do their job. How is the
commission going to assist?
Uh huh.
You can't help mighty a. I mean,
how How are they going to the
commission Going to assist the D
A. When the deviation knows what
job they should be doing.
The judges know what job they
should be doing. The cops
probably already did their job
because they have him there for
some reason.
How was the commission going to
assist in that Mr Chair? What
we've seen based on our
valuation of the state as we've
gone around everywhere is
everyone is doing great work in
their area, but they're not
necessarily looking at this.
These organized crime issues at
the larger lens of what's
happening throughout the state
of what's happening from Mexico.
How old these things are inter
playing together.
That's where we're trying to do
our work.
5 million. You're still a lot. I
mean human trafficking, right? I
mean,
It's somebody's got to catch
him.
The feds, the state sheriff,
somebody's gotta catch him,
right?
I just don't. That's a large
amount of money for commission.
So I guess Scott will need that
background information as we
move forward. Nobody really
knows everybody's kind of
raising their eyebrows about
But it was before and when it
needs to be right.
I've heard about it, but I
didn't know that.
That it was that large amount
you're gonna have to give up
your seat to Scott.
Mr Chair just to be fair to both
the department and the
recommendation. Part of the
reason that there wasn't an
analysis studies that this was
not part of the original budget
request for DPS when we received
it in September. It was
something that was added by the
executive later in the process,
So it's definitely something we
can look into.
Yeah. I just want to see what?
Why? That number is so large and
f d E s and we know the number
FTS.
I believe we have sorry, Mr
Chair. I believe we are
requesting for 12 to speak close
to the mic. Otherwise me,
they're gonna apologize. I
believe we have 12 FTS that we
were projecting FTS.
Give us a deep dive into that,
Scott
Okay?
Thank you, Um
Secretary. I know we didn't get
everything handled. But if you
had to come back and and
And I don't have them handcuffs
so I can't let him I can't let
him go at any time
acquistion
Prepare to you.
Mr Chair.
So people reaching for
handcuffs. I don't
um so, Mr Chair, a question that
I was debating with myself on
one of, uh, wanted to ask or
not, but
Um
Mr Secretary. You may recall
that in farming tonight, there
was an NGO that came up there to
do a gun buyback thing, and I
believe that they were operating
in some kind of criminal
activity up there because they
didn't
They didn't follow the law that
they pushed through this
building.
Ah, nor did they follow what the
A T F was doing or required of
them.
Ah, And then, of course it was
canceled, but
Is there any money anywhere in
this budget for gun buybacks
specifically to give to NGOs so
they can do it.
Mr. Cherished Senator Sherrod.
No, There's not none. None for
you. None for them. Okay. All
right. Thank you.
They don't take BB guns and
share.
Slingshot, Okay?
Write it in other things, I
mean, if if
This committee decides that
payroll is our priority, right?
Where other critical issues do
you think we'd be leaving you
short?
Forensics laboratories, Uh,
indicated on hearing information
technologies.
Again. All the support places.
Um, we have some need within law
enforcement records Bureau.
And then, um, you know last but
at least like I said, if we were
not inclined to look at Officer
pay plan, we would hope to be
competitive with the longevity
pay.
For those that already employed
with Romesco State police pay
plan is something I'm looking at
some other members of the
committee and you heard they're
coming where we get, but I mean,
we do have to
Yes, you have something to say.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. The one other item
that I would mention um, and
that we had lengthy discussions
in HFC Is the 7 million, uh, on
fleet, um
I think it was in capital outlay
at one point executive budget.
Um
And then wasn't an LSC. I don't
I will defer to Scott name
exactly of what exactly happened
there, but
Um, So as of right now, that
would basically be like a 70%
cut to our fleet budget for the
upcoming year, um, from the
previous couple of years, so
that would be
Problematic, to say the least.
Thanks,
Scott. What happened in the hcfc
hearing? Mr Chair members of the
committee to do Frank. It's kind
of the same thing. This was not
something that was included in
the executives Capital budget
framework, and so they moved to
specials in the
Executive budget recommendation.
I think Diego will probably add
more to that. Um, but
essentially, we in LSC didn't
know there was request for 7
million for as part of specials,
so it wasn't analyzed. We'll
have more information for you
shortly once things get done in
the house.
That's probably because we're
gonna buy that fleet of E V cars
for the state employees, and
then they don't realize we gotta
pay 35,000 more for a charger
for that TV, right?
So the vehicles 30, the Chargers
30, right?
And
And and so I guess you guys
didn't get that into us. That's
probably didn't get that vehicle
requesting to lfc. Right, so
that's probably why it's not
In our wreck.
Mr Chair. I will say that the
Department of Public Safety has
worked with us to try and
recognize where these pain
points are in the budget. You
know, we talked this last year
about ammo and Taser costs, You
know, fuel things that really
are recurring costs but that
often get funded through special
appropriations. Fleet
maintenance is one of those
things that kind of is the
candidates kicked every year,
right. Funded through specials
at varying amounts, 9 million in
21.
5 million in 22, but ultimately
what DPS is working with us to
do is come up with a predictable
number that we can use to plan
for, you know, Fleet
replacements on a cyclical basis
so that we understand, you know,
at what point
Do we have a number that you
know we could build into the
base budget in future years that
would more adequately allow them
to replace vehicles on a
consistent basis when they
reached the 148 150,000 Miles.
Whatever the you know, correct
amount is before the maintenance
costs get so high that it's not
tenable anymore.
Okay. You guys developed that
yet first
Great chief, Mr Chairman of the
committee. Uh, we have gotten to
be pretty standardized on our
expenditures. We obviously had
some increases the last couple
of years about 10,000 unit build
with all the supply chain and
everything. Um, be. Yes, sir. I
mean, I think we're pretty
consistently around.
10 million A year is what we
need. We usually have 3.5
million in the operating and
then we're trying to
Put together the rest of it out
of capital and special
appropriations the last couple
of years.
I don't think that lets Scott's
asking you right. He's always
seen
You know, if you if you have 100
cop cars, right? And you this is
year, one right in the year
three. Do they have 100 and
40,000 and how many are gonna
replace and create that cycle so
he can say okay?
These vehicles have a three year
cycle.
You get 240,000. That's we're
gonna replace him. So I mean,
that's an average of what we'll
look at. If something happens
differently, right?
The car gets wrecked and
That's different, but he's
looking for an average cycle, so
we're not
That's 7 to 21 to 9 to and so
well, that's what he's looking
for. Is saying, if we buy fleet
are average Fleet life is three
years, four years.
Two years, right? Yes, Mr
Chairman of the committee. So,
so we do have a pretty
standardized, uh
Rotation marked vehicles or one
mileage. Unmarked vehicles are
generally another mileage and so
and then, of course, our fleets
go up and down a little bit. But
over the course of the year of
several years, um you know,
there's a fairly stable amount
on that. I think the reason that
the budget
The amount funded is just
bounced, bounced up and down
within that, of course, changes
are numbers for that year
because we're not able to
replace as many units so then we
have to adjust the mileage. Um,
but we do have we can provide it
free Standard rotation for
vehicle replacements. Yes, sir.
Is that what you want? Right,
Scott? Mr. Chairman of the
Committee. Yes, And to be fair,
they've worked with us to come
to a better understanding of
what the actual cost is. I think
that what we're looking at
Overall is that you know
whenever a What was it this
year, you know?
$6 million increase in their
budget represents a 3.7% jump.
It's going to be hard to justify
the other things that they need
If they come back next year and
say, Well, we need a 10%
increase, you know, to fund 3.7
of that's gonna be new projects.
You know, additional lefty and
then the bulk of it. 70% of that
is for Fleet maintenance. And so
you know if that's a
conversation that we need to
have in the next few months
before the next cycle.
They were happy to have that
They've done a lot to provide us
with information.
And that should be a well. It's
always come out of Capitol
correct. It's never been in
their operating budget.
Mr probably is a base in their
operating budget. But then
Excess. Okay, Mr Chair. That's
Kind of correct. I think they
have about 3.5 million in the
operating budget and over the
last couple of years as a
believe, chief said, it's been
hopping back and forth between a
special appropriation in
capital.
It sounds to me next year. You
need to increase your operating
base for your vehicles.
So you can start getting that
number of justice.
You know what your priorities
are? I know you got to go
another meeting. I hope I didn't
talk too long, but I think we
kind of need to hear that as
well before. We don't know what
happened in the house yet.
Um, what they funded and didn't
funding so
Move forward. You mean get
another call from us or put out
another Amber alert. Jeremy,
Appreciate your time. Appreciate
your support. Uh, appreciate
yours. Mr Appreciate my local
guys, and I'll tell you a funny
story. So I walked out of a
restaurant and they were all
there and we started having a
conversation with him and and,
uh,
One of the somebody walked up
and said, Don't arrest the
senator, even though they're
having a conversation film might
have a little ride on their end.
I do sit. I sit in the
controller here, so I did have
one question.
I understand that there were
some bars and this just coming
from nobody that's at the state
police.
There was some bars for
transfers for per diem.
And those bars were denied maybe
prior years or something like
that.
But when we send people into
Albuquerque and out of
Out of office. And in that I
think you guys try to transfer
some bars.
Okay and D F A or the controller
rejected them for
For for Diem, which didn't make
sense to me.
I would have done Mr Chair and
get that information for you.
Look into it. Are you talking
about transfers like when
someone gets a position transfer
into another jurisdiction
talking about when? When the
governor calls you guys into
Albuquerque and says we're going
to do a sweep and do all this
and you got to put your police
officers and their per diem rate
right in their podiums. And
you've gotta transfer those per
diems and bars and there is a
denial of that transfer, Troy.
They have anything to say, Mr
Chairman of the Committee. I'm
not aware of a denial for per
diem. The vast
Gorriti of our bar last year was
to cover fuel costs.
Prior. I just want to believe
so. I'm pretty, um no.
Issue.
Okay. Good. Thank you.
Let's jump to do it
with a presentation. Can I do
that about someone says it's
presentation.
You guys are so many to each
other.
Okay? I thought he said Oh,
there he is. Hello, Cecilia, not
Sydney. Yeah. You should have
corrected me.
I mean, you should just said
Yeah, because they're upstairs
in the meeting. Unless is
somebody to make the
presentation for?
Business for us.
Yeah.
Sure we know our loyalties are
going to be
Uh, come tell me your name and
you're gonna start us.
I'll call you the wrong name
might get called Sydney. But go
ahead. Tell me your name.
Hi, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. I am Emily Hyla. I am
the analysts for the LFC for the
Department of Information
technology before starting or do
you want to mention that HFC?
They did go with the LFC
recommendation and to just to
get started with the quick
overview, high levels with the
bullets, um, for the agency 361.
The LFC recommendation exceeds
the executive recommendation by
4.5 million in overall budgets.
This is mainly attributed to the
LFC recommendation, including
the Office of Broadband Access
and Expansion as part of the
Department of Information
Technology, whereas the
executive recommendation
supports broadband as its own
agency separate from do it.
The executive recommendation
supports 650,000 of these share
transfer from the agency to the
Department of Finance and
Administration that the LFC
recommendation does not support
The LFC recommendation is
470.5000 under the executive for
the Office of Cybersecurity
Expansions and 16,000 under for
expansions of the Enterprise
Management office. Other than
these differences, both
recommendations align, such as a
4.7 million reduction in general
fund revenue for the compliance
and Project management program.
And an FTE reduction to support
more FTE and other programs.
I forgot to do introductions
here. But the secretary for the
Department of Information
Technology is Rajasa Band, um,
as well as the D F A analysts
Cecilia Mavrommatis. Um, I'm
going to turn over to Cecilia
for
More comments from the executive
side.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. Um
There is a couple of changes
that were mandated in
legislation last year, so I'm
going to go over briefly. What
some of those major changes are
that are recommended in the
executive recommendation. So
both the LFC and the executive
recommendations include the new
cyber security Office laws of
2023 chapter, 115 established
the Cybersecurity Act, creating
a cyber security office, which
is administratively attached to
the Department of Information
Technology.
Previously the cyber security
functions resided in the
compliance and project
management program. The purpose
of the cyber security offices to
identify detect protect all of
the states. Digital assets
provide effective risk
mitigation strategies and to
respond and recover from cyber
threats. The executive
recommendations supports the
agency's general fund requests
of $6.8 Million.14 FTE s. And
this is $470,500 more than the
LFC recommendation.
Additionally, the executive
recommendation also abides by
Senate Bill 93 and follows the
program Change request process
established in Article three a
in the accountability in
Government Act, both of which
prescribing the office of
broadband access and expansion
as administratively attached to
the Department of Information
technology. Therefore, the
executive recommendation has
provided for such as business
unit 36 to the office of
Broadband access and expansion.
And because of that, we will
also have the director of
broadband, um
Yeah.
Come up and have his own
presentation as well.
Um the general fund increases in
the executive recommendation
were found in only three
programs, programs support
compliance and project
management and the cyber
Security Office. Aside from the
broadband office executive
recommendation in your packet,
does not. You'll see when you
look at the broadband section.
Um, there is no it's all zeroed
out, and that's because they are
a new business unit. So that's
going to be a little bit of a
Uh, follow. Follow up on another
sheet. Um, The FTE
recommendations were also as
follows. 14 share FTE s are
being transferred to DFA. An
additional six FTS were added in
the same Enterprise service
program P 773 and for FTS in
program support P. 771. All of
these adjustments are done
without the use of general
funds, which means it was built
into their base and not an
expansion.
And both recommendations include
six additional FTS utilizing
general funds for the Office of
Cybersecurity, Um, just to also
note the agency currently
operates 7 84.6 funded vacancy
rate. The executive
recommendation provides a 1.4
increase to that of fiscal year
25 unfunded vacancy rate for an
86% for this next fiscal year.
This indirectly affects the
level of revenue brought to the
agency as prescribed by the
Office of Management and Budget
Circular, But
Secretary Sam Van Dam can fill
in those blanks for you, Mr
Chair. That's everything for me.
But thank you, chair and members
of the committee, okay?
We have a quick presentation to
run through taking cue from
earlier presentations. We try to
keep it to 5 to 6 lights, he
added. Two more for officer
broadband so that we can provide
continuity.
Um, if you look at slight, too
The summary of budget
recommendations.
Um
Column close to the left and by
sources we have the executive
recommendation.
And then the executive
recommendation for Officer
Broadband. And then the LFC
recommendation and the
difference between executive and
LFC.
So
One of the points that we may
have connected earlier on P 791,
which is the cyber security
aspect. That is a delta, Um
That is because of the
additional F D and the 14 Ft.
That's a silly I was mentioning.
Moving on to page number three.
We have a brief understanding of
that compressed version of what
some of those variations are
almost starting with program
number 771 on programs support.
03, please.
Thank you, Um, executive
recommendation includes
$650,000 General Fund, increase
in, uh, 200 categories.
And then 77 to project
management and
Compliance. Executive
recommendation includes $16,000
General Fund.
And the 773 Enterprise Services
It reduces 200 categories by
$977,000 because of the transfer
of shared to the FAA, and then
791, which is office of
Cybersecurity executive
recommendation includes
$470,000 470.5000 dollars in
supports the expansion of six
fifties.
His number four a little bit
more detail on B 791, which is
the office of Cybersecurity.
Ah, um
You see the 14 ft years at the
bottom? Um
That is a difference.
Um, between executive
recommendation and lfc
recommendation on the 200
categories for about $162,000.
That is something that you know
we would
Really like this body to, um,
support us with a little bit
more money on that 200
categories because cybersecurity
resources are one hard to find,
and to, they are a little bit
more expensive, then reminding
Um, job classifications that we
have.
Um and, uh, under spoke.
So moving on, Um two. That's all
I have. I'll be have the
Department of Information
Technology. Special
appropriations are listed on
page number five.
And with that, I'm going to
transition to officer broadband
to talk about. They have to
slides and then we'll come back
to page number eight. If you
prefer.
So, Mr Chair. Thank you, Um
So the big ask, you know here is
is really about the separation
and having the ability to
control our own destiny. We've
been able to create, uh, you
know, an ASD team. We've able
been able to create our programs
team to run our federally
mandated programs as well as our
state programs. You know,
collectively, we're looking at
about a billion dollars of
programmatic requirements as
well as the other statutory
requirements to be the data hub
as well as right away.
And technical assistance for the
state and broadband, and so just
looking at the two budgets, they
are very similar. But the real
distinction I want to draw here
on on this is that the
separation of the speed at which
I have to deploy, but the
federal programs and the speed
at which our constituents new
Mexicans request, you know that
they actually get service around
the state, and especially, those
world parts really requires the
speed.
And we are a very large program
attached to, you know,
essentially smaller agency.
And so just that I think I'd
just like to highlight the point
of we would really appreciate
the ability to have the
appropriate money in our own
business unit there.
Um, so with without there is a
slight difference as Cecilia
brought up in the number of FTE.
We do have some federal and
state funds that that we are,
you know, talking about us, and
they are negligible difference.
Um, but it is, you know,
imperative if the mission is to
be quickly done, that we
actually have the ability to
control this testing yourselves.
Um
In the next slide.
So and just want to highlight
very quickly on the special
appropriations that we have a
$2.1 billion gap in
infrastructure.
With broadband, with all of the
federal and state funds have
already been appropriated. We
are consistently moving out and
developing programs. This year
we launched two different grant
programs of the connecting
Mexico Fund.
With that $2.1 billion gap. The
executive recommendation puts us
on a basically 50 years, you
know, build out right now.
The LFC recommendation puts us
on an 84 year build out. It's
very important that we do not
take our foot off the gas to be
able to build out to everywhere.
Make sure that we actually get
five G service out to everybody.
We just upgraded phone
technologies. Broadband is the
backing technology advanced
backing technology for for GPS
and radio Broadband's backing
technology, You know, for just
about everything we do in our
lives, and so you know, I want
to make sure we keep our foot on
the accelerator that we are not
the rabbit who is taking a nap
in the middle of this race.
And that we continue to finish
it.
And happy Stanford questions if
unless Raja has anything else.
Sure. Let me quickly wrap up.
Um, thank you. Chair and members
of the committee. Um and slide
number eight. I just added few
key elements of what the office
of cybersecurity has done since,
um, standing up or establishing
that function around July. 1 of
2023.
Significant milestones have been
accomplished with the amount of
money a lot of the appropriation
be had as a combined function
between office of Cyber and
Enterprise Project Management.
What used to be a small function
with 76. State agencies are
providing services to 76
agencies now has been scaled.
Thanks to your support and the
executive support to 33
counties, Tribal entities 106
municipalities 31 higher
educational institutions and
189 K through 12 school
districts.
Ah, this was not possible
without planning and a lot of
support from
Um, this public policy making
body and the executive, so thank
you for giving us that
opportunity to serve such a
large
Audience. Here are some key
points that I would like to, um
Communicate, Um, to this
committee.
There's a threat landscape is
changing on a daily basis, and
it's very hard to keep up.
The statewide cyber security
plan was, yeah requirement, part
of the law and be successfully
delivered it on time and made it
available to this body and to
the executive branch.
One key aspect that I would like
to bring here. The state
agencies are one of the, um,
interesting group out of the
once listed about that does not
have any cyber insurance.
The others have cyber insurance
in some shape or form, so that
is some unique
Ah, difference that you need to
be cognizant about and last but
not least, the cyber salaries
does not meet market condition
And, uh I have repeated that
multiple times and even with the
current 200 categories that we
are
Provided with the six F D it
will be impossible for me to
hire that. Six f D R the current
going great.
Thank you, sir. Will stand for
any questions You made that
comment in HFC. What? What was
their response to you?
They were going to create a
workgroup to connect with us,
But that workgroup never
happened. And I correct Drew.
Mr Chair. That is correct. And I
just double checked with the
chair of that subcommittee, and
she was surprised that we were
never called to come together on
that so
You didn't tell him just do it.
Yeah, Center. Can I say sorry?
Thank you very much, Mr
Chairman, And so, um
Wow. Um, as though this area
didn't have enough to do, I
thought I would create two
offices for you to get even more
busy officer, Broadband access
and expansion officer
Cybersecurity. So can we talk
just about broadband, Mr
Chairman, just real quick, So So
show me the money, Basically,
um, How are things going with
our beat applications and
I guess I had another number
thrown out of
Now, are we in line to? I don't
want to let it all out at one
time, but is it 1.31 0.4
Million, So it's still the 970
Million? Not that That's bad, Mr
Chairman, But where are we right
now? So chair and and Senator,
so we have $675 million from the
allocation right of the bead
funds that does not really
arrive into the state until
later this year at the earliest.
And that is dependent upon
India. We have submitted every
document that's required. We're
going through curing right now
on it. We are moving full speed
ahead and we expect the grant
program to be designed Still, at
the end of that, and early 2025
in CIA must approve all of the
grants that we that we
tentatively put out there with
that funding. We have
approximately $150 million
between the RP funds and and
other state funding between the
connecting Mexico fund.
We've been working with. And so
you're you're right about that
947 number and with the ask of
the 42 from the executive, we'd
be right at a billion dollars. I
think you know, 1.4 billion that
you just mentioned. Keep in mind
that we've been tracking $1.4
billion coming into the state
from other federal programs as
well. And so there's a lot of
money that is coming into the
state on this. But again, the
need is
You know much beyond that is
still a $2.1 billion gap. So
thank you Chair and so I think
one of the more expensive parts
of this proposition is
definitely gonna be the middle
mile projects. Are we actively
reaching out working with folks
like you know that are putting
Pipes in the ground. And you
know, um, you know, Sequoia
Investment is one that I've been
working and I know that you've
gotten involved in that as well
Had our congressional delegation
delegation. Mr Chairman, worked
with the likes of BNSF and
others that you know there.
There's a ton of right away
there that can we we can. It's
already there are even approved
going to disrupt any private
landowners. Anything like that,
Um,
Where are all those
conversations because we can
certainly capitalize on opening
the ground once and bringing our
costs down.
So Sharon and Senator thank you
for the question. That is
exactly right. Yeah, you've
nailed it. I've been working
with Sequoia and having
conversations with Arcadian been
having conversations with Lumen.
You know, there are existing
companies in the Middle mile
space. There are more companies.
I would like to come into the
space. We do need to make sure
that we utilize that dig once
philosophy and that's exactly
why. You know, I've been
approaching this from a more
money is better now.
Because every time we go in to
dig or have a project, we can do
the next project, using the next
source of funding and move on to
the next area, right. And so
those are those economies of
scale are going to be really
important. And the less money we
put into this, You know, now
it's gonna cost us more later to
be able to do the projects and
make sure that every new Mexican
gets served.
Well, thank you, Mr Chairman. I
really hope that you're spending
it well, So you know the six or
seven items I put in the
legislation to create that
office. One of them was
definitely spending, eating,
sleeping, drinking spending as
much time you know, trying to
find those deals for us, because
you know, we have that.
46 and population fifth and
landmass. We've got to get this
done somehow. So I appreciate
that You're doing that, Um
You know? Can you just give us
you know if you tell me
specifically which ones but one
of the key aspects of the office
was to When I created this thing
was to have specialists in the
office to work with local
political subdivisions. I know
that Shama was working on a
project succor. Oh, there. How
many projects are you Is your
office engaged in helping
outside of the 25 quarter
outside of the metro areas.
How many projects are you
engaged in helping along the
way?
Uh, chair and Senator, I don't
think I have that member number
memorized. I think the last kind
of count that I came up with was
like 76. And that was probably
about six months ago. And we've
been engaging with, you know,
counties and municipalities,
Tribes all along the way we have
right now six employees that are
in our Project Management Bureau
working on technical assistance.
I have one vacancy that's posted
for filling on that as well.
We've aligned our processes to
be along with, like the six
districts of duty, along with
kind of someone heading that up.
So, um, you know, we're trying
to maximize the same kind of
efficiencies. Well, thank you,
Mr Chairman. And I really am
happy to hear that, because one
of the biggest issues I ran into
when I was trying to get this
thing done.
As well. This is going to focus
on the larger towns and cities
in New Mexico, but that very
function is incredibly so Please
keep that office staff. Please
keep reaching out to
communities. I don't even know
if all communities know that
that services available to them,
Um and then so full stop. One
Last thing on broadband is there
is the office that or the
portion of the office that is
focused on rights of way and
easements. And that and things
of that nature is that stood up
already and is that you're
working with anybody on that
kind of stuff?
That's the chair and senator
that's probably the most
complicated, you know, portion
and I mean, as you know, it is,
uh, very deep topic. Um, you
know, we've certainly looked at
at adding a legal staff. In
fact, we have got a position
action request form out to add
one more legal staff member to
really help us with that we've
actually looked at contractors
in that area. It is $800 an hour
to get someone who's an expert
in rights away.
Um so I think we're all in the
wrong business. You know if
you're looking to make some
money on that, but it is a
substantial issue right now. Uh
And I mean, I'm sure you're
aware that we're working with a
bill to try and try and move
that forward in the state and
we've tried to do this in the
past as well. So it is. It is
something that we're going to
still have to continue to work
on. It's going to require some
work with D O t. They actually
just launched a portal that
they've been doing in the pilot.
We'd like to try and not
reinvent the wheel. And so we're
looking at how can we build a p?
I s into that and utilize the
programs that already exist in
the state. But we've already
begun conversations with other
state agencies. It's just skin
again. It's going to be
complicated. We need to make
sure that we have the right
kinds of people working on it.
And, uh, much as as the
secretary of talking about cyber
security, you know that there is
gonna be a hard one to compete
in the grow our own. Yeah. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. And so just
just for the benefit today,
we're talking about your budget
and things of that nature. But
right now, if you had to measure
the
Return on investment. We're
investing. How much in this
office versus how much we
believe we're going to bring
into the state of New Mexico.
Can you give me like a
Ballpark on that, you know,
Chair and Senator Video Vehicle
Rica is here. Video. Would you
maybe come up and just give the
study, I think is North
Carolina, South Carolina on the
gap of funding every day. We do
not fund
Broadband in the state of New
Mexico cost the state
I think it's actually Mr
Chairman, where I was going was,
you know, I see that your budget
here for broadband is, um you
know, for the actual, the entire
office and the end is what is
your end it operational fees.
What is that?
Oh, currently, uh, so we are
approaching about a 3.5 million
right now, with the 20 staff
that we have. And then the three
employees with PSF to and we're
approaching a little bit more
than that, if we can add the
next couple of positions that we
need, Thank you, Mr Chairman and
director I acting director. I
just want to underscore for the
committee and for those that are
paying attention to this thing
right now.
Under $4 million for a return on
investment of somewhere between
670 million and $1.4 billion.
Please keep doing this. Please
get this done. Okay. So full
Stop. I just wanted to ask on
cybersecurity. Mr Chairman. That
other um s key thing that we're
all dealing with, Um
So on cybersecurity, Um
Mr Secretary.
We are all funded. Uh
Programs and poor. I'm sorry
portions of that office. I think
there was a deficit of is it 4
million or something that we
needed to
That wasn't um, accounted for in
the proposal. The original
proposal who said shed some more
light on it, Thank you, chair
and members of the committee.
There is, uh um, $5.5 million.
Ask to cover, um, Higher
educational institutions and the
K through 12 for our scanning
really that activity, So that is
part of our service offering
that we currently do in FY 24.
And, um I made the same played
to a house appropriation, and
they took that I'm yet to see
those changes to be reflected,
Um, so, but I was given
Um, the information that they
have added that to our okay, So,
Mr Chairman, I really want to
make sure that we're bird
dogging that and staying on top
of it because that has to get
into this year's budget
otherwise
You know, we're going to be sort
of in in a near boat of where we
were before. That is that that
is correct Chair and members of
the committee and Senator? Yes,
because right now we It was very
well received by
Um, the higher educational
institutions and the school
district. Um, we would like to
continue that offering so that
they can use
Those savings to fix those holes
that we identified to keep New
Mexico out of headline risk. So
chair just I guess the last
thing I'll mention is just, you
know, Want everyone to really
look at slide eight here, which
I think begins to really do the
vision of what we had for this
office, which is
A minimum set of standards. If
you want to do a transaction
with the state of you're
probably sick of hearing me say
this right secretary, um but a
minimum set of standards. Where
are we? As a percentage. Would
you say we're all that all
agencies that would require a
minimum set of standards to do
transactions with the state
government? Comparatively,
speaking, the 7068 agencies are
a little bit doing better than
the counties are the other
groupings that we have
It is just because of the fact
that we got that pilot program
going with the state agencies
and then we are scaling that
same template to bring in these
other entities in there, So in
terms of maturity, I would say
the state agencies are a little
bit ahead of the game in that
when it comes to that, but
slowly but steadily because this
programs are consistent and we
are using the best practices.
I am very confident that we will
bring the rest of the groupings
to the same caliber as bad we
are. Thank you Chair and and Mr
Secretary. Can you give us some
sort of an indication or do you
have some sort of a timeline on
when we can feel a heck of a lot
more secure? I mean, you know,
we had the rld right compromise
before the 23 session.
We must recently had another set
of things that happened.
Yes. So thank you, Chair and
members of the committee. So,
um, the office was stood up July
1 and we started getting the
contracts going and start
hiding, and that's when we
realized we need to strengthen
our staffing. Um, so we worked
on that. And thanks to both the
executive and the legislative
branch to recommend the six FD
that is much needed.
So we will have that possibly by
By end of the fiscal year once
we have completed all our
assessment of all the scanning
activities across the ecosystem,
and then we are talking here, so
in less than
Six months or so. We will have
that information readily
available, But we have done the
state. Um Cyber security plan
working based on the Senate Bill
280 that was
Helpful for us to create the
Office of Cybersecurity using
the planning committee and that
technology advisory committee
that was stood up. Um we have
come to a reasonable conclusion
on what some of those high
priority items that we need to
focus on because that's where
the lack was.
So, um, the plan has identified
four areas for us to work on,
including developing a suitable
workforce are putting in a
workforce development plan as it
relates to cyber
So those are the elements that
we will be working on, but by
the end of the fiscal year, our
scanning activities would be
complete and we will have the
meaningful number that you're
looking for. That's great, and I
really look forward to seeing
that. That's all I have. Mr.
Chairman. Thank you to both
offices. I know there's a hole
over there, slew of things that
you do in this office, but I'm
very proud of the work that
you're doing. Keep it up. Keep
bringing those dollars into New
Mexico and let's get this thing
done. Thank you.
Thank you. Chair.
Chair. Thank you for that.
So we were given 123,000,006 of
it was given as as
administrative and that's you
know, would have been using to
to hire staff and and really
bulk up the office.
$117 million We've actually put
out as awards were down to the
final four contracts, you know,
going between between the
awardees and us and so we're
basically at the point of having
those projects start. A couple
of them actually are already put
shovels in the ground.
Completion on him range from
2026 out to believe the end of
the appropriations into October
of 2026 for for that timeline,
So Yeah, right now. That zone
yes.
Sure, absolutely.
Dinosaur. Very and,
yeah.
So chair. You know, While there
are things that are out of out
of my control, and certainly the
control of the Internet service
providers out there, the
appropriation from Congress runs
runs out. You know on that
timeline, so there's not really
extensions that I'm aware of on
the R P Capital projects fund
money.
No.
With this morning.
Chair. I was doing the broadband
date Legislature and I did not
hear this morning. What I said
this morning, if if you think
those projects are in jeopardy,
right?
It doesn't matter why I moved
the money. If I move, 100, I
think you said 100 and 63
million, right?
163 million over 21 accounting
side and expended for Kim
federal costs. All I'm doing is
expanding that money in this
year.
So we don't lose that money.
And I think
You know if you guys wanna play
jeopardy, play jeopardy, right?
I mean, we don't want to do all
this work and then
And then lose this money so
I'm kind of preach that to the
You may hear that in one of your
executive meetings.
It's common sense to me.
Um
Things happen. I mean,
So chair given that we are under
contract with all but four
awardees. You know, at this
point, um, I think would be
Highly problematic with the
federal money and that we work
with Treasury on on the capital
Projects fund, you know, on this
and that, you know, we work very
closely and making sure that the
program is in line with their
requirements for the funding as
well. I would be concerned about
re re appropriating and
somewhere else at this point, I
don't know there'd be enough
appropriate. I think we're
swapping.
If you have 100 and 63 million,
and those contracts are here,
and this is our money.
And this is General fund money
and we swap right.
Understood. General fund money
gets expended. This year we send
a notice to the federal
government. We expended the
money. You still have the same
amount of money in your account
and a longer timeline.
That's a chair. This is first
I'm hearing of it. I'm happy to
to, you know, listen a little
bit more and think about it.
Yeah, and under understood that
that's the first time I'm
hearing about it. I'd like to
think about what you're talking
about. For a little big
question. In our part, I mean,
24. This is the year that the
Legislature has the last ability
to touch Arba because after
this, it's
Katie Bar the door.
Because we'll be and I'm not
picking on you. But I'm just
telling. I think I said that
this morning.
At work.
I'm watching closely.
Chair point taken, Uh, you know,
and you know, as the head of the
agency, I'm you know, certainly
accountable for it so understood
On your point. Like I said, I
will take that under
consideration. What? You're what
you're suggesting.
Roger. I know even if we put
money in there, and you can't
hire that rate, which
Not doing anything that make any
difference. You may have to
combine F to ease to get to that
number right and do a bar to
To make that adjustment. I mean,
Yeah. You didn't have a hearing
that you had a hearing in front
of the full committee in the
house, Correct?
Yes, Chair and members of the
committee. Yes and no. Actually,
it's not a full committee. It
was it was a subcommittee. I
thought you didn't mean it in
front of the sub community. I
thought it meant working. Sorry.
It was a subcommittee of HFC and
they decided that work group
will be set up for us to go in
front of them, too.
Try to reconcile the
differences, but that did not
happen Chair Correct. Emily and
Inter LLC analyst Was there any
comment? Why that subcommittee
didn't
Seven Committee of Working Group
of the subcommittee.
Mr Chair. I would also like to
preference. I started working at
the lfc two months ago. So I'm
still learning a lot. And I was
under the impression that the
working group I would submit
which happened to HFC.
Something for the working group
what they wanted to, and then I
got information.
Back, but that is what
Kelly? Yeah. Mr. Chairman of the
Okay, Um
I just want to clarify that so
we know we'll have to see what
happens in HFC.
As as we move forward and and
figure that out, But thank you,
chair and members of the
committee and thank you for that
date. So this is as I said,
Thank you for that day. You
don't know? I don't know.
Rookie has to learn baptism by
fire and Loc during this
session.
You know?
I'm still a true believer,
right?
That sub orbital
Is is where we're gonna go.
Right? You're gonna have to lay
fiber to certain communities. I
mean,
You know, two or three years
ago we talked to Google. We
talked to Amazon. We talked to
all of them about their sub
orbital in there. I think Google
had some kind of noise or forget
what they call him.
But they place them and they
serve almost 1200 mile radius in
a circle, right?
We put one in the four corners,
you could almost get to Salt
Lake and that surrounding area
and so technology's gonna drive
this. I mean, I'm a contractor,
and we digging in the dirt all
the time, right?
Things now technology is so much
greater
With StarLink.
With. I think Amazon's bringing
theirs on within one or two
years.
Forget Who else has There's the
up and down. Speeds are almost
sometimes are almost higher than
old copper wire, right?
So chair. You know, certainly,
satellite is going to be part of
the solution, and I know that
we've had other discussions on
this. You know, there are still
you know very important issues.
Five g again radio towers for
DPS. You know those are going to
be you know things that have to
be served, you know, by
terrestrial based systems, Um
and, you know, certainly the
capacity right now that that
StarLink is at
Um, it's not not where it needs
to be to truly, you know, meet
that demand, nor does that
timeline looked to be anytime
imminent and and again, just a
lot of those rural communities,
you know, it's a great solution
for the most rural places, but
it's not exactly an affordable
solution for a lot of those
communities, either. Well, I
know in Santa Fe and people on
that Senate floor in employees
in the middle of Santa Fe,
Could not get service. They all
went and purchased StarLink
after we had that conversation,
and they don't complain about it
now, and this is in Santa Fe,
right?
Not real.
At all. So chair if you if you
add the entire population on of
New Mexico onto starlings
network, they would not be able
to provide the speeds that are
required by the federal
government.
And it's just that the amount of
bleed off the amount of use
right. They are not able to meet
that demand that capacity or
grow. You know that fast with
it.
But I mean, we're gonna spend
years putting wire in the
ground.
Hmm. And technology may have
caught up to us by then. I mean,
uh, old, but I'm not old and
dumb enough to know that I can
go to Lake Powell and the
canyoning and use my starling
WiFi on a boat to connect
anywhere in the world that I
want.
You know, there's just water and
rocks.
Senator. I know that we've
shared that story before. And,
um and chair you know.
Again. I think the demand the
need right. This is kind of
similar to the electricity side.
and you know there's just more
and more that's going to be
demanded. The Internet of things
you know, continues to grow. And
at this point, I'm not confident
It's not seen any studies that
show that satellite can meet
that demand. So, um, you know, I
think at the moment, terrestrial
based fiber is really gonna be
the gold standard and
You know, wireless that is
backed by five will be become
the next year.
Raji or carrying members of the
committee. Thank you for, um,
listening to the differences.
There is one item that I would
like to get your attention, You
know, thanks to talking about
public safety radio network.
That is the difference between
the Executive recommendation and
LFC recommendation on Page five.
The executive recommended this
and lfc did not. It's about $2.8
million
For the public safety radio.
Subscription fees. This is for
emergency state radios across
the
For the emergency responders
statewide. Um, this has, uh
A lot of support from the
counties and money's so I just
wanted to bring it to your
attention.
And, uh, I have few guests. If
you would allow me. I would like
to introduce them to you. Guests
are in place.
Their guests, and I will
introduce the employees that as
well.
So, um, we have to do it. Staff
here. Um, our CFO if
And the fire and then followed
by our
Budget Director Gerald
And Jason Johnson.
Who is head of enterprise
services, and he manages
enterprise services that we
offer to all state agencies and,
uh
Is anybody. Oh, and Renee are
wise schools, our bio
Miss anybody from do it.
Okay. And then I have, um, um
folks from
Chess, which is the service
organization for higher
educational institutions here,
and I have given control board.
Um
Here as well. We work very
closely. We have been helping
them through our enterprise
services to provide assistance
and provide are filled the gap
that they currently have.
And any assistance that this
body can provide in in their
funding request because we have
Project oversight
responsibility, But do it I t
project responsibility.
And, um they are lacking.
Some ideas staff. This has been
a common theme and occurrence
across the ecosystem.
And, uh, the chess organization
is here because they have one of
the largest e r P project
implementation that we are
closely monitoring and
observing, and there have been a
very valuable player in that
area, so I would like to
introduce them. You're the one
responsible for turning off the
slot machines.
Control guys waving his hand at
me. Yeah, chair and members of
the committee. We take a very,
um risk based approach to I d
projects that be review and
approve for CTO funding And they
all went through that rigorous
process and the chest
organization.
Although it's not a requirement
for them. They agreed to follow
our process and provide
quarterly updates. So I command
um Greg Sanders and his team for
coming in front of our
Ah oversight process and provide
us updates. And, of course, the
LFC and D F A are also part of
that oversight process so that
they can stay tuned to what is
happening and those large dollar
volume projects.
Mr Charity Section seven. I
think you're going to see us
again on Monday for section says
what? He's referring to this
project's okay, let me ask you
Well, Officers, State insurance,
right? Uh, are they reopened and
Operating again because they
were closed down completely
right?
Chair and members of the
committee incident did happen,
and they did acknowledge and
Um, I will provide you with as
much information that is
publicly available, and then we
can have a That's right. Just
tell us quickly and then yes. So
they are called them and
informed them about
Some malicious activity.
But they open again. Yes,
Absolutely. They are back in
business. Okay? They were closed
for a long time and I couldn't
really down.
For a period of time.
Um I would say they were
internally operationalized in 30
days or less. And then there
were their website became
operational with newer
technology and that part took a
little bit longer.
Okay and then to go back to the
to the radio communications,
right? Yes, sir. For years and
years and even this year because
I looked at it again through
lfc. And I don't remember if
analysts was there not. There's
only so much equipment you can
put up in a year.
And that is the leg and not
fully funding those completely
at one time.
Because the manufacturer cannot
install
At the rate that we could fund
at and complete the project, and
so we got to call a spade a
spade and you know we can. We
can fund it completely.
But you're not gonna have the
equipment and it's gonna sit in
your warehouse for years, and
it's gonna become outdated in
the Motorola. Whoever installs
those cannot install the rate
that we can fund that is that
correct?
Chairman members of the
committee. Absolutely the spaced
out, um are on the face. Um,
appropriation of the funding for
that. D t. R S P 25 project. We
are good with it. That $2.8
million ask is to pay for the
monthly subscription. The users.
For the users of that radio.
That's different than my yes, it
is. There is a capital. There is
a large investment in capital
for those p 25 radios and all
the towers the subscription
pieces just to cover agencies,
municipalities. Anyone that
wants to participate with a
subscription can buy their own
radio so long. It is a dad like
it can take that software and
it's just covering those
subscriptions, Not
Not part of the capital, not the
infrastructure to it. Radios
either.
And should it be in that capital
request, then it should be in a
different
It's considered more operational
time. I would say it's a pilot
project. I think this year um
Mr Chair, So I think that
because it's subscriptions, they
don't fall in line with a cap
the nature of a capital request,
which is why they've been carved
out and that's not really
Uh, so then that is not the
agencies operating, but that's
just subscription for sheriffs,
Police locals correct
And do it is not allowed to
build those build those
subscriptions right that is
correct Chair members of the
committee That is why the the
municipal League and Association
of Counties and their
representative reached out, um,
indicating that
Uh,
The ability to communicate
between multiple lines Force
mint of, um
Offices has helped them
tremendously in fighting crime.
So they came out and said, Hey,
is there if if there's
subscription cost can be taken
care of it will further.
Help with the on boarding or the
adoption of the larger scale, so
that every possible line Force
Mint within New Mexico can start
utilizing that D T R s system.
Yeah, sure. That would still be
a real It's Yeah.
The one term problems, Mr Chair
just for the executive
recommendation as it being a one
time non recurring cost is just
to subsidize agencies that are
interested in being part of the
program. We don't know exactly
who's going to join and get a
subscription to continue that
subscription through various
years. We don't know what that
cost would look like. And then
that's when that the actual cost
will be built in so if they
don't use the full $2.8 million
We can just reauthorize it for
another year until we get the
buying power to then build it
into the operating budget.
So it's a difference of approach
is cherry pilot Riyadh are not
spending completely. Another
story of state government. Thank
you guys for your time.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I had
talked in some other members,
You know, uh
Uh, Senator Rodriguez wants to
be here for transportation. And
so the Senator Hemphill
Early childhood is important to
us. We need to see where they're
at, and we probably need to have
full members.
Here, so that way we can kind of
get these questions answered and
not keep
Rebutting the old thing.
So we'll try to go from the
bottom up tomorrow.
So we can get transportation
done and completed.
We don't know what the House has
done yet completely so
Try to get them.
We'll try to get them. Rick,
I'll see you in my office in a
minute. We'll try to get them up
tomorrow. So first thing
We're gonna roll over D f A and
everybody else So they're
upstairs in the meeting, so
