There's
Woods, are you in this room.
We'll get started, uh.
We're gonna do uh Senate Bill
36076 is amended real quick. We
need to strip an amendment off,
won't take any public comment.
The amendment just takes
Some healthcare issues off.
Oh
It's a committee sub.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
we also, uh, the finance
committee also has um
Friendly amendment that uh.
Directs the department to look
at a variety of plan options and
so we consider that friendly
with.
ripping the other off, putting
this one on and it's a committee
sub.
And I have a motion to uh.
the committee sub for discussion
purposes.
based Hill second by Senator
Padilla.
Right, Senator
the substitute.
Let's them review more plans and
more options doesn't change the
structure of the bill. Yes, and
we had kept in the actuity sound
of doing reports and making sure
that the rates were, uh, solid
going forward, but looking at
other plants might help lower
the cost as well.
You have some
And.
So
We're gonna get the sub passed
that that was real quick. Sorry.
You have a coffee.
You want a motion chair? We
already have a motion for
discussion purposes. We have
motion to adopt subs too.
Correct.
in discussion of the.
future.
So does the sub senator does not
include the amendment, is that
what you did here, Mr. Chair,
Senator, we didn't have time to
analyze it correctly and uh
during the year of, of uh
legislature wants that to be
Looked at uh the department
could look at it.
So Mr. Chair, since it wasn't
debate, I would move a do not
pass on Senate Bill 376 and the
DuP pass Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 376. Do you want it for
discussion or can we act on it?
I think we know what it is. We
already did the discussion
purposes, so that's motion
that's my motion to do that.
In a second.
Any objection to that motion.
None.
We're on the sub, uh.
Anybody in the room in support.
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody on Zoom.
No, we show 11 in the room in
support.
motion for a due pass.
Mo do pass and motion for do
pass by Senator Padilla,
seconded by Senator Gonzalez.
Um, we call the.
And
Just
Do the rope call first.
Senator Brent
Senator Campos. Senator Campos
votes, yes, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Lanier.
Senator Padilla, Senator Padilla
votes yes. Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo Botsia, Senator
Woods.
Senator Sindo, Senator Sendo
votes yes. Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz votes, yes, we
have a due pass, 6 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative,
yeah, and just so everybody
knows that Senator Woods is
presenting a bill, Senator to uh
Senator Tobias presenting bill
into the nearest presenting the
bill. So that's the reason
they're in the room.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
So do we have an amendment for
Senate bill 376.
Thank you, Senators.
Oh no, in 170, I'm sorry. We do
have an amendment, Senator,
whenever you're ready to.
Ready for you.
All right, thank you, uh.
Chair and vice chair and ranking
and committee, uh, essentially
170 is a companion bill to 169,
which is the significant site
readiness, uh, discussion we had
the other day and essentially we
want to make New Mexico as ready
to rock and roll the moment uh
anybody takes a look at us or a
New existing New Mexico business
wishes to expand, and we have
many of them in the state that
really want to already. Uh, we
did have an amendment um in
Senate Tax Business and
Transportation, which
essentially um amended.
Uh, language to eliminate, uh,
electric utilities from the
definition of public project and
clarifies that the increase in
capacity for incremental
capacity is up to 10% of the
public utility's total system
peak load.
Um, why are we wanting to do
this again? Economic
development, um.
It, it, it, it dovetails very
nicely with again, uh 170 which
uh passed out of this committee
unanimously. Um, we do revised
definitions, uh, simply to
clarify specific definitions
within the NMFA Act to ensure
consistency and alignment with
current financial practices and
technologies, uh, fund
allocation adjustments, uh, it
proposes modifications to the
allocation and management of
funds under NMA's purview aiming
to enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of financial
resource utilization.
And then it allows uh provisions
for interest rate provisions
with monies that would come out
of the PPRF fund, uh, why would
we want to do this again?
Enhanced clarity and consistency
and it provides a lot of
certainty to companies taking a
look at New Mexico, whether
they're from out of state or in
state.
Uh, improves fund management.
Uh, there's a huge potential for
cost savings down the road as
these companies succeed and then
increased flexibility. I do have
uh secretary designate Rob Black
with me here as an expert
witness and he and I have been
working on let's just ask him to
say a couple of words.
Sector.
Mr. Chairman,
Committee members, um,
appreciate your, your hearing us
today on this item, we do
believe that the ability to
deploy utilities quickly is
essential for us to be
competitive for economic
development, and we think this
bill goes a long ways to helping
us do that. It really just
expedites the time frame that
the PRC has to review, um, we've
worked with the PRC on this
language to make sure that it
works for them. And we look
forward to the discussion today.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and again,
just simply a lot of the
uncertainty when you're taking a
look at New Mexico to do
business, whether you're out of
state or in state, is just how
long it takes to get your, uh,
utility scenario kind of sorted
out. It's, it's anywhere from 18
months to 3 years. This is going
to require an uh PRC to act on
these items within 6 months, or
it's gonna be deemed approved
and we're gonna move forward.
and fix our economy in a big
way.
And you have an amendment?
Senator, yes, we do.
Um, but this is just setting the
rates for for utilities, for gas
and electric.
Mhm
Senator, all the chips on the
table, doesn't it falls within
the the economic rate section,
but it doesn't actually change
the rate structure.
That's all your chips on the
table.
Yes sir,
9 of 10 9 10
9 to 10, 9 to 10.
Let's see I looked at the
amendment it's fine to me. We do
have a motion. I mean, we do
have an amendment. You haven't
seen the amendment, Senator,
you're gonna explain the
The Amendment can have a motion
for uh.
Discussion purposes on the
amendment motion by uh Senator
Gonzalez, taken by Senator
Trujil, any objection to the
discussion purposes.
It's a friendly 10 1702.1 is the
one we're working from, is that
the same one you have? That's
correct, correctly verified
that. Questions on the senator
explained the amendment.
And then uh.
This wasn't my amendment, but
I'll explain it, uh, essentially
ensures public comment when
we're going through the process,
much like you do here, Mr.
Chairman. OK.
Questions on the amendment.
None can have emotion to adopt
the amendment. A motion by
Senator Gonzalez, seconded by
Senator Trujil.
You have an amended bill, we're
back on the bill. Anybody here
in support.
Uh, will take how many we have
on Zoom?
We'll take one from the room and
one on Zoom.
We'll note there is for support
in the audience.
Good morning Chairman Munoz,
members of the committee, Carlos
Lucero with the Public Service
company in Mexico.
One of the main issues with
economic development projects
are the timelines take too long.
This could be due to a supply
chains and approval processes,
etc.
And I'm able to build fast
enough under our current
process, which may take 34
years.
SB 170 will help rebuild
infrastructure and expedite the
remaking process to attract and
retain commercial and industrial
businesses capable of enhancing
the local and state economy.
The more of these large economic
development projects.
The more we are able to offset
increasing costs to customers.
For these reasons, we support.
So Bill 170. Thank you.
Thank you. We have one on Zoom,
who is that?
Enrique
You have your there you go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, good
morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Enriqueel with
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce, Senate Bill 170 is
another pragmatic bill that
allows New Mexico to do the
literal groundwork that we have
to do to be truly ready when
economic development
opportunities arise, allowing
public utilities to recover
prudent and reasonable costs for
certain economic development
projects will encourage
investment in future projects
today. And oversight from both
the
Economic Development department
and the public regulation
commission, as well as a 10-year
sunset are designed to ensure
that projects do indeed pay
dividends. We respectfully ask
for your yes and do pass vote on
Senate Bill 170. Thank you.
Thank you.
Questions on the bill.
Oops, I'm sorry, I, I thought I
didn't see your hand come up.
I'll take one opposition. How
many are in opposition?
Take one in opposition since I
did not see your hand go up when
you said opposition.
Um,
good morning, um, chair and
senators, um, thank you for
allowing me to speak. My name is
Mariel Nassi, and I am the
executive director and senior
attorney for New Energy economy.
I respectfully oppose this bill
for a number of reasons. The
most important thing is when you
fast track a bill, what you do
is you leave out community.
There's already a very fast
track for what's called CCNs.
Which is certificate and
convenience and necessity. This
bill would undermine the current
regulatory practice and twists
62-9-6, which requires that the
utility seek prior approval
before it constructs this bill
would allow them to construct
and then
And then what, what happens? Oh,
it's built, so what are we gonna
do? Um, make, make PNM pay or
make ratepayers pay. This twists
the process on its head. Please
vote against this bill. Look at
it. I have been in a regulatory
attorney for 15 years, and this
bill does not help community and
will not also will uh cause
ratepayers to pay undue
financial risks.
We have anybody in Zoom a post.
And
Uh, question center, we won't.
What bill did this committee
come through before it came.
So it has gone through another
committee. Was there any
amendments or any comments like
that in if you like. No, we're
not going to respond to the
audience question from committee
members.
S E Steinborn and Senator,
uh, if you already answered
this, but can you kind of speak
to that senator? Does this uh
short circuit.
Um, I, I like to kind of address
the concerns that were just
raised. I appreciate it, uh, Mr.
Chair and Senator Steinborn. So,
uh, an item on on item this
process. Second, um, no, I mean,
if, if, if you take a look at
the way things are done today,
we wanted to set this, uh, but
we, we, we agreed to the year.
To figure out your certainty
there. And I don't know a
business in the country,
including my own, that would go
build first and seek their
authority. I think that would be
a silly business.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, if I
could, um, this does not change
the process. They would still go
through the CCN certificate of
convenience and necessity
assessed before the PRC, uh,
but.
Expedited to 6 months.
I mean that's
OK
Thank you, Mr. I tried to
operate yesterday Senator Tree
Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you
Secretary for being here. So
that was gonna be one of my
first questions. Yeah, am I
understanding this to be a
two-part process. In other
words, economic development
certifies it as a site,
certified site, and then it goes
through the CCN process, which
is expedited.
OK, I see your head shaking. I
know the public can't, yeah,
thank you, um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, and then, um, you said
that you've talked with PRC. I
read there FIR and it does seem
that they're saying that there
may need some more staffing,
depending upon how many
applications come through.
I'm assuming that we don't have
money in the budget for that
right now. When would this go
into implementation?
Chairman Senator, uh, it would
go into implementation, I
believe, in June, um, as a time
just as um
The, we, what we don't so the
process would be uh a utility we
would have, I believe 30 days to
go through the amendment that
was done today would require the
utility would take that document
I don't anticipate that this,
again, this is, I would have to
go through that.
And we're gonna look at what are
the best, uh, what, what's the
workforce look like? Is this
something that's um, so I don't.
Uh, we're a utility ones prior
to an identified customer, you
know, we hope that there will be
some and that that we can test
this and see, but we don't
anticipate a large number. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator secret, um, so I, I'm
wondering, and I was trying to
look up really quickly and I'm
sorry I can't reference it
correctly, but you were before
us a couple of days ago, about 3
designated sites. Does this work
in collaboration with that or
how do they connect?
Center, yeah, that was the
introduction excellent point.
Yes, these are.
We were hoping that they would
swim along this how this was
scheduled, but yes, definitely.
OK, and my last question, but
you may not have an answer for,
but I've heard, Mr. Chairman,
I've heard that Ener secretary
talk about the, the pretty high
volume of.
Um, power transmission lines
that we need in New Mexico to
meet the coming demand for
electricity.
Um, do you have a, a
recollection as to what that.
Number is, I, I recall somewhere
in the neighborhood of 600.
Uh chair and senator, I've heard
that it's essentially all of the
above that
um.
That adheres to the ETA I guess
the best way to put that. Thank
you. I appreciate your answers.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any other questions,
Senator Steinborn again, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. So, just,
just read more so, Mr.
Secretary, Senator, is this kind
of get to the issue that you had
briefed us on early in the
session about data centers and
Trying to authorize new
infrastructure essentially to
basically what this bill is
about.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, uh,
that, that is one that could be
that could fall within this, um,
it could also be
Um, we're in conversations with
a company that's interested in
building a.
Uh, decarbonization fuel plant
that would require a new um and
that's a site and those sort of
opportunities, can we pre-deploy
even without that beforehand
because we know it's unreal,
it's a great site. So it allows
us and I think one of the key
pieces for rural New Mexico.
there is a funding mechanism
through the PPRF co-ops to
access funding and investor
owned utility could rely on
their shareholders.
We've tried to create a funding
mechanism so that's
Mr. Cha, as I read the analysis,
so this allows rape recovery.
This allows rate riders, this
allows this infrastructure to be
charged to customers. And so I,
I'm really concerned about, I
appreciate what you're trying to
do, but you know, you know, in
Las Cruces.
Uh, I've learned a lot more
about demand side management and
about how utilities make money
and
Just the importance of not
building infrastructure if you
can avoid it, because ultimately
customers pay for that. And so
I'm all for economic
development. I worry a little
bit about this because
We allow them to charge
customers for infrastructure
whether or not that customer
follows through, frankly. No, I
don't, sorry, like an economic
development project follows
through, but then the
infrastructure has to be paid
for and the customers can be on
the hook for that.
I, I probably won't support the
legislation right now while I
learn more about it, and I will
continue to learn this through,
but I'm, I'm I'm concerned about
repairer exposure.
Um, so, and I'd love to learn
more about consumer protections
to protect them, but you're
welcome to answer if you like,
but thank you, Chair and Senator
Steinborn. Excellent questions.
Uh, I'm gonna ask the secretary
to comment, but, you know, I
will say that.
From an economic development
standpoint, we didn't invent the
way economic now. I think it's,
I think it's shouldn't be lost
in the discussion that
Um, you know, when Oregon and
New Mexico company wished to do
something, when they're making a
decision, they're looking at all
potential ways to make this
thing work for them.
This is something that we didn't
invent or create. We do need to
learn how to play in this
environment, but Secretary, if
you want to add a couple of
things, uh, Senator, I think I
can speak to exactly that, um,
so the process would be, uh,
again, just like today, if they
uh utility came forward with a
CCNN request.
Uh, and then the utility would
ask the PRC to track those uh
going forward, um, which is
again typical how the rape and
the commission would then.
Could then amend
Declined or approve the project
as in the public interest. That
would happen, uh, and then they
would allow for the regulatory
asset or make a determination of
what and then uh they would
still have to.
Let me uh ask you some
questions. How much is in the
PPRF on the public project
revolving fund, and how do we
fund that? Marquitas jumping up
behind you, Marquitta you wanna
come up.
Just remind me, we have so many
funds, I can't remember. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. So this is a
fund that we replenish through
the issuance of bonds and so
that, that loan fund um actually
changed the balance changes
weekly as we fund loans. So we
just closed on $100 million
bond, we replenished the fund.
We're preparing now for another
bond in 2 months because we
expect those dollars to be fully
drawn down in that time period.
Um, but the capacity of the
program is based on the
underlying strength of the loans
that we fund. So it is.
We have the capacity to fund
$300 to $400 million of loans
annually without really
impacting long-term capacity.
And, and those are used for
water projects, number of
things, correct, the loans.
Mr. Chairman, yes,
infrastructure projects, capital
equipment projects.
And in my
My concern is what if one of
these large utilities comes in
and says we need $120 million
substation.
They've used 1/3 of the.
Just using your numbers today,
1/3 of the total.
Total fund
And
In the they approve it, and then
now you got to fund it, and
you've taken 1/3 of your lending
value out.
Um
You think that might limit you
for future loans if we got to
that point where cities and
Michalis now need to learn.
Mr. Chairman, we're not
concerned about the long, about
the impact of adding electric
utilities, um, ultimately to the
program. We already fund large
utility projects that are
operated by cities. We did a $40
million project recently for
City of Farmington, for
instance. Um,
So we don't, we're not really
concerned about the underlying
long-term capacity as long as
governmental gross receipts tax
stays strong. We don't expect
that this will be an issue for
us. In the legislature approves
those, correct?
Mr. Chairman, yes, there's an
authorization process where they
approve of the qualified entity
and the projects that the
qualified projects that they
would like to have uh
authorization to apply for
funding.
Chair, that's through this
committee no, no, no, I know I
know which bill it is, but I
mean this, this takes the ledge
legislative approval authority
away till 2035.
Uh, I mean, that's.
I mean, these projects are going
to take a year to get.
Developed a year to get.
and then a year to come borrow
the money.
In and we're taking away till
2035.
You know why we want to take
legislative approval away from
the PPRF. Does this wipe all the
PPRF approval away or just this
portion of the PBRS.
Senator, uh, that's correct. Uh,
it, it would, um, and part of
the challenge is we would take
all of it away. It would for a
period of 10 years, it would
have a sunset, uh, the concern
is that if we have to wait an
additional year or two for
legislative approval for
individual projects, it, it puts
us so much further back in the
timeline.
And the intent is to allow our
co-ops, and this is specific to
co ops and my question was, does
it take it away for the water
projects and the electrical
Marquita shaking her head, yes,
Mr. Chairman, so it does it for
the water projects through the
water Trust board, that's a
separate authorization bill
where the projects are listed,
um, the bill that you just
passed through the last week or
so, the 199 projects, all of
those would be able to access
the program, um, directly and of
course, that means that, you
know, if they've got a project 5
months.
Before we'd have a bill entered,
they could save some significant
money. Uh, Mr. Chairman, we have
seen in the high interest rate
environments that the delay of
even 5 months for that
Farmington project cost an
additional $310,000 in interest
costs. So we know that there is
cost associated with time, um,
both from the project increased
costs and the potential increase
to interest rates.
Uh, chair, we'd be happy to
take. Well, I think, I don't
mind testing it.
And see how it works and, and I
scratched that already.
So it may produce an amendment
and put 2028. Let's see if it
functions, and, and if it
doesn't function, then we know
we got to do something, but I
don't want to come back and say,
oh, we never know you give MFA
more bonding money cause they've
consumed the whole PPRF and this
could happen.
Large utilities agree and we'd
be happy to do 2020. Wait, let
me, let me finish what I'm
saying.
I mean we could roll the bill
over till tomorrow if you want.
I mean, but just let me finish
that. I mean, that's my only
issue, right, is we, we need,
we're taking all the legislative
approval out so members need to
know that.
I mean, for us to prove the the
water projects or anything in
the expedites alone, I
understand that 2035 is a long
timeline, maybe we want to see
if it ought to work.
So my, I, I propose some
amendment to the committee that
on page 7, line 23, that uh
after June 30th, 2028 striking
2035.
Any comments on that. That just
shortens the date by 7 years,
gives them 3 years to get ramped
up and then let's look at that.
second question
we're gonna have a motion.
I made the motion for the
amendment questions on the
amendment, Senator ran I think
Chairman and I thank you for
your comments on.
On that portion of taking away.
Basically the authority and
responsibility from the
legislature.
I, I do like making it a shorter
time, but I don't like taking
away authority from the
legislature.
Um, we seem to do that
constantly up here.
And um we we just hand it all
off and we've seen that not work
that great.
Um
The, the
The bill that was passed on the
floor for projects.
didn't even really have projects
they were just a bunch of.
language for everything.
Which I thought was ridiculous.
Um, that's not us approving
anything. That's just us
abdicating our responsibility
and our authority.
And so, any objection to that
amendment?
no
So
Pam
I made the motion center for me
a second.
Friendly.
Mm
You second the amendment.
I that if we need to.
Good
We're back on the bill more
questions on the bill.
None can have emotion.
A motion for do passed by
Senator Demise and to get my
senator to hell, we call the
role.
Senator Brandt.
Yes. Senators, Senator Senator
Campos votes, yes, Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes,
Senator Lanier.
Yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes no.
Senator Tobiasson. Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator
Trujillo. Senator Trujillo votes
yes. Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Schendo, Senator Schendo votes
yes, Senator Munoz. Senator
Munoz votes, yes, we have a DuP
passed Senator Lanier,
you want to vote on this or no?
OK.
1 in the negative. Thank you.
So we are gonna go into
executive censure. We'll be
clearing the room, so I moved
that Senate Finance convening
executive session discussed
matters adjudicatorially to in
nature and legislative matters,
not presented in either house or
legislature. Can I have a second
on that motion. So a second from
Senator Shindo. Any objection
from the committee to go in the
executive session.
See that will you guys clear the
room except for members of the
Senate.
