58, um, is a bipartisan
bicameral piece of legislation
that establishes a long-term
stewardship fund for carbon
dioxide storage projects here in
New Mexico.
The fund collects a fee from
operators of no less than 10
cents per metric ton of CO2
injected throughout the entire
operating life of the project,
usually over 30 years.
The bill allows Emner to publish
a schedule of fees that meets
the projected needs of the fund.
The fees are deposited into the
fund for the sole purpose of
ensuring the long-term storage
security. The operator cannot
receive a certificate of
closure.
Uh, until at least 5 years after
injection has ceased, during
which there continues to be
rigorous monitoring and
reporting.
Uh, finally, based on an
amendment adopted um on the
house side, the legislation
allows the state to assume
stewardship, responsibility, but
does not relieve operators of
legal.
responsibility.
And, um, with that, Mr. Chair,
uh, we'll stand for questions. I
have two experts with me. Uh, if
you'd like for me to introduce
them.
Introduce them and then they
have anything to add. OK, um, so
I have Doctor Robert Balch from
New Mexico Tech.
And I have Ben Shelton, um,
deputy secretary at Energy
Minerals Natural Resources. We
don't the secretary today.
You don't get the secretary
today.
Anybody in the audience in
support.
There's 2 so far. Anybody on
Zoom and support.
Uh
When it gets OK.
Take the two and support.
Jerk.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
Sheriffrohorse of PNM. Carbon
capture and storage technology
is still quite a ways off into
the future. However, should CCS
become a reality and and with
this legislation, New Mexico
would be positioned to be able
to sequester carbon deep
underground. Also given the
complexity of the energy
transition, the increased
electricity demand statewide and
the all of the above approach
needed with respect to
generation. CCS could be a
viable option.
the future for managing carbon
emissions from CO2 generating
facilities should CCS become
viable and cost-effective. For
these reasons, PNM stands in
support of HB 458.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lipchutes
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor, uh, we stand in strong
support of this bill. We not
only believe that carbon capture
technology will lead to further
energy transition in the future,
but also to very good high
paying jobs, which we
desperately need in the state
and we do have quality, uh,
workers who are ready to take on
those positions. So for those
reasons, we urge your support.
Thank you. We don't have anybody
against it in the room, correct?
Uh, we'll take the one against
on Zoom.
against
OK, we'll take the 2 against his
first.
going to do.
Sophia, unmute yourself and.
One minute.
Yeah, thank you, uh, Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Sophia Jenkinso. I'm
here on behalf of Youth United
for Climate Crisis Action, uh,
we strongly urge you to oppose
HB 458. I want to emphasize the
dangers of false solutions like
carbon capture. In New Mexico,
carbon capture projects will be
disastrous for our communities,
as they will extend the life of
the oil and gas industry,
because CCS creates a market for
the further creation of
emissions. This technology is
counterproductive to
comprehensive climate action. If
coal plants UCCS to mitigate
their emissions. It would be as
if they're burning 39% more
natural grass, and 43% more
coal.
New Mexico is currently in a
drought, experiencing a higher
frequency and intensity in
wildfires, hotter days, um,
which exacerbates pressures on
already marginalized low-income
frontline youth and indigenous
communities.
This is not sustainable for our
future's environment or
community health. This expensive
and energy intensive technology
will not curb greenhouse gas
emissions, as it allows
polluters to make baseless
claims on sustainability and
working to meet emissions
reduction goals while still
having to rely on fossil fuels.
Additionally, there should have
been more tribal consultation
with these discussions, because
tribal communities will be
directly affected by CCS
operations, much of which would
likely occur in the four Corners
region. It's irresponsible to
invest our time.
time, money and resources into a
technology with such a high
cost, when there are other more
reliable options to address the
climate crisis and diversify our
economy and create jobs. Please
vote no on HB 458 as it poses
false solutions to the climate
crisis. Thank you.
Thank you, who's next?
Camilla.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Camilla
Feibelman with the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter. They want to
recognize some of the
improvements to this bill,
increasing the liability
transfer time to 5 years and
expanding the breadth of fees
that could be imposed per ton of
carbon. I think for our
organization, the larger
question is, would carbon
capture and sequestration lead
to more facilities coming on
online to emit carbon. So for
example at the San Juan
Generating Station, the
municipality and the federal
government spent a lot of money
to come to the conclusion that
the enchant proposal was not
technically or economically
feasible, and now that proposal
is sort of repackaging itself
for the 4 Corners plant, and if
we look at the proposals for
using carbon capture and
sequestration.
Especially in the four corners
area. There's quite a bit of
concern from communities about
the safety of the process, the
questions of liability if there
were to be a bankruptcy, um,
maybe seeing an an immediate
transfer to OCD um rather than
assuming that there would be a
bankruptcy. So I think there's a
lot of context to think about,
but ultimately we understand
that the reasoning behind
wanting to do this is one of
carbon.
reduction. We just question
whether it will result in the
carbon reductions we're hoping
for. Thank you so much to the
members of the Committee and the
sponsors.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members.
Steinborn.
You, Mr. Chair, Ma'am, Vice
Chair, welcome to, to this
committee, um, and welcome
everybody else. So I have a
question.
Um
I guess I'll just put my card on
the table a little bit, having
read the bill and the analysis,
I'm a little, I'm very concerned
about shifting a long term
liability to the state that this
bill would do.
And I realized that this bill
would charge a fee, collect the
fee, but it really doesn't, tell
me if I'm reading it wrong. It
doesn't like
Benchmark
Get off in financial insolvency
of some company in the future.
It just literally allows them to
walk away from it, walk away
from the responsibility and
shifted to the state of New
Mexico.
After 5 years. Is that right?
After
Yeah, please explain a little
more.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator,
yes, uh, at a minimum of 5
years, and it could be more just
depending on the department's
assessment, but after a minimum
of 5 years, that risk could go
to um or the, the, the liability
or the stewardship of the wild
go OCD the reason, um, that this
is the, this is sort of the
industry standard is because as
members of this committee are
well aware, we struggle with an
orphan well issue in the oil and
gas space. We want to get way
ahead of that issue here.
do not want orphan wells. We
don't want unmonitored
facilities, generally speaking,
the long term stewardship and
monitoring um.
It's not the same as oil and
gas. It's a lower, it tends to
be a lower impact.
You know, you're, you're
watching your soil monitors,
your, you're generally not uh.
Having to work on the same level
of intensity and that is because
you're not having to go back in.
German knows Senator.
Um, I would just add on to that
that.
There's a specific list of
things that.
become the stewardship
responsibility of the state
outside of that list that would
remain with the company forever.
And then uh if the fund were to
be incapable of paying for it,
that's one of the reasons that.
The uh liability could go back
to the operator so I think that
the state of New Mexico is
pretty well insulated from, from
your concern with this bill?
And uh the subsequent rule
making which will also so let me
ask this, thank you for those
answers. So if the goal is to
reduce carbon, and I can
appreciate that or
Well, first of all, how many of
these Chairman Senator Steinbor.
In New Mexico, if you want to
count acid gas disposal wells,
there's going to be around 25.
There are projects that are in
the pipeline for pure storage in
the Northwest and in the
southeast part of the state.
If you look at it in the US
there are 276 projects uh in the
commercial pipeline of which
132 are an advanced development
and 19 are operational, so this
is a
Mature technology, people are
doing this, they wouldn't do it.
Mr. Chair, um, and Senator
Steinborn, I also wanted to
acknowledge that, um, our
co-sponsors, former, uh, Senate
Finance Committee member, uh,
Senator Scher has joined.
moved the table.
So.
So, uh, you know, your expert
said.
Mr. Chair.
Representative that, you know,
they wouldn't do it if they
couldn't make money.
I'm just wondering, like, why do
we need this bill? Why, why
can't we as a regulatory matter
just require.
This, it's a great policy
solution for the day, why do we
need to
Why do we need to uh take on
this responsibility, this long
term liability to the state.
Uh, thank you, uh, Chairman and
Senator Steinborn. So right now
class 6 wells are permitted by
the EPA. And so that's going to
be either folks in Washington DC
or Dallas. Currently, the Trump
administration oversees that.
Um, those wells are getting
permitted under existing
regulations. If the state of New
Mexico applies for classic
primacy, which 4 other states
have received 9 other states are
in the process and 23 other uh
states are seeking, or planning
to seek primacy plus the Navajo
Nation. That gives New Mexico
the ability to
Add additional regulations onto
the classics primacy. So for
instance, um, the companion bill
to this to 458 is 457, and that
bill includes requirements for
tribal consultation and
community benefit agreements.
Those are things that the state
of New Mexico can do if we have
classics primacy. Thanks, I'll
keep listening. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
questions
I guess nobody has any
questions.
Just explain this scenario to
me, I, I just, I don't know
enough about it. We can get
carbon, we're gonna inject it,
give me the whole run through.
Senator Sheject carbon tell me
what you do with it next. I
know, uh, I have about a 12 hour
lecture I can give you on the
subject. We got all night. OK.
Um, I mean, essentially what
you're talking about is, is
capturing CO2 at a point source.
That could be directly from the
atmosphere in the case of direct
air capture equipment.
It could be attached to an
industrial facility like a
cement plant.
Uh, fertilizer plant ethanol
plant, uh, power plant, natural
gas peakers, things like that.
That's CO2 no longer goes to the
atmosphere or is taken from the
atmosphere.
It's compressed.
Moved to underground storage,
which is deep under the earth, a
minimum of 1 mile and up to 4
miles.
The
In a secure geologic formations
where
Um
One of the reasons people
contemplate this, uh,
particularly direct our capture
is we put 1 trillion tons of CO2
into the atmosphere already.
Since 1780 humans have.
And that's one of the only ways
we can roll back some of that
concentration.
And, and so what are these
formations? I know there's one
outside of the Gallup on the
Arizona line cause we store
propane in a cavern.
Yeah
Uh, uh, Chairman knows the the
formations are, like I said,
typically at least 5 6 7000 ft
down.
MB's deepest 20,000 ft in the
Permian Basin.
So they are primarily in New
Mexico. You were looking at.
The San Juan Basin, which is
around Farmington area.
Or the Permian Basin, which is
around uh.
Once it's there, it's just
there, right?
Once it's there, it, it's pretty
difficult to get it back out.
however the well you drill to
inject it, right? Do you seal
that well afterwards and then it
just remains there, why is why
is the monitoring still
happening.
The chairman knows the classic
well program is, is, uh,
formulated by the Underground
and direction is is part of the
underground injection control
program.
That's uh administered by the
EPA.
And advised by the Groundwater
Protection Council. So there's
two main things that you're
trying to do. You want to make
sure that it doesn't come back
out.
You want to make sure that the
CO2 does not get into
groundwater.
So the monitoring uh program is
very intensively designed.
For safety.
And his and the wells are
overdesigned.
It prevents
Um
And much possibility of any sort
of a leak, but the monitoring is
there.
Boost
During
After for 50 years.
Uh, to make sure that things are
staying where they're supposed
to stay, but physics and
chemistry will tell you that
after injection stops, the sites
become more secure over time
instead of less secure.
And and what happens if an
earthquake comes.
We, we have had him in Gallop.
So if you
Uh, Chairman knows, if you, if
you look at uh.
Storage formations, these are,
these are deep underground,
that's the same kind of places
where you, where you find oil
and gas in New Mexico.
So unless an earthquake directly
cuts.
Through the formation that is
ceiling the CO2 into that
formation.
Uh, you would not have any sort
of a, a release, but typically
when you're doing the geologic
characterization for these
sites, you're looking for places
where you have a storage.
A direct seal.
And then above that you have
secondary storage and secondary
seals and sometimes tertiary.
Storage and seals above that, so
there's places for the CO2 to go
where it cannot go.
Into groundwater.
So correct closing, uh,
monitoring of those closed
wells, making sure there's no
leakage around the site.
Long term, that's how you
insure.
Safety for over long periods of
time.
And what happened?
The chairman knows under this
bill, uh, the leakage if the
operator is still operating the
site, uh, the most likely time
for a leak to occur is during
operation. That's when you could
have a wellhead failure or
something like that.
Uh, they would take care of
that.
If it were to occur or if there
was a leakage detected
afterwards, uh, the after
liability or stewardship had
been transferred to the state of
New Mexico.
That fund would oversee that.
And to the extent that it could
afford to, if it couldn't afford
to, it'd still go back to the
operator.
But what you do is you, you have
techniques that have been
developed in oil and gas
industry for.
For sealing off formations for
uh closing wells, making sure
that these things don't leak to
other horizons. And how does it
go back to the operator when it
releases the operator.
Once it ceases, long term
monitoring.
So easy
or I have to close
all stewardship and legal
responsibilities for for the
sexistration facility including.
Stored carbon shall transferred
to the state, so I'll just give
you an example so I can
comprehend it in my brain.
There's a piece of state land in
the middle of the reservation
and they find a cavern there.
And they wanted to see
questioned on that state land.
It starts to leak.
Operators already closed down
and shut down and the bill says.
The
The Transfer ship
I mean, their penis to be, but
what is, what does it cost when,
when these, is it whenever went
bad in the US, I guess, let me
start there.
And what was the, um
In the amendments in the House,
we did remove, um, the words all
legal. So the only thing that's
transferring to the state is the
primarily the monitoring, but
I'll ask, um, Doctor Balch to
talk a little bit more about the
other.
its.
I don't have that amendment in
the book.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. The
amendment was done in
Mm
And then there was a 2nd
Amendment in the House
appropriations.
I only have the house to build
tracks to that.
The bill I have in the book does
not track the.
I have an amendment
and I have that
the amendment, um, in-house
energy environment, um, and it's
that amendment, um, the first
one that um.
On it removed um the word legal.
Um, I can provide, I only have
the house appropriations
Amendment 707.2.
I don't have that in the bills,
so I believe in that amendment,
so.
The Germans to answer the rest
of your question.
The only thing that gets
transferred is stewardship
responsibility, and that's for a
specific list of things. So
anything outside of that list.
And any legal responsibilities
could still fall back on the
operator.
What would fall back.
The Germans on your example of 5
or 6 years later.
There's a leak, uh, depends on
where that leak is going to most
likely place a leak we go to is
into one of those secondary
storage horizons.
At that point you would go in
and you would, you would, um.
Fix the well
Even if that meant drilling it
out again and then
cementing those in a week.
So that that cost would be borne
by.
The operator during operation or
by the.
The conservation fund, if it, if
that stewardship responsibility
had been passed.
OK.
I'm just trying to track the.
Um
So 50 years later, right? I
mean,
Uranium story rings true every
single day, right?
So 50 years later, right?
There's no bonding on this and
see that unless it's.
Fired in some other
committee there is a financial
assurances that, um, oh, sorry,
that's in.
OK.
But in 457 doesn't make it then.
Chair and members, then OCD and
MRD would do it through the,
through rule really trust them
to do it through rulemaking.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes.
So if there is a leak and it's
just say it's near a house or
something.
And how, how seriously.
Lake town outside of Gallup,
right?
How far do you have to evacuate
the area if there is a leak.
Mr. Chair
A, it's CO2, which is coming out
of your mouth right now.
It's not gonna blow up.
You have to evacuate anything.
It's CO2 coming out of your
mouth. Same thing.
So the whole idea here is when
you stick it.
5000 ft or more down.
And we know what's down there.
Uh, science will tell us what's
down there, so we know where the
oil is, we know where the gas
is, we know where the water is.
We know where impermeable.
Uh, strata is. So you go past
the imperial strata and you put
it down in that. A couple of
things happened. First of all,
over time, the CO2 actually
turned solid down there when it
uh when it's doing other things.
So the chances of it coming out
get less and less over time.
So
So the whole idea of a leak, I
think is being overstated here.
So it does leak.
Let's assume it does. So it
comes out.
Um
The, once the, once the well is
drilled and it goes all the way
down there and the well is then
capped and sealed, and filled
with concrete.
And it's 5000 ft down. That's a
lot of concrete for it to seep
through.
But let's say it seeps through
over 50 years.
The answer is you drill through
that concrete.
And then you re-plug the well.
So that's how it happens. But
even if it comes out of that
well,
It's CO2.
And granted, you might think
that I spew out more CO2 than is
healthy.
But we all breathe.
And so it's not gonna blow up.
That's the key. There's no
evacuation necessary.
Uranium obviously has other
issues, OK? Uranium causes
cancer.
Uh, especially when it's yellow
cake and you're tapping it off
your shirt when you come home
from hand digging it in the
mine.
Well, this is, this is captured
from wherever it's captured, can
be direct air captured,
literally a giant vacuum
cleaner.
You can suck it out of the sky
and stick it down in the earth.
Uh, but it won't go in the earth
where there's not an impermeable
cap.
So you're not going to stick it
somewhere that it won't stay.
And that's why we got, it's
under OCD so, you know, they
already know what's down there.
And so I, I, I think that the
concern about a, a blowout is
not.
It's not.
How long does it take to turn to
a solid?
Germans.
What happens when you put CO2
into a deep formation. Usually
there's very salty water there,
saline water.
Uh, sometimes 3 to 5 times
saltier than the oceans. When
you put CO2 into salty water,
uh.
very quickly within a few days
and and weeks.
About a third of that CO2
becomes absorbed.
That's how we make carbonated
water and how we carbonate beer
and things like that.
We put the CO2 into that water.
So at that point, that's that's
CO2 unless that water also moves
with it.
Can't come back out somewhere
else. It becomes bound.
Gets stuck in a mobile 4 spaces
over decades.
You see mineralization occur and
by 1000 years or so, around a
third of the CO2 is turned into
rocks. So it doesn't happen
necessarily overnight.
The main thing to think about
with CO2 and pressure though is
it's not like saltwater disposal
where you're.
You're using water, which is
like a hammer.
And that can push pressure way
out past the well bo.
COT is compressible.
Sorry.
Mm, OK.
Um, CO2 is compressible.
What we see in our modeling,
what we see in our observations
from projects that we've already
performed.
And New Mexico Tech is that.
The CO2 near the well bore can
pressure up a little bit.
But once you get more than a few
100 m away from the well bore,
you only see a very small change
in pressure.
So if you're pushing the CO2
down the well here.
were to come out somewhere else.
There has to be an equal amount
of force in the opposite
direction. You would have to
actively try and produce the CO2
to get it to come back out. It's
very difficult to move in the
reservoir.
And, and where has this done
been done successfully.
It's, uh, chairman knows has
been done successfully here in
New Mexico.
Uh it's being done right now
through, uh, acid gas disposal
wells in the Permian, there's
about 25 of those in the state.
CO2 gets uh.
Put down the hole along with
HTS.
Um, those wells have been
operating for more than a dozen
years, a lot of them.
It also has happened through
pilot projects over the last 20
years or so.
one at Pump Canyon where we, we,
uh, tested putting CO2 into a
depleted coal seams and it's
also been done, uh.
150 in soil recovery sites
around the country and the the
19 uh running projects.
In the US right now as well.
And
Sorry, uh, Mr. Chair and
members, I would also mention
that, um, they've been doing,
um, carbon storage in the North
Sea, uh, in Europe for, uh, over
50 years.
And why 10 cents per metric ton.
She knows I'm, I'm not an eco
economist, but I was asked to
figure out what a good baseline
number would be.
I use the simple compound
interest calculator, uh.
Based on uh my assumption that
we would, we would get up to
about 10 million tons per year
of storage happening
continuously in the state.
Uh, over
A period of
Of 35 years, so the.
The operational period plus 5
years post before it became.
Uh
Uh, stewardship transfer that
that 35 years would get you
about $300 million worth of.
Of stewardship fund at 5 or 6%
interest rate.
Also, the uh the bill does allow
the OCD to up that if the
numbers aren't coming in the way
they.
to.
And, uh, Mr. Chair and members,
the based on the fees that other
states have imposed, um, this
would be right in line. In fact,
uh, the majority of the fees are
7, between 5 and 10 cents.
OK.
Mullet in her Schindle.
So I can go get over this
allergy that I'm having.
Sendal cleanser.
Senator Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, good afternoon. Thank you
guys for coming in. Um.
Why do we want?
CO2.
But what, what does CO2 do that
we need to collect it?
So, um,
Mr. Chair and Senator Lanier as,
uh, we discussed, um,
In terms of removing, um, if
you, if.
If we want to stay within, uh,
the recommended 1 point global
warming, and that's, uh, an
objective, then we need to
remove carbon dioxide from the
air, no matter what, because
we've already exceeded the
limit.
Um, but then if you want to
electrify um and reduce the
amount of carbon that's being
put into the atmosphere, turning
to renewable energy or um
A uh chemical manufacturer or
anything like that. And, and
then store it somewhere.
Um, people don't drink enough,
um.
Carbonated beverages, there
aren't enough trees, um, to do
this with just sort of those,
those other solutions, and so
that's why, um, CO2 storage is
Acknowledged as part of the
solution, uh, from all. All
right. Thank you. And Mr. Chair,
I, I might disagree with you on
um
Thus drinking enough
carbonation.
We sure seem to drink a lot of
it in Santa Fe.
Anyway, um, so, so what we're
really doing is we're helping
the environment here.
Is, is that what I'm
understanding?
Um
Mr. Chair, um, Senator, yes. So,
you know, for folks who really
want to focus on, um, solar or
wind, um, a couple of, um,
statistics for folks, um.
So first of all, um, industrial
decarbonization. So our cement
manufacturers, are steel
manufacturers glass, all of
those um industries actually
emit in the United States about
30% of the greenhouse gas
emissions. So in order to build
or to make and all of the things
that we rely on and need for um
an energy transition, um, those
processes emit carbon dioxide.
And so we need to be capturing
those.
As we trans
Uh, Germany's, uh, Senator
Nolan.
When you're
Um, I'm, I'm very pragmatic
about this.
Mhm
I'm a
I'm a geophysicist and I have
physics in my background, so I,
I look at numbers and I try to
add things up.
Uh, and, uh, the world, uh,
community that looks at climate
modeling says the same thing, we
need about 6 to 8 billion tons
of CO2 in the ground just to
meet.
scored goals, and that's a goal
that our country would send to.
Uh, the other thing that is
important, I think, is
sustainability of our oil and
gas industry.
This does make the industry more
sustainable. It can clean up its
mess just like we clean up.
Dirty salt water
We don't put HTS in the
atmosphere.
Try not to floor gas, things
like that.
Uh, so to me it's a twofold
thing. It's a.
Economic opportunity for the
state that that has a uh
environmental benefit for the
world.
OK, thank you. And Mr. Chair, so
If we can't switch over to the
economic part of it because I
don't want to get too deep into
the.
Can we take the 02 out and use
it and all that cause.
We all kind of know where we're
going there.
But economically.
Is this gonna be a plus for New
Mexico.
Or
Is it gonna cost us?
So
From our perspective as, as a
landowner, start there.
You own everything that you've
not sold. So if you've sold the
mineral rights, fine, but
everything else from the surface
to the core of the earth, the
landowner owns.
And if there's a place there,
then the landowner will get paid
for that just as they get paid
if the oil is coming out.
So yes, it's beneficial to the
landowner.
But it's also a brand new, if we
do this, a large scale industry.
We've got companies in San Juan
County that are looking for
doing this right now. This is an
industry for something and it's
probably an industry for other
well.
Um, so I think that.
Uh, Navajo Nation is looking at
Uh, creating a urea plant right
now, which is fertilizer.
Navajo Nation is gonna save $4
million a year in fertilizer.
If they can do this. They're
allowed to do this.
And, but it creates CO2 in the,
in, in the process of making
urea.
So in the case of this, just,
just nappy, just now. They
create the fertilizer, they save
money, they then sell that
fertilizer to everybody west.
So California, Utah, Colorado,
all those places that have large
ag operations.
Navajo Nation will then be
selling them the fertilizer that
they've created, but you have to
put the CO2 somewhere to get in
these formations that we already
know about. So from just a nappy
perspective, it is a whole brand
new industry for San Juan
County.
It has nothing to do with
driving your car, right?
Thank, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, leader,
because that is, that is the
point I'm trying to make.
is it is a whole new economic
development for our area as it
is down south and
You know, I want to make sure
that we separate it from oil and
gas because this would be a
separate thing. And now that
we've lost.
Um, power plants, the coal mine,
all of, all of that stuff. Now
we're moving a direction to
where we can.
Um
Backfill some of those jobs in
that in that industry. And so
the collection, the collection
itself is going to create
Uh, a lot of jobs.
Weary had the drilling rigs and
things there, so economically,
I, I think it's a.
A huge
Um
Development for San Juan County
and, and that is why I wanted to
put my name on this bill and
make sure that uh
We get that point across, so.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
pictures.
Let me ask one question.
Cause I think I figured out the
money.
Once they capture the carbon,
they're selling the tax carbon
credits to another company, are
they also receiving federal
credits.
Uh, Germany knows there's two
ways you can monetize CO2
storage right now.
Uh, the first is 45Q tax credits
under the federal government.
Uh, those are up to like $80 a
ton if you capture from an
industrial source.
1
$65 time you do it from director
capture.
But if you talk to public
utilities, uh, I have this data
from Arizona Public Service.
Mm
They, they need gas switching
power plants.
To be able to meet their their
um renewable energy swings.
It can solve all the rest of the
renewables and their, and their
nuclear power plant.
But the peaker plants, you can't
really capture CO2 on those.
They told me that they can, they
can spend $1000 per ton.
The store see too through direct
air capture, the offset those
emissions and break even.
Right now airlines like
Lufthansa and others around the
world are buying storage credits
from DAC companies pre-buying
them for exactly the same
purpose, paying up to like $1000
1100 dollars per ton.
So it's a it's a way to.
Make money from airplanes flying
in Europe, in New Mexico.
But they're selling them $1100 a
ton and we're getting 10.
Uh, I mean, no, no, no, I could
do the math of the tax credit,
right? I mean, this is like the
hydrogen deal, give me $500
million in hydrogen tax savings
and I get 7 billion or 3 billion
in returning money and tax
credits on investment. I mean,
the money is easy for me to
track. I just wanted to see
where the money was going, so I
mean, and they're selling those.
So Germany knows that I probably
answered the wrong question
there.
Um, the 10 cents is just to
build up the stewardship fund.
The the real money comes to the
landowners that Senator Sheer
mentioned, uh, you know, cattle
growers, state land, things like
that that are that are going to
jobs but.
Those people are going to get a
royalty share of the CO2 that's
put on the ground, and someone's
getting paid $1000 a ton,
they're gonna get there 1015,
20%.
That's gonna be a direct benefit
to the landowner.
It's also going to contribute to
the economy in New Mexico.
So how much is the royalty rate
on carbon sequestration at the
state lands I think this has to
be resolved here before they'll
settle on that, but uh.
They will come up with a number.
OK, what's Senator Trill
question.
I do still kind of trying to
figure this.
So there would be potentially a
direct air capture facility.
And that facility would
only be
Built where an old or would we
be drilling?
Where that facility is.
Terbinos, uh, Senator Trujillo.
When we, when we picked these
sites, we do very detailed
geologic studies.
So what you would do for
director of capture is you would
cite it near a place that you've
determined is a good place to
store. You're not repurposing
old wells, you're drilling brand
new wells, these brand new wells
are.
are very
heavily overdesigned to be
protective of groundwater and to
prevent.
Future problems. So we're
talking layers of stainless
steel pipe.
And in between those layers of
sta in the pipe you have.
Yeah, corrosion resistance
cement and things like that, so.
You're starting brand new, you,
you picked the site based on
where the.
Where you can store
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and,
and thank you intriguing, um, a
little confusing and way above
my uh my, my brain around this.
So,
How much carbon goes down.
And how long are we pumping it
down and then, and then.
She knows, uh, Senator Trujillo.
Uh, it's gonna vary depending
upon the size of the capture
facility, but an individual well
can take about 1.2 million tons
per year.
To put that in comparison, the 4
quarters power plant puts out 10
million tons.
You would need 1010 wells to.
if you were so inclined to do.
To do that.
Uh
You, you are putting it on
underground in a dense phase,
you're taking the, the CO2 and
compressing it all the way to
where it's a liquid.
And then you would be typically
operating these wells for as
much as 30 years. That's what I
was, OK, so we're, we're
drilling down there.
We're, we're building this
direct capture facility.
And that's jobs, I'm assuming,
um, what I hear Senator shared
talking to me and thank you,
Senator, for bringing this to
you.
Um
So this would be happening for
about 30 years.
Before it got sealed off and the
facility is no longer.
Germanos, uh, Senator Trujillo,
I kind of on average I'm basing
that off of acid gas disposal
permits that the OCD is already
giving to operators, a midstream
companies in the southeast part
of the state.
Um
But there's some caps on that.
So if you're injecting and
suddenly it becomes harder to
push the CO2 down.
Yourring activity has gone down,
you may.
have to reduce your injection
rate, you may have to close the
well early. There's a problem
with the well, we'd have to
close it early.
But most people that are doing
these kind of big long term
infrastructure projects are,
they're looking at 25, 30 years.
And so what's like the dice are
we talking about?
bigger than this room, or are we
talking about the size Senator
Tillo, the well itself, uh, at
the surface.
It's gonna be around
This big, but with layers and
layers of pipe and cement in
between.
At the bottom, you're probably
talking about 7 inches in
diameter.
The area of the CO2 in the in
the formation maybe is what
you're asking about.
Most typically that's modeled to
be around a quarter of a mile.
half of a mile away from that
center point.
So that whole area at the
surface.
Is where you're gonna see that
that uh.
That poor right, uh, royalty
apply not just to the exact
place where you're injecting,
but everybody that.
is above where the plume could
go during 30 years. Got you. OK,
Mr. Chairman.
Um, representative senator, so.
I'm assuming that a direct air
capture facility is pretty
costly to build.
Um, could another
Py be somewhere close, or is it?
One and that's all that could be
used for because I'm, I'm
hearing you say that now it's
like a quarter of a mile
underground, which means you're
probably not gonna drill another
Germany knows, uh.
Yeah, so
You're gonna space these
projects so that they don't
interfere with one another.
But an individual well can take
CO2 for more than one source. So
you may have a director capture
facility. You might have a
A fertilizer plant and they
could all all put the CO2 into
the same wild.
Uh, up to, up to its capacity.
But yes, there's, there's.
You, you want to keep them far
enough apart but they don't
start to impact each other.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman
Representative, so.
What?
Are we talking about does it
make cold? Does it, what, what
does it make? You said it turns
into rock. What kind of rock
Jeremy knows uh
unfortunately not diamonds. uh,
it makes carbonate rocks so uh
like limestone or or calcite
like Khaliche that kind those
kind of rocks. OK, all right.
And then my last question is,
um, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative, I heard you say
you trust Emner.
To do the role process, I do
right now too.
But I don't know what's
happening in 2 years and I don't
know what's happening in 10
years.
And so how can I be assured that
the language in this act.
is going to make sure that it's
still, I'm, I'm not a fan of
rules explain how the process is
done, how anyway. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
That's a really great question.
And I think one of the reasons
that it is imperative that we
pass 458 and 457 this year, um.
As we, as I mentioned, right
now, it's the federal EPA that
oversees the permitting and
regulation by putting in
statute, some of the additional
components that we want here in
New Mexico.
We are telling not only OCD and
M nerd, what we want to be in
the rules.
Everything that currently is in
rule and regulation at the
federal level. We have to do.
But we can do more. And so by
putting it in statute, what we
want, those additional layers of
um community engagement, um,
That, that's our protection, and
that's why we want to do it now,
um, because we'd like to have
primacy, um.
It's more effective.
Emner knows our communities
better than the folks in Dallas
and.
German knows, uh, Senator
Trujillo.
Actually it's not on the
Conservation commission for 8
years.
Uh, so I have a very
Close association with what a
rulemaking looks like from the
inside.
Um
The, the good thing about that
process is that it lets every
party come in.
And share their opinion and
their.
experts
And then the panels which are
built up of hopefully experts
will then make.
Make the right rules and they
can be adjusted. So the real
strength is as Representative
Dixon said is that up front you
can set some boxes, bounding
boxes around the rule that OCD
has to use in their rulemaking,
and that's, that's very useful
for rulemaking process.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative, so the first
bill I passed when I became a
representative was to update the
State Rules Act.
My career has been in
rulemaking, so.
I'm, I'm familiar with it, but I
also know that it can be
skewered.
Um, and it just depends upon
who's at the helm. Um, so,
I, I, I guess my one last
comment and I'm not looking for
an answer for this, but it seems
to me like we may be.
Resolving two issues. One is
that we've got too much CO2, and
I did look up how many trees it
would take, cause that was my
thought is why aren't we just
planting trees?
Uh, 1.2 to 2.2 trillion trees is
what we have to do.
We don't have space for that
here, so, um, I, I don't think
it's, I, I think it's still part
of the solution.
Um, is to plant vegetation if we
can figure out the water issue,
but nonetheless, we're kind of
Looking to reduce CO2.
And we're looking to create
jobs. So for that, I, I think
I'm probably gonna.
So, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
I'm concerned about, well, not
concerned, I heard you mention
when Senator Lanier mentioned,
Mr. Chair and sponsors that um
we have displaced people still
from the coal plant that was
shut down in San Juan. So is
there a focus on rehiring those
individuals, making sure they're
trained.
have whatever certification they
need and will those displaced
workers be prioritized as
workers on these projects.
Um
Germany, you know, uh, Senator
Tyson.
One of the things that was
rolled back from from the uh
federal.
Version of this.
I, I think all Justice 40, but
also anything that had to do
with community benefit plans or
or community benefit analysis.
So
part of what we've been able to
do here is add that back in.
Make sure uh that
That when you are building a
project in or near a community
that you address ways that the
project can be a benefit to
those community and and jobs and
job training San Juan College,
for example, uh.
Is standing ready in in
Farmington right now to train
workers that would come into Mr.
Chair and thank you for that
explanation, but could you be
more specific? cause I'd like to
know that the displaced workers
from the coal-fired plant that
was closed, get their
applications and credentials are
put at the top of the list.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. And that's exactly what
we can do in rules. Um, and we
need primacy to do that. So
that's something absolutely. OK,
thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, uh.
Don't confuse me on Monday,
center Brent.
Uh, any other questions from
committee members?
It confused, I mean.
What would you pass.
have a motion for due past. We
have a second bite co-sponsor
Lanier, which is illegal.
Mhm.
It's not really. I'm just saying
that.
Uh,
just one real quick thing uh.
Next year, I'm gonna use this as
a revenue stream.
Diversify our economy and say
you're if you're gonna get that
amount of money, we're gonna
take more than 10 cents.
So be prepared with.
Germany knows, give it a few
years to
give it a few years to develop,
maybe not.
next year.
I think it will be.
I think it will be a potential
resource.
OK, diversify our economy, we
call the role.
Senator Brown, he's gonna vote
next Monday.
Yes,
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalezia, Senator
Linier, Senator Linier votes
yes, Senator Padilla. Senator
Padilla votes yes, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes No,
Senator Tobiasson
Tobias and Bosas, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo Bosa, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes yes.
Senator Shando.
Senator Sindo votes yes.
Senator Brown, yes.
Senator Brant votes yes. Senator
Munoz.
Yes. Senator Munoz votes, yes,
you have a do pass 10 in the
affirmative, 1 in the negative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
CO2 tonight, Senator.
Great.
Uh, let's see, 352 is.
How long is this gonna take?
We're gonna close all the courts
so we can produce the
executive's budget before the
before we have to.
house build too.
shaking your head yes. Well, we
can do that real quick.
Right.
Mr. Chair, House Bill 352 would
restructure various magistrate
courts in the state by closing,
relocating, or modifying
operations in several judicial
districts.
This legislation contains no
appropriations, but what this
bill does, it's focused on
reorganizing the judicial
infrastructure in New Mexico to
improve the use of resources and
to access justice. It will not
impact any of the magistrate
judges.
Eliminating the non-operational
courts in Poake, the Rue, and
Estancia has no impact on the
public or the judiciary.
Closing underutilized locations
will directly reduce costs that
can be used on other efforts
aimed at improving access to
justice.
These efforts can include
justice stations, placement, and
expand hours of operation.
Relocating courts to more
centralized locations across the
state, eliminates confusion
among the public and pools
resources for greater
efficiency.
hatch and gel often have only
one employee working alone.
This is a security concern for
those employees and the public.
Mr. Chairman, additionally, if
the single employee is ill,
attends training or takes
vacation. These locations will
either be closed to the public
or the district will have to
send an employee from another
location.
Currently in my district and
Senator Schindler's district,
the magistrate court is in
Chama.
For example, it's dilapidated,
unsafe portable building,
creating health and safety
issues, statute does not permit
a magistrate court to be located
under such conditions. This
magistrate court, Mr. Chairman,
would be moved to nearby
District Court building where
health and safety standards are
excellent and alongside me to
answer any questions is Cynthia
Pacheco, the director of court
operations andyle Restruck, the
AOC director.
Thank you. Anybody in the
audience and support?
Anybody in opposition Zoom.
Questions from committee
members, Senator Steinborn.
The chair Senator, sir, so, um.
I know that Sedonia County is.
seeks to close the magistrate
actually in my district in
Hatch.
And so that's obviously a
concern for me.
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinborn,
the hatch court handled 22 cases
in FY 24. All those were traffic
cases, so no person physically
went to the building. Those
cases were all handled by video.
Um, remotely, and actually the
judge didn't even go to the
courthouse for those hearings.
The judge handled those remotely
as well. Um, there is a
municipal court, of course, in
Hatch as well that is unaffected
by this legislation. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, Senator. So, um,
a lot of cases are being
handled.
Through video
Right now and
Is that what you tell me?
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinburn,
that's correct. Um, unless the
defendant requests an in-person
hearing all of our traffic cases
are held, um,
Uh, by video or phone and that
helps both the defendant who
could be anywhere in the state
and also law enforcement, they
don't have to come to the
courthouse, they can just pull
over 5 minutes to the hearing,
be back on the road.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me ask
one more question. Are there any
magistrates around the state
that are opposed to this
legislation?
And you made a good case for
Hatch, but
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinberg, no.
OK, thank you.
I don't see any other questions.
So reducing these costs and
doing video.
Video should reduce the cost to
the courts we can start to look,
I want to see what those numbers
look like next year. All the
court cases I have been on are
now online or through phones, so
reducing the cost reduces send
employees. That was your words,
not mine, Carl, Mr. Chair, by
closing hatch and jaw, we will
save $12,240 per year.
Every penny counts absolutely,
sir.
That's two people's payroll in
the state maybe at the bottom
end, so.
Senator
A motion for due pass. I was
seconded by Senator Woods.
Color
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator, Senator
Campos votes, yes, Senator
Gonzalez. Senator Gonzalez
votesia, Senator Linier. Senator
Linier votes yes, Senator
Padilla. Senator Padilla Boia,
Senator Steinborn, Senator
Steinborn votes yes. Senator
Tobiasson, yes, Senator
Tobiasol, Senator Trujillo.
Center Trujillo Botsia, Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes. Senator
Schino, Senator Schendo votes
yes. Senator Munoz. Yes,
yes, you have a 11 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Representing doubt how long
you're bill is gonna take.
No should be, how long is this
gonna take?
Mhm
Can kill it in two or we can.
and in 5. Thank you, thank you,
Senator. Thank you, members of
the committee. Um, this bill
adds the purpose of the fund.
Uh, to the Sunshine Portal. So
right now, the fund is listed in
the balance is listed, but the
the purpose of the fund is not
listed.
Anybody not in support.
Anybody in opposition Zoom.
Motion for do pass by center
woods, 2 by center Treil.
All the room.
Senator Brent, Senator Brant
votes yes. Senator Compos.
Senator Camposia, Senator
Gonzalez, Senator Gonzalezia,
Senator Linnier, Senator Lanier
votes, Senator Padilla, Senator
Padilla votes yes, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborne Botia,
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes, yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Sindo Senator
Shendo votes yes.
Senator Tobiasson, yes.
Senator Munoz. Yes.
The sports, yes, we have a Du
pass 11 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. I don't know what
she taught those house members
when they came to the Senate,
but representative has been
raising taxes like crazy over
here. 00
yeah.
enlightening didn't strike, and
she didn't die when they raised
taxes, nothing really happened.
People got rescued from floods
when we did that.
Well, I like reducing the number
of quarts, but I, how many, how
often are you in there, senator?
You said you were in the courts
a lot.
Those are evictions.
I, I have a lead foot, so.
Motion to reconsider.
That's one way to put it in
Woods House Bill 63, we're gonna
jump to that. We're
I've never, I've never heard
that put in committee
after he passed the bill that
way. That that might be the
quote of the day, I hope they're
listening.
In their woods crow the day, get
the hell out of here.
Representative Romeros, Senator
Wood's gonna tell you the same
thing.
Uh, let's hope not, Mr.
Chairman.
All right, so how's Bill 63
would, is the culmination of two
years' work by the legislative
Education Study Committee, the
Legislative Finance Committee,
um, and it would change the
state equalization guarantee. So
for the at-risk index that would
change it to the mechanism of
the family income index, um,
which is a more accurate way to
measure um students living in
poverty.
Um, and it would also include an
at or sorry, English learner's
factor into the state
equalization guarantee for um
English learners, so.
Um, I think there's an amendment
for this, Mr. Chairman, based on
the current budget. We need to
check because don't we need to
mend the money to match the
budget well the need to strike
the money on.
Check with Adrian real quick. Do
we need to strike. This is one
strikes the appropriation. We
just
John, you know, Mr. Chair, you
probably drafted it, yeah, the,
the amendment should should be
striking the House
Appropriations Amendment that
shifted this, the factors down
to match what was in the HAFC 3
and 4. That's right. So it
strikes those amendments so it
takes it back to the original
version of the bill. It keeps
the HAFC amendments that, that
struck out the appropriation,
and because that money is in the
budget. The amendment you have
is 912.1. That's right. OK. We
have an amendment.
You John
I have a motion to
Move them in for discussion
purposes, motioned by Senator
Tindo, second by Senator Hill.
Uh, John just explained the
amendment and strikes the House
amendments on 13 and 4.
Questions on the amendment.
You can pass this amendment out
for them.
Questions on the amendment.
Me none can have a motion to
adopt the amendment.
I motion by Senator Gonzalez, 2
by Senator Tobiasson.
Motions adopted were back on the
bill, questions from committee
members on the bill.
This is fixing the 6th through
9th grade.
SEG appointment, correct?
And emotion, huh.
motion by Senator Steinborn, 2
by Senator Padilla.
Cholera.
Senator Brent?
Senators Senator Senator
Gonzalez, Senator Gonzalezia,
Senator Lanier,
Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator
Padilla, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasson. Senator
Tobiassonboa, Senator Truil.
Senator Trujillo votes yes
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes, Senator Shinodosia
Senator Munoz Senators 10 to 0.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm just gonna repeat senator
110.
I'm gonna repeat, Senator
Woods's comments.
Um, representatives are more or
less jump to you that I've seen
represent Olympics in there,
representing the Morris, take a
seat. Yeah, get, get your, get
the hell in the chair.
And then we're gonna tell you
when to get out of the chair.
I don't know about your expert
witness. How long is this bill
going to take? About 2 minutes.
We're timing you, mister, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
before.
In front of you, you have House
Bill 154.
It relates to Raffles exempting
from the New Mexico Bingo and
Raffle Raffles for fundraising
purposes held by a tax-exempt
service, educational, athletic,
or extracurricular.
Organizations, the primarily
serve youth who are 18 years of
age and younger.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee with that we stand for
questions.
And you want to introduce your
expert witness. My, my expert
witness, I'll let him introduce
himself that way I don't mess it
up.
Good evening, Mr. Chair members.
I'm Pat Garrett. I'm chairman
for the Gaming Control. We also
have Michelle Pedro online. I
hope to answer any other
questions you may need as well
in opposition, anybody in
support?
Zoom
I
Sorry, did you say Pat Garrett?
Thank you.
And
wait, wait, wait, I guess, if
you, uh,
the senator, I'm also a retired
state police officer, so career
lawman in New Mexico.
That's what I thought you said.
Tell me why.
Give me the reason why we need
to do this, Mr. Chairman, again
on the bill, we're on the bill,
not on your name.
Why you need to approve this?
Yeah, why? Tell me why we should
pass this bill. Essentially what
this does is it protects youth
organizations, uh, it allows
them to have fundraisers and
raffles because if my my current
state statute there not
complying with law and and we
don't want to send our
enforcement division down to
your local high school because
they're having a raffle to try
to earn money for the uniforms
and stuff like that. I mean,
that's basically in a nutshell.
about the nuns.
They're exempt from this, sir.
And the Catholic Church.
Mr. Chairman, that's why they
have their bingos.
So now we can have high school
bingo.
are some differences Raffles,
sir.
Senator Campos, you look like
you raffles.
You can do high school bingo
with this. It says bingo and
raffle.
You not know the bill, Mr.
Chairman and members, the, the
bingos are totally separate,
separate and unrelated issue,
we'd have to tackle that at a
different time.
Why would it say bingo and
raffle then?
That's how it's titled in the
Act, Mr. Chairman.
OK, in compos.
OK.
You have a do pass motion from
Senator Woods.
Second by center Tobiasson.
Oops, I'm sorry. Well.
Mr. Chair, Representative,
welcome and, uh, Mr. Garrett. So
why uh
Yeah
But why was rifles not included
in, you know, what do you think
the intent was?
The original law here that we're
trying to change.
Mr. Chairman, members senator,
it is my belief slash opinion
that when once gaming was
legalized in the state of Mexico
in the late 90s, they just kind
of scrambled to put things
together, kind of over regulated
things, kept things real real
tight and real close. And it's
just something that's been on
the books forever that we'd like
to change.
Are there other are there other
things that we don't allow.
Be raffled off.
I think I totally understand
your question, sir. Well, the,
the bell, we're including rifles
or we're taking out that
exemption or are there other
things that are in that
category, and we're not
including rifles, raffles. I, I
understand. It's, it, it
involves that I read this wrong?
Am I that tired?
I guess I am.
That's hilarious. Well, and then
I'm gonna shut up right then,
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Although, although Mr. Chairman,
I was at a raffle
Mr. Chairman and Senator Stein
Steinbrenner's uh uh defense,
uh, when I was at a raffle one
time, they were raffling off a
rifle.
You must be over 18 to win.
OK, we only do pass motion.
She's calling the row.
Let me just help you out.
Everybody's in the room, anybody
objecting.
11 to 0, Senator Woods sing your
famous line.
Mr. Chairman, members, thank you
very much.
Representative Bente, you're
next, then we're gonna get to.
What time is it?
55.
Representment, how long is your
bill gonna take before Senator
Woods gets impatient and tells
you something, do a minute and a
half, OK.
All right. How's Bill 189 allows
the taxation and revenue
Department to share certain tax
data with the Legislative
Finance Committee for use in
their evaluations were used then
in FIRs that we all receive and
utilize. Then, Mr. Chairman, I
stand for questions.
Thank you
Kayla, you wanna add anything,
anybody in support, anybody in
opposition Zoom.
Seeing none
Questions from committee
members.
A motion for due pass by Senator
Steinborn, seconded by Senator
Padilla.
Any objection to the new pass
motion, we'll have 11 to 0 roll
call.
70 center would say your famous
words.
45 seconds. Thank you all.
Representative Garrett.
We're gonna do
Representative Garrett, you have
2 bills here.
And then we're gonna do the
strategic water supply and then
it's gonna be time to go.
Representative Garrett, we're
gonna do 167 as amended first.
We do have some amendments for
167.
Are you on this bill to Senator
Tobiasson OK.
And you have, you have an
amendment for this bill. So
Garrett explained the bill.
So then we can move them, them.
Amendment for discussion
purposes.
Please turn on your mic,
otherwise I'll get a text and
I'll ignore my phone is
provides that the higher
education department will pay
the cost of high school
equivalency credential tests and
associated tests.
Preparation for students who at
least 16 are not currently
enrolled in secondary school,
have not graduated from high
school yet and have passed an
official practice test.
However, I have learned this
moment that there is an
amendment and uh Senator
Tobioson we'll discuss that
since I have not seen it.
You can read it while we're
moving the amendment, can I have
a motion to uh.
Mhm
My motion to move the amendment
for discussion purposes.
Any objection to that motion
center device and you want to
explain your amendment.
Mr. Chair, yes. Um, on page 1
line 14 before the period insert
requiring public post-secondary
teacher preparation programs to
teach a science of reading, and
on page 2 between lines 4 and 5
insert section 2, a new section
of chapter 21 NMSA 1978 is
enacted to read new material
teacher preparation programs,
teaching students how to teach
reading.
OK.
John, you may want to come up
here just to help us a little
bit.
Well, let's
Representative Garrett get
caught up here for a second.
And this adds the science of
reading.
And there is what the amendment
does. We have a motion to adopt
the amendments of 2 by in
Padilla.
Uh, any objection to amending
the bill.
See then wait it's, let's get
Representative Garrett's
comments before you have a
question on the amendment,
Senator Woods.
OK, Senator Woods.
Mhm
Pardon?
Oh, I don't know what day's.
Uh, I don't know what bill that
is you're referring to.
had a
to
Senator Woods, that's correct.
That's, this is the substitute
amendment put Senator Stewart's
bill in representative Garretson
Tobiassonville and Senator
Tobias in your sponsor this,
correct?
Mr. Chair, yes, I am.
Representative Garrett you Mr.
Chairman and Senator, it is an
amended version where a lot of
Items that health education
question were removed.
And we're just looking at one
section.
Mr. Chair, uh, so page 3.
Paragraph 4
Yeah, I think this is a, this
was a, this was a piece that was
referring to the amendment
correct John the amendment yes
sir on page 3 of the amendment
number 4 G 4. this is about
collecting data that um.
For the 1st 3 years, Essentially
you'd be collecting data.
On how teachers do to gauge
whether or not effective.
So that's, this was a a a topic
of discussion.
Uh, in, in another because I'm
not sure, uh again, I don't know
if uh.
The representative wants to
speak to it at all.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, that, that was
our only questionable area.
Oh we like that.
Excuse me. You like that
senator.
To uh center woods, are you
done? No, I've got the question
is, is this an acceptable
amendment.
Mr. Chair, um, senator from my
perspective, absolutely, because
it's asking that we collect
data, which is something we
question people on daily here in
this committee. I, I think it's
very friendly amendment.
Representing you have a comment
to that.
Mr. Chairman,
Although it would have been good
to actually reflect on the
amendment before sitting at this
table.
Um, we will accept.
I will accept the amendments,
you still have the floor.
No more questions, Mr. Chair.
Senator.
Senator Trujil.
You can call me.
No, I'll call you by the right
name. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
um, uh, Senator Representative,
I'll just, I just want to point
out that the collection of data,
um, there's no performance based
analysis that is attached to
that. In other words, there's
not gonna be races or emotions
or disciplinary action, just as
a matter of collecting data.
To see if what we're doing is
working, so I hope that assures
you it feels comfortable to me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
that's correct, Senator,
correct.
Mr. Chair and Senator, if you,
it could risk ultimately
disqualifying a teacher's
program, so there are some
consequences.
Um, there's issues with data
collection, which many of you
are familiar with.
But I will accept him and Mr.
Chair, um, representative, thank
you for your comment and I will
just say at this point.
Um
If a program's not.
Teaching teachers how to teach
our kids, then it probably does
need to be changed or.
That's just, that's just, I, I
mean, our kids are desperate or
we as parents are depar center,
we have no objection to the, the
science of reading and some
other parts that were objected
to have been removed, um, I just
will say, as you know, and many
of you who've taught know,
there's a lot of variables, um,
that are involved besides the
test results that a certain
teacher gets such as absences
and things like that. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Mr.
Chair.
Thank you.
Senator Gonals.
Why would they have an issue
collecting the data.
Mr. Chair, um, I don't think
it's an issue of collecting the
data. Is that the data is
essentially going to be used to
judge the effectiveness of a, of
a teacher prep program based on
the test scores. So,
I, as, as representative said, I
don't think we're opposed to
collecting data.
But there are, so you, let's
take two teacher candidates from
NMSU just as an example, I'm not
calling it MSUO.
But you take two teacher
candidates out, and then you put
those two teachers in two very
different schools and two very
different school districts where
one has had.
Uh, consistent leadership and a
good principle.
Versus one that's had 3
superintendents in 3 years and 3
principals in 3 years.
And you're gonna judge those two
teachers, not their teachers,
but those programs.
Based on the results of those
two individual teachers were
having two very different
experiences in the classroom.
And I think there's a lot of
variability. So, again, I'm not
arguing with the, with the, but
there is, there is just a word
of caution in terms of how you
use that test data.
To, to, to, to measure the
effectiveness of a program that
those teachers came out of,
well, 3 years you're talking
about two different situations.
The graduate person.
And the superintendent gives
their teacher support.
If if if the if the
superintendent is giving the
teacher support.
And they're getting the support
systems to be a better teacher
in the school district.
That's completely different
scenario. They're only going to
say that these two graduated,
if, I mean, my wife is a
principal and she spent a lot of
time mentoring teachers and.
Especially when they had a grade
teachers to make sure that they
made it to the grade they needed
to be at.
But I mean, if we're gonna judge
them how they come out of
school, I, I.
I get your situation, but the
situation you're telling us is
based on the superintendent or
the principal of the school and
how they treat that new teacher
coming in, if they support them
and give them the training they
need and they come in and the
evaluation, their evaluations
are both the same.
And say they, I don't, so they
give him a test on teacher
evaluation tests, same school
and they both come out at 100.
And a year later, they look at
the data and they said, well,
this teacher who had all this
program support or support from
the principal is now at 350, and
the other one is still at 100.
That tells you that that college
program is not teaching what
they need to do, so that the
principle that did give him the
support.
I
Filling in for what the college
should have done. That's my
evaluation that Senator, you had
a question.
No, Mr. Chairman, I was just
gonna say that you're gonna
have, it, it's a little bit
broader than that, right? I
mean, the, the premise of an
evaluation and collecting data
is that you're gonna have,
you're gonna have teachers all
over the place. They're not
gonna be in one building.
There's not gonna be two people
that we collect data from.
There's potentially going to be
hundreds of and it's if you know
how to analyze data, which I
don't, right? That's not my, my
skill, um, uh, if you know how
to analyze data, you're going to
recognize those.
inconsistencies like, hey, we've
got a building that's got
teachers from
3 different programs and they're
all failing and that means that
there's something else going on
at that school, whereas we've
got teachers from all those
different programs in other
schools and some are doing great
and some are struggling. I, I
think the data analysts.
Know how to figure out if
there's an anomaly happening
that is unrelated to what the
education program was teaching.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator,
absolutely right. Luckily I have
a team full of analysts who know
how to do that, uh, really well.
Um, it, it's just, it's just a
word of caution about the bill
specifically says we're going to
use this data to, to but.
You're right, we will do that
kind of thing when we get it.
Mhm
Thank you. I don't see any
further questions. Wait, wait,
we're on the, we got adopt the
amendment because we're
discussing the amendment.
Let's just double check and move
adoption and mean by Senator
Padilla, seconded by Senator
Hill, and the objection to that
seemed um on the bill.
Motion for a due pass by Senator
Gonzalez as amended, seconded by
Senator Woods.
Uh, 123456.
78
899 well everybody an objection
to it.
940ins.
We're past that now.
It doesn't show 9 Senator Lin or
do you want to vote on this? Are
you a yes or no.
Uh, 100.
Representative Garrett, thank
you. Stay there at the table.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members.
What's the next one?
What's your next one with
Senator Stewart
House Bill 156, tell us what
that does. We have an amendment
for that too, so you're aware
and get her the copy of the
amendment.
Do we need, we don't need to
strike the money out of 1563
John.
OK
It's exact amendment you just
read.
Tell us about the bill
representative Garrett.
OK. House Bill 156 increases the
salaries of teachers to 55,000
for level 1, 65,000 for level
two, more competitive with other
careers. OK. Anybody in the
audience in support?
One doesn't want to talk, one
does.
Come on up if you do, anybody
opposed.
We
Anybody, uh, on Zoom in support
or objecting on Zoom.
No? OK.
You're the lone soldier, so.
Mr. Chairman, committee members,
thank you, uh, Edward Wepstrom
with NEA New Mexico, um.
For everything that
Representative Garrett just
said, we are strongly in support
of this bill, and we encourage
you to vote yes. Thank you. OK,
we do have an amendment for the
bill. Can you have a motion to
move the amendment for
discussion purposes. Motion by
Senator Brandt, 2nd by Senator
Manos were on the amendment,
exact same amendment you just
seen represented Garrett.
Mr. Chair, can you explain why
we need the exact same amendment
to two separate bills we're just
gonna make the bills today. We
started our bill amendment
process right now, so there's
gonna be a lot of bills from
here on out to get amended. So,
um.
Or we're amending it to ensure
that
cin is treated fairly.
Someone explain the.
It's the exact same amendment
that we just put on the other
bill.
Well,
on discussion purposes of an
amendment. I would like someone
to explain it.
We just explained the amendment
in the prior bills, Senator,
it's exact same amendment we
just put on the bill.
Really.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment. We have a second by
Senator Tobias and any objection
to adopting the amendment.
shows
Senator Steinborn in objection
to adopting the amendment.
Or on the bill, questions on the
bill.
Brent.
Sorry, uh, John, this is more
for you, um.
We we've actually been moving
the pay up a lot.
Yesterday we had a group in here
that was advocating for us to
raise the pay of our teachers.
Can you remind us over the past
4 years, what we have done for
teachers.
You're gonna have
Yeah, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Brandt, um.
So in 202019 is when you really
started, um, you, you had
already incrementally increased
teacher minimums, that's what
this does, um.
To go back to the original
version, it was 30, 40, and 50
for levels 12 and 3, I believe
in 2019 you went to
40, 50 and 60.
And then in 2022, you went to
50, 60, and 70.
This moves that to uh
55, 65, and 75 as teacher, as
minimums for those levels. In
addition, you've also added uh
percentage increases. I do think
and I just happened to be in the
room this morning when those
folks came in asking for teacher
raises. I think they were
specifically referring to early
childhood, because those, those
salaries are not tied to these
minimums and so there's.
It's been an issue in early
childhood that.
They're struggling to keep
people in those classrooms
because they're not getting
parity with with.
K-12 schools. They did have
their own bill this morning.
Uh
OK, thank you, and that's why I
was a little bit confused, but I
did want to remind everyone
since 2019, we have
Actually raised our our teachers
in the state of New Mexico are
now paid more as starting
teachers in any of the states
around us we've done a heck of a
job.
Raising the pay for our teachers
and, and it's something I think
we can be proud of is the work
that we've done and, and now
we're not having the huge
shortage that we had before. Now
we need to start improving
quality so that the outcome.
is much better because our
outcomes are still not good.
Uh, when we only have like 17%
of our kids, you know.
On grade level in math, and what
is it? 26 and
Reading
We, we still have a lot of work
to do, so we really need to
start. Thank you.
Any other questions, Senator,
would, do you have a question on
the bill? I do, uh.
So this will increase is put
into House Bill 2 in the SCG.
Mr. Senator Woods, that is
correct. OK, thank you.
Thank you, see no further
questions can have emotion, have
a motion for due pass.
2nd by center Padilla, any
objection to that motion.
As amended.
You pass as amended 11 or lesser
in the room, seeing no
objection.
11 to 0, Representative Garrett,
Senator Woods, we're waiting for
that comment.
Get out of here
I'm happy to get out of here.
All right, we'll move on to uh.
House Bill 137.
Re
is that
House Bill 137 commit
substitute.
Mm
Mr. Chairman, I just want to, we
have no amendments for this. Go
ahead.
Mhm
Thank you.
All righty, go ahead.
Jonah school. I thought Jonas
was sitting up here.
You can come
I can. No, you're fine, you're
fine. I just didn't know.
With me I have Rebecca Rouche,
Jonas Armstrong, and Tanya
Trujil from the Environment
department, uh, Mr. Chairman,
New Mexico has struggled with
water.
Uh, we're gonna see that
struggle throughout New Mexico
and, and those of us that were
on LLC got to tour a treatment
facility in El Paso.
Where you can drill into
brackish water.
Turn a dial and have 10 million
gallons come out.
Uh, immediately or shut off 10
million gallons immediately.
Uh, that was built because the
Air Force was going to move out
of El Paso, not the Air Force,
but the army.
And they needed a water supply
and stable water supply in the
US Senator to then put the
money. I, I'll give you the
perfect scenario that I think.
From my area or any other area.
The Gallup water supply.
I was moving some money.
Moms and dads stuff in 1970.
6, my dad testified before
Congress on the day, it's not
even close to complete and it's
over $3 billion.
And there's no water in the
pipes.
We would take a brackish well.
And drill, put it into the water
system and not rely on river
water.
And if we did it in a couple of
places.
We would fill that pipeline up,
that supply line was really
built for the Navajo people. It
feeds to Window Rock, it's gonna
feed to the south of Galba
Standing Rock is still waiting
for some money which Pinto
represents, but that's just.
How you get water in the water
supply right now. There's only
so many.
Holes we can poke in a cup and
put a straw in before the water
starts drawing down and gets
deeper and deeper.
The strategic water supply.
Uh, House Bill 137 encourages
the development of brackish
water supplies from existing or
newly developed sources.
In compliance with the Office of
the State in June in the Mexico
environment department.
We'll provide water for
communities while protecting and
preserving New Mexico's
freshwater as we face hotter and
drier future.
promotes a local strong economy,
job creation in the water
treatment sector.
Of supporting New Mexico clean
energy transition.
Established guardrails for
grants and contracts that
advance bracket water treatment.
And supply treated water to
customers that will align with
the state, tribal, or local
economy.
That memo goes fresh water.
Before I put that.
Rio Rancho has a break as well.
If that well is determined that
we can clean that once we know
it's there.
You could automatically.
Turn that in and pump it into
Rio Rancho and probably tied
into the Albuquerque lines, and
we would depend our dependence
on on well water and so this is
the future of water in New
Mexico and will stand for
questions.
OK, thank you. First we'll go
out to the audience and anybody
who support of uh.
House Bill 137 is amended.
But.
One, can we get a couple of
people that
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla shows reg
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque, Bernalio County
Water Utility Authority. We
stand in strong support, would
like to thank the sponsor, the
governor's office, and the
Office of State Engineer for
collaborating on this important
piece of legislation that keeps
and preserves our water and also
provides reuse. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, John Thompson,
registered lobbyist for the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District, certainly support the
bill, certainly support anything
that can take pressure off of
surface water resources and
certainly support anything that
can create economic development
within the Middle Valley and and
take use of our brackish
supplies as that you support the
bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mhm
There
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Terry Cole and I'm president and
CEO of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. The chamber
very much supports the goal of
creating a strategic water
supply in order to improve the
state's drought resilience and
for use in developing green
energy. New Mexico has the most
brackish water in the nation,
almost as much as in Lake
Superior. Our neighbors in El
Paso have been processing
brackish water since 2007 with
no health or safety issues. We
need the research and
development as well as aquifer
characterization provided in
this legislation. We also need
to get these projects off the
ground and we commend the
sponsor very much for carrying
the bill. Please approve HB 137.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Uh, anybody in
opposition?
OK. Uh, we'll go to committee,
Senator Brent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and uh
Senator, I, I really appreciate
this bill and actually I've been
in conversations with the
governor's office on this very
issue.
Um
And uh really appreciate the
direction we're, they're going,
um.
Actually got to go to Israel in
December and go to a water
desalinization plant and and see
the process and actually drink
the water.
Uh, it was really neat to see. I
wish I had been on LFC when you
guys went down to El Paso. Maybe
I'll see if I can get a trip
down there by myself, but uh
it's, it's really great thing
Rear Rancho has looked at it
before, um, but now that the,
the state's interested in coming
in and helping. I think it's
something we could do that could
really help solve a lot of the
water problems for for New
Mexico overall. The one that's
in here on the city of Al
Moordo.
They've been working on this for
like 30 years and they're not
desalinizing any water.
And so it's got plans ready to
go.
But it's complete and
operational.
Um
There's, there's one that's
operational and one that is not.
So there's one that's
operational, it's run by the
federal government.
Um, and then, and that's like a
research one. I just went
through this a couple of months
ago, um, with them, and there's
one that actually was built by
the city of Almogordo that is
not because they don't have any
brackish water to tap into. They
thought they were being able to
bring it in on a water pipe,
that water pipe belongs to the
Air Force. They didn't ask the
Air Force before they built.
So there's a lot of problems
there. So we've really literally
got a desalinization plant
sitting there ready to go.
That we'll probably have to pump
water to and build another pipe.
So I, I think having the state
saying all that to say by having
the state come in and kind of
coordinate this. Maybe we won't
have another problem where we
invest that kind of millions of
dollars for a plant that we
can't eat that can't even be
used right now.
So I really think this is a
great project, really glad
governor's office has been
willing to work with me on it,
and uh actually been
coordinating with a company in
Israel that does this, so thank
you.
Thank you to the governor's
office.
Senator Steinborg.
Senator Steinborn.
OK, I got a quick question uh
for the sponsor here, Mr. Chair,
probably.
Maybe a little bit for your
experts, so.
I think the first question got
answered, which is, is this
inappropriated water?
And that we're dealing with here
for these projects. So, but I
see that in the bill.
Uh well can't be drilled until
11 days after notice and then
after the data engineer has
determined that it is not taking
impairing anyone else's water
right? Am I reading that
correctly?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
and center, yes.
Mr. Chairman and uh Senator
Steinborn, I'm Tanya Trujillo,
the deputy state engineer, and I
can clarify that we wanted to
make very clear that all state
engineer procedures will apply
in connection with the operation
of this program. So the state
engineer office will be involved
in evaluating impairment.
And authorizing use of water in
connection with either existing
wells, existing brackish wells,
there's estimated to be 8000
some around the state or in
connection with development of
deep brackish water, which has a
separate section in the
statutes, the state engineer
office will be involved in
evaluating impairment associated
with those water rights.
Senator, um,
To your experts. So, so we're
gonna make sure it doesn't
impair someone else's water
right, does someone applying for
use of funds of unappropriated
water, does that inherently
trigger
Like a water right.
That would in a way supersede a
normal water right adjudication
process.
Is this is just basically gives
someone some authorization de
facto to jump.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Steiner, the short answer is no.
You'd follow the normal state
engineer process if you were
trying to appropriate a new
water right.
Or if you had an existing water
right and we're trying to use
that water and clean it up in
connection with this program.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Given uh
Senator, given the uh
Economic development here that
we're dealing with and
You know, the implicit economic
development benefits that's
spoken to in the bill and
consulting with the department.
Is this basically, is it, well,
I guess the bill says it must be
a public entity. Is that
correct? That's receiving the
grant?
so
Senator, yes, Mr. Chair Senator,
yes, that's correct. OK. And
does that mean, Mr. Chair,
Senator, that it will be a
publicly owned project.
Mr. Chen center, I, I don't
think anybody commercial
utility, I think.
Even water that spot.
Example of we meter some meter
everybody else.
Good.
Uh, Mr. Chair, senator
Steinborn, uh, nice to see you.
The, um, the
Uh, infrastructure that might be
built with uh this program and
the funds that are made
available through the program
is, um, there, if there's grant
money from strategic water
supply going into that project.
And, uh, supporting development
of a brackish water treatment
facility. Um, it's very possible
that that treatment facility
could be publicly owned. It
could be one of our water
authorities, water utilities,
um, municipality, um, there's
also the possibility there's a
contracting program stood up
through this bill.
As well, and there's a
possibility there could be
private partners that are
engaged as the treatment company
that's actually building the
plant, putting the capital
investment upfront and um be
also engaging with these two
state agencies to um take
advantage of the strategic water
supply program. So there's a
number of different ways that
public entities could be
involved, depending on the
project. Thank you Mr. Chair.
That's, that's the kind of
there's a little vibe that goes
through the bill a little bit on
the economic development aspect,
and that's where I'm just kind
of
Wondering how that plays a role
in this and how that ends up
manifesting. Uh, is it?
anti-donation at all, if you're
If you're, uh, is that something
you've looked at if, if it's a
contemplated that you're gonna
basically be
But it, it is going to be.
It says that only a public
entity can receive the grant
though. I think the bill OK.
Thank you, Mr. OK, thank you,
Senator Padilla.
Thank you chair and thank you,
uh, chair, and uh to the uh
experts. So a couple of quick
questions on the brackish water.
And did I hear you say brackish
water can be pumped out and then
pumped back in, and then it can
be
It's, it's drinkable at that
point, or do you need to
Give us a little more detail on
that. So what happens with
brackish water, you drill into
the brackish water formation
determine what minerals are in
the water.
And then they come back out and
they're these filters.
And they filter the water to
purity to remove those and
whatever strain and then.
pure water comes out on one
side, there is some minerals
that come out on the other.
One in El Paso sold them the
minerals for aren't the minerals
were.
And then whatever can't be used
will be processed in El Paso,
the minerals that were pulled on
this that's why we have 4 ft
chicken now.
4 ft high chickens
I think you're referring to the
governor.
Those extra large nuggets, so,
uh,
I thought, I thought the I heard
you say the minerals that have
no value
and then no, are all pumped off
and re-injected into a well site
at another location.
The other minerals that have
value are sold out to the
To fertilize and then the fresh
water is is brought in.
And so, uh, are, are we able to
do this at scale, what you're
proposing here?
They can scale to whatever they
need. I mean, El Paso built
theirs sounds like El Paso in
1960 and it's not a big
building, you think this would
be a giant humongous building,
maybe the quarter of the size of
the capital.
Maybe half the size of the the
old just giant filters that that
have sediment filters. Some
filters are used for a couple of
years.
Until they have a tear ripping
them, but they just, I made it
to that LFC meeting. I just
didn't get to go to that. I
might want to get down there if
they have a contact, I'd like to
see it. You miss the uh chair
and, and the chair and uh to the
state engineer. Uh, thank you
very much for being here today.
What about uh uh basin to basin
transfers. Are those permissible
under New Mexico law?
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla, so the state engineer
process.
Does exist if you're going to
transfer a water right from
point A to point B in the rules
would vary depending on the
circumstances. I, I don't know
if I answered your question. But
if you transferred in that case,
if you're in the same basin
transferring your water right.
It's already in that basin. But
if you're transferring the water
right from a basin to another
basin, you actually have to
actually have to physically
transfer the water too. It's not
just a right,
Chairman and Senator Padilla, I
think I agree with you.
We evaluate the impacts
associated with
The proposed transfer and make
sure that water is going to be
available at point A or at the
move to location.
But Mr. Chair and chair and
engineer. So is it, uh, but it
is permissible.
For that to occur, you'd have to
jump through 58 hoops on fire,
I'm sure to get it done, but,
but that is permissible.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla, yes, depending on the
circumstances of the particular.
Um, there would be an
opportunity for objection and
all of our normal processes
would be undertaken with
brackish water from bases to
basin.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla, yes, that there's
nothing that, nothing that's
different.
salinity of the water may happen
to be brackish in the.
Correct. And then you could just
clean it through these.
These uh filters that the the
Chairman Mundos was talking
about when you, when it lands in
the other.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla, yes, you could treat
brackish water and you could
transfer it.
If that's, if I may understand
it
it's being transferred.
Correct. And when was the last
time we transferred from one
basin to the other? Do, do you
know?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator B,
I don't act.
Information. We could get back
to you,
but you are aware of basin to
basin transfers have occurred in
New Mexico. Mr. Chairman, yes.
OK. And uh so I guess uh on this
proposal here, um, what do we
think this is going to cost us
to actually bring it online. Do
we have any idea?
Um, centered the one in El Paso
was initially 60 million to
start and then that was $1960
right? Yeah, and they really did
it, redid it and it was about
110 million.
Facility, I think in Elmer I
think for that facility, but
smaller disability.
Facilities, they can range from
the 10 million so chair my first
um
12 years here in the
legislature, the west side of
Albuquerque, the Southwest Mesa
at a minimum 125 million acre
feet of brackish water out
there. Would that be something
that would work with what you're
proposing here?
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes.
That's now Senator Charlie's
district, uh, with the
redistricting. OK, great, those
were my questions. Thank you.
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. you know,
dinner's ready too, so
you never get to talk. I'm
always the last one is it
because I'm a freshman.
OK
You guys stand up for me. Help
me out here.
Um, OK, so a couple of things.
First of all, I noticed that
appropriations is still in the
title. It seems like that needs
to be amended out.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
um, when we had the
appropriation section removed
in-house appropriations Finance
Committee as an amendment. The
drafter said the, the word
making appropriations needed to
stay in the title because of the
fund creation, language in the
bill, um, and so what you see in
section 4 of the bill around the
fund is the reason why making
preparations needed to remain in
the title. All right. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Uh, thank you,
Senator Altrust, um, drafting on
that.
Then. So, um, I, I do want to
point out something because I, I
don't want red flags on this. I
very much support.
brackish water.
Like changing it to increase our
water availability.
Um, but I want to just point out
to the public that under
The definitions in section 2 is
a definition for produced
waters.
The only reason for that
definition is because the
definition above it says and is
not produced water, so the
definition for brackish water
says and is not produced water,
and the only way you can define
what produced water is is to
then have a definition for
produced water. So this bill has
nothing to do with produced
water.
I just want to clarify that I
get it, but sometimes, um,
reporters listening in.
people
listening and don't quite get
that. So that's why that
definition is in there.
Um, the second thing is they're
the 3rd thing I guess.
Who reviews the community
benefit.
Plan to determine that there's a
community benefit.
And what is, what is gonna be
the standard for what qualifies
as a community benefit.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Trujillo, I'll take a stab at
that.
The Office of State Engineer and
the Office of the Environment
Department will work together to
develop a way of evaluating the
communi community benefit plans
that are associated with the
program that's coming in.
And we have some examples from
other programs that we would
rely on.
OK. And so, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, I'm wondering is I, I
get that the community where
this is gonna happen, we'll have
some input on that.
Um, before a decision is made,
will the community outside the
community have any input or will
it be posted so it can be seen.
Is there any appeal to that, um,
or is it, you make a decision
and the community to benefit is
Somebody,
Senator Trujillo, um, the, uh,
The bill requires that the
community benefit plan be posted
and made available to the
public. So that's, that's
Posting and transparency of the
community benefit plan is, is
baked in. Um, and there will be
um opportunities for the public
to uh engage when either of the
agencies is either issuing a
solicitation for grant
applications or a request for
proposals if they're going into
a contracting process, the
opportunities for the public to
engage then and um continue to
uh participate at the local
level with whatever projects are
ultimately receiving funding
through the program. Thank you.
Mr. Chair.
All right. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chair, Senator. So my last
question is probably a little
more complicated.
And so I'm sorry. I know you're,
I know you're there's a, there's
a picture of brackish processing
plant, the one in Almogordo. I
told him to pass it around. He
went and made copies. I was down
at the LFC and I, I, I remember
hearing about it. I went to NMSU
and
At a what, 2 or 3 day
presentation. I, I, I, I, I do
understand this. I, I'm just
concerned about
To get the grants.
That's going to a public.
entity. I don't get the
contracts and I don't understand
why we don't make this a leader
project.
So if you could help me
understand who's gonna get the
contracts. Are they then going
to produce the brackish water in
the water and sell it.
Are they going to sell the
minerals.
Are we contracting with them to
build something so that we can
get the produced water and give
it to local communities. I'm
really concerned about this. To
me this seems like if we're
giving them a contract to build
something that they're gonna
benefit from, it should be a
leader project.
And we've had this conversation,
so I know I'm not, I'm not.
It knew out of lefty, thank you
for the question and just to
clarify to your earlier point,
um, we're talking about brackish
water not produced water, um,
and, uh, in terms of how the
contracting process would work
and it
There are.
A number of ways in which these
contracts could take shape, um,
the bill isn't so restrictive
that it would only be for, or
only be for um uh making the
finish, the price of the
finished treat, but you could
have contract terms that are
anywhere in between there, um,
and so the idea is that either
agency when issuing a request
for proposals would articulate
in that contracting process.
What type of contract proposals
are they looking for?
Um, and ultimately the the idea
around having the natural
resources agencies sitting here,
uh, with us today as
administering this instead of
the LEDA program is a couple of
reasons for, for one thing, um,
there's been a lot of
Uh, conversation around brackish
water treatment and initially we
had produced water in this
public safety, making sure that
we're not polluting our natural
resources as we move into some
new territory around our water
resources, um, making sure that
we're protecting public health
and the office of State Engineer
and the Environment department
have missions that are um very
aligned with those concerns, and
they implement and oversee the
regulatory programs that are
going to attach.
any one of these strategic water
supply projects. It has to go
through an OSE permitting
process. It has to go through,
um, a discharge permitting
process to the Environment
department, manage their
hazardous waste or solid waste
in accordance with state laws.
So you have the two agencies
overseeing those regulatory
processes and protections
directly involved in casting the
net and determining which
projects make sense, um, and
they're also intimately in this
program, which we haven't
mentioned, is um one component
of the governor's 50-year water
action.
plan that is designed to set our
state on a clear path to water
security, um, no matter what
comes our way in future, in
future decades. So those are
some of the considerations for
putting it into those two
agencies, um, and not tying it
directly to Lita even though or
running it through LIDA, even
though there's a, a key driver
of the program to support
economy.
So I, I can, there's more I can
say, but I know we're, we're
trying to keep moving. I know, I
know, and thank you, Mr. Chair,
um, Senator, so.
So again, what I'm hearing is
that we're gonna
Enter into a contract.
So that a private entity can
build a water desalination.
Project
And what are they gonna do with
the water? Well, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator T Trujillo.
Uh, let me give you a scenario
then for uh requirement
department and a um private
entity that's going to treat the
water.
Um, the contracting process
would determine the specifics of
that particular contract and
let's say they, um, it's a
treatment plant that has already
decided on a location. They
understand the brackish water
resources that are available at
that location. They understand
the volumes that they're likely
to treat. They've done all the
economics of building out a
plan.
Is this, uh, a smart economic
decision for whatever that
company is, and they've got some
idea of who their customers are
gonna be.
Who is going to purchase that
water. They're gonna need to
know that in order to apply for
a contract under the strategic
water supply because that end
user component who their
customers are, is going to
inform in the environment
department's evaluation of how
does this proposal support
state, local, or tribal economic
development goals. Who are those
customers? It's also going to
ensure that the Environment
department understands.
How much treatment is going to
be needed for that water by
virtue of use of the water if
it's potable versus being used
in a closed, no discharge system
to manufacture widgets. Those
are might be two different types
of water quality needs. That is
going to be included in the
proposal. The actual contract um
might be putting um some level
of funding over a particular
negotiated period of time to
make the cost of the treated
water more cost.
competitive so that those
customers are more likely to buy
that treated brackish water than
any other source of water or
just go someplace else in the
country to do their project.
Um, so the, uh, contract terms
could be not building a
treatment plant, but rather
saying, um, the, for the period
of terms of the contract, the
strategic water supply will
support.
5 cents a barrel discount on the
treated water, making sure that
that brackish water treatment
plant gets built, and those
customers get to use this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. So they are going to
sell it.
So it is a private business, and
it, it
Are there, I don't see any
clawback provisions in here if
we give them.
$50 million and they don't end
up building, uh, you don't have
to answer it, it's OK. I know
we're all looking and we're
hungry and and ready to go
downstairs. I really want to
support this.
those boundaries around it and
Lita already has those.
They already, Lida already has
those kinds of boundaries set
into it and even though I get
that.
Environment and inner and the
state engineer.
Understand the economic
development of it and the
regulation of water and such.
I still think that either the
State Investment council. I
mean, the, um, finance
authority.
Or, um, or it needs to be a
leader project. So I, I
appreciate this and I really
want to support it I just.
OK, thank you, anybody else, um,
so it's a pleasure.
I moved too fast for passing to
rent
by Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
Boots, Senator Senators Senator
Gonzalez
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Lanier.
Yes. Senator Lanier votes yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilia
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborne Boser,
Senator Tobiasin, Senator Tobias
and Bosa, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes no.
Senator Woods.
In the woods senators Senator
Munozen yes, you have a do pass
10 in the affirmative, 1 in the
negative. We're gonna be
adjourned.
All right. Thank you. We are
adjourned.
