I think
House.
And so that they could present
this morning or something and so
they asked.
New Mexico PTA's.
In that case.
Eight years later today I will
try to hold him off okay.
Come of they don't will have the
corrections right behind in
front of.
A place to call home.
Thank you.
Anderson you to start.
Sounds good all right good
afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee today we have
with us US secretary Schardin
Clarke of taxation revenue
departments there agency code is
three three three you can find
them in your volume on pages
sixty five through seventy.
Also get.
I wanted to just point you guys
to the high level it's I think
on page ten and it's sort of
like the high level overview
that shows all of the
departments in one place in case
you want like a quick reference
to those and also joining us is
to Celia the DFA counterpart so
just kind of give a quick
overview of the roll up and then
I'll hand it over to her for
emphasis on the differences
between the LFC and Executive
recommendations.
so we were pretty darn close
about lopping one percent in
between the two recommendations
this time around of both the LFC
and Executive recommendations
recommend fully funding all
categories in accordance to tear
dis FY twenty four budget
request and LESC request is
about thirteen point four
thousand below the exact
recommendation the LFC
recommendation supports a
general fund increase of a
hundred and ninety three
thousand about five point two
percent above the FY twenty
three budget.
and so with that in regards to
the base budget both the
executive and LFC
recommendations fully fund the
base and all categories with
that I'll hand it over to
Cecilia.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee just in
the interest of time because we
do have an agenda with various
large agencies I'm just going to
go.
The programs I do have those
differences that ginger did
discuss starting with a P. five
seven for the motor vehicle
division as far as revenues to
both LFC Executive
recommendations include
charities requested reduction of
two hundred and sixteen thousand
in federal revenues the LFC
recommends a five point four
increase above motor vehicles
this we're twenty three
operating budget as requested by
TRD where the exact
recommendation includes ninety
four point five from other
revenue sources to fund the way
distance transfer to DPS in the
base the LFC recommendation
recommendation for other
financing uses is that ninety
four point five thousand below
our recommendations so that is
where that difference exists in
both recommendations include
funds to reduce motor vehicle
division's vacancy rate in to
fund the positions with new
salary schedules and it as
intended by the agency and in
performance the analysts have
come to consensus with those.
And now in compliance
enforcement P. five seven nine
there was a small difference LFC
recommendation fully funds here
these requests for a hundred and
seventy one point eight thousand
dollar increase of nine point
two percent above the fiscal
year twenty three in the audit
and compliance program operating
budget the executive
recommendation is an increase of
ninety point seven or five
percent above the programs
fiscal year twenty three
operating budget moving to base
the LFC and recommendation the
LFC and executive recommendation
fully support tiered is request
requested increase of a hundred
fifty five point two thousand to
reduce those vacancy rates ten
percent above the fiscal year
twenty three personal services
employee benefits category.
The executive recommendation
supported an increase of seventy
four point one thousand only a
five percent about this we're
twenty three in the PS maybe
category both recommendations
are the same for the other cost
categories providing an increase
of sixteen point six thousand
above the programs fiscal year
twenty three and both LFC and
Executive recommendations are
the same for contractual
services which include a nine
point four thousand increase of
four point one to fund per diem
for travel and contracting for
fraud and tax and
investigations and with that I
will turn it over to cabinet US
secretary Schardin Clarke.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members the committee
pleasure to be here today with
you to present our budget I want
to introduce a couple staff
members who are here and you may
have questions for over the
committee hearing first to my
right is are HSD director in the
DC area
also from our administrative
services division as our budget
bureau chief and that Reynolds
also we have our audit and
compliance division director I
Shimoda our chief information
officer Mike Baca and we have to
folks here from motor vehicle
division that acting director
tech Gonzales and MVD finance
director Ali Rodriguez company
part just so if you have a
detailed questions maybe call
out to them with that I have
slides that look like this you
should have in front of you.
I'll go through them very
quickly because they know you
have a long agenda today slide
to just for your reference is
our executive leadership for
chart you can see the names of
each division director and a
deputy director listed slide
three is our mission and vision
statement what you've heard seen
before but just as an you know
as a refresher we really do try
to remind employees every day
that our job is really about
customer service whether they're
taxpayers or drivers or others
we're we exist to serve the
public
to recap on a couple keep
initiatives that we've recently
been completing and and working
through slide for
really just kind of.
Emphasizes that we're always
trying to rebuild and build our
work force to be able to recruit
and retain the most competent
and dedicated staff we can some
of the ways we're doing that are
through participation in job
fairs internship programs we
offer mentorship program
documenting procedures to ensure
consistency things like that and
kind of going back to our budget
request the main thing that
we're trying to do through our
budget is to chip away at our
funded vacancy rate and be able
to fill more of our positions as
time goes by.
Like I have some of our most
recent completed initiatives
back in December we completed a
two million dollar multi year
property tax modernization
that's fully in place
we've resumed fully the
delinquent property auctions
that were on hiatus for a little
while during the COVID pandemic
we launch the cannabis excise
tax and have successfully
registered and began to accept
and distribute those payments
we launched an unclaimed
property renovations to that
system and September twenty
twenty two that's working great
I'd I want to highlight our
financial statement audit for FY
twenty two every year that I've
been with the department and the
Syrian and others have been with
the department we've been
chipping away at the number of
findings and the severity and
I'm really proud to say that for
at the complex the agency that
processed over sixteen billion
dollars last year we had only
two audit findings neither of
them significant are only
findings across this whole
agency where that some employees
brought premium gas and there
are a couple days where the
armored Currier showed up late
to deposit at the bank.
That was it we're we're very
proud of all that progress.
I'll skip past the rest so slide
I it is there for your reference
I do want to say that seventy
seven percent of all and be the
issue credentials are no real ID
compliant and we've got about
two more years until the federal
deadline for compliance.
On slide six is just a recap of
some of the tax policy things
we've been working on just to
highlight that this summer we
issued about a billion dollars
of rebates on time and on budget
that was between may and August
for the most part with just a
few continuing to trickle out as
returns come in or here is a
corrected
just to recap our budget
highlights the executive
recommendation provides for an
eleven point nine percent
average funded vacancy rate
across the department the two
budget rex as you've heard are
very similar
probably the single biggest
difference between the executive
and the LFC wrecked that I'd
like to speak to is for a
nonrecurring appropriation every
year there is a contention
appropriation and house bill two
for us to implement tax changes
that are enacted during this
session we requested five
million as we have in past years
the executive reconciliations
that and the LFC wreck funds
that two million so the
background behind that is of
course that the tax package and
all the tax bills that are going
to be passed we we don't know
that until after the budget is
sized usually and so it's a
contingent appropriation where
we total up all the
implementation cost of what is
actually enacted and we go to
the board of finance and present
that request for them to
release.
we also have a few other non
recurring request request that I
can go into detail on but that
five million for bill
implementation this is the one
that I wanted to highlight.
I think I can skip through slide
eight and nine is really just a
recap of of what the two
analysts already presented to
you so stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
secretary.
For all your hard work I I first
want to thank you your office is
quite responsive when I have
constituent restored concerns
and you mentioned the
disbursement of rebate checks
alone we task your agency with a
lot of new jobs last year and
you did a great job X. and job
the following Thursday thank you
for coming here a quick question
I also talk specifically about
my experiences with the truth or
talk consequences DNV I
personally I appreciate the
ability to go online schedule an
appointment walk right in and be
seen immediately so much better
than the long lines basically
sitting in V. D. all day I have
a lot of constituents expression
rural New Mexico who doesn't
have they don't have internet
access and there's still a lot
of confusion about how they get
in how can we better meet the
needs of that rural population
to be serviced in BG one how how
can I help them how can you help
them and number two can you
clarify are there still in V. D.
workers working remotely and not
in the office because I've been
told both states
Mr chair and Senator Diamond
thank you for recognizing the
work of the department on the
rebates last year it was it was
a huge task but we're glad to do
it on your M. P. D. question we
also
see that the big picture is that
M. D. D. functions as a whole
much better on the appointment
model we've delivered much
better timeliness for the
customers in fact in the most
recent monthly had data the
average wait time to start your
transactions statewide was just
four and a half minutes that's
unheard of and but we are also
concerned about the folks that
you're talking about you might
not have reliable internet
service and our call center is
aware that they should go we
also created a
a special queue in line just for
people who are calling to make
an appointment to make sure that
it's fast for them I'm so if you
call the call center one of the
first options is if you.
Calling to make an appointment
press whatever can you go to a
special Q. were able to staff it
with people that have less
overall and we do specialize
training but they're able to
make appointments and the wait
time on that that queuing line
is usually under a minute
perfect thank you thank you
that's where to refer them any
other questions Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
secretary Schardin and staff for
all your work I just a quick
question back on the rebates and
you may have addressed is what I
was looking down at your paper
there are few people still who
have not receive those rebates
and you said before and one of
the other meetings we had you
were working on that have you
made any progress this is for
the last time someone make sure
they don't pile up for the next
rebate if we end up voting on
something yes Mr chairman and
senator Rodriguez we're
constantly working on clearing
the work queues that are
constantly coming in if if
there's a constituent who hasn't
yet receive their rebate their
return is most likely an error
or we sent them the check and it
returned to us as undeliverable
through the mail so we're going
through the undeliverable mail
and its thousands of items per
week that we're processing
between returns an error that
needs to get finalized or
corrected in the the undelivered
mail so it the the number of
rebates being resend to and re
issued as is always going up but
we're pretty much done if you
have constituents though anyone
who hasn't received the rebate
or has questions on it you can
give them my number I'll make
sure they get referred to the
right person within the
department thank you in giving
them their number is your your
cell number okay to give them
absolute because one of the
concerns was that they couldn't
get a hold of anybody when they
call that there was a voice mail
and they never get a call back
so I just wondered if they were
dialing the right number where
they can call right earlier on
in the Mr chair and senator
Rodriguez earlier on and last
summer when we were in the in
the heat of the rebate season I
think there was a week where we
receive something like fifty
seven thousand calls we had
about a hundred and twenty staff
members temporarily assigned to
taking calls and still our call
volume was was to hide and so
there's a a customer call back
feature but people you know at
that at the time it was taking
several business days to get
back to them it's it's improved
since then.
Thank you very much for that and
thank you for bringing up the
fact that the one week to audit
findings and you know well we've
presenter to really not not to
better all right considering the
big workflow so thank you for
all your work Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman and
secretary good afternoon and I
think part of what I like to do
up here once in awhile is given
out of what Mr chair just so we
get good feedback also not just
negative feedback and I just
want to compliment you madam
secretary on doing an
outstanding job from my
perspective and being completely
responsive to any challenge has
come up in my district and your
staff member April the hell and
I don't know if April is here.
but anyway hopefully she'll get
the we're back with just kudos
to all of you who are doing hard
work and really being responsive
to New Mexicans and that's what
all of us that's not always easy
that's not always done but let's
keep striving for that and just
wanted to compliment you thank
you madam secretary.
Thank you Mr.
The house up to.
Mr chair the house adopted the
executive recommendation.
In that.
That's fine with us.
There are videotapes recorded
so.
no I I think it me too you
didn't great job right the of
the still has its struggles at
some point but I will tell you
and private in their thirty five
times this year trying to get
stuff registered and waiting
distancing and so they're doing
the best
I just don't like being there's
elected official because
somebody has a problem usually
comes to you and says George
fixes for me but the laws a law.
I think that's it but I
appreciate it thank you
and I just realized when you
said that I forgot to answer
part of some question I just
want to hi all our workers are
back full time in office MVD
field offices have been in
office pretty much the entire
pandemic of the central office
that help support MVD field
offices was working up hybrid
schedule until recently but
they're all back a hundred
percent of the time thanks thank
you secretary.
Yes be nice today so.
Gonna go to the committee on
miss abilities also.
I discuss.
We hope.
The development of the school.
Right thank you to get myself
oriented years animals have to
leave for a little bit the facts
so here we are thank you Micaela
and we've got it let's see who
is here Allison okay.
When you and we have first names
here what is your name of
MaryBeth Mary Beth thank you
Katie.
Mary Beth all right thank so we
can get started sure thank you
madam chair Micaela Fischer and
the program evaluation under the
LFC standing in for Kelly client
we're on HSD six forty seven
which is the developmental
disabilities council here with
more that than similar to DFA
and Ellis makori who is the
executive director
so just very quickly I'll go
over the packet you know this is
a agency that's grown a lot in
the last two years and is
looking to grow more than had a
general fund budget that's grown
by forty six percent since
twenty one I believe well both
recommendations executive in the
LFC for this agency recommend
increasing general fund see
executive general fund
recommendation was about one
point four million above the
LFC the executive recommendation
for personals about five hundred
thirty seven thousand above LFC
to reduce the vacancy rate and
the LESC recommendation for
personal was flat with the FY
twenty three operating budget in
fourteen thirty seven point nine
thousand about for FY twenty two
actual expenditures so both the
executive LFC significantly
increase contractual services
wealth of guardianship rate
increases the executive
recommendation was seven hundred
thirty four point three thousand
above the LFC for case backlogs
of previously the council
received a special appropriation
of five hundred thousand for FY
twenty one and twenty two for
guardianship Services but about
three hundred and thirty two
thousand one and spends reverted
so the LFC recommendation this
year for nonrecurring specials
which is in page seven of your
packet includes two hundred
fifty thousand more for
guardianship case backlog.
the executive recommendation for
other cost is ninety six point
six thousand above the LFC for
additional costs for the vacancy
rate I think that's the overview
alternative were to very many
that for anything honest.
Hello madam chair committee
members I'll just take a minute
to kind of highlight some of the
differences there's not too too
many despite it looks like a
large general fund there is a
large general fund spread but
the differences are pretty
There's there's like maybe three
I think to focus on and of
course
the director will be able to
correct me if there are things
that she would go into more
detail on but just so so the
first one I just want to bring
your attention to is in the the
developmental disabilities
program not the guardianship of
the other programs one of the
bigger differences is that the
executive has added two FTE to
support the office of special
education but so these are in
the executive recommendation
they were not in the LFC this
was an ad after the request come
through but this is something
that's in the executive that the
agency has requested support for
hi that's one of the main
differences we would have
guardianship the two main
differences in guardianship for
that the executive put it in
about six hundred and fifty
thousand dollars to increase us.
I'm sorry to be able to a
decrease the wait list and
support.
The service is not program and
about six hundred thousand
dollars to
finish the provider rate
increases from a study a few
years ago for the guardianship
providers in those.
Well to provide legal services
and everything in there
That's what I see is the largest
things that that are still up
for some discussion but I'm
going to turn over to directly
support more thing I got madam
chair sorry I should have
mentioned the during the JFC
they took the LFC wreck for this
and also the very back your
packages since there's some talk
of FTP of PS calculations the
vacancy rates as of this fall so
that's all thanks.
No thanks thank you madam chair
over to director.
Thank you thank thank you Mr
thank you for your work I get
your emails all the.
Thank you madam chair for
recognizing the working thank
you members of the committee and
for both the if LC we have
historically been supported by
DFA in LC in the past couple
years in recent years I do want
to
speak on what we've accomplished
in the last few years and some
of the issues that we've run
into so when I walked in the
door in August of twenty
nineteen this agency had in the
very recent years in the past
couple of years seen eight three
almost I think about a three
million dollar fund balance in
their office of guardianship
balance with a long wait lists
and so there was very little
trust between the legislature in
my agency about you know getting
those services out there since
we've been working in the last
few years
we have aggressively attacked
the wait list at the beginning
of every fiscal year and some
years we've taken away list all
the way down to zero the growth
is happening since the pandemic
we have seen drastic growth in
the need for guardianship and
there's many reasons for that
and happy to have offline
conversations with you about
those as well and how we can
stem the tide on that one of
which is a Senate bill that
we're proposing this year
supported decision making based
SB eighty nine but since then in
guardianship specifically we
have we've got a bill through in
twenty twenty one that
drastically increases the
oversight of professional
guardians here in New Mexico of
Bill we did ask for an
appropriation for that we didn't
receive it and so
Being.
Okay so what we are doing this
work despite it being an
unfunded mandate but it's
important it's that important
that we're doing
and the DDC has also launched a
brand new statewide program
since twenty twenty one in
December first I we launched the
special education but we've been
doing advocacy work supporting
and really pushing for the needs
of families and students with
disabilities across New Mexico
so this is a statewide program
have one F. T. doing all that
work as well as a few
contractors I think about this
three at this point part time
contractors and just in the last
year of loan we served over two
hundred families I'm so two
hundred eleven I don't even know
I think it's probably hard for
right now I'm not sure if you
see my one pager sent to all of
you
we have served two hundred
eleven families probably more
that forty one school districts
twenty three counties and nine
out of the ten regional
education corporative regions we
desperately need additional
supports and resources
particularly human resources
people on the ground in this
work they are really getting
down to what's missing in our
education system for are for
students and families I'm and so
I believe the executive
recommendation ads in two FTE
for that program as well as a
nonrecurring appropriation of
ninety five thousand dollars to
support that work integrated and
after office of guardianship
again we've done across of what
request reduction
one of the things are HSD order
and at
Mr chair representative at HFC
and pointed this out is that you
know we did at one point have a
forty six percent vacancy in our
agency and that was in August
first of twenty twenty one since
then we have hired pretty much
every position with a just a
very few probably two or three
they're missing three I think
that are are crucial in the
state and so I'm I've given you
a vacancy reports you can see
exactly which FTE we've hired an
interim one of the things that
we did was we brought H. our in
house and that is a really
drastically changed from just
being able to to get those
positions filled because we're
doing really hard work and we
really need all of that the
person to get that done so one
of the things that happened was
we didn't have a CFO for about
seven months last year and that
meant a from April to November
that meant that we didn't have a
CFO which is the who which was
the only
financial staff an entire agency
we didn't have a CFO for closing
of the fiscal year opening of
the fiscal year setting up the
budget request for the next
fiscal year those are really
important ones not to have any
finance in HSD and one of the
things that happened was.
You heard about the reversion in
our nonrecurring special
appropriation
That that folder to the cracks
it was an accounting error and
we've put in checks and health
systems with the new CFO to
ensure that will never ever
happen again one of the reasons
why I'm we lost that funding was
because and typically than in
prior years we were able to get
language in H. B. two on not
that reverting back to the
general fund but taking those
funds and putting them into our
at a guardianship Fund Senator
Padilla had talked about setting
up that fund for this very
reason we are legal services
program which means our schedule
is determined by the courts not
by us and so we have to be able
from year to year to have
continuation services we need to
make sure that we have this fund
balance in there to to capture
all the services I'm in what
we've been doing because we
haven't had that language is
we've been holding the wait list
when we don't think we have any
more funding for the remainder
of the year and letting it grow
and grow until the next fiscal
year begins and so just to give
you a snapshot of what that
looks like when we thought we
had spent on that special that
we didn't have enough funding to
to continue from January to June
of twenty twenty two so three
hundred fifty percent increase
in a weightless in less than six
months so this is the rate of
growth you're seeing and request
for the services.
and just very quickly you know
is that the one one last thing
that I mentioned earlier that I
wanted to support today was we
are also requesting above and
beyond the executive
recommendation eight two hundred
eighty nine dollars for
certified eighty nine thousand
dollars for supported decision
making this is SB eighty nine
the sponsor is Senator Hemphill
and at you know this is to
establish two FTE and contracts
to build to you could build this
program from scratch it is going
to help us reduce the need to
put people into overly
restrictive guardianships you
know when you're in a
guardianship or legal civil
rights go away this is the
bottom line and so we want to
empower people as much as
possible to live as a tirelessly
as possible while still getting
the support that they need.
And I'm happy to answer any
questions about that built
wealth and with that I stand for
questions thank you very much
madam chair thanks committee
thank you very much hello my mic
call you thank you so much for
all your kids it's this year
commitment is admirable and and
that we appreciate it very much
I do recall from way back the
deficiencies that existed and
unfortunately it was at an area
where it's they're such great
need and so anyway that being
said I'm in a different members
of the committee for any
questions or comments.
Yes Senator Diamond madam chair
I I have a quick question Alison
if I'm reading this correctly
the executive is requesting
seven hundred thirty four
thousand higher for the
guardianship case backlog last
year you received five hundred
thousand but she reverted over
three hundred thousand back and
so my concern is the LFC
recommendation is a nonrecurring
two hundred fifty but that does
seem that LFC recommendation
does seem to be on track with
with the amount of cases you're
responding to if if we had to
revert to to high number last
year.
How was your capacity increased
to to meet the seven thirty four
this year thank you for your
question madam chair and as
Senator Diamond so as I
mentioned earlier we didn't have
a CFO for about seven months
during the year and the
reversion was
losing County miss that's the
bottom line and we were very
transparent with LESC about it
as soon as we counter the air we
realized it happened we flag it
right away we called our LFC
analyst and a you know we were
completely transparent about
what happened and we had put the
trust in our you know
legislature to ensure that that
funding was going to be there
because we do need to use it we
ended up having a hold our
weight listen let it grow
instead of instead of using that
funding to reduce a weightless
that's what should have happened
if the county here had not
happened and since then I've
have hired a new CFO we have put
new checks and balances in place
of that kind of thing will never
happen again I think that one
other thing that can prevent
that from happening again is if
for example we set had that
Non reversion language to to
replenish or find because then
we could use that funding in our
funds that are coming back and
asking for additional funding in
the later years and so you know
that's that's another safeguard
I think for for this kind of
issue happening yes please thank
you madam chair Micaela maybe
this one's for you but in the
LFC recommendation along those
lines for the two fifty that for
that backlog reduction it is
that is one time correct sure
that's correct and can I can you
explain just briefly why we
would want that as one time so
the to ensure that the the
backlog after we spend that
money doesn't doesn't continue
in years to come.
The shares
I'm gonna have to get back to
you on the I'm gonna have to
confer with our analyst but my
understanding was that was what
they thought appropriate amount
was to work on the backlog this
year and we can come back with
to address it may be a little
more recurring funding next year
okay so we would visited again
next year all right thank you
madam chair thank you anyone
else all right yes MaryBeth
thanks madam chair Senator
Diamond I just wanted to respond
to your question about the seven
hundred and thirty four that
yeah some hundred thirty four I
just wanted to make sure that
you are all aware that that also
includes the provider rate
increase amount as well so the
seven hundred and thirty four is
the difference between the
executive and the LESC so it
does have the additional for the
guardianship services the
executive has but it does also
have some of the provider rate
increases amount in there so I
just want to make sure that it's
clear that that seven hundred
and thirty thousand is not
entirely supposed to go to the
back to back okay that makes
more sense thank you.
Thank you thank you MaryBeth for
that explanation it does seem
like we have any other questions
let me just make a comment again
with more preaching to the choir
than anything is that I recall
when which you said Alice
earlier about the fact that
there was a balance of
approximately three million
dollars in there but the waiting
list continued to grow and grow
and grow so it was not being
used for its intended purpose
obviously and let me just ask
you quickly on this balance has
defined here that the
differences but it's a little
too much to to get immediately
has that all been used up
already and in three done Adam
chair we use it immediately to
reduce the backlog as quickly as
possible we spent it within my
first year to.
Right yeah it was really
important to us to provide
services as quickly as possible
I'm to the people needed it and
we didn't want any kind of
weightless but the reality is
that the needs are great and we
continue to see a growing
weightless we are trying to put
and we have put policies in
place to reduce that for example
we're doing pretty extensive
legal evaluations before we
spend you know taxpayer money to
provide the services so you know
we were seen for example you
know in the past state income
eligibility was the only
Representative the only
requirement to get services I'm
and you we would go all the way
through the entire case and then
the judge of find that there was
no guardianship needed and if
simple legal evaluation had been
performed at the beginning of
the process we could have saved
all of them funding and you know
given to somebody else who you
know did have a guardianship
that they need to put into place
so you know we've put in a lot
of safeguards to ensure that
we're spending money as as
effectively as possible to
provide as many services as we
can.
Thank you very much for that and
I don't have any other comments
and there's no one else to ask
questions or comments that we
just want to thank you for your
good work for the great cost is
thanks again that's all we have
all right thank you okay we're
gonna move on to the office the
family representation and
advocacy and as we said the
General Services Department was
moved to the last of the agenda
items so okay Office of family
representation where is that
where are.
McHale are you gonna be in for
that one too Senator okay thank
you.
Madam chair of the again Micaela
Fischer standing in for your
action needed for the LFC again
with MaryBeth and we're from DFA
and we're here on HSD six eighty
that's page three forty two any
volume to.
So the office of Family
representation and advocacy or
offer a is created as a
standalone agency last
legislative session and this
fiscal year will be the first
year the office so I have an
operating budget that separated
from the administrative office
of the courts where many of
offers functions were previously
housed
the agency was created to
provide high quality legal
representation for children
youth parents and guardians and
child abuse and neglect legal
proceedings with the goal of
safe and timely permanency
either through reunification
adoption independence for youth
aging out of the child welfare
system.
because the offices function
were previously housed in the CV
of ministry of office of the
courts but the executive an LFC
recommendations are reducing
general fund revenue to HSC by
merely nearly five point three
million dollars and to establish
the office LFC recommended a
twenty three point seven percent
more than the executive director
in the executive recommended
sixty two point six more general
fund that was reduced from AOC
space budget so in other
transfers from federal title for
E. revenue the LFC recommended
one point five million and the
executive recommendation two
point eight million the LFC also
recommended another one point
five million in federal revenue
because AOC had previously
received direct federal revenues
in support of this program.
Then finally all to say that LFC
recommended establishing the
office's budget for FY twenty
four in the basin the executive
recommended establishing the
budget through expansions in
total both recommendations
increase personnel costs
spending significantly above a
personal spending with the
offices functions were house to
AOC the difference between the
recommendations of about four
percent LFC recommended less
contractual spending because the
offices expecting to directly
hire attorneys as opposed to
continue to contract for
attorneys as was previously done
it is safe whatever the more
that we can madam chair I two in
pension for the analyst so
forgive me I will do my best to
explain what I know but get
Micaela did give a great
overview I just wanted to focus
for a moment on and I think one
of the issues that this we are
having with these budget system
the discrepancy between the
direct federal the transfers and
the general fund
so my understanding which please
correct me if if I am I'm wrong
is that there is one and a half
million in the LFC is budget
for direct federal funding but I
believe there is
it's not likely that that money
is going to come into the agency
they the grant has not been
renewed to my knowledge so they
may be facing a bit of a hole in
the budget without that ability
to bring in federal revenue the
transfers you know the if they'd
do more services and they can
bill us two FTE for more title
forty reimbursement of course
they can do that but I think
there is still little question
of is the general fund enough
for them given the fact that the
federal revenues are likely to
not materialize which would you
know give them quite a big hole
in their budget so it just
wanted to make sure that that is
out there as a as an issue that
they're facing this year in the
first.
Chair of their you know
existence and so with that I'll
turn it over to our director
Kelly.
Not good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Beth Kelly I'm director
of the new office I've been on
the job for about two and a half
weeks now and the office will
actually come to full life on
July first so we're really in
the planning phase and we are
working through AOC at the
administrative office of the
courts at the moment but will be
completely independent on July
first I'm also here today with
retired judge Monica is a more
of a sitting behind me she was a
children's court judge and
appellate court judge and she is
now one of the two co chairs of
the oversight commission that is
monitoring and overseeing the
office of Family representation
and advocacy.
I'm not gonna go through my
prepared notes because I think
there was a really nicely laid
out description of what the
office is about and what the
budget issues are by the two
analysts I would just emphasize
a couple of things one is
primary importance and that is
that the legislature adopted
this new model of representation
because it's an evidence based
model that has proven successful
for keeping kids safe and
returning kids home faster or
return or getting them to
permanency faster and the
current model that we have in
the state currently our children
families in the abuse neglect
system get a contract attorney
who contracts with the
administrative office of the
courts under the new office they
will get an interdisciplinary
team of legal representation
that will involve not only a
lawyer but a family peer
navigator who helps explain the
system to them who helps on
identified the family's needs
who helps identify under the
supervision of a social worker
master's level social worker of
the supports and interventions
that are necessary to move the
family forward to change the
conditions that brought them
into the system in the first
place and that will keep them
safe after the this model has
proven successful in other
jurisdictions and has had
significant return on investment
but the return on investment
financially is far less
important than the change in
well being and safety for the
children so I don't want to lose
I don't want to lose track of
the kids and families that we're
really focused on in light of
the dollars but the dollars to
matter so I'll just bring that
to your attention and you all
have received this document that
outlined some of that return on
investment and described our
model to you I do want to
reiterate what Meredith Dinsmore
mentioned about the federal
funding we expect to draw down
about two and a half million
dollars a year in federal for
easy funding that is a
reimbursed.
Then process we don't have to
apply for it will enter into an
agreement just like the AOC has
with children youth and families
department and we will bill for
the services that are
reimbursable of course the
amount we draw down depends on
how much up front investment the
state make something office the
additional one point five
million dollars that are that
are mentioned district transfers
in the LFC budget that was based
on a federal grant program
that's a discretionary grant
program called adoption
opportunities well that grant
program exists on paper there's
no forecast requests to be made
in the coming fiscal year we
don't know when that money will
ever be available again and if
it's discretionary so we would
have to compete for it and so to
rely on it in our first year of
budget I think would be a
mistake just missed is more
said with that I will stand for
questions thank you.
Thanks any questions comments
Senator Steinborn as senator
thank you very much madam chair
and welcomed the committee today
Question is this the same
program that also advocates for
families the kids in the CYFD
system that's exactly this
organization okay I had an
interesting I met someone
involved in the system and
always she really educated me.
About this
And sounds like it's pretty
effective program at advocate
for kids I have a question
number one what percentage of
the lack of putting in a better
way this is the right way to put
it eligible.
People are able to get the
program because of the funding
levels we find is there is there
are we are we short staffed in
other words are we not able to
provide full services are you
fully funded and so madam chair
and Senator Steinborn so the
program that exists right now is
the New Mexico family advocacy
program that program is grant
funded and it will and on
September thirtieth that program
is a demonstration program that
exists only in a handful
counties I don't I'm not
involved in that purpose I don't
know what they're turning
clients away or not what I do
know is that our contract model
that we have now for the rest of
the state that's not involved in
demonstration project.
Those clients do not get the
benefit of a social worker or a
family care navigator on their
legal team they get so like a
lawyer and
Every every family and child who
is in the child welfare system
gets legal representation under
our children's code.
Well let me ask you this number
one within the six so I'm a
little confused so your system
does not deal with CYFD or does.
So madam chair and senator
Steinborn yes when we come into
existence on July first we will
our clients will be the children
and families were involved in
CYFD exclusively that's that's
will sort of and this is a
program independently that
independently advocate for the
child independent of what CYFD
is recommendations are for the
child as correct okay and what I
was told which kind of was
fascinating.
is that what they're finding or
what they have found is a
certain error rate and
educations or.
The really finding that when it
when an independent lawyer looks
at some of these things the end
up with a different outcome the
let's put it that way is that is
that what you're finding.
Madam chair and Senator
Steinborn.
Children and families already in
the system already have lawyers
so that's not the ship that will
be made the shift that's going
to happen is that those lawyers
will no longer contract with the
administrative office of the
courts they'll be either
contractors with the new office
or they'll be employed by the
new office and they'll have this
interdisciplinary team that is
part of their legal team.
The main difference I think in
the model is the
interdisciplinary services that
support children and families
and the support that the lawyers
will get themselves right now
all those independent
contractors they really don't
get much in the way of training
they don't have oversight they
don't get mentoring they don't
have investigators they have
limited access to experts this
office will provide the
infrastructure that supports the
best kind of lawyering so while
I don't want to go out on a limb
and say that I think errors are
being made under the current
model I think the quality of
representation that that young
people get and that parents get
will be significantly heightened
and that's been shown in on
these other jurisdictions where
kids are going home sooner or
going home to a permanent home
in a in a quicker fashion.
I guess the punch line is
Senator that decision making is
better informed as of judges are
making better decisions.
So your forgive me again but
your program is going to take
over the CYFD.
set services this independent
and to be clear what I'm talking
about one separate from the CYFD
lawyers independent team of
people looking after the kids
interested legal okay so I think
what I've what I also understand
is that we benefiting kids I
mean this is another way to help
these kids and to make sure they
get the best outcome.
And so it seems like money well
spent and it sounds like it's
doing pretty well and I'm sure
have a lot more to learn but a
thank you for answering those
questions.
Thank you.
Thank you and we just Senator
Padilla then Senator Diamond.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the work that you're
doing thank you madam justice
for continuing to serve the
community and so many different
ways but this is one incredibly
that's close to my heart you can
imagine
please keep this that this more
right here in the middle of your
presentation please keep that in
every prison everywhere you go
is that is very powerful stuff
right there that's one second is
how are are we are so how are
the referrals going to come to
you I guess at the the one
question I have.
Madam chair you madam chair
Senator Padilla thank you for
your question they'll come the
same way they all come from the
court the court assigns the
council and they'll assign the
US office of family
representation and advocacy to
each of these clients and then
the office will sign the actual
attorneys to these cases thank
you madam chair because I I have
to say that over time I
different types I care a lot of
legislation and see why the and
stuff I sort of the repository
from a Senator Diamond does a
lot of this and several of us
receive a lot of calls on this
topic I can refer somebody to
you who is having issues finding
representation absolutely and
you're only going to represent
the child madam chair Madam
chair Senator Padilla no we will
represent the child and the
parents of their statutorily
required representation for both
parties for each respondent
which is usually the parents but
could be a custodian or guardian
and the children so will
represent all of those folks and
madam chair how are we going to
so what what is the again I know
you're you're you're trying to
fly the plane while you're
building and all that so
how are we gonna make sure that
their services outside of the
metro area what we're this whole
states a frontier state and with
this just you know don't get
ourselves but outside of
Albuquerque Santa Fe maybe Los
crucis you know some of the big
how we're going to ensure that
their services and and
availability for those.
Families that are barely need
also.
Madam chair Senator Padilla we
currently under the
administrative office of the
courts have a hundred twenty
five attorneys who already do
this work statewide we plan to
draw on that pool and I know
that I have heard it's anecdotal
at this point but I have heard
from people who are not
interested in being contractors
as attorneys but who would like
to comment be employed so I
think we'll actually have a
larger pool of attorneys to draw
from as for the family peer
navigators and social workers
that we intend to hire there are
and I miss you is certifying
family peer navigators now
they've sort of five forty one
there are going to get the names
wrong certified peer workers
that are so certified by the
department of excuse me that
Human Services Department
there's seven hundred and ten of
those in their eight hundred
additional certified your next
navigators or as separate system
so we think that we need twenty
six.
I think what they'll be a plenty
of tools available for those and
only a handful of most of and
most W. level social workers so
our intent is to have five
offices over the next couple of
years that are statewide and
will fill those and make sure
all our clients are served
quickly and and you madam chair
and and do you think that with
that salary ranges you're gonna
be able to attract and retain
the professional attorneys that
want to do this work I sure hope
so I know a lot of people do it
out of the kind of so there are
but you know that the we also
make sure you have the best and
the brightest of this service in
the hardest working and most
passionate people working for
you madam chair and Senator
Padilla I think that would be
additional supports that
attorneys are going to get in
this office that will actually
attract more attorneys that have
come to this as contractors in
the past we mostly have solo
practitioners doing this work at
the moment and they struggle
with high caseloads this model
actually allow us to reduce
caseloads and provide enhanced
compensation so that it will be
more attracted and it will come
with these additional support so
I I think it will be very
appealing thank you madam chair
really appreciate the work that
you're doing thank you thank you
thank you thank you Beth thank
you senator I think that it be
hard to to counter any of your
comments because your work has
been up the example of
supporting and protecting
children and providing education
from early childhood to
protective services and so on so
thank you for that and we've got
next Senator Diamond thank you
thank you madam chairman I'm
both excited and a little bit
concerned reset for it for the
creation of this first of all I
want to begin by asking this is
By statute of authority here
Representative by thirteen
member board one of those
members is appointed by the pro
ten and the other from the house
of reps have those board members
been appointed in can you give
us the names of the two
legislative appointees.
I'm sorry Senator Madam chair
Senator Diamond I can get that
to quickly I the whole board has
been appointed has been meeting
for many months already I don't
recall which member was
appointed by which okay if you
could send has yes I do not that
would be great.
Have a couple questions you said
quote these kids already have
attorneys but but we know in
some cases they didn't so in the
case of of James Santa Cruz
there were eighteen open child
abuse filed reports with CYFD
and he never went before a judge
and he didn't have an attorney
so tell me how your office then
would be able to representative
hit him in that instance a
similar case when he didn't have
an attorney Senator Madam chair
Senator Diamond our office will
not represent at least at the
outset children are families
that are not yet involved in the
court system so that clients for
that young that you just
mentioned there was never a
court case filed so we would not
we would not represent tactile
thank you that helps a little
bit madam chairman to make sure
that we get them before a judge
so that they become part of the
court system and in that case
they would have representation
there was also something else
you said
Is victimized by parents or
someone in the family how are we
making sure that that the
priority in the interest of the
child is prioritized over
family.
So madam chair and Senator
Diamond a couple of things about
that first code is really clear
that the safety is paramount
concern in these cases safety of
the child so that will always be
a priority its statutorily
required by our cold
in terms of representation our
office will have.
Basically a wall between the
lawyers who represent the
parents and the lawyers who
represent the children and each
set of lawyers will be zealous
advocates for their clients when
there are conflicts we will
contract out that representation
so there's no complex so that
needs of the child will always
be fully advocated for by our
office and then the parents
representational the equally
zealous so that we will always
put on child safety and the
child's best interests at the
forefront of that child's
representation thank you madam
chair so represented by
different attorneys but within
the same the same agency you're
representing both the victim and
in some cases the perpetrator.
Then in the same office Madam
chair Senator Diamond yes that's
correct but that's not unusual
it sounds like a conflict but
for example the public
defender's office frequently
will represent multiple parties
that Pete may appear to have
conflicts like that like what
you just described and they we
can create technological walls
and we can create different
lines of authority so there's
not sharing of information
between attorneys it will be as
if they're represented by
entirely different teams of
people that will be represented
by different teams within the
office thank you madam chairman
I will say that you're asked
don't seem too much to me I
think that every dollar spent to
be keep a child safe isn't is
money well spent but and I I
would encourage you to keep a
close relationship and
communication with legislators
to express areas in gaps in
which we are failing and so
initially you mention because
that they don't become part of
the court system they never make
it to our radar and so there is
a gap there that we have not met
and so you will see things on
your end that we don't see as
legislators and I would like you
to to frequently communicate
with the legislators on what we
need to do to make sure that we
are streamlining these kids
keeping them safe as possible
and they're not identify the
cracks and which are falling
through there seem to be so many
so bring that to our attention
and thank you for the work that
you do insurance reporting we
appreciate your heart of
services thank you thank you
thank you senator done alright
Senator Woods
I'm sorry madam chair that a was
in in at the first of the
presentation not apologies to
you I hope that don't ask too
many questions twice years of
the first question madam chair
is.
How many employees are in this
agency right now.
madam chair Senator Woods.
I'm sorry my my.
Okay.
Sars and so the HSD the office
of Family representation
advocacy I am currently it's
only employee we come into
existence on July first based on
what we've recommended we
anticipate having eighty two
employees at the outset plus
contractors eventually we
anticipate having something
close to a hundred seventy five
employees plus contractors it'll
always be a mixed model so that
we don't have conflicts of
interest on the model that
exists now where the attorney's
contract with the administrative
office of the courts there are
currently a hundred and twenty
five and madam chair.
Of and your title is director of
sectarian one what does call you
today Madam chair Senator Woods
you can call me director you can
just call me back.
Director Beth okay.
Where are you house right now or
where do you anticipate being
house what what
You you anticipating to grow out
of what agency so to speak.
Madam chair Senator Woods I am
currently housed at the
administrative office of the
courts the administrative office
of the courts currently has the
funding for all of the Attorney
so they're using that pool of
funding just to support my
position so that I can get
things ready to go on July first
once July first comes we will no
longer be part of the
administrative office of the
courts will be a separate agenda
agency in the executive branch
and our goal is to have offices
ultimately in five locations
starting in Albuquerque we will
provide representation statewide
from day one but we will be
opening up offices are
sequentially.
Have you done surveys of.
Madam chair and Madam director
have you done surveys to see
that that you have attorneys out
there that would be willing to
work for you
I always worry about workforce
and and the potential work force
have you got some idea of that
we have those attorneys
available.
Madam chair Senator Woods I
don't know if you were in the
room when I said this before so
I'm just gonna repeated and
currently there are a hundred
twenty five attorneys doing this
one.
earlier I said that anecdotally
I have heard from a number of
attorneys who didn't want to do
this work on a contract basis
but would like to be employees
and are very interested in
coming to the office once we
have employed staff but will
always have a combination and I
expect that that pool will be
sufficient to meet our needs
over time and lasts a question
that I'm sure is that a few days
ago we had the public defender's
office come in and there was
pockets in the state where there
was no.
No nobody you know they had to
travel.
To those districts to to service
those clientele so that's why
I'm worried about the volume of
warm bodies that you're going to
need so you assure me that there
there
I'm not going to question that
fact whatsoever so.
Madam chair and senator was I
don't want to mislead you we
have a hundred twenty five
attorneys doing is working.
They are covering the state some
of them tribal I don't want you
to have the sense that in every
community in the state we have
an adequate number there are
some there are some counties in
the state that have only a
handful of attorneys period and
none of them do this work where
they do it on time.
we do have a number of COVID of
contract attorneys who do travel
I expect that that may that may
continue for a while I hope that
in the long run that we can
solve the.
Okay and I know that you'll be
working closely both with the
courts madam chair and with the
CYFD soon
They would probably.
The two would feed.
The kids enter your organization
I would assume
And I don't know how many
attorneys CYFD has right now
that that does this kind of work
advocates for those kids that
thought that was their charge in
my Rome madam chair and Madam
director Senator Beth can you
respond to that thank you madam
chair Senator Woods yes CYFD has
a pool of attorneys are
confident for the times and they
represent the HSD and in
representing the agency they
represent what they believe to
be the needs of the children.
This office will represent the
children's best interests and
the youth's stated interest
that's what our model our
children's code has as well as
the parents and that's required
statutorily in our children's
code so in effect if that I
don't love this analogy but it
might help in criminal cases
with the prosecutor and the
defense counsel in the child
welfare Reno while it's not
criminal CYFD is effectively
quibbling to the prosecutor and
the parents attorneys and the
children's attorneys are
somewhat equivalent to the
defense counsel so they're
they're all required in the
court system.
Okay I'm gonna quit madam chair
thank.
Thank you senator good question
thank you and thank you for your
responses I don't have anyone
else on the list and I don't
have any other questions they do
have one quick one you may have
said earlier Beth what did the
house do on this one which the
adopted which recommended to the
LFC LFC okay thank you very much
and that's all I have Preciado
you working thank you judge the
more for all your work my
goodness never cease if I can.
In.
Yeah.
I wanted to give the perspective
from the trial court judge
Senator Diamond you asked about
this is the best interest of the
children under the children's
called a trial does is required
to balance the constitutional
rights of the parents and the
children but at the end of the
day under our case law in this I
was trying to remember the name
of the case I know it's in right
J. J. B. our Supreme Court has
told us when you have competing
interests with the parents and
the children that boils down to
that it's the children Senator
prevail
number one and that's what we
have to do Simon this is about
seventeen years ago and I was
appointed to the District Court
meant that I complained about
the system that we have now so
this is what brought me out of
retirement to sit as a co chair
on this committee because this
is a fabulous system what I was
of the District Court as the
presiding judge of my division.
I had to contract with these
attorneys.
But we had a separation issue
because I was the judiciary and
they were providing services to
parents I couldn't find
oversight I couldn't insure that
they got training or mentoring
right they were just there
they're also making pennies on
the dollar so there are a lot of
very good attorneys who were
very interested but could not
afford to do this kind of work
and I know that there are some
that have expressed an interest
in becoming employees is that
I'd love to go back to it there
were also attorneys who were not
only doing the
this work but they also had a
practice in these cases got
neglected with this system they
were able to focus on these
children and you don't you need
somebody there if they could go
and find the services themselves
and never be in the system in
the first place but by having
this interdisciplinary team they
get to know the family they get
to know that children they get
to seek out the services that
are really gonna work you
identified the my had situations
where we did the adjudication
which is where
the judge makes the finding that
that that that the children in
the state within the
department's custody you're next
to is what's called an initial
judicial review so between that
first the trial and that first
hearing you're looking at the
treatment plan did the did see
one of the identify the
appropriate treatment plan and
if not what changes need to be
made there were times when I
would ask over the objection of
counsel.
My dad how many times have you
met with your attorney between
the adjudication and the I. T.
A. R..
And it was right before they
walked into the courtroom so how
do you know if the treatment
plans going to work right
and so this there's that wrap
the inter disciplinary team that
wraps around this family from
the get go and you're going to
know whether or not they're
going to move forward or not
thank you thank you very much
for that and Senator Diamond it
you have a final point here only
because of time we've got if I
may the response that I agree
with you I'm optimistic I'm
excited because it does look
like we're finally putting the
interest of the child first and
we have not done that in New
Mexico and excited about doing
this I will tell you I have some
concerns and why said to
communicate with the legislators
I know that R. AG expressed many
frustrations with CYFD in the
past because they couldn't get
case information because C. Y.
FTE would claim that there's
confidentiality issues what I
hope is that you don't
experience that as well and if
you were getting the information
from CYFD to follow through on
these cases and to protect these
kids and make sure that those
are abusing them are are are
punishing held accountable so
let us know how we can help you
get the information that you
need thank you guys all.
In the conflict will be
addressed to I mean this is like
it.
A statewide law firm that's
being created and under the
rules of professional
responsibility after that
there's no conflict and so
that's part of what that and are
going to be working on in the
next six months the thank you we
look forward to seeing all the
additional work that you can.
The staff and we're going to
have to.
I am so here we go we're going
to go to the state investment
council and we've got where's
the staff here at C. thank you a
smile is always there.
And then we just kind of like.
What.
Sure.
Thank.
Is.
Receive that new.
This is what two forty five so
right okay so let's get started
good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is these mild though to some the
analyst for the state investment
council and we have state
investment officer and a good
one yes hopefully.
This is agency code three three
seven.
And we have state investment
officer Steve Mounie is here
with us IDFA counterparts Celia
and of the chief financial
officer BrainChip for the state
investment council and very
briefly there are very little
differences in this budget
between the LFC and Executive
recommendations this is not a
general fund agency they get all
of their of funding through the
investments that they manage and
the only difference is really an
FTE funding the LFC
recommendation includes funding
for three additional FTE that
were requests well the DFA
recommendation includes funding
for I.
And with that I'll hand it over
to DFA for additional comments
thank you very much there we go
and we see if I got your name
correctly Cecilia right yes
ma'am thank you thank you I have
no further comment so without
prospect Agency highest thank
you for all your work nice to
see you thank you madam chair
it's a pleasure to be here with
you and with all the various
members of the committee.
Almost the committee.
I have here and half their
another exactly how we do it
right it works Sir pleasure to
be here
It
has introduced Brandt our chief
financial officer who is sitting
here with me.
That Smith is our chief
investment officer that's
Charlie what is in terms of
communications client relations
and legislative relations chart.
Madam chair all rights could
look very briefly at only three
slides if you would please so if
I may refer Michelin teacher
slide one.
Assets under management as of
the last the last day of last
year were forty one point two
five billion dollars as of today
that number has increased to
forty two point six billion.
When I first arrived at the
council.
In twenty ten.
We manage fourteen million
dollars so there's the delta
between fourteen and forty two.
Over the following ten years.
We saw generally lucrative
markets with strong investment
returns more recently.
We've been lucky enough to
receive some record breaking
inflows from the oil and gas
industry.
So this slide shows you however
I have been able to grow over
the last four calendar years.
Estimates have done well the
fund inflows and the new funds
that you placed under our care.
Are a big part of the story.
Especially last year when the
markets were down so what does
this translate into for our
state please look at slide to
select three.
Permanent fund distributions.
It shows the history of the
permanent fund's delivering
benefits to our citizens all the
way back to the nineteen
nineties.
The girl the graph and these
numbers tell quite a story but
let me highlight a couple of
things.
The projected FY twenty for
distributions and distributions
is really what we are all.
The blue lines that you see.
Distributions from the land
grant and the severance tax
funds for the upcoming fiscal
year beginning in July.
Will increase by more than three
hundred fifty million dollars
year over year.
Coming in at more than one point
six billion dollars in benefits.
For the funds beneficiaries hand
General Fund.
About two hundred forty million
of that one point six.
Is due to the passage of
constitutional amendment one.
The rest is from the growth in
our funds for investment.
Other sources year over year
growth is important to recognize
because the funds have
consistently grown the amount
they provide to New Mexicans and
to use.
As our policymakers.
Bottom line.
New Mexico is permanent funds
provide stability.
New money for US policymakers
almost every year.
And they act as investment
revenue engines for the state
and I really like that term.
Investment revenue and to.
Moving on.
Slide number four.
Fund performance.
Shows are more most recent
performance available relative
to our benchmarks as of the end
of last year.
Short term you can see that
twenty two was a challenging
year as we all know.
As we have all suffered through
individually and other ones from
the start market correction.
We may not be out of the woods
yet.
In the next ten years are not
expected to be easy as this can
on page this can elaborate if
you wish.
He can discuss any questions you
may have about the markets our
outlook for other things.
We focus on the long term
results with the permanent
funds.
And long term we're still
achieving or actually very close
to our targets at seven percent
returns from a land grant Fund
at six point seven five percent
returns for severance tax.
Importantly madam chair.
Members of the committee looks
slide five if you will.
When greater inflows booming
that's an understatement.
This slide shows monthly inflows
to the land grant permanent fund
all the way back to twenty ten.
And after January of this year.
The word unprecedented is often
over used but it's definitely
what we're seeing here.
What once were typically fifty
million dollar monthly inflows.
Two years ago.
Grew to one hundred fifty that
two hundred and last October.
Those fifty million dollar
inflows were three hundred
million.
Remarkable.
When I came to the council in
twenty ten we were authorized
for thirty three staff members
thirty three FTEs.
To manage.
One third of the money we
oversee today so today we're
managing three times what we
work.
Thirteen years ago and we only
have twenty six FTEs authorized
for us for five more.
The funds which are already
produced fifteen percent or more
of the state budget every year
are going to be more critical
than ever as the world
transitions.
From oil and gas toward more
renewable energy.
So for that reason madam chair
members of the committee I ask
you to help us get the tools we
need.
To properly prudently manage
these funds to operate optimally
benefit Mexicans thank you for
allowing me to present and we're
happy to respond to any
questions thank you very much
for the good information I like
your.
Your presentations they're
they're very clear very Sir
Senator member since we LFC
meetings we used to comment on
how nice layman's terms for us
thank you so much okay do we
have any comments or questions
from the committee or before
let's go to this nice gentleman
before I didn't need would you
please your next and then we'll
go to members of madam chair
members of the committee of the
really brief with my comments I
think Steve mentioned that we
have twenty six authorized
employees we recently had to
retirement so actually fill
positions we have twenty four of
as Steve emphasized our assets
have grown markedly over the
last twelve or so years I know
when I started to make the
assets were little over fifteen
million dollars and as he said
today
over forty two billion
whether it be thirty one or
something higher than thirty one
going forward we are
forced to out positions and we
ask that you money to consider a
request as is already banned in
full size bar analyst the
funding for the state investment
council comes from the land
grant permanent fund in the
severance tax permanent fund of
general fund monies are involved
I just wanted to of maybe put a
little bit of a cherry on that
even though they're not general
fund monies we take the
expenditures within our agencies
that are made very seriously
I know when I first started over
eleven years ago I was asked
questions as it relates to this
and I I treat the money's almost
like their money money's under
careful for the guy and that's
kind of the way agency operates
and then finally I just want to
point out for fiscal year twenty
to or external audit was
completed.
And filed the day before
thanksgiving it's since then
finalize it's on our website
there is absolutely no findings
or no on a proposed adjustment
any adjustments that were made
during the audit were timing
like it just means that we
provided to the auditors and
that's all the comments I happen
we're certainly open for
questions thank you very much
any questions or comments from
the committee.
Nope all my goodness can you
Senator Woods I didn't see with
your hand up.
Recently.
Madam chair of madam chair.
So we're asking for some more
employees.
And so to me what camera of.
Qualifications you need in these
employees.
Madam chair.
Madam chair Senator Woods
typically it I'm glad you
brought that up because I had a
point I didn't make it of we are
signing up most of most of the
employees within our agencies
are investment relating or
accounting related to police and
the I did want to emphasize that
there are challenges with
recruiting those types of
individuals across the market
may not just in New Mexico but
outside of New Mexico as well
but mainly investment time and
accounting talk people are the
ones that were looking for yeah
that's that's kind of what I'm
getting at madam chair of.
You know if there's a.
For a better word
the that's really been making
money in the market somewhere.
He probably doesn't want to come
to you but he would be glad to
do some contracting with you so
that's that's some of the
questions I'm asking is how do
you.
Even determine who you want to
contract with because the
Sooners view Schachter's there
that.
Madam chair so what's this is
Matt Smith our chief investment
officer he's the best person to
answer that question.
Senator was
so so most so all of our money
is managed externally by by
manager such as you're you're
describing so we we don't manage
any money in house primarily my
folks are divided into two
groups one that does
macroeconomic analysis and asked
allocation portfolio management
those type of things a second
group that actually picks those
managers such as you're you're
talking about and builds asset
classes out of those.
That's what I thought you
operate more less like a
an investment firm.
Described in the assumed and you
you know you get good returns I
mean yeah you you've had a bad
year but everybody had a bad
year and so I'm just assumed
that you the the year very
sensitive to the investments
that are made in and the
position that.
That you take
And I don't really have any
further questions for you
because maybe.
You guys are the experts so I'm
not going to second guess what
you do this I am concerned
though of of finding them ploys
that you need.
you need highly skilled
employees and this is one of the
most crucial things that we have
in state government is actually.
For profit institution.
Is that a picture of thank you
for that opportunity thank you
very much Senator okay do we
have any other questions or
comments from the committee at
this point I don't have but one
final comment just thank you to
all of you truly for your hard
work and it's been a very big
challenge for everyone but I see
what your main question is here
to us is can you please give me
some people to accommodate the
three times more growth in
funding that we're having to
manage in in that shell that's
your main point right now
correct madam chair thank you
and that seems reasonable to me
that if we're gonna require you
to handle three times more the
funding you should have at least
a few more FTE right to
accommodate that so thank you
for the House Appropriations to
issue chair they took the LFC
recommendation.
Okay we're gonna take all of
this into consideration and I
thank you so much for for all
that you do for your staff yes
each of you also yes.
Your budget thank you and I have
to move on because it's got
couple of others
here we got the corrections
department we have the General
Services Department.
Point.
General Services.
Okay but we moved to the left
yeah okay okay thank you we're
gonna go with the corrections
department let's go with you and
then where did you have yes we.
Thank you very much we can
proceed thank you for the record
as we always do yes
thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ellen or even
LFC fiscal analyst I'm doing
this afternoon by Lisa to for
a live Serra secretary of the
corrections department at Smith
the administrative services
director can do to menace the
executive budget analyst for the
department hi this is agency
code number seven seven zero.
I'll need referring primarily to
the high level comparison of the
two recommendations which can be
found on page three of your
packets.
Provided recommendations for
this agency exceeds the
executive by three point one
million dollars from the general
fund.
There are no differences in most
the programs corrections
industries community offender
management program support the
same between both
recommendations provided
recommendations for the in the
management and control program
which can be found on lines one
through thirteen of your high
level is six hundred and
thirteen point five thousand
dollars higher than the
executive recommendation in the
reentry program which we found
Alliance fourteen through twenty
one of your high level the bank
legislative recommendation is
two point five million dollars
higher than the executive.
The executive recommendation
itself represents an increase of
two point two million or up
point seven percent.
It includes transferred from
vacancy savings to contracts and
other in the inmate Management
control program the cuts million
dollars from the reentry program
to add to the community center
management program for offenders
drug testing.
Provided recommendations total
of three hundred seventy one
point one million dollars
increases the general of the
increases the the budget by five
point three million dollars one
point five percent that's one
point six percent from the
general fund.
This includes additional
reallocation of vacancy savings
in the elimination of three
hundred nine long term vacant
positions you can find that in
line five year high level it
also provides additional funding
for raises for correctional
officers in both public and
private facilities you'll see
that online eight and eleven of
your high level.
Increases in evidence and
research based recidivism
reduction program programming
this online eighteen and
increases in for support housing
online nineteen.
Other revenue sources
Where fully supported by the
legislative recommendation but
it did eliminate the use of
symmetry income fund balance and
replaced it with recurring
revenue to the fund.
All know that the proposed
raises for public correctional
officers would average about
five point nine percent you also
see this noted online eleven.
and that the as of January first
there is a thirty four percent
vacancy rate among public
correctional officers there's
been over four hundred vacant
correct public correctional
officer positions for the
entirety of FY twenty three so
far during the entirety of FY
twenty two there are over three
hundred and twenty vacant
positions for public
correctional officers the agency
has been able to balances due to
a long term reductions in its.
Inmate population for example
as I noted on January first time
thirty four percent of public
correctional officer positions
were vacant but thirty seven
percent of public of prison beds
were on the field at the same
time.
on January thirty first AGFC
adopted the executive
recommendation for the
corrections department.
We'll touch briefly on
nonrecurring recommendations
these can be found on page four
of your pockets both
recommendations support thirty
million dollars to continue the
agencies hepatitis C. treatment
program the executives to highly
from the general fund for the
legislative recommendation is a
seven million dollars from the
penitentiary income fund and the
rest is from the general fund
that's active on page four and
both recommendations support a
one million dollar general fund
appropriation to convert
offender files to electronic
records not on line two of us
the table on page four amount
handed over to Diego for any
additional comments from the
executive thank you.
Thanks Alan madam chair and
members of the committee well
into the very thorough job
describing the differences.
However there are two.
Two of them that I would like to
express the executive's concern
about.
To learn more extent
Both of these changes are and
the in may and management.
Let's see maybe Mr.
Is backing up here we want to
make sure that.
We don't hurt anyone's years and
we can hear you clearly.
Thank goodness R. I think it
went away but I could hear so
good thank you that sounds good
okay thank you madam chair great
staff still.
Yes.
Trying to get that fixed here we
go all right let's try again all
right go ahead you can thank you
madam chair thank you
Then if I switch seats with Mr
mistreatment are good yeah you
just do what you need to do to.
makes up comfortable make sure
we hear correctly here with this
sound.
Okay thank you madam chair
there was a there are two.
To the differences that that
described are are of particular
concern to the executive other
both in the in may in management
control programs.
The first is the legislative
recommendation eliminates three
hundred and nine vacant
positions because a significant.
Administrative and other
problems of the for it for the
department of the other item
that we find particularly
concerning and and would ask the
the committee to support the
executive recommendation on is
the.
Language the.
The inmate Management control
program that that allocates a
specific amount of funding for.
Correctional officer
compensation of the executive
recommendation for person is
actually higher than the
legislative recommendation is
and so the the executive
recommendation provides the HSD
one more money to accomplish
these types of actions and to
give them more flexibility to to
decide what appropriate
compensation levels are as they
have been doing very proactively
over the couple years and a lot
of them flexibility to address
disparities and take care of
staff both inside and outside
facilities thank you madam chair
without a head over to the
secretary the echo and thank you
secretary to Sir for being with
us today yes you can proceed
good afternoon madam chair thank
you good afternoon members my
name's Lisa to foiling Serra and
the secretary for the
corrections department and of
course these folks they always
do a great job of explaining
things and I just wanted to give
a big shout out and an
appreciation to both agency
right in and Mr Jimenez for the
amount of effort and work that
they put into this and this was
an interesting recommendation as
we were looking through the LFC
recommendation because it looked
like we were very much on the
same page as a lot of these
different items except that we
had done many of them
proactively and so one of the
things I want to mention is that
cut of the three hundred and
nine vacant positions so I
believe many of the members on
this committee are aware that we
took over operations at to
privately operated institutions
just last year and in requests
we merged the CoreCivic
institution there with our
existing western New Mexico
correctional facility in in
Santa Rosa we took over
operations from the geo group in
in that location and when we did
that at these two places we used
existing vacant positions to do
that so we did not come to DFA
or to the executive office and
say we need to create a whole
bunch of new positions we
recognized the same thing that
that they're looking at with
these vacant positions and so
instead of creating a.
Positions from scratch we
primarily use positions I have
been long time they can't there
are few positions that we had to
create of course for some of
those administrative roles
within both locations but I want
this committee to be aware that
we did that and we converted
quite a few thank you positions
into into the the positions that
allow us to operate those two
institutions this kind of three
hundred and ninety get positions
I I understand where they're
coming from with it I can see
the logic behind it but my
concern is that what it would do
for us is that it would leave us
essentially exactly where we are
right now I know that mystery
been mentioned the thirty
percent vacancy rate that we're
experiencing facility wide which
is true and we also right now
have about a thirty percent
vacancy rate in our inmate
population as well so we're
really kind of leveled out right
out right now but that doesn't
mean that we should stop doing
recruitment and making sure that
we're bringing correctional
officers on board with the goal
of course to be able to operate
at capacity should we see an
increase in prosecutions now one
of the things that I think is
significant that was mentioned
in the the report the breakdown
report from the LFC was that the
number of people that were being
convicted out of the second
judicial district had decreased
significantly I think the rate
of people that we were seen
admission wise with something
like sixteen percent whereas in
the past had been in the
neighborhood of about twenty six
percent at this is an important
factor to know because the vast
majority of the prison
population is fed out of that
second judicial district from
the Albuquerque area and and
crimes being committed in that
area and with the push that's
taking place in the work and all
the hard work that's been done
by the district attorney's out
there in the courts to get back
into pre COVID levels with court
cases and hearings I think that
it's fair at this point to
anticipate that we might see
higher numbers of people being
convicted and possibly coming
into our facilities which would
put us at of course a much high.
You're right of us what we're
holding right now which again is
about we're about seventy
percent of our act able capacity
so what we're doing right now is
we did a big shift with the way
that we do recruitment right so
once upon a time people used to
have to come to Santa Fe to do
any of the screenings that would
take place it's like it to do
screening event it's a fairly
extensive process where you have
to come and do some physical
fitness activities there's a
psychological exam and things of
that nature and what we've done
is we've been able to shift all
of those things to the
facilities so what we what we
did and I the reason I believe
this is making a difference is
that recruitment taking place on
site at individual locations by
the wardens have their staff and
they really are very community
centric so that people know who
is in their communities they
know where to reach out to
people and what locations are
the most popular areas where we
might be able to recruit people
and then we're able to bring
them on site to our facilities
and conduct the entirety of the
screening and so far we have
seen this pay off in that when
we do bring somebody through the
screening process were able to
bring them on board right away
in the role that we COVID T. so
we bring Amman as mentees and
they work with mentors within
our institutions until there's
another correctional officer
class that they can take to
become fully certified officers
so we're seeing more people
coming on board and the class
that we have active right now at
the corrections academy has
forty one students we have not
seen a number this large in many
many years in the most recent
losses we've seen in the
neighborhood of seventeen
graduates twenty three on a
really high class so we're
really making strides towards
those recruit recruit
recruitment and retention
efforts and the loss of this
number of vacant positions
really would put us in a
situation where we're almost
having to hold steady I think it
would leave us with just over a
hundred vacant positions yes to
distribute across all of our
facilities which is about maybe
ten eleven positions per
institution and I think that
that can be problematic.
In the in the long run if we
start to see those increase
populations I just wanted to
make sure that the the committee
was clear on that another one of
the items I would like to bring
to your attention is the CPI
that was mentioned by Mister
Jimenez there is language in the
LFC recommendation specifying
additional CPI for private
partners I do recognize this has
been problematic in the many
years in the past and there were
many years I mean I think there
was even a ten year span at one
point where the private
operators did not get any CPR
what so ever and we recognize
that as problematic years back
and we have been giving out CPI
as we are able to and in fact in
twenty twenty two of the
remaining two facilities that we
work with the management
training corporation operates a
facility for us in the chaparral
the town of chaparral in Ontario
county we gave them a two
percent in twenty two July of
twenty two they will be
receiving another two percent in
July of this year and the geo
group who operates the Lee
County correctional facility in
Hobbs they were giving it given
a three point one in January of
twenty two and the also are
receiving at two percent CPI
increase this year in January of
this year so those are things I
believe that we've already
covered those are things that we
we we recognize the need over
and over time but that those are
not things that we see pressing
and then finally the last thing
that I'll I'll mention that that
that one of the big differences
and I Diego alluded to it just a
bit but that we've worked really
hard internally to try to create
equity for our staff members not
just for correctional officers
but for all the people in the
positions within our facilities
and so what we've done there is
figure out ways where we can
create baseline pay for
positions and in not when we
first started in two thousand
nineteen our correctional
officers would be paid at a rate
of seventeen dollars and eighty
six cents per hour and then as
of this month I believe it was
as of January.
The position now has elevated up
and the pay for a starting
correctional officer is twenty
two dollars and fifty cents an
hour in that time span that is a
twenty six percent increase and
we've it that's really just
brought them up to mid point so
now the correctional officers
are finally in mid point and we
believe that the increase that's
included in the executive
recommendation will enable us to
acknowledge rate increases for
all of our staff members and not
just one category of them so the
executive recommendation is
three hundred thirty seven point
six million the LFC
recommendation is three hundred
forty point seven million.
Difference is three point one a
higher form from the LFC and
with that madam chair and
members I respectfully request
your support for the executive
recommendation and will stand
for questions thank you thank
you Secretary a question of yes
thank you before we go on
Senator and you certainly on my
list here let me go to others
here see did you want to say
anything young gentleman here
Madam night how many to add.
Thank you very much then I think
we're going to go out to members
Senator Steinborn.
We are we so if.
Not so good and then we don't we
think he's just amazing he read
so much and always seems to know
so much I just learned from him
so our we go.
Thank you thank you ma'am
Inspector Good afternoon.
Few questions for you what is.
What is New Mexico's recidivism
rate you know.
madam chair Senator Steinborn
our recidivism rate right now
sits at forty four percent.
The thank you and I remember
years ago and four years ago
think we're closer to fifty
percent forty nine percent the
correct is that number gotten
better since lower Madam chair
Senator Steinborn yes much
better in fact I I recall of
looking at fifty four fifty six
percent.
Thank you and one metric in a
way I guess is maybe look at
states around us I remember New
Mexico used to have the highest
recidivism rate of return to
jail for this don't know what
that word means listening
we have the highest rate in the
region how do we stack up to
other states around us now no
Madam chair Senator Steinborn
percentages from other states
but I do think it's important to
know and I I meet with other
states leadership regularly we
get together a few times a year
and one of the things we've been
talking about recently is the
fact that none of our state's
defined recidivism the same way
and so some of the states they
maybe don't includes Connors at
all and some states to do just
like what we do in our state is
we include every single person
for any reason no matter what
who ever comes back to present
within a three year period of
time and many other states only
include them if they committed a
new crime for only if X. Y. NZ
so I do know that if we were to
make modifications to the way we
calculate we probably see
significantly lower numbers but
regionally I do think that
Colorado still beating us but
we're competitive now with the
with Texas in Arizona and New
some of the other states in our
area
thank you.
About I think one difference in
the the exact LFC.
Were these read the reentry
program.
And the community offender
management the.
From
the program.
Madam I think it was also the in
mid management control area.
Yes can you talk about the
reentry program first of all and
what that is.
Let's start with the chair
Senator Steinborn absolutely I'm
happy to so the reentry program
is is a newly created area
within our budget we asked to
create a separate area my
intention there was to say that
I want to make sure that
corrections leadership forever
into the future always makes
reentry a priority and so
turning it into a budget program
code made it such that you all
the legislature would be
involved in the funding in that
process no matter what happens
so what it is is when we first
created instead of coming in
asking for new money to create
we recognize that a lot of those
activities we're already taking
place in our system right so we
took resources out of in the
management control and out of
community offender management we
shifted them over into the
reentry program and so we're
sort of in that phase where
we're still sort of like growing
pains status and so what you see
here I I would consider it an
error on our part and something
that we were trying to correct
in this budget cycle so what we
did was we pulled money.
Out of community offender
management and we moved it over
into the reentry program not
realizing that it was
specifically earmarked for
electronic monitoring and then
we said oh wait that belongs in
probation and parole community
offender management so what
we're trying to do with the
budget was just to correct it
and put that money back and
community offender management it
wasn't anything that was taking
services away from the reentry
division.
Right thank you madam chair and
then secretary I still don't
quite know I mean the word
reentry.
Well and and more more to the
point is that here executives
actually recommending a
reduction in that budget for
this coming fiscal year than the
current fiscal year that's what
senator she and but the LFC
recommendation is more than the
current year that's pretty big.
Pretty big disparity of wealth
about two and a half million
dollars anyway but why are you
recommending it a decrease in
that and LFC is recommending an
increase in.
Madam chair Senator Steinborn
the reduction in the L. and the
DFA recommendation is what we
ask for that's the million
dollars we had for offender
monitoring that we put in all
the numbers last year for the
new program got we over move the
money so it's just putting it
back that's why to actual
reduction but it's what we ask
for it's putting that money back
the LFC recommendation included
additional new funds in that
program.
Okay.
All right so.
I'm still a little confused so
but
So.
Sounds like you were it was
originally there was an item
that was originally in that that
you took out in the act and the
LESC still have that money in is
that
madam chair Senators Time Warner
when I put those numbers
together I took X. amount of
dollars from community offender
management program and moved it
to reentry one I should've left
a million dollars in community
center management for that for
those offender monitoring
services so it's putting it back
to where it belongs for the
offender monitoring and madam
chair Senator Steinborn if I can
clarify the LFC recommendation
also supports this movement of
money in addition it supports
the addition of two million
dollars for additional evidence
and research specific based
recidivism reduction programming
an increase of five hundred
thousand dollars for supportive
housing.
Except for Kip are you there I
apologize the with the executive
what the hell is a yes man chair
Senator Steinborn on the HSD
director of corrections sitting
next to you about this madam
chair Senator part is because
that Diego and I I switched
places but and Allen right and I
work for LFC sorry I apologize
so the question thank you for
saying what you said because it
kind of gets to the heart of the
you know we're looking at
program titles were saying the
numbers the concern is that
we're not Steinborn it gives the
impression that we're seeing
we're not.
For some reason you seeking
reduction so does the executive
embrace the LFC recommendation
on that line item are you saying
there's a discrepancy there
still.
For the evidence based reentry
provisions.
Maybe for you all.
Sure and at that the executive
recommendation does not support
increases for recidivism
reduction programming for
supportive housing and I would
defer to Mister Jimenez are the
secretary to discuss more to to
give more detail on why the
agency in the executive have a
prioritized what they have.
Madam chair Senator Steinborn we
feel that we have addressed that
in the two prior budget years of
taking place we have
consistently increase the funds
available for supported housing
and we're at we're finding that
we're at a point where we're
sort of leveling out with what's
available in the community when
it comes to what we can spend in
what what resources are out
there to put money towards so I
might be able to get more
funding in that area but that
doesn't necessarily mean that I
will have additional housing in
that area so it wasn't
Ask for additional money in the
reentry program code also
because we at this point we're
in the process of ramping up and
increasing in every facility the
type of reentry programming
services that we offer and
resources and things like that
so again it's one of those
situations where more funding
doesn't necessarily equal more
programming and I feel like it
might require that I have to
hurry up a little bit faster and
then I don't do the level of
quality that I would like to be
able to do for the dollars that
I do have.
The and thank you madam chair I
just wonder you know it seems
like it's one of those things
that's on going it's like you
know what we did last year for
somebody who got out last year
doesn't mean that need I would
assume money and service goes
away this year for.
New people are getting out that
we want to keep from going back
in so I am interested in
learning more about that in the
I can ask other questions but I
will stop right there I'm glad
that we are reinvesting the
money and this and better wages
and into supporting workforce
because I know that was such a
huge challenge and so that's
good to see thanks Mitch
Senator Senator Diamond we did
you have your hand up I do
Representative real quick madam
chair I I really just wanna also
echo the concerns of my
colleague someone here LFC is
recommended being a two point
five million dollars higher it's
unusual in HSD come before us
this is specific to the reentry
program it's unusual a standard
December missing when we have an
agency come before us and they
don't want the money with the
LFC is actually.
Recommended we give you more
money and you don't want it you
and I agree it seems like that
would be a recurring need is to
address these reentry programs
you said you met many of your
goals but as I look under here
included in the re entry is the
purpose purpose the Braintree
programs to this facilitate and
we ability these processes
including a list of educational
opportunities.
Your actual results for the
percent of eligible inmates who
want to high school equivalency
is it eight percent were our
target is that eighty and so
that alone in a number of
metrics that we're not meeting
would seem to indicate that you
do need that funding and you do
need.
That program what what am I
missing here in D. funding this
program.
Madam chair Senator Diamond I I
I understand completely what
what you're what you're saying
and I'll just I'll be real real
straight about this specifically
that and the need to you don't
be sick education so we did have
a shift in focus in what we were
doing and what happened was a
lot of the staff that were
working in the reentry division
leadership in that area was
really trying to focus on
creating new programs and new
things and things that we were
already doing in order to make
sure that we were spending the
dollars that we were receiving
for the support that we receive
for the reentry division and as
a result.
Some of the basic things that we
do and have always done and we
know to be important factors in
reducing recidivism one of those
things adult basic education in
receipt of a general equivalency
diploma those are some of the
things that lost some of their
attention as the teachers and
educators that we had in our
facilities were trying to shift
their focus to implementing some
of these other programs so we're
trying to balance that out right
now and I'll tell you that we
are working really hard right
now to shift our focus back to
making sure that we're meeting
those basic levels basic needs
things like making sure that
people are getting those TV's
while still being able to do
some of the extra things the
primary reason I'm not asking
for those extra dollars that the
LFC is offering us is because I
think it's important for us to
take stock of what we have make
sure that we're able to do what
it is that we do very well and
then perhaps next year come back
and see okay now we're ready to
add some additional layers of
different types of programming
options on top of that but right
now I feel like some of our
basic needs are suffering as a
result of trying too hard to go
too fast on new things.
Answered thank you madam chair
thank you.
Yeah.
This for.
Staff that
had major
concerns how many things you can
actually jobs.
Session and.
The population count yeah with
that song.
Revenue budget I should say.
Mediations.
Three hundred nine decisions
this.
You also mention that it would
be the process hundred spread I.
The
problem problem this.
Decisions for each.
Thanks special.
That sounds thank you very much.
The problem that you mentioned.
I lost.
C..
To people like yourself.
And your.
Clearances dollars.
And so I just I just pointed out
that.
I.
After.
Thank you madam chair.
Last
year today.
You madam chair.
Thank.
Yeah.
As we did from from.
Okay.
The
have yeah.
The.
Terry is not here so do are we
going to have three years out so
madam chair acting secretary and
so that is here today.
Thank you hi and.
Thank you you know I have to say
that I've seen this a lot of
times actually at the state
level in New where we go we have
people who work there like Anna
thank you for a long time in
different positions you always
curious and especially in
situations like these you're
right a step into to handle
things and we appreciate that
because when cue Here okay so
shall we proceed yes madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Joseph Simon I'm your LFC
analysts for the General
Services Department with me
today is see you Cecilia
mathematics.
With the department of finance
and administration and acting
secretary of the General
Services Department and Silva at
your agency code is three five
zero and
just in the interest of of
moving through this as
expeditiously as possible madam
chair we have eight programs in
this particular department but.
You'll see in your LFC packet
there's a high level bullets and
there's really you know I just a
handful of of key differences in
some of the larger programs and
I'm gonna focus on those with
your permission madam chair and
both the executive and LESC are
are willing to answer your
questions on any of the other
programs but I'm just going to
focus on some of the some of the
larger differences in the in the
big programs.
So
to start out madam chair if I
can start with the employee
group benefits program and you
can see the different sheet on
page eight of your LFC packet.
Final notice madam chair that
there's quite a large difference
between LFC and exec for the
employee group benefits program
let me explain what's going on
here so for the last several
years the state has not raised
health insurance premiums
leading to a significant deficit
in the employee group benefits
fund so for the current year the
the department is projecting a
the.
Eighty eight point nine million
dollar deficit as of today and
then through the end of this
fiscal year an additional
fifteen point six million dollar
deficit so
we're looking at the end of FY
twenty three and having a
hundred and four million dollar
deficit in that fund because of
insufficient revenue I will say
the department has requested a
special appropriation totaling
ninety six million to partially
resolve that deficit
but part of the reason for that
is because it revenues into the
fund are insufficient to cover
the expenses so the LFC
recommendation adjusts the
revenue the projected revenue
into that fund to reflect the
current year projected actuals
verses applying an increase to
the agencies expenditure
authority so the executive
recommendation includes about
ninety three point seven million
dollars more in revenue than the
departments expected to take in
in the current fiscal year what
I would say on this is the LFC
recommendation does include our
language for the department that
would allow them to bar in
additional funds pursuant to a
premium rate increase the LFC
recommendation for compensation
does include funding for the
general fund portion of a ten
percent rate increase so the
department could bar the
additional revenue in to that
program.
with that with that authority
and that's essentially the story
of the employee group benefits
fund and I'll just ask Cecilia
she has any comments on that
before moving on to the next to
the next program madam chair I
think Joe we did a fabulous job
explaining that thank you thank
you so this is nice you all have
talked of greed.
So much easier for us and it's
three forty so Hey we're going
to move on this quickly thank
you okay so we're yes the next
program I'd like to discuss
madam chair is the facilities
management division that's on
page nine in your LFC packet and
there's a couple of differences
I just would like to discuss now
the facilities management
division and at GSD is is
important because it's the one
division in the in the agency
that is General Fund funded
right so most of the other
programs are funded by
contributions into the program
for
for insurance or other for other
services like transportation
facilities management is is
general fund funded.
So you can see there's a there's
a difference in the LFC and the
executive recommendation of
about two hundred seventy five
thousand dollars the both of
that difference is related to
the what you'll see on the other
finances uses uses line that's
the truth right now the
facility's Management Division
transfers two hundred thousand
dollars out of the program into
the program support program so
you all appropriating general
fund dollars to the division
which then the division turns
around and transfers to the
program support program so what
the LFC recommendation does is
sent okay you don't have to make
that that transfer anymore you
can keep those dollars in the
division for actual programming
at the division.
you will see madam chair and
members of the difference in the
LFC and the executive
recommendation the LFC the LESC
recommendation does a little bit
more in the other cost
categories that's where the
division funds maintenance
activities utilities
other other things other costs
the executive recommendation
places more into the personal
services employee benefits line
item I believe acting secretary
so was going to talk a little
bit about that would at her
presentation so with that I'll
just note I actually forgot one
thing the LFC recommendation
does include a seven FTE
expansion for the department to
hire security guards executive
recommendation also includes
that and and three additional
FTE not including the LFC wreck.
Thank you Joey all right you are
next would you like to say
anything Representative this
thank you thank you to the
committee in the try to conserve
some time I like to start on
page eight of the presentation
so we can go over a little bit
of the differences between the
LESC and the executive
recommendation
let's start with the purchasing
the LFC recommendation because
the general fund and as fully
dependent on other revenues the
problem with this is that
national cooperative procurement
as of right now in the bill very
volatile state we cannot assume
that the revenues that have been
generated in the past will
continue to be generated at the
same rate in the future
to the LFC to the facility's
Management Division as Joey
stated the LFC recommends seven
staff were as the executive
recommendation funds ten
additional staff I'll go into a
little bit more detail at the
end of the presentation on the
importance of that difference
reductions in the general fund a
facilities management will not
is not being able to properly
operate and maintain the
additional half a million and
square footage that we have
brought in in the past one and a
half years in addition we will
not be able to provide safety
and security in our buildings
further of adoption of the
General Fund in transportation
services put the operation and
maintenance of the state cracked
at risk the reduction of a
hundred and seventy seven point
six thousand in general fund is
a twenty five percent reduction
in
in us the transportation budget
this this would impact our
customers and the students at
the New Mexico school for the
visually had a class Capt and
the a medical staff of the
children's medical service
program.
a little bit about the impact
the risk management fund when
this administration came into
the office we inherited a fund
that was already up five million
dollars to the deficit in order
to get ahead of this this
administration increased rates
in twenty nineteen by four
percent and then twenty and
twenty twenty by five percent
then COVID hip and this
administration did not want to
Byrd and people who are already
experiencing hardships as a
result of COVID with additional
hardship of a premium increase
this fund is the largest gap
between the LFC and executive
recommendation.
looking at let's see here.
It passed our initiatives and
let's go to slide twelve so we
can talk about our supplemental
and our special request.
We are requesting eight hundred
and seventy nine thousand four
shortfalls in the contractual
category for life insurance we
are also asking for two point
seven million in the special to
add new vehicles and our
transportation division we
currently have two thousand
vehicles in our fleet and twenty
percent of those vehicles have
over a hundred thousand miles
we're requesting money to move
our fleet to incorporate
additional electric and hybrid
vehicles.
We're also asking for one point
two million for overhauling both
engines and IGST aircraft FAA
requires overhauls of the
engines at thirty six hundred
flight hours our engines are
currently at three thousand one
hundred and sixty hours
therefore if we do not get this
funding we will need to the
ground the plane by next year in
June.
We are also asking for four
hundred eighty thousand special
for seven security guards in our
state buildings and lastly we
are requesting ninety five
million one hundred and six
thousand and deficiency for us
for our health benefits for the
last sixteen years this fund has
had only seven premium increases
and two of those have been in
this administration this fund
supports not only executive
branch but legislative judicial
and local public bodies as well
thirty six percent of this fund
is made up of local public
bodies from truth or
consequences to Los crucis
McKinley County my RD to Leslie
this.
And the majority of the
individuals in this fund make
less than fifty thousand dollars
the deficit for this fund was
exacerbated by an unforeseen and
unprecedented pandemic COVID hit
us hard.
Fifty four million that we were
dissipating.
turning to slide thirteen the
next few slides are highlighting
a few of the projects that we
have either completed or in
process funds slide thirteen
this is the new vital records
building and this was completed
in August of twenty twenty.
On slide fourteen this is the
new DPS secure storage facility
this was completed in June of
twenty twenty two.
On slide fifteen I slide fifteen
this is the CYFD pine tree
campus this is a three phase
project and we are completing
the third phase of February of
twenty twenty three.
And slide sixteen is the DPS
District one field office this
will be complete June twenty
twenty three.
slide seventeen is the DPS crime
lab this will be completed
September twenty twenty three
and the reason those facilities
are important because those are
just a few of the seven that
will be coming online that we're
that we're asking for program
expansion for maintenance in
order to support those
facilities.
If we look at slide eighteen
this is a project that we want
to highlight this is the tier C.
Veterans homes this will be
project will be completed in
December of twenty twenty three
this will be our first net zero
community.
Looking at slide nineteen
something I mentioned yesterday
and are aging FC hearing is if a
picture is worth a thousand
words and I'm hoping that these
pictures are worth four hundred
and eighty thousand which is
hard request for supplemental.
And the the pictures that you're
seeing of the vandalism that
occurred that was just happened
about two weeks ago so it's a
regular court I currents
unfortunately.
which is why we are requesting
additional security guards we
are also implementing a craze
training program for employees
and a rate notification program
for employees to notify them of
any emergency that might be
taking place in any of our
buildings.
Looking at slide twenty because
we do not have security guards
are maintenance staff are having
to remove and respond to
homeless in our buildings our
maintenance staff are the first
on scene and they are not
equipped nor the properly
trained to deal with these
issues.
On slide twenty one as a result
of having to clean that poems
camps cleanup after vandalism
and respond to emergencies we
have a work order backlog of
over five hundred and thirty
work orders.
Our current staff is inundated
with requests and now we have
seven more buildings coming
online.
Therefore as you look at
geocities budget request whether
it is for security for the
budget to maintain the plane
that support the school for the
blind for for a budget fund that
supports thousands we are
requesting that the executive
recommendation be adopted thank
you thank you very much any
comments or questions from the
committee Senator Steinborn and
Senator Diamond then Senator I
share.
Thank you madam.
Thank you madam chair and
congratulations on your
appointment there madam
secretary definite is that the
total or acting acting secretary
thank you what question about
the you know my passions of
facilities management you know
I'm gonna ask you
State owned about eight hundred
buildings now how many what's
the total number of state
buildings from a little over a
hundred over a hundred and a few
years ago I was trying to
encourage that we use.
More renewable energy on more
buildings in eight hundred
buildings at that time we had
renewable energy I think on
approximately one of them.
And
And then there was a funding
item we spent twenty million
dollars to retrofit I think the
buildings in Santa Fe with solar
so I guess I'd like to hear in
at that time I was trying to
pass a bill as you know to put
us on a path to study energy
efficiency across the state.
And that bill did not pass.
Which I don't agree with but so
my question is how what what did
we accomplish with the money we
spent and how far we've gone
since sent in assessing energy
efficiency at all the other
state buildings Mr chair Senator
Steinborn thank you very.
So since back to project we will
be completing the last solar
array this year in June and that
will be at the come others
campus and the west campus since
the initiation the project we've
have over one point one million
in savings that we received from
the project we're also currently
in the process of to two
projects one at the and B. H. I.
facility in Las Vegas and one of
the correctional facility we're
doing audits on both campuses
once audits are complete then we
will determine what additional
renewable energy projects we can
complete on both of those
campuses so because the Santa Fe
campus initiatives was so
successful that's why we're
doing the net zero project in
truth or consequences
we have the window Chino
building that would be
completely net zero we will then
be looking at like I said the
Las Vegas campus and the and the
penitentiary of facility here in
Santa Fe and then on on I'm with
you on that and it's a great
initiative and something that I
want to do is on many as many
buildings as we possibly can
thank you madam chair so in
total what's the total number of
buildings you just described
that are now so here in Santa Fe
we have over twenty buildings
that have it are benefiting in
some way from renewable energy
in Las Vegas depending on how
the audit turns out it could be
as many as fourteen just
depending on what the outcome of
the audit is an independent
country maybe I
but a lot of the facilities that
we have statewide won't aren't
good candidates so there sheds
there there maintenance shops
and so not every of facility
that we have as a candidate for
renewable energy or energy
efficiency project so madam
chair so we saved a million
dollars in utility costs from
that.
In for the one project just this
year and that will be on going
every year.
So.
I noticed in your budget now in
that particular case here in
Santa Fe we say that it cost us
capital expense to get into the
game with the esco contractor
whatever it's called the
So is it I don't see and and the
supplementals or anything in
your budget that we're
requesting money to do that
work.
So why is that the case why
aren't we asking for more money
to do this work Mr chair Senator
Steinborn so the first thing we
have to do is we have to
complete the energy audit once
we complete the energy audit
then we will ask for capital
outlay requests depending on
what the outcome was from the
energy audit and thank you madam
chair is the energy audit says
statewide madam chair of Senator
Steinborn no it's just for the
Las Vegas campus and for the
penitentiary here in Santa Fe
the madam chair what are we
doing to assess statewide I mean
we have a penitentiary and lost
when we got him all over the
state bill and we've got lots of
big facilities all the state
what are we doing statewide to
do this assessment Madam chair
Senator Steinborn that's very
expensive and so right now as
far as priority of the priority
is a
yes security on our campuses and
that kind of took a backseat so
right now the audits we were
able to do to audits and two
campuses hopefully we get the
security
the security situation rolled
out then we can come back with
looking at a master plan for the
rest of the state so for what
it's worth drugs and thank you
for that you know years ago when
we did this thing and I was
trying to pass this bill that
would put us on a path statewide
to just even doing an
assessment.
Bill then passed
And I put in some language in
the bill I work within secretary
or tease we put in some language
requiring that like just a
little sliver of that money we
appropriating do a statewide
plan.
It I guess hasn't happened this
was now for five years ago we
still really haven't made a move
we did we made an investment
here because it was important
legislators in Santa Fe they did
that and sounds like we don't
know more I would just suggest
madam chair that unless we put
more money into this.
I mean past is prologue
I don't know we need to help
kind of encouraged to this
policy if we think it's a good
thing and put more money into
planning it would be really
helpful for me maybe the
committee to know like what
would that cost us to do a
statewide assessment of our
buildings to look at if we want
to put more money into this to
help support getting that work
done.
And that in and then out it also
includes other efficiency
measures right it's not just
solar but it's also things that
other state just as much or more
energy than than that right Mr
chair Senator Steinborn that's
correct okay would you mind
getting getting the number of
what that would cost absolutely
that be great thank you that's
all have thank you Sir and I
think with your perseverance
someday we will have that not
only the study but the results
of that so thank you very much
our ID sure Senator Diamond and
then we have Senator share and
then we now have Senator Woods
thank you madam chair thank you
guys for the presentation you
mentioned the deficit thank you
inherited from FY twenty twenty
two the state spent ninety five
million dollars more a group
budget and it's that is
collecting in premium revenue
someone here in FY twenty there
was a balance of six million by
the close of twenty two there
was a sixty five million dollar
deficit and it's estimated at
the close of twenty three
there's a ninety five million
dollar deficit.
We're not just headed to a
crisis here you're in a crisis
and so respectfully I asked it
despite of these deficits
you're agency did not increased
premium rates how are we going
to respond to this financial
hole.
The madam chair Senator Diamond
thank you for the question so as
I mentioned we did inherit of
the fund for the past sixteen
years there has been a deficit
so we inherited at fifty at a
five million dollar deficit in
addition as I mentioned COVID
hit us really hard we were not
anticipating the fifty four
million dollar
additional costs for comment in
addition to that we're still in
the middle of the flu season R.
S. B. and COVID so yes it is a
continuing to be a problem
however we are already looking
at other options and looking at
we have brought on a
subject matter expert who is our
actuary a on and they have made
some recommendations to look at
the tears and to of and with
that recommendation is looking
at the actuaries said they could
level off however the
administration this year as well
is working with the state
personnel office to do of us
basically all of a whole
analysis on the group benefits
plans to incorporate the
employee benefits so it's going
to look at right sizing their
of their salaries and then with
the commensurate
Right up the premium should be
as a result of that so it is
being looked at but there have
been two rate increases in this
administration both in nineteen
and both in twenty twenty a four
percent and twenty nineteen and
eighty five percent and twenty
twenty of the seven increases
two of those happen in this
administration.
Thank you.
With that said the big
significant.
Increases to that deficit have
just happened to the last couple
years are you going to be
raising premiums this year madam
chair Senator Diamond I don't
know.
Do you have any other put
possible solutions to stopping
this please madam chair Senator
Diamond there are solutions
being worked on currently.
At at the rate of a ninety five
million dollars a year chair
Senators we are asking as part
of the recommendation of the
supplemental requests from the
executive branch.
Okay and and I see that on here
there was still some back
filling it looks like in FY
twenty three there was that the
legislature even provided
another forty two million
dollars to address the shortfall
but it continues that gap
continues to widen this is a
serious problem for New Mexico
it seems like the answer to
would we be increasing premiums
would quickly be a yes to at
least try to stop some of it I
don't think we're gonna be five
ninety five million dollars a
year but Senator Steinborn
there's not enough solar panels
in the world to get this time we
we got a fight we got to find a
way to fill this deficit and
we're committed to it thank you
madam chair.
Thank you very much.
Take me off Senator Diamond ask
questions better than I would
have so taking off.
Yeah we don't thank you Senator
what.
Questions we have a.
Is here.
Thank you senator madam chair
the only question I had was on
the same subject but it was the
fact if we had a.
The number of individuals
covered under state health
insurance plan fell by twenty
percent could you provide me
some detail on why we had such
a.
Decrease in coverage individuals
participating.
Madam chair Senator Woods so
we're showing that we have a
total of fifty seven thousand
four hundred eighty three
individuals that are on the fund
that includes the dependents the
majority of the individuals that
are in the fund make less than
fifty thousand dollars and of of
those in the let's see local
public bodies it looks like the
amount of the individuals are
twenty one thousand six hundred
and thirteen I'm not showing
that there was a decrease in the
fund but I can get you that
information if there was.
Well and and and to be fair to
the I read back further in the
Senate's and it said from FY
twelve to twenty one so it's a
long term the you know a long
term happening and it's it's
hard to.
This is one thing you need some
well people pay and then to.
But a claim no the that's way to
make the deal work and so.
Yeah I'm concerned about this
particular deal a lot because we
are.
We are not making the plan pay.
And.
Certainly there's insurance.
Ruse out there that know how to
make things work.
But.
We have fifty seven thousand you
said in the program.
And I think we have like.
Many state employees forty
thousand state employees thirty
thousand years state of.
That number but it's madam chair
Center was is about twenty two
thousand state employees but as
acting secretary so madam
there's a good number of local
public body.
Members in the fund you know
municipalities counties
universities.
And and that madam chair is
twenty one thousand I think was
the number and so that leaves.
I guess the rest of that are
dependent for families that are
involved in the in the fund.
So.
This is quite a deal quite
upside down.
And there's got to be some way
we can.
Get this thing fixed.
Madam chair.
Yes what time to what time does
the.
The office of the insurance.
supervision of insurance at what
time to see do anything of that.
Health insurance is that not
news preview at all Mr yes I'd
that is not it is for in as per
purview or preview either
neither one.
It was either one yes and would
you like to learn more
explanation or no doing this
fall within this category the
question I had so thank you
madam chair thank you for the
questions yeah you make me think
to you're asking for their good
question Senator all right and I
don't have anything but one
simple question we're gonna stop
and and but where is your latest
there that's new building that
you have in this picture the new
vinyl records building where is
that located so it's next to the
where the coals in fact yes okay
yes good area thank you so much
I don't have anything else and I
appreciate all your work you're
just doing marvelous work thank
you appreciate it so much thank
you to our staff in the
executive okay in that we're
