Six which is the judicial
education services funded
administration and
Representative Hochman Vigil is
here with us and Justice
Thompson thank you and already
after that we're going to hear
us Senate bill two will I we're
gonna move Senator gone side
just because he's got to go and
we indicated we would put this
bill up right away so he can go
into has been needs to do thank
you madam chair I also make a
request I'm here to present
house bill one seventy five in
place of a Representative Romero
so if I could also do that at
some point earlier in the agenda
that would be amazing so that I
can go back and share my own
committee in transportation well
we're gonna try our very best
for that are you very much I
appreciate it.
All right all right let's get
started on house bill seventy
six thank you very much madam
chair members of the committee
were here for on house bill
seventy six and what house bill
seventy six does is providing
the administrative office of the
courts the ability to administer
the judicial education funds and
also creates an education
services division in the in the
administrative office of the
courts we are also we have an
appropriation and we are
included in house bill two and
with that we will stand for
questions after I introduce the
my expert to the amazing justice
Thompson who's here from the
Supreme Court to L. also answer
questions you may have morning.
On your request that you just
have said thank you so much
Senator really appreciate it
thank you very much now can we
speak do you want to say
anything justice Thompson and
hardy.
Madam chair the sponsors
senators I know you're your time
is is is limited we appreciate
the opportunity to present to
you today this is one of the
judiciary's top priorities based
on the best practices study
going back a number of years we
educate annually about fifteen
appellate court judges hundred
two District Court judges
nineteen metro court judges
sixty seven magistrate judges
municipal judges probate judges
are and are tribal colleagues.
this bill would allow us the
funding and structure necessary
to educator Judiciary and we up.
We thank you for your
consideration will stand for
questions thank you thank you
just as I do remember having
discussions on this throughout
the summer and it's been a long
time we really need to Texas
already did you want to say some
before we move on Madam be happy
to answer questions thank you
very much I do we have anyone in
office in support of this bill
first okay okay fine let's see
we're going to come up how bout
anyone propose before we say
anymore okay and I know you
wanted to say a few things even
though we don't have anyone
opposed in the audience but I
will go to zoom in a minute but
wanted to come up and briefly
briefly stand up in support
state your name here and I'm
going to allow the public
comment in this way because you
you want to you've been waiting
awhile so thank you but let's
proceed.
Yeah.
Okay thank you next person here
this year all with the
administrative office of the
courts all right thank you so
much do we have anyone on soon.
Okay thank you committee members
Senator share.
Thank you
so madam chair representative so
we're removing this from the
university of New Mexico to the
administrative office of the
courts are we going to remove
the funding that goes to
University of New Mexico
Madam chair representative share
there will be some funding from
H. B. two that will go over to
AOC for the administration of
this program however there is
one small part of it that will
state UNM that will keep the
funding necessary for that
particular program and I defer
to my experts to funny he wants
to add anything else to that
answer.
Madam chair Senator all the
different already on this the
it's funded a number of ways
judicial education is funded a
number of different ways both
through fee and then direct
appropriation it's a fun this
created for judicial education
to so that your question
directly that fund will be
transferred to the
administrative office of the
courts there are some direct
appropriations that will remain
with you and them because
judicial education is under a
larger structure UNM
under the public parks to start
that correct Mr yes and madam
chair Senator there's a
particular general fund
appropriation you maybe four
years back to four hundred
thousand dollars it goes to the
university special projects fund
for judicial education in the
current house bill two that's
not in there.
But you did making appropriation
that increases a general fund
funding for traditional
education going into the fund
the funds transfer to their
seated.
Madam chair representative.
We spent a lot of time talking
about the the R. P. S. P.
funding and I think that's what
this.
Coming from if I just remember
that big along list of three
hundred things for you NM.
Of.
So I'm just wondering you know
we just throw another ex number
of dollars in her many sis two
million dollars in there or did
we did we just move it from U.
N. M. two A. O. C.
Madam chair and Senator you did
both you move the fund from the
university district the focus of
the loss prevented the chasing
funded judicial move the fund
which has some fun bouncing that
that'll come to is and then you
appropriated general fund money
to AOC for the operation of
judicial education right now
that makes a general fund
funding includes also few
funding actually more fee
funding the general fund my fair
amount
and we're trying to go funded
through general fund instead of
the funding for a lot of reasons
I can discuss if you want but
the university will lose a
little bit will gain a little
bit and
we will hire director go
forward.
You madam chair I don't think
the answer to question but they
also probably can't answer the
question and neither can anybody
sitting at this table at the
moment thank you thank you
Senator all right any one else
on the committee.
Okay there's a motion for it to
pass.
In the second from senator
credit Hemphill can we call the
roll please.
Senator Burt excused Senator
Campos excused Senator Diamond
yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn excused
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator mean US is
excused we have seven zero do
pass thank you have a do pass
appreciate your work thank you
madam chair thank you for that
let's go let I'm gonna go ahead
and first here and Senate bill
two oh five percent Gonzalez in
that we're going to go ahead and
hear your since you're already
here after that I I understand
having to run back to Cherry so
if you to wait a moment we'll
hear your thank you.
A set of aside a Senate bill two
oh five County Hospital gross
receipts tax and we welcome back
Senator Gonzalez he has been out
for a while and let's give in my
hand here.
Yeah you know this this comment
staff as he mentioned Israel
fell crazy thank you senator and
Dan weeks welcome.
If we can just.
This year thank you can proceed
Senator thank you chairman a
member so.
with the.
Senate Bill tool I fall.
Of madam chair members is so.
It's a bill that has been
enacted for thirty years with
the tiles as a local option the
first ten years was to the
construction of Holy Cross
hospital.
And then since then you know it
was so in lieu of that was used
for educational purpose which it
helped and now the it's ready
for re authorization like to
take it back to the hospital
with the provision of the
continuation that you NM tells
us being a recipient of twenty
five percent of the gross
receipts for the nursing program
the that's all it does is just
us authorization to continue
it's a local option it only
applies to the PTA's area to the
Thomas county thank you thank
you for bringing this we have
heard throughout the summer not
only this last summer but years
before how much medical care is
needed in two thousand and what
if shortage you have out there
so and this is hello my expert
witnesses yes we have yes which
is to say a few comments yes
welcome were yes thank you Dan I
was going to go to unix tell us
thank you madam chair and
members of this this local
option was originally enacted
and voted for in nineteen ninety
one so it's been in place a long
time the hospital was the
recipient of the first ten years
they issued Bontade actually
built to do hospital in that
hospital bed and session for now
thirty years so there's a.
The dire need for for the
additional funds to make some
renovations and prove the
services so with that it is a
local option the people to also
have to vote on this.
Thank you very much for that and
that's always a good point right
when people get a chance to vote
on it all right anyone in
support of this bill in the
audience anyone opposed to this
bill anyone on zoom.
Support okay okay can you speak
and state your.
I'm sorry very good very good to
address okay merry are you
there.
I am thank you and vice chair
Rodriguez and members of the
committee my name is merry yes
and the chancellor at UNM Health
I'm speaking in support of the
bill.
I'm.
The the hospital Holy Cross in
hearing house is a very
important partner for a nursing
program and the I'm the fiscal
solvency of that the hospital of
the ability of the hospital to
provide up to date equipment I'm
not only affects all obviously
all of those who are seeking
health care in our region but
also has a really profound
impact on our nursing program as
our student nurses are learning
in Holy Cross are mentored by
the staff and and the nurses and
doctors at Holy Cross and really
rely on
the currency of treatment and
equipment at the hospital to
enhance their learning
environment very often nurses in
that hospital are serving as our
instructors some of the ability
for us to provide additional
local funding to the hospital is
critical to the.
Excellence that we currently
have in our nursing program so
this is a very important bill to
our community for just to have
the ability to the to provide
this additional G. R. T. to
Holy Cross and to the UNM PTA's
nursing program thank you thank
you Mary all right members of
the committee.
The rest of Senator Woods I
think you have to get with this
for discussion Senator go ahead.
And I know we're running against
the time restraints so I try to
make it very shortened to the
point.
There seems to be maybe a
little.
A little bit of
Representative on the aunt
donation Clause.
By directing.
Some of the G. R. T..
So madam chair and senator.
Do you believe that that there's
anything a problem with the at
that donation with your
legislation.
Home Madam chair Senator Woods
no there there isn't because so.
the hospital itself you know
is it is owned by the county.
In the county would be the
recipients and the gross
receipts as they County gross
receipts.
The same thing with the
university you know with the.
Be in their own or with the
through main campus.
But in the past we haven't had a
problem.
Sure.
Senator Woods there's also an
exemption in the constitution
for the from the Santo donation
clothes for seconded digits so
it's exempt regardless.
And and from what I understand
from what I read here this will
be a new percentage of G. R. T..
And it's going to be given.
To test County.
In particular by changing the
the parameters of this gross
receipts and then it will be act
enacted only after of out of the
general populace of Taos County
to Senator that is correct.
Okay I have no other questions
madam chair thank you thank you
Senator huh all right I don't
have anyone else on the list do
we have a motion.
Some okay there's there's a
motion for Senator Diamond
second from Senator Padilla
let's call the roll.
Senator Burt excused Senator
Campos yes Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn is excused
Senator Woods no.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
There are many else's excused at
seven two one two passed all
right thank you very much
senator Sanders thank you.
Thank you have a due pass now
we're gonna go on to house bill
one seventy five as amended
crime reduction act changes and
fund we've got Hochman
Representative Hochman Vigil
here to present that bill thank
you Representative if you can
tell us about your bills thank
you very much madam chair thank
you so much for also
accommodating my schedule our
hope is here from the
administrative office of the
courts I think you can answer
some questions for me is my
expert if necessary what house
bill one seventy five does is it
creates the we're calling it the
creating the crime reduction
grant Fund what that does madam
chair is it creates a pot of
money for the criminal justice
coordinating committees to apply
for specific programming that
would be utilized for programs
and from from million justice
criminal criminally Justice
involves programs for criminal
justice involved individuals it
will also allow for data sharing
if anybody remembers House Bill
to sixty four Representative Ely
a couple years ago created a
bill that would allow for these
agencies to share data so that
we can do a better job and in
fighting crime and seeing and
utilizing how are programs are
working on on fighting crimes so
without madam chair I'll stand
for questions thank you
Representative already did you
have anything to say on this
Madam this is a bill brought
forward by the on behalf of the
centre Commission but we're
member services member since the
commission and very supportive
of this work through the
criminal justice coordinating
councils and it is funded house
bill two the grant funds and we
very much supported and answer
any questions you and madam
chair also it was endorsed by
the courts corrections and
justice committee during the
interim thank you thank you very
important fund I'm so glad to
finally get it done hopefully
are anyone in support of this
bill we're moving a little fast
because we got a huge agenda so
anyone support please in.
Anyone in opposition anyone's
and.
Okay there's one person on zoom
can you state your name please
for the record.
Do have names the card Douglas
Carter thank you Doug.
Right thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Douglas carver deputy
director of the sentencing
commission and I mostly here to
answer any questions you might
have about the mechanics of the
bill I apologize that I wasn't
able to be there this morning
thank you madam chair thank you
Dick and thanks for all your
work and members of the
committee.
Senator Padilla thank you madam
chair just you may have said
this Representative and RT it is
the budget.
Okay thank you that's all I have
thanks thank you all right that
would be the best there's
there's much of remedy for the
pastor senator Munoz and we're
going to have a second from
Senator Correa Hemphill in can
we call the roll please thank
you so.
The third from so.
And then my dad is gonna break
in are moving that quick Senator
Burt excused Senator Campos this
three seconds Senator Diamond
yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn is excused.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator my
nose yes.
Nine zero do pass you have to do
passenger for thank you for your
work Representative and RT let
me just say thank you to Senator
Woods because he agreed he was
next on the agenda and he agreed
to let you go on and and then go
back to his chair very willing
to roll money to the bottom of
the.
You go next.
Yes exactly once I do off I owe
you a coffee or something.
Yeah we're going to go next
Senator was one but that rule
and we probably to say something
that.
No we're going to go to Senator
Woods Senate bill sixty six is
amended thank you yeah gross
receipts distribution to certain
entities Senator Woods.
Very quickly.
Your Senator.
For Mr chair or lose your.
Madam chair this bill sixty six
and what this bill does is it it
it.
Tries to keep the county hold on
their property tax we we are
during the years we have bought
quite a bit of state property in
the state property
when it comes into state hands
it takes the private property
taxes away from the local
government which is a school
district which is the the
hospital funds which is the
Rhode Fund which is the services
of the county and what I'm
trying to do is figure out how
what tax that we might use to
repay our keep paying the
county's portion of those taxes
and the present scope with this
bill uses gross receipts tax and
as you know most of you know and
county government gross receipts
tax is paid monthly so I had to
have the bill amended so that it
would show up that it would be
paid to the county on a monthly
basis so that was one change
that was made to this bill so a
CenturyLink.
It shows a cost to the county to
the state a recurring cost.
Let me tell you this the
reoccurring cost to the state is
the exact cost that it cost the
county.
To to take these properties away
from.
So yes it's a reoccurring cost
of state and that was the
biggest complaint I had in the
last committee that the state
could afford it well how can the
county four to lose those money
madam chair with that I stand.
Ready for questions thank you
senator thank you for your
kindness truly in your good work
I will yes we do we have anyone
in support of this bill in the
audience.
Anyone in opposition of this
bill anyone on soon.
Thank you know what I'm saying
committee members okay do we
have a motion place so more
Senator Gonzales move for it to
pass Senate Center share
seconded the motion can we call
the roll please.
Senator Byrd is excused Senator
Campos yes Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yeah.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share.
Senator Steinborn six used
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes yes
Senator many of us yes.
Nine zero to pass thank you
senator all right okay we're
gonna go on to House Bill two
ninety eight public project
revolving fund and that's mine
I'm gonna be doing a cost in a
representative capacity on
because he is out with the same
thing a lot of people are.
This is.
Yes if the bill rate includes.
Thank you and I will be.
Pencil somebody have like to
have a pencil with ended with me
thank you Mr chairman this is up
a bill that the it's actually a
simple bill but it goes a long
way for the New Mexico finance
authority it more than I have
Marquita high Marquita.
We're moving yeah this bill
merely transfers fourteen point
two million dollars from the
public project revolving fund it
into these three funds so that
we can match it with federal
dollars we do that every year
and so it transfers three point
five million to the drinking
water state revolving fund from
the public project revolving
fund and to point oh million
from the local government
planning fund administered by
the NMFA and three point seven
million to the waste water
facility construction fund I
move into the cultural affairs
facility infrastructure fund
does not affect the general fund
it merely transfers funds to the
proper funds so we can leverage
federal dollars that's all it
does and it's a committee
endorsed bill and I don't market
would you like to say something
and are accused do we have
questions or very well thank you
go to the audience in favor of
this yes is there anyone in
opposition to this.
There is no one of zoom can go
to the committee.
We have a motion for it to pass
for hospitals to ninety eight as
amended there's a second by.
A title.
All right Senator by the.
Is there any objection sorry
call the roll.
Senator Burt excused Senator
Campos yes Senator Diamond yes.
Well as yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn is excused
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes there are many
else's excused eight zero to
pass thank you thank you very
much members of the committee
and I'm I'm gonna do Senate bill
for twenty three because that's
also with NMFA Marquita is here
and it's a bill very much goes
hand in hand with what we're
doing here and that one merely
we have let me go back and try
and explain this summary it
expands the use of three small
NMFA loan funds to include
operating capital for example
the primary care fund that
exists within MFA behavioral
health capital and the child
care facility loan funds they
can only be used to build
buildings lease for example they
lease and they built the
buildings but there's no
operating capital so the
building set there and this
allows the fund to be used to
provide operating capital
through their usual
mechanism that they use for
contracts and it aligns the
statues to two very similar
programs
in the it allows NMFA to recover
actual cost of administration
which they do now but they're
limited so this merely allows
the funds to continue its an
annual bill but this one allows
them to use the operating capped
that's all it does Mr chairman.
Marketed to us and we know you
Mr chairman.
Thank you very much Senator of
up to the audience of favor of
this.
In opposition to.
Of this.
Senate bill for twenty three.
Zero.
For the right we have no one to
go to the committee.
The motion to pass from some of
the second by Senator couples.
Hello.
Senator Burt is excused Senator
Campos is Senator Diamond.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share this Senator
Steinborn excuse to Senator
Woods yes Senator Rodriguez yes
senator Munoz.
Nine zero do pass thank you Mr
Mr chairman members of the
committee thanks Marquita.
Senate.
It's going to.
Yes let's do let's do Senate
bill eight geothermal resources
development Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino you are here in the
audience.
Thank.
We have the status of.
The.
Watson.
Have.
And Amanda already or is not
ready Senate committee so that
the madam chairman and members
the the of the amendment that
was prepared was was based on
the original bill so the lines
in the pages are a little
different so I don't know how
you want to proceed do you want
to
adopt the committee sub and then
perhaps.
I don't know how crucial these
amendments are to tell you the
truth actually yes as senator
but what we can do is maybe FY
we get the amendment here I
don't that we haven't Senator
yes it looks adopt this up yeah
and then you can adopt them and
and when it goes before the
amendment will be in this okay
that's correct.
The the only thing is the pages
in the in the in the lines in
these in the amendment.
But the new one.
In in in in Madam is Mr chairman
to Senator Judy do we strike all
the all the appropriations all
for.
I.
Just or the entire appropriation
section.
Yeah in this of there for
appropriations money for this
center of excellence at New
Mexico tech.
Yes thank you.
Here's.
We're trying to figure out to
see what did you want a motion
on the
this is the first movie do not
pass on Senate bill eight and a
due pass for purpose of
discussion Senate finance
committee since two percent
ability.
Hey and we're we have a motion
on the floor do we have a second
is that for discussion for the
sub already for a discussion
okay a second for discussion all
right is anyone in the audience
in support of this bill anyone
in opposition anyone as a friend
thank you very much I committee
members can this is for
discussions so can we have a due
pass or motion or whatever you
effective this amendment for
well my understanding I thought
it was the senator Munoz.
Seeing things that we yes yes
yes he needed some time
so the this straight the
appropriation totally yeah yeah
we have exactly but I guess
there's more than one
appropriation in the bill is
that will expanding their own
section seven they're all in
section seven.
Okay let me give me give me some
clarification here there's
language in the bill says we
just got this news that we want
to make sure it's done you don't
reach any mood pulls out there
that will hurt your bill
Senator.
The bill certainly where we got
a.
On this up for discussion
purposes.
The substrates the
appropriation.
Yes that's correct so hope hope
for the appropriations would go
up.
Dot the amendment.
So.
You were part of the amendment.
This language in here that would
allow the fund to do just be
appropriated by another entity
and not the legislature so it's
just reverting back back to
being something that the
legislature approved.
that's that's the part part of
this ammendment in the
separation Axia no the amendment
actually the sub doesn't strike
the appropriation it has the
appropriation in it so the
amendment this was strikes the
appropriation.
Yeah it's a language so it
doesn't.
Office and then adopted
and go to the floor to help
track impressed yes still that
one match so the order they get
to the floor would not have the
appropriation okay but
in the amendment to the pages of
the lines don't look don't mesh
with the with the sub do you
want me to to make those changes
here do do that later we would
do that with Council services
okay
so we'll have more on this then
we'll about the amendment and
then council will track the
changes it goes okay one quick
quick quick question it do we I
had submitted some possible
language for inclusion in House
Bill to this is Dr Kelly from
New Mexico tech the to create
this center of excellence in the
act that spoken of here we
strike the appropriation is
there money anywhere else in the
house bill two for the
geothermal center of excellence
at tech.
There I I don't.
We have an adopted any money
again.
Okay money so we're going to try
to do those sometime today but
we're trying to rack up the tax
package of that house bill two
so we will let you know what.
What if any anymore I would love
to see a little bit of
strengthening for the energy
minerals department to give a
couple of positions and the
center of excellence to get us
started otherwise we we
basically have a wish list.
So we need to okay thank you are
you okay with that center then
we have and we can try to find
some money for that for those
two things at a minimum
structure to big funds that's no
problem we can deal with them
later but to get started we need
energy and minerals to have some
capacity and then the New Mexico
tech center of excellence.
Why do we have a can we call the
roll on the south so Senator.
To make things make sense.
Senate finance committee
substitute.
To.
Percent daily point two would.
We can just I don't know.
We have to move this.
Thank planer.
Then the amendment in the state.
Yeah.
We we right now we need to vote
on the sob itself can we call
the roll place on that.
Senator Burt it's excused
Senator Campos.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn excuse Senator
Woods.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Munoz yes nine zero.
Except the committee sub.
We have madam chair I move
Senator.
Amendment for Senate bill.
Percent finance committee
substitute for sympathy.
The motion.
Senator we have new we've seen
it in the the only thing I mean
we we've noticed there's no
money at all in the bill if we
adopt this amendment I'm relying
on.
Share trying to find some money
for those two pieces of this to
get us off the ground just say
seventy or Senator that and
we're trying to do it in this
way because if we have your
substitute with this in their
then it won't go anywhere
because the funding is not there
so we're trying to give it some
opening flexibility to be able
to provide some funding for you
so we can let the bill out and
that's really interesting
understand thank you very much
all right so anyone opposed to
this amendment.
Okay can.
Let's do the roll out here
because senator Byrd to excused
Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Hemphill yeah Senator
Padilla yes Senator share this
Senator Steinborn excuse to
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
when yes yes R. thank nicer on
the amendment thank you thank
you bill senator thank you so
much thank the bill on the
substance over the river on the
amendment meant that substitute
oh we didn't just go ahead and
get we have a motion for an
amended substitute for us up to
date with amendments thank you I
have a motion.
Yes bill as amended as fine
thank you.
So you might Senator Gonzales
second by Senator.
Okay can we call the roll
Senator Byrd is excused Senator
Campos yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share.
Senator Steinborn excuse Senator
Woods yeah Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator then yes yes nine two
zero synergies go.
It was a dream thank you very
much you have a the house
version of this it's in
conservation this morning this
may be coming to you so thank
you for telling us that thank
you senator all right.
K. yeah my goodness that was a
little bit of a.
And I hope and we're still not
finished and hopefully we can
get that response to the news
we're gonna move to seven.
The one that got about that
number.
Senator Campos very good thing.
Percent Campos.
Seventy two I think there's
just.
I just wanted to seventy two.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you very much madam chair
thank you very much members of
the Senate finance committee
in essence Senate bill two
seventy two what appropriate two
hundred thousand from the
general fund to the local
government division to DFA for a
second and Committee ditch
education program and if I may
um madam chair Mister chair as
we go forward there will be
money available for this
particular program we've done
this in the past it's proven to
go ahead and be very fruitful to
our use as we continue to
educate them when it comes to
the second and community ditch
our initiatives thank you very
much that's what this bill does.
Thank you Senator okay do we
have anyone in support of this
bill the audience.
Anyone in opposition.
Anyone on soon.
Okay no one on soon all right
committee members voted best K.
there's a there's a motion
presented a signed a second
senator Munoz
okay can we take the road to the
roll call Sonny she.
I know so fast thank you for
even following.
Senator Burt used Senator Campos
is.
Senator Diamond to.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yeah.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share.
Yeah Senator Steinborn is
excused Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz yes thank you very much
more Mr chair thank you very
much for your consideration
members of the state of New
Mexico's finance committee thank
you senator all right we're
going to move on to
let's see we're going to have
Senator let's see Senate bill
committee substitute for Senate
bill three sixteen juvenile
corrections grant funding and
Senator Lopez is out so Senator
Leo hi to me is here to
present if he's here somewhere.
No.
I guess he's not here to so
we're gonna go to three eighty
two and that is bioscience Fund
reversion and investment Senator
manos and Senator Hickey.
And the.
Thank you madam chair on Senate
bill three eighty two allows the
biosciences Development.
Of creation for co investment
fund and it's impose
restrictions on the coal
investment fund so what happens
is when we invest in in angel
fund or an angel investment as a
co investors we in these new
bioscience is that are coming up
we co invest with them we take a
share the risk we take a portion
the stock or portion of the
company in a partnership and LLC
and when we do that we take the
percentage of the profits when
we when the committee comes to
fruition in sells out so and two
expert witnesses with me here
today we're gonna be very short
no explanation so we can get
this done so good
Madam chair committee members
Michelle Henry I'm the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico bioscience Authority as
you know the bioscience
Authority was created by this
body in two thousand seventeen
in recognition of the importance
of the bioscience industry to
New Mexico and that this bill is
a well when the bioscience
Authority was set up at the fund
was created the file size
development fund was created it
will but it wasn't funded and so
the this year presents an
opportunity to fund the fund and
put some money in there in order
to do the Mexico investment
opportunity the Senator unit mon
yes just talked about so
basically what would happen is
the bioscience Authority would
partner with an equity partner
like an angel investor or of a
fund to put money into these
bioscience businesses in doing
that
The the the the angel investor
puts in twice as much as the the
state and so the state ends up
investing in these businesses
for equity and as the businesses
exit
it and get bought out by a
larger investor the state gets
the money and puts it back into
the fund yes thank you thank you
very much for that this
gentleman here would you like to
say something can state your
name please.
Hello my name's Paul or.
Just be brief so we can I think
it's a.
This is not the person is not
that's right.
Money's Paul are madam chair and
centers and I am the CEO of a C.
O. O. and president of mercury
by or about text company here in
Santa Fe and I've been in the
biotech industry for over
fifteen years it's very
diversified it's not just the
medical and pharmaceutical and
and devices it's also bio
remediation carbon capture and
sequestration it can the idea
behind this fund is to diversify
the economy off of oil and gas
in the bioscience sector is
prepared to do that statewide
utilizing our resources thank
you very much thank you thank
you very much all right do we
have anyone in the audience for
this bill.
Anyone against there's somebody
to raise their hand.
you for okay thank you anyone
against here in anyone's in
person to.
Okay.
We have an amendment to strip
appropriate yes we did we did I
was going to get to that here
after this or can we just hear
the person on zoom and tell us
who you are please.
It's always difficult to get on
soon.
Anyone on them.
I guess there isn't no it's not
there anymore so all right now
before we do go to committee
members here we do have an
amendment to strip the
appropriation can we have a
motion for.
To move the amendment please
okay.
There's a motion the second from
Senator Diamond in first motion
Senator Padilla okay and so any
one have any questions on the
amendment of comments and if not
we have a.
Motion for it to pass on the
amendment.
K. this emotion for the past and
we have a second condition
second by Senator Gonzalez you
have an amended bill all right
can we move on with the bill now
what's a which was the wish of
the committee Senator Woods.
Will quickly I know we're in a
hurry tell me what the.
Foundries of this give me a
little brief explanation of the
boundaries of madam chair
Senator Woods there are some
boundaries of the Mexico
investment partner needs to be
qualified and the bioscience
business that is funded needs to
be a New Mexico business or a
business that is relocating to
New Mexico other boundaries will
be established during rulemaking
this is going to go through
regular rulemaking like any
other agency and so we we've
been asked about other
boundaries and those will happen
but they are not in the bills at
this time.
So madam chair and and Senator
madam.
The the rulemaking will be done
by the.
Both sides Authority Madam chair
Senator yes that is correct and
and quickly tell me who is on.
Who
Put people on that is forty who
who's a nominator of are the
Senate confirmed and that kind
of stuff Jr Madam chair Senator
with they're not actually Senate
confirmed but the bioscience
Development Act does set up who
nominates I was confirmed as
part of the more excuse me part
of the market for.
Sir I can.
State your name please hi my
name is hello my name is
Stephanie.
Hello my name is Ashley to begin
the executive director of the
New Mexico bioscience Authority
we have a thirteen member board
I and part of them are appointed
by the president of the
university of New Mexico to from
there to from New Mexico state
one from New Mexico tech then we
have to their appointed by the
governor and we have four that
are appointed by the Senate and
house they cannot be more than
two from the same party they do
need to be confirmed by the
Senate and then by the
legislation and then there also
representatives from the
economic development department
and the spaceport Authority.
Okay that gives me a an idea
thank you madam chair thank you
senator anyone else the.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
chair so I'm familiar with the
very familiar with this but so
it what was the funding level
before we do this fifty million
dollars.
So what have you been operating
up to this point they receive
general fund from the bioscience
authority to operate but this is
a fund so if we take in any
company in the public has a
company complex point better.
Yes so there there are we did do
one investment this year it was
two hundred and twenty five
thousand dollars seventy five
thousand dollars of which was
state money in a company called
Benny Benny bio and that help
them get to another level of
investment the idea is that when
they come off the table it'll
Hey dividends back to the state
as an investor I just like any
other investor and if it to us
is very successful and has an
exit and gets a either I at the
I. P.
and goes public the stock and
and the proceeds will go back
into the state this frontier and
the frontier of will then invest
in other companies the idea is
that it it's here to develop a
new industry in New Mexico to
take risks and those risk and be
rewarded by being self promote
promulgated by this by these
investments so it and there
there are many guidelines and
and we're a guard rails I should
say on this it has to be arms
length from any anybody that's
involved such as myself
but we have some expertise on
the board now that can help us
make wise investment decisions
on behalf of the state thank you
madam chair in the chair Mr
chair so
what did this come over in house
bill two already built in order
to are we adding this fifty
million.
Madam chair center we haven't
determined amount of funding yet
because we're waiting on the tax
package.
So this was Original Bill that's
why we stripped appropriation
was for the request was for
fifty million for stripping the
appropriation and so wrapping up
the tax package and that's what
we're waiting for.
And so madam chair Mister chair
so what what point and I I love
the commission and I'm I'm very
supportive of it at what point
though can that can someone that
for a company that we invest in
can they separate their New
Mexico ties up the business and
move over to you know where
we're at there's a requirement
that the company state in higher
I think it is I in place for
five years.
Of course if there is a purchase
that happens like a and in the
case of my company mercury bio
if were bought out by Fizer
obviously that would be for
quite a bit of money and that
would would you know go into the
state funds that would and that
obligation is there a madam
chair a size limit to
what can be invested in a in a
company that you're looking at
and hearing center.
No but it does have to be
matched two to one by either
venture capital fund or in in
New Mexico angels which
partnered with us on that other
deal that I just mentioned.
One of thank you for.
Which is.
Moved to pass.
For the.
Thank you.
Senator Burt excused Senator
Campos is this Senator Diamond
yes.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn is excused
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz.
Nine zero.
Thank you.
Correct.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
presenting this bill on behalf
of Senator Lopez who is ill
today so I would rely heavily on
my expert witness but what I can
tell you is Senate bill three
sixteen is that it expands the
population of the youth eligible
for community corrections
programs and services beyond
educated delinquencies to all
juveniles referred to the
juvenile probation services or
adjudicated offenders having
been charged with an offense
that would if committed by an
adult be a criminal offense this
is a stab wishes that grantees
receiving money from the
juvenile community corrections
grant Fund should reflect the
diverse population the community
being served and authorizes
those grantees to serve all
eligible juveniles including
those at risk the bill
reconfigures the money spent by
the juvenile justice advisory
committee and the bill relates
in compliment Senate bill three
thirty nine which is to rename
juvenile continuing grant Fund
advocating for equity to be
included the juvenile justice
advisory committee is authorized
have up to two members serving
in an advisory capacity to CYFD
in the grant award process now
joining us we assumed it madam
chairwoman is the honorable
judge Schneider who should be on
issues like to add a few
comments thank you senator of
thank you for doing this for
Senator Lopez I do hope she's
well all right a judge are you
there.
Is there some.
Doesn't seem like she's there.
That we're not alone phone so I
guess judge are you there.
Yes we do all right so is there
anyone in the audience is
support of this bill okay
there's one person you want to
post all right we're just okay
thank you would like to come up
in state quickly or at this
point just raise your hand all
right thank you so much one
person in support here so all
right Committee members.
Legislative there's a motion for
the past year we have a second.
Thank motion the second by
Senator Padilla the motion was
made by Senator Gonzales call
the roll please.
Senator birches excused Senator
Campos.
Excuse.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator shares excused Senator
Stiverne excused Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
That in the US is excused we
have a six zero to pass thank
you senator thank you madam
chairwoman on behalf of Senator
Lopez thank you all right we
have the last bill we have here
is that Senate bill one ninety
four and it is New Mexico Wirth
say back to retirement changes
senator Tom and and
Representative Lujan so.
Okay and there is an amendment
to this bill.
Yes and so we have an amendment
S. hi Senator welcome.
In the let's
Introduced here this other
gentleman here please.
Well he manages himself okay
that's fine.
The full T. but let me advocacy
director for a a RP New Mexico
as well as by conceived for.
Thank you very much Senator can
you tell us about your bill a
little bit let me explain that
we have an amendment that is
customary here to remove the
appropriation.
