Separately I need to put in a
massacre what's happening.
Don't have COVID have infection
my vocal chords amount of about
three months so I my voice
negative challenge because I get
to the godfather Tom Senator
Campos one introduce yourself
and.
To thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the Senate
finance committee it's a
pleasure to be here with you
today and I really appreciate
the chairman talking to us about
of course yet not only using the
mass but the precautions that we
all need to take as we continue
to work through this session
as you can tell today's
particularly with the large
groups that have been in this
building of there's quite a bit
going on and and again everyone
has their own prerogative in
terms of what to do what not to
do but we'll continue with those
safe practices so Mr chairman if
I may state senator Pete Campos
so representing all or parts of
seven counties in northeastern
New Mexico and it's always an
honor to go ahead and be here
with each and everyone of you
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Michael Padilla Representative
the southwest quadrant of
Bernalillo county about ninety
percent there service the Senate
majority whip chief cat wrangler
and happy to be here and and
we're really looking for these
presentations today and mmhm
Senator Padilla could to see
you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
I'm Senator Siah Correa Hemphill
from Silver City of
Representative Senate district
twenty eight which is Grant
County catching County and most
as the crow County looking for
to the presentation thank you Mr
chairman.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members so.
Senator prevent full lobby take
one sentence districts six which
encompasses part of Saddam was
Rio Arriba Santa Fe and Taos.
Thank you Mr chairman Pat Woods
Representative curry quay in
union county's district seven.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
Senator crystal diamond I would
Representative Lujan hell of the
doggo lunacy or if you.
Mr Chairman I'm senator bill
share from Senate district one
San Juan County but mostly
farmers.
Yes thank you Mr chairman I'm
Nancy Senator Nancy Rodriguez hi
from Santa Fe district twenty
four thank you.
Good afternoon everybody I'm
George mills from the school at
San Juan county is going to get
started as quickly as we can
madam secretary we don't want to
be for ever and everybody's
making a presentation so we're
sorry for the delay the last
couple of times also going to
start you're gonna start us off.
Yes good morning madam Mr
chairman and good afternoon
sorry Mr chairman members the
committee chair Simon I'm your
LFC analyst for the state
personnel office with me today
is not going to see us with the
department of finance and
administration and today so
Padilla who is the director of
the state personnel office so
Mister chairman in your LFC pack
I'll just point out real quick
last time we were before you we
talking to that LFC and DFA
analysts had come to consensus
on
Some payroll numbers just to
make sure we had accurate
numbers of what future
compensation increases would
cost you will see we've come
pick on page one in the table
come to consensus on the general
fund cost for a one percent pay
raise for the legislature
executive judicial and higher
education we estimate that to be
about nineteen point one million
per one percent so you can see
there amounts for the executive
recommendation of four percent
and that the LFC recommendation
of five percent.
And then Mr Chairman just very
briefly before handed over to
Nicole note for the state
personal boards operating budget
there's a seven and a half
thousand dollar difference it is
very minimal and the departments
other state funds revenue that
comes from human resources
shared services basically the
department charges fees to other
agencies that use the state
person office for human
resources services
the LFC recommendations based on
earlier projection from CPO
where's the executive
recommendation had had a little
more and was a leader
projections so with that I'll
hand it over to Nicole.
Members of the committee have
nothing further to.
although we do appreciate your
support to
For FY twenty three our language
so that the agency departments
of services revenue
This thank you.
Thank you madam secretary.
Afternoon chair members of the
committee the state percent I'll
just go through our slides you
should have them in front of you
starting on page three the state
personnel budget is made up of
revenues from the general fund
another state transfers Richard
our shared services.
As well as our compensation
increases our expenses are out
of the two hundred three hundred
to four hundred categories the
changes to our revenue for.
The fiscal year twenty four are
to bring in a hundred and eighty
two thousand dollars of other
state funds into our into our
budget authority so that we can
have a place to.
To bring in the revenue that we
get from our shared services
division our shared services
provides HR services to
approximately four to fourteen
agencies it's approximately
This was the number two thousand
it's a hundred and eighty two
thousand dollars that we're
asking to bring in the.
The shared services agency
provides HR services for
fourteen agencies and.
It saves agencies overall about.
It saves the state seven hundred
and three thousand dollars for
us to provide the services the
average cost for shared services
is sixteen thousand six hundred
with the lowest agency pain
points I.
The two thousand five hundred in
the highest agency paying thirty
nine hundred I mean thirty nine
thousand a year and the average
cost for one F. T. E. which is
what each one of these agencies
would support is about eighty
point.
Eighty point five thousand
Under cross fourteen agencies
it's a savings of about seven
hundred three thousand a year.
Our personal services that.
And benefits of increased due to
the salary increases in FY
twenty two and twenty three our
contractual services remained
flat in the FY twenty three
increase in our contractual
services is due to the increased
need for professional
professional services contracts
including social media
advertising training and
mediation service.
In FY twenty for our other
increases our other expenses
decreased by eight percent due
to reduction in employee travels
in state and out of state as
well as a concerted effort to
work with do it on our I. T.
services charges and then
activate emails and cell phones
and desk phones that were no
longer needed.
Our agency priorities for FY
twenty three are to continue
expanding training
opportunities.
To increase the impact of
talented Act position through
paid marketing and agency chord
with our social media sites
continue we continue to work
with agencies to provide
recruitment and retention tools
to address critical vacancies
based on HSD specific needs
we're in the process of.
Of implementing an automated
process in which actions can be
routed across agencies so it'll
be easier to track for inaction
is at any given time.
And we are committed to
implement strategies that allow
for stakeholder feedback in
process improvements.
On the next two pages of the
presentation are the where we
address the legislative program
review that happened over the
summer.
And we had our hearing was with
With you all in August in trauma
there are few things that I'd
like to bring up about about the
program review.
There are.
Where the on the third.
The third section where we
talked about the number of time
that it the transactions of the
State personal processes the
state personal process the state
personal office only sees about
ten percent of the transactions
of agencies process to hire and
to promote and to fill positions
the remaining actions are
processed by the.
By the it within the agencies
and they don't need state
personnel office or the FAA
approval there are some actions
that require CPO and the FAA
approval and we've reduced the
number of the in July of this
year we reduce the number of
those actions that needed to go
to DFA so we've we've really
tried and we're really trying to
work and cutting down the
processing times of the times
the the number of times a
transaction has to be reviewed
The in the report that you
heard.
A couple of weeks ago there was
a statement that the exit
interviews that this is that the
state personal had implemented
have fizzled out and in fact
this the exit interview surveys
continue the the process is
still the same and we employees
are encouraged to to fill out an
online exit interview and then
that information is collected by
the state personal office and
disseminated to the agencies for
action.
Another another thing that we
that you all were discussing at
the lot the last time we were
here is the number of
classifications of the State
personal office has in December
of twenty twenty two we limited
two hundred and five of the
classifications we now have a
thousand ten with
classifications and in those
classifications there are a
hundred fourteen pay back.
With that I'll stand for any
question Senator Campos.
We got a bunch agencies to go.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
just real quick in terms of the
turnaround for
Positions with the agencies can
kind of give me an idea of what
seems to be the hurdles as we're
trying to overcome an expedite
if you will the filling of those
positions.
The.
Chair Senator Campos the I
believe a great deal of the
challenges are.
In in the number of days to fill
positions I believe that is
having managers and supervisors
be able to
dedicate their time to be able
to review applications and
resumes and decide who they want
the who they want to interview
the schedule interviews I
believe it's all in process and
the amount of time that it takes
managers to make that to commit
to that time to get those those
actions the applicants
interviewed selected and then go
through the the process of
creating compensation actions
that would the need to be
approved by mostly internal
agency and then some actions
would need to come state person
for approval so so thank you
very much Mr chairman and then
just lastly so so is it
happening there a CPO do need
additional FTEs or would you
anticipate that your work is
flowing but it's the agencies
that that hinder if you will the
hiring of additional individuals
that we do need thank you Mr
chairman.
Chair Senator Campos state
believe that we have adequate
staff to process the actions
that come through the state
personnel office and we have
and I do believe that the
agencies.
Most of the the time that it
takes to fill a position over
the the agency's discretion
thank you that's all I have
Mister.
Thank you real quick to make
sure madam secretary on that
page one of Joey's presentation
do you agree with the
percentages and the numbers are
correct the one percent the four
percent a five percent increase.
So this is the use.
The with the with the amounts
that the information was
provided by our by our data
expert at the state personal
office join the in I want to
make sure because we got into
this last year where.
CPO said one thing we said
another and we ended up short
and everything got mixed up and
and we had a issues throughout
all.
Every agency budget supervisor
for twenty years getting paid
less than somebody had been for
there for five years and so as
one make sure Joe you have some
of the state so Mr chairman
so essentially what LFC and if
they did arrive at these numbers
was look at the average but the
average across the board in
increase increase would cost
right
so I think some of the issues
might might have to do with the
so the the way
The executive pay plan for my
chair to get everyone to fifteen
dollars had different different
tiers right and so you have you
got a lot of different people
getting different raises the LFC
recommendation would give the
the executive discretion as long
as it reached an average of five
percent I don't know if the
executive compensation
recommendation I don't recall
Simon if you remember the
executive compensation
recommendation if it if it
anticipated such a complicated
system like we had last year.
I know that in anticipated
because.
Former secretary and I spent
three or four days with Adrian
trying to figure out what those
pay bands were and and they had
it under control but they don't
have anything under control let
me ask you one other question we
have five vacancy rates twenty
twenty percent in your
department forty fifty percent
in health care right across the
state forty percent and yellow
just thirty percent interest in
therapist thirty three percent
and nurses and correctional
officer thirty percent vacancies
social agree about twenty five
percent we met with you earlier
in the year with the executive
and said can you come and bring
us.
Correct but then.
Excuse me.
The correct pay them for those
positions did you come up with
anything.
Sure.
I'm.
I'm not clear about I I'm not
clear about what your question
is clarify if we stay the we met
and we talked about.
Whatever the tier classification
is right and how do we hire
those attorneys in the vitamin
department how do we hire
executive director staff how do
we hire people to write pay
bands and asked you to bring us
back in number to correct some
of those shortages on the higher
end that didn't get filled.
Like are we in the right demand
for
Health Care eight of in and we
have not heard anything back no
dollar amount in order to fix
that problem.
It's my understanding that you
guys came back and said he'll
just take the four percent
across the board but that
doesn't fix our problem and
agencies.
Sure the executive has asked for
money in the there is a request
in the budget for five hundred
thousand dollars to do a
compensation classification
total compensation study.
That is in the executive.
From you now.
But that doesn't fix our problem
today.
And madam secretary that may
take two years to do that study
there's twenty five thousand
employees correct me if of the
number I'm wrong the number
twenty five thousand placing
statewide right and that is a
very complex study to do.
I don't even know how to tell
him to begin right.
So I mean I I would assume that
executive order came to us with
some recommendations as CYFD
needs
you know.
One point two million in order
to fill the directing directors
eight at this level you know
health care social workers at
this level in order to retain
those you do you guys haven't
come with any number and so you
just want to wait for the study
correct.
Sure that's that was that is a
fund is to to study about that
macro level I just you know this
is the number one issue facing
government and every agency that
says we can get our work done we
don't have employees you can
hire the right pay and so when
reversions come next year I
think we overdid about two
hundred thirty million in
general fund from agencies this
past year so when when it comes
back in the those are versions
are there any guys one more FTEs
we're gonna come back and say we
try to give you the correct pay
band so you can hire but you
guys didn't want that so why
would we give you additional FTE
for not gonna have the right
payment so Senator do have a
question.
Thank you Mr chairman just to
pick up from really where you
read if it's all right I got you
know so I guess I'm.
The entire time I've been here
for fifteen having this debate
and I'm very concerned about it
You can't you know what we have
to dollars right now Mr chairman
and madam secretary to to you to
to to correct a lot of things
that need to be corrected I
would hate for us to wind up
getting the results of a of a
complete
salary survey budget every
whatever it's going to be you
know two or three years from now
because we could very well be in
a situation where the revenues
are not where they are right now
can you give the specifics on
where that are is there any pre
work being done
yeah I I'd actually like to I'd
like to add on to what this
survey is going to produce which
is every position in state
government where it is today and
what needs to be where the gap
is and you know stack rank them
so we understand where things
are
where are things today and
where's the planning everyone
when they signed when when the
governor signs a budget this
year I mean we we should be done
with this thing within six
months and now I'm hearing two
years this is this is like
ridiculous.
Sure Senator the the state
personal office works.
Daily with agencies to address
to address compensation issues.
In pay band adjustments
temporary recruitment
differentials temporary
retention differentials of the
number of different mechanisms
that are available.
Through the state person rules
we do we do meet with agencies
we do sit with them and go
through their individual
employees and help them figure
out help them figure out what
appropriate placement should be
and where their employees need
to be and and then they go with
that information they go back
and they figure out what their
budget is to support those and
generally the state personnel
office will work with them to
help them implement whatever
they have the budget to
implement if it's an appropriate
plan that the agency presents to
us based on their individual
employees and their specific
placement in current placement
in the put pay band and where
they should be at the rate that.
Also Mr chairman of the big
thing I'm worried about is we
finally get the results of this
thing we don't have the money to
to to make the changes so what
what is the timeline madam
secretary if this salary survey
study and and all the items that
we've all been requesting you
know Paul you know this this
last year especially what is the
turn around time on that study.
Chair Senators the time on on
the study would
would depend on the the
allocation of the of the funds
to pay for the study and then it
would have to go through an RFP
process and so it is it's it's
not it's not something that
could be implemented by December
because the the the process to
do the study would take longer
than that.
So Mister chairman are we at
least doing the pre work now to
get the R. P. ready I mean I
think we all know that that's
where we're going and that's
what we're going to request are
do are we doing work now to put
this R. P. together.
Sure Senator we have begun to
look at what we're going to need
in that study in the all of it
is going to depend on on getting
The appropriation to to pay for
the study yes we have started to
look at where what we need to do
on our end to get that going.
Senator Padilla let me interject
one question we we put the
legislature we took it upon
ourselves to do with the money
in for the study and so when we
voted on the female our study
money is there it'll required
agencies to the to the.
give us information for the
study.
role the Legislative Council
reached out to several people
NCSL right where do we find this
resource would provide the the
people in so he's looking at
that as we move forward.
I don't know I've never done a
twenty five thousand employees
study and so we don't know what
it's gonna look like we think we
have the number right.
According NCSL as best gas but
it requires the agency to to
share information and agencies
that are not under spoke because
you don't have every single
agency under CPO so that's what
we think is going to take the
longest for every agency to come
back and say is my snow plow
driver competitive with Texas
Colorado in New Hampshire thank
is my a viral Attorney
competitive in Arizona New
Mexico Texas Colorado regional
wise and then national license
itself I don't know they may
have some that bills so that's I
think the agency information is
going to take the longest if the
agencies will give it to us.
Appreciate that Mr chairman so
I'm wondering if maybe then we
get Joe we state our someone's
data on a more regular basis it
to the LFC I know we're not
gonna be here after more to eat
this you know the legislature
will be after March to March
eighteenth but but immediately
following LFC meets every month
of the year right at so can can
we get an update on this one at
a minimum every month.
Senator Padilla that that will
come out of Legislative Council
LOC probably have to work with
Raul Legislative Council to
gives updates or it'll come to
council since that's a funding
mechanism that we've chosen I
think I'm just a you know one
underscore one more time that we
have the dollars to probably
right size things and to right
size salaries and we need to do
this now for later thank you.
Thank you Sir what.
Most industries that I've been
around Mr chair.
Go buy compared to use of
salaries from the region.
They they go they they there's
already out there of essentially
what we're paying for this job.
And.
You're telling me that we can't
use that to come to right size
our deal right now that we need
to make up a half million dollar
steady.
None of that data is available
right now that that what other
states do in our region what
other states do in the nation
these job titles can't be that
for part in me.
ever as senator Munoz said.
Of our mail engineers probably
across the nation for so many of
those out there we should be
able to find out what they're
being paid so I don't
understand.
Where the heck up Mr Chairman.
That that is not available
through NCSL or CSG.
Senator Woods.
This is a pretty complicated
study to undertaken in Joe you
can step in and help me every
time thirty that life jacket I
just I I am I mean it I don't
know what is going to entail
from a CYFD social workers to
a prison secretary to a medical
doctor in the in the prison
system to compare the medical
doctor at and
wherever in it's a little
complex for us to.
To shoot from the hip.
The last one was done twenty
years ago.
I wasn't here maybe Center ship
was but last was done twenty
years ago and.
I mean I I I don't really don't
know the answer I mean and I
think we have to do it correctly
but how do we do it correctly
it's a lot of detail work that.
But to figure out.
Don't mean to step on you Mr
chair no I but surely some of
the state is done this.
Some other state has done a
study like this recently I can't
believe everyone is far behind
is twenty years.
And the classifications have to
be close to the same I mean.
Ever agencies going to have to
have a like agency some and some
other states that do essentially
the same function I would think
Mr chair Mr chairman and senator
woods so actually some.
It's even been done within the
state so for example a couple
months ago we received a report
from CYFD actually looking at
what the so that they're looking
at their rate at what their
staff is being paid and where
they need to be to be
competitive in the marketplace
and while I haven't read that
study Garcia with the analyst
has and and our program
evaluator seven they tell me
it's pretty good right so one of
the things that LFC did during
the budget cycle was identified
those areas where specific
agencies of said we need more
money for for pay in specific
ban in in specific jobs and
included in the LFC
recommendation recommendations
for targeted compensation for
particular jobs from CYFD to
corrections officers to
attorneys and elsewhere and so.
As you say relying a little bit
on HSD expertise in their field
to identify what their people
need to be paid and then if if
something needs to be added to
their budget to do that going
ahead and including that is a
short term you know perhaps not
comprehensive fix but it's a
short term way of getting to
some of these problems that have
been identified but I'm just not
be just to the right question Mr
chair.
Other states have had to have
already gone through this.
Other states have had to.
Search and do research as to
comparable salaries and compare
bill states.
No so this is a no no quit
attention so Mister chairman
Senator center was I'm I'm sure
some some states have done that
I know traditionally CPO has
You know worked with other state
personnel agencies to try and
you know look look at some
larger term trends on state pay
and I don't know if director
Padilla has anything to add on
that but there are other offices
in other in other states I think
perhaps if they paid for a
personal study they may not wish
to share it for free I'm not I'm
not sure but I do know that
there is some information
sharing among the offices that
are generally state personnel
offices.
Mr chair.
That you know you will put you
on the committee with the study
of I think that's it madam
secretary thanks for your time
appreciate it sure came as
better numbers but it is what it
is thank you.
Joe we in.
Yes Sir are next in next agency
I have on the agenda the retiree
health care authority of that's
correct.
That is correct.
So Mister chairman is agency
code three forty three the
retiree health care authority
and with me at the table is
Simon Miller with the FAA and
you'll keep for who is the
executive director of the
retiree health care authority.
So for fiscal year twenty for
the retiree health care
authority requests and base
budget of three hundred ninety
eight million that's a fourteen
point four million dollar
increase over the FY twenty
three operating budget and I'll
just note that both LFC and
Executive recommendations fully
funded the agency's request for
the health care benefits program
the only difference in the two
recommendation is in transfers
from the health care benefits
program to the program support
the agency is seeking three
additional FTE and while that
was included in the executive
recommendation the LFC
recommendation only included one
additional FTE and I I just will
point out Mr chairman that it
recently subcommittee of HFC
adopted the LFC recommendation
on with that I'll ask Simon if
he has any comments on.
Mr chair members of the
committee Joey.
Covered the the main difference
is here this is almost a four
hundred million dollar budget
but most of it is to pay out
health care claims for are
retiring members.
Just just less than four million
is for their agency operations
and like Joey said the executive
includes a couple more FTE then
the LFC so with that I'll turn
it over to the directors thanks.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you both
houses further intro and
recommendations of their budgets
I will jump right into the
presentation just give a brief
overview and I'm gonna focus a
little bit more specifically in
regards to those FTE positions
but as far as a retiree health
care thirty this program was
established in nineteen ninety
and we started with fifty
thousand members there was no
prepared material funding and we
start paying budget six months
later so one of the points I
want to look at is that since
that time we've actually grown
which is kind of part of the
reason we are requesting the
three FTEs as back then we had
fifteen thousand today we're
standing closer between sixty
seven to sixty eight thousand
members.
What that additional duties have
come into the agency some of
those are the procurement
activities which you can see on
slide to as a friend to the
bottom where we do go out for us
a request for proposals as it
relates to many of our contracts
the current one that we're in is
it is for life insurance which
would be effective July first
twenty three part of the study
that we also do with an
organization is solvency I can
tell you that as far as our
deficit spending we would see
that twenty thirty two when our
revenues to start takes anywhere
expenses will start to exceed
our revenues I will say though
as far as are projected solvency
echo back in two thousand seven
as project would be to twenty
fourteen and now we're projected
beyond thirty years for Gatsby
we continue see some
improvements from twenty five
percent about thirty three
percent.
moving on to slide three we will
focus a little bit more in the
budget as stated the health care
benefits administration was the
same for both LFC and LESC and
DFA so I'm not gonna spend
really much time on their really
focusing more on the program
support is related to the
program support we are
requesting the three FTEs I know
that was part of what was up in
the recommendation for DFA that
was going to be about a.
Increase for us of looking about
it you know ten point seven that
would be point our program
support that would go into it it
was looking at the personal
services as well as it can
contractual services category
for both of those under the DFA
were slightly higher than the
recommendations for LFC.
with that as far as with the our
membership we have seen to
continue to grow it's been about
a twenty percent growth from FY
fourteen to FY twenty three
during that time as far as the
growth of our FTEs we've
actually had one FTE from back
to that date to where we are
today so it's been about four
percent growth which is part of
the reason why we are requesting
those additional FTE ease with
program support for those three
FTEs as far as those individuals
we will get into a little more
as far as positions we were
requesting but any funding that
is not utilized for this AG
agency is reverted back to our
budget administration fund.
moving on to slide number four
it has to do with a retiree plan
participation growth this is
just a diagram that was kind of
reflecting exactly what my
statement was before showing
where we had about fifty five
thousand members bringing us
closer to that sixty seven of
sixty eight thousand members
today.
Other thing they will notice you
will see continued as far as the
coloring as far as what that
means is showing as far as our
pre chair members or continue
moving toward Medicare plans
which is the transition from the
red to the blue and then the
voluntary which is on top in
green but as far as the agency
support moving from as far as
the growth in that chart the
three positions that we work
requesting was the I T. network
administrator to and
administrative operations
manager one and a business
operations specialist.
the the reason being for this is
the additional responsibilities
since you know FY fourteen we
continue to see different
federal laws and regulations
that are being passed on to us
whether it be through the
affordable Care Act consolidate
appropriations act or the
inflation reduction act many
more these actually require more
compliance as far as with
reporting and information
regarding more pandemic manpower
to meet the need to make sure
they were staying compliant
other things that we're looking
at was cybersecurity I believe
everybody's probably well aware
of this being a hot topic and
issue as many data breaches that
have occurred within health care
and other organizations and
that's why we're getting a look
at building up our staff is
working very closely with do it
as it relates to cybersecurity
the additional areas of support
to these positions would help us
is really looking at across
proposals making sure that we
have proper people to help
analyze and review it helping us
to look at our contracts as far
as reviewing making sure that
we're holding all of our vendors
accountable looking as far as it
research and opportunities where
we can actually work with the
health plans and delivery system
to see how we can drive better
care looking and are oversight
of investments as well as well
as an education.
I will say as regards to our
investments which we will move
on to slide six part of those
contractual services in the
higher recommendation with DFA
bar that is looking at bringing
on a of.
Full time consultants that the
hopefully can do a quarterly
review we've actually seen a
growth of our investments back
to when we were in December
twenty twelve or at twenty fifty
six million we are now over the
one billion mark and so the
board as well as staff things it
would be a rather important to
bring somebody on a more regular
basis basis rather than our
by annual asset allocation
review that currently we go out
for.
Moving on to slide seven was
specifically just to kind of the
progress and just kind is
playing as far as what we have
with our agency it does so as
far as the revenues we've
incurred expenses but what it's
really showing the liabilities
that we've actually seen
decrease over time due to the
stewardship of the board as well
as even some of the support that
we've had for increases in the
past for the legislature we're
we had in two thousand six were
standing at three point six two
percent and today were at that
thirty three point three
percent.
Slide a it's just a brief little
up chart showing our solvency as
I did kind of mentioned earlier
about deficit spending so I
don't want to put a diagram that
kind of shows it in regards to
the expenses and when that would
occur and it would start
exceeding our revenues there is
a little chart in there you will
see an orange box as it relates
to deficit spending that is
showing actually in July of
twenty thirty two when that
would start to occur at this
point this is what we're really
trying to avoid this is where we
want to make sure that we're
taking enough revenues to avoid
having to pull from our trust
funds because we know that it
starts to occur that's gonna
start affecting ever a returns
from our investments.
And slide number nine I just
want to briefly state those I
know when the time is right I
hope for consideration as the
retiree health care thirty will
be looking at putting a bill
forth for an employer
contribution play an employer
contribution and totally to be
about a half a percent for a
line and some members and then
we also did have a special
appropriation of twenty six
million that up retiree health
care thirty I had requested but
I know was not in the budget
recommendations so with that I
do have my information on slide
ten and I do stand for any
questions in regards to my
presentation and the budget
thank you thank you very much we
have any questions for members
of the committee.
Senator Woods.
Thank you madam chair.
Mmhm slide eight.
You're showing your deficit
spending period and then you're
showing where you're gonna get
through that.
And it's going to do is move up
in.
Never another four day.
Can you explain a little more
about that chart on how we get
from.
Twenty twenty at twenty thirty
nine to.
Twenty fifty three are we.
Are you figuring on.
Us putting more money in.
Less participants.
More contributions how do we do
that madam chair and.
Madam chair Senator Woods thanks
for the question question I do
know this chart it does contain
to show growth in their and
that's really due to a number of
factors and I think you
mentioned a few of them we know
that on our side we will
continue to have to make plan
design changes we anticipate you
know with with medical trend and
and Health Care continues the on
the rise we will be looking at
our premiums to make sure that
we are keeping up with the
fences of one of the other items
that is incorporated into this
revenue is going to be from our
tax suspense and distribution
fund we do know that there is a
growth factor that is being
applied to it so that is part of
what that to yearly growth is
and that is something that is
being taken account of this
assumption whether or not it
would be something that's
addressed later on which
anticipated baby
that's part of what's really
growing and helping to drive
some of these revenues that's
pushing this particular graph as
you continue to look more to the
right side hopefully with our
hopes to of of growing
investments but we do know this
year unfortunately with the the
rock investment we're not seeing
the returns that we've seen in
the past but we would have fared
for the day that that would turn
around.
Madam chair Senator Woods you
may be able to see this a little
better if you look at volume
three on page thirty five.
And this is a copy of the
retiree health care authorities
financial projections.
And there are lines here for
each fiscal year between FY
twenty three in FY fifty four in
columns that have different
revenue and expenditures and
just to to highlight what Mr
keeper was just telling you
about senator will Madam chair
Senator Woods if you'll note the
tax revenue com that currently
forty one point three million.
That's expected to grow
substantially over time and so
that it just looking at that
deficit spending period which is
in white in this table you can
see it goes in from FY thirty
two from a hundred and fourteen
point six million.
To an estimated two hundred and
eighty three point seven million
in FY forty so if you can see
the amounts of the deficit
spending are pretty small and
that.
Exponential increase in that
distribution from the tax
expense fund is covering that
That deficit over time.
However as Mr keep in noted
that's a pretty substantial
increase in may need to be
something the legislature looks
out over time so madam chair.
I think the agency in up on a
definition here.
Tax revenue that's that's got
maybe a little.
Lost could you explain that just
a little more to me Mr certainly
madam chair and senator woods is
so by statute the retiree health
care authority is currently
receiving a distribution from
the tax expense fund essentially
income taxes that would
otherwise go into the general
fund are being sent instead to
the retiree health care
authority and their trust fund
so because that annual
distribution is growing by
twelve percent a year that's
expected to significantly
increase over time in the
retiree health care authorities
financial projections in that
particular statute.
It is it is it states that it
will grow by twelve percent a
year Mr Tom madam chair and
senator was that is correct.
Madam chair no more questions
thank you thank you senator and
thank you for your responses any
other questions from committee
members all right thank you very
much let me just make a more
than anything a COVID here
because I've been here as we
know for several years many
years and ever since I can
remember the retiree health care
authority has struggled to keep
the funding adequately that we
actually need to keep this fund
not only growing but sustainable
and in committing the amount
that the retirees themselves
have depended on for always not
for many years you know retirees
as we now have have deducted
willingly a certain amount out
of their paycheck so they be
small or large paychecks
whatever it may be likely small
they have the drive to mount
very willingly to be able to
have insurance some day through
retiree health care authority
and so they've done so with the
hope that they would continue to
have it forever and we're hoping
that that will be changed that
we can continue to not only
supplied the the funds that are
needed for retirees but also to
to build up the fund to where we
stop does barely barely making
ends meet and wondering if by
the next year perhaps we're
gonna be falling through the
cracks and we won't be able to
pay all retirees we never want
to see that so I'm thank you for
the work that you're doing and
we understand your requests and
we certainly will take those
into consideration I know you've
got a lot of support
but we still have some work to
do so thank you very much and I
don't have any other questions
Mr Chairman did you have any
questions before we move on to
the next.
Thank you very much are we
should okay.
Let us imagine.
The time aboard.
Only one character changes in
the cast.
So Mister chairman this next
agency there educational
retirement board is agency code
three five two and as you know
Mr David Archuleta has joined us
at the table the executive
director of the educational
retirement board
so for fiscal year twenty twenty
four ER be requested thirty one
point seven million dollar
operating budget the three point
three percent increase from the
prior year both the LFC and
executive recommendation are for
the agency's request
in I just wanted to know very
quickly Mr chairman and members
that Europeans had
strong investment performance is
relative to their peers while
most that public pension funds
were actually down in FY twenty
two the educational retirement
board reported a positive one
percent return on its investment
in a very tough investment here
in addition if you want more
information on the investment
performance you can find them on
page twenty one of volume one
and with that I'll just
assignment if you has any
comments and then if not Mr to
look at Mr chair members of the
committee on both
recommendations are exactly the
same so I won't waste your time
and I'll pass it over to
director Archuleta.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members the committee is
mention my name is Taylor to let
them the executive director of
the education retirement board
with me today if I may I'd like
to introduce a couple might key
staff including our deputy
director Mr Lawrence right now
I'm sorry Mister Lawrence just
keep it are assistant director
and acting chief financial
officer Mr Rick Scroggins our
director communications at Rene
Garcia and our chief investment
officer officer Mr Bob
Jack Shaw who's with us to
answer any questions about
investments you may have just
briefly we've got a ten point
slide here that'll go through
fairly slide to for those who
are unaware or unfamiliar with
the organization education
chairman act as created in
nineteen fifty seven it was
recently amended to include two
additional board members who
represent various organizations
but ultimately we're one of
those what we refer to as a non
executive executive agencies so
we're governed by that nine
member board of directors to
include the governor appointees
a saddle board but you can see
the list of those individuals on
page two.
Briefly if you turn to page
three there's just a couple of
highlights about the
organization and the information
presented on that one is as of
June thirtieth of twenty twenty
two you can see that we had
about sixty thousand members
active folks in the Education
chairman act paying into the
system with some expectation
receiving a future benefit we
had a just under fifty four
thousand retirees and
beneficiaries payroll that we
pushed out last year was more
than three billion dollars of
which we do part of which we
derive from and part of that
process is the collection that
we have from employees and
employers totaling more than a
hundred and fifty million
dollars the difference between
what we collected what we pay is
derive from the investment
returns as he mentioned before
we had a well not a stellar
investment here we were able to
generate a positive return on
our investment this last year
and.
About the strategy we drop on
nearly three point six billion
dollars in payroll funds from
two hundred sixteen different
employer groups net assets as of
the end of fiscal year twenty to
state it fifteen point five
billion dollars and are funded
status is reported to us by
actuaries was just a hair over
sixty three percent or sixty
three and a half percent.
Now we have four office
locations are soon I'm sorry we
have three offices locations
into to have a fourth we're
working with the General
Services Department to acquire
some additional leased office
space in the building next to
our home office before we move
on to building a building
ourselves as we prepare as a lot
of our as folks are coming back
into the office will be setting
up and some additional leased
office space our offices are
open from eight AM until five PM
Monday through Friday for we
provide income in person and
virtual appointments we have
ninety one authorise F. T. E.
seventy four which are currently
working with this now that
translates to about sixteen
percent vacancy rate then you
can see the reference to the
number of retirements over the
past couple fiscal years.
On page four I will
believer the investment stuff
but the investment information
we present here but certainly
would like to make mention that
are that are chief investment
officer was nominated and
received a recognition as being
the CIO in these industries and
invaded
award winner back in December so
congratulations to our
investment team at the chart the
sea on page four indicates our
assets were just a hair under
eight billion dollars back in
two thousand and nine you can
see that they touched off more
than sixteen billion dollars
just last year and as mentioned
before we were down to fifteen
and a half billion at the end of
the fiscal year and the most
recent count that we had at the
end of December was just a hair
under fifteen billion dollars on
slide eight we can reference the
investment returns both in the
one year at that provided are
the one year was at four point
one percent through the end of
September but ultimately our ten
year return is seven point three
percent in the number that we
use in our actuarial reports
targets believe seven percent.
On page six just make quick
reference of the legislation if
you hear about this or anything
that is considered with regard
to the educational retirement
board Senate bill thirty six
which passed the legislature
last year increases what we
receive from employers it
actually bumped us up by two
percent so fiscal year two
thousand twenty three were
originally scored scheduled to
go to sixteen and a half percent
bump up to seventeen and
seventeen point one five percent
in fiscal year twenty four moves
up to eighteen point one five
percent that puts us on a
trajectory to be fully funded
within the next twenty nine
years and then the next item of
the of of of interest to the
committee I would say would be
house bill seventy three which
provided for employees of the
education retirement systems to
return to work after ninety day
lay out for rate of up to thirty
six consecutive non consecutive
months we have several thousand
people that are in the return to
work program as of last week we
had sixty six members that were
enrolled as a result of this
piece of legislation on page
seven I just briefly
good lord Centers budgeting tool
advises to man city to my sites
in the both recommended the
exact same thing as a request so
there's nothing for anyone to
argue about the in terms of the
recommendations that come from
the legislature.
We've also requested to thirty a
half million dollars for the
implementation of a new pension
administration system that we
recently put out our P. and will
begin to implement at the
beginning of the fiscal year
additionally we've requested an
additional eight million dollars
in capital outlay for the
construction of a new office
location here in Santa Fe.
On page eight I will just
briefly mention the bill that we
will have hopefully presented to
the Senate finance committee
here shortly after it passed the
Senate education last week it
started off by doing three
things the first of which you
see listed on page eight
referenced and read will be
amended out of the bill that you
guys were actually here so we'll
only talk about the piece is
that it does now one of which is
it includes the southeast New
Mexico college as part of it as
part of the list of eligible
participants for the members to
participate in the alternative
retirement plan which is the
defined contribution plan that
we make available to certain
educator certain folks within
the higher education system the
second thing that it does is it
increases the required minimum
distribution age from the
reference we have an education
retirement act from seventy and
a half just.
To reference what is in the IRS
guidelines it was recently moved
up to seventy three in ten years
it's scheduled to go to seventy
five so rather than come back to
the legislature anytime the IRS
or the federal government to
change to that we figure this
stinking it up with that
language would be most
appropriate and with that Mr
chairman members of the
committee it's in pretty
questions.
in in just because.
That should.
For sure correct.
I Mr chairman of the senator
Munoz right now we are based on
the calculation that we have
we're four point four million
dollars short the total cost of
the building is going to be
fourteen point nine million
dollars the appraisal price of
the building that we're
currently and is two point two
million dollars to settle help
offset a portion of what we're
missing to date I'm not
completely but it will help
offset a good chunk of that.
The additional request we we
requested finally doors I think
capital outlay but the true
figure after everything was
refined and the information most
recently received indicates a
figure four point four million.
Mr Chairman at the end of fiscal
year twenty to we reported part
one percent return.
It's.
that.
So.
Thank you.
Thanks.
So Mr Chairman our next agencies
agency code three six six the
public employees retirement
association and join me in
saying here at the table is
great to hear the executive
director of the pair up.
For FY twenty four peril
question operating budget of
forty one point seven million
that's an increase of eight
point four percent over FY
twenty three the LFC
recommendation includesd thirty
nine point six million prepare
up.
And the big difference in the
recommendations here Mr chairman
members the committee is in the
contractual services line the
LFC recommendation health
contractual services category
flat noting most of those
expenses are related to
investment contracts which vary
greatly depending on the
investment returns for that
project particularly here
typically you all find budget
adjustment of thirty related to
investment contracts that would
allow the agency to bar in
additional
Authority if the have a good
investment here and need to
spend more
you know the the executive
recommendation included a
slightly higher amount for
personal services employee
benefits including one
additional FTE the LFC
recommendation hold the number
of FTE flat but also includes an
increase for the department the
agency rather to make targeted
pay increases and with that I'll
hand it over to Simon.
Mr chair members of the
committee no additional comments
I'll pass it over to director
tree of thanks.
Thank you Mr chairman members
Gregory hill with the P. R. A.
if I may introduce a couple of
key staff with me here today
have and Williams are deputy
director as well as Mike shackle
Ford he is our new chief
investment officer who began
with us in August moving briefly
Mr chairman to us like to just a
brief overview of where power
was at the end of FY twenty two
the fund stands at sixteen point
six billion dollars we had a
negative return of of one point
six seven percent
right now we are we have just
under forty seven thousand
active members paying into the
pension fund and just over forty
four thousand retirees receiving
benefits this is something
you'll hear from us continually
we are getting closer to those
numbers matching or even
exceeding I expecting twenty
twenty five that we will be
paying more retirees that we
have active members painted it's
something that we watch closely
it's something that you all
heard about in twenty twenty
when when you pass Senate bill
seventy two of but that that
will happen we will be paying
more retirees and we have
members paying in we take that
into account and we expect that
to be the case probably till the
end of this decade and that's
when those lines will cross
again we currently support three
hundred thirty five of
participating entities we paid
out one point three seven
billion dollars in benefits
toward Tyrese this past year we
have a funded ratio of seventy
percent in our amortization
period it has decreased to fifty
nine years
touching briefly on the budget
Mr chairman Joe we covered it I
just do want to emphasize one
thing we did request an
expansion position in our
contribution accounting unit
that's the group that supports
all our participating employers
taking in contributions and
making sure they are credited to
those members accounts
accurately.
One of the issues that we've
seen in the past couple years it
had been a number of pay equity
lawsuits with our participating
employers it is not something
that para is involved in that
occasion ways but if a if a
member is due back wages and if
you recall in the early twenty
tens there was the asked me
Madam asked me against the state
of New Mexico works pay had to
be adjusted for members we've
had some lawsuits with the
attorney general's office is
well is now with the City of
Albuquerque when those lawsuits
are settled.
Era has to work with the
employer and the members to make
sure that their accounts are
reconciled correctly and the pay
that they should have received
is reflected in their accounts
currently that's a manual
process and it is very time
consuming so that that's the
reason we are asking for that
expansion position beyond that
we we are happy with both
recommendations I think Joe
incitement of for each.
Moving on Mr Chairman just to
brief the committee on the
Senate bill seventy two which
thankfully ceremonial sponsored
in the twenty twenty to
legislative session just give
you an update on where we are at
this point we are in a year for
of a six year implementation
what that date is it changed our
cost of living adjustment model
for our retirees of the last
three years they received a
thirteenth cheque of two percent
of their annual salary for most
retirees we had a car about
where retirees age seventy five
or older as of six thirty twenty
twenty or a disability retiree
earning less than twenty five
thousand dollars a year for a
member who worked a full career
twenty five years and earns less
than twenty five thousand
dollars a year they they had a
car about with regards to the
cost of living adjustment they
get a two and a half percent of
Cola of for the rest of their
lives that was built in
it also increase the employee
and employer contribution by a
total of four percent two
percent each we are in the third
year of the state
increases and the first year for
municipalities and counties they
were giving a two year deferral
period for those contribution
increases as I Senator here are
funding Parities currently fifty
nine years prior to the passage
of Senate bill seventy two we
now have a funding period we're
funded intimate that then drop
down to a hundred six years last
year was seventy two years this
year we're at fifty nine years
so we are making progress we
just want to make sure it's
fully implemented it is a six
year implementation and we are
halfway there.
just looking at at what happened
with the thirteen check and the
cost of living adjustment this
past year we paid twelve
thousand members got that two
and a half percent scola costs
of just over half a million
dollars these here and we paid
out nearly twenty nine thousand
members a thirteenth cheque
payment that was just under
twenty million dollars
and part of Senate bill seventy
two the legislature and the
executive gave us a
appropriation of fifty five
million dollars we actually came
out to a little bit ahead week
we actually had a surplus of
forty three thousand dollars
from that fifty five million
dollars appropriation and then
in the bottom right hand corner
of the contribution increases I
mean come again for State
General last year we saw a
thirty two million dollars that
will be recurring that will
increase for the next four
years.
Included that Mr chairman I have
some basic information on our
investment performance for FY
twenty two Mr shackle fourth can
of speak to that more if there's
questions and the the last night
is just the economic impact of
of where the dollars that we pay
out in retiree benefits go
within the state of New Mexico
and happy to stand for any
questions Mr chairman.
New to this tell me health the
board members are chosen and
placed on the board.
Chair Mister chairman Senator
Woods so we are governed by a
twelve member board ten of those
members are elected we have to a
retiree members that we hold
elections for same with I
believe we have for state
members one county member three
minutes to pull members and they
are on staggered terms so we we
have elections pretty much every
year they're staggered four year
terms and then we have to accept
this you'll members we have the
state treasurer and the
secretary state that serve on
our board.
Mr chair do you have to have
any kind of educational
experience to serve on the board
Mr chairman and senator woods
there's nothing in the air act
that mandates any educational
requirements once they are
elected they do have anymore
Education that they must go
through they have a set number
of hours that they have to
fulfill each year but as far as
minimum requirements of the
paired Act does not contain that
at this time.
And are the board members of
have a seat on the board for
quite a period of time or the
rotated for the is there a
Term limits on the board members
Mr chair the Mr Chairman center
Woods there are not term limits
and we have a.
We have had a pretty decent
amount of turnover on the board
I will say that the longest
serving board member currently
is a retiree member and I
believe she's been on the board
since two thousand six but there
are no set term limits for board
members.
Okay that's.
Your.
I don't see anybody else's hand
raised me ask you something
great
One point six seven percent was
how much in dollars.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
To my team to see if we don't
have that thank you answer that.
We probably could have been.
Joys give me the answer at the
end so we can answer to Mister
chair it is a one hundred forty
eight million dollars.
And then are we still
subsidizing some cities and
counties like I think the ball
we've all we have one person
that's on the boll weevil border
something that's in para the Mr
chairman not not that I'm aware
of I will say that our
municipalities municipal general
municipal police they are among
Star better funded plans within
the pair Division they're
probably right around seventy
five percent and seventy two
percent
But and I I'm I'm not aware of
any anybody that we are
subsidizing at this time.
And then I have two other
questions we we put more money
in judicial retirement last year
I think to the tune of about
twenty million the need to
invest set and and that move the
needle in that fund apparently
not with the returns Mr Chairman
actually that twenty million
dollars to have a long way I
believe.
The judicial retirement fund was
about fifty two percent
before that appropriation it is
now about sixty one percent I
will say it is a small fund so
any amount of one time money
does move the needle but I
believe they also got a pretty
decent salary increase last year
so that eight into the impact of
of that appropriation.
So let me ask you that we're
looking educational increase so
we look at additional dollars
from the judicial to be put in
the retirement and maybe we'll
have that conversation offline
before Senator want to sometimes
bills come so we can help create
the fact where is the magistrate
at today because I think we need
to move that fund Mr Chairman
the the magistrate retirement
right now is about fifty three
percent of funded they also got
a significant increase last year
so we didn't see the improvement
we thought they would but even
if if you talked about one time
dollars I believe the unfunded
liability of magistrates right
now is about twenty nine million
dollars so anyone time money
that would be helpful right now
the contributions plus the
docket fees that they get to
fund the retirement it's it's
just not adequate to really make
an impact in moving that fund
forward and let me ask you this
I mean it the magistrate Fund
according to.
To and then there long enough to
know.
It is that something we should
target to move in the state
general fund in order to not
have that.
Negative impact of fifty percent
or.
Blessing it out there you Mr
chairman and the members of the
committee it is a possibility we
have looked at those scenarios I
do think we have right now if
all my district positions are
filled sixty four members I
think with retirees it's
probably you know four hundred
members combined so moving it
into into the state general plan
is a possibility
it's just.
It moves it but it's not enough
of an impact it's not it's not a
big enough population to really
make an impact I mean you can
make the liability go away
potentially but it is it is a
relatively small population.
Yeah I think than the number of
sixty four people that are
currently working paying into
the fund and a fifty three
percent.
On the funded ratio and four
hundred people in retirement
with probably a higher number
coming up in the federal
retirement it some are numbers
gonna get really bad at some
point have a look and see why
that.
Crosses that X. axis pointer.
At this point Mr chairman I mean
the.
If things are done the way
they've been done for the
magistrates it's it's going to
continue
the fundraiser is going to
continue going down
in the he plays in the unfunded
liability it's a small plan is
twenty nine million moving get
into state general state general
could absorb it the state
general plan isn't that well
funded either so it it would
just be moving one unfunded
planning to another but at some
point we would have to figure
out what to do with with
magistrates.
I think we better figure it out
right now that we got money and
I don't think it's fair they got
a hundred and a great increase
because executive did not veto
some language and magistrates
got a great rate increases in
their funds still unsolved and
that means we're gonna have to
look at that pretty hard and.
Estimate and paintings so we can
track that magistrates on and
see if we need to fix it for the
session
our current Fund in
our liabilities SB right now
right now Mr chairman we are
just under seven point two
dollars.
In the primary where five years
ago.
Of five years ago Mr chairman we
probably would have been right
at six billion dollars.
And unfunded liabilities still
increasing with the facts of the
Mr chairman and members of the
that is correct and you know as.
The plan matures we expect that
unfunded liability to to
increase I think the more
important aspect that the
legislature needs to evaluate is
a funding period in right now
that being at fifty nine years
which has been increasing that's
I think that's a better
barometer to to kind of see the
health of where the pair Fund
is.
I mean I guess marketing.
Fifty nine years worth of work
Mr I'm very great at an old like
million Wayne after Dennis para
thank you Greg.
Thank you.
the ex commission.
Simon one these days you're
gonna jacked for say we
disagree.
Percent of the.
Doing the measurement of the
stages.
That had enough.
No that's perfect right now
thanks.
Senator built milk tea for
anybody who wants to.
Thank you.
The fiscal you're gonna start is
a yes Mr chair thank you thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Jessica
hits then LFC analyst this is
for the state ethics commission
agency code four one zero if
you're following along in your
volume to use the agency's
budget is on pages one forty
four and one forty five.
quickly the executive
recommendation exceeds the
legislative recommendation by
thirty nine point five thousand
dollars in general fund revenue
the executive provides an
eighteen percent increase over
FY twenty three where is LFC
recommends providing a fifteen
percent increase over FY twenty
three.
The executive recommendation
provides an additional sixty
four point five thousand dollars
in general fund revenues for
requested F. T. E. expansion and
this is to support a financial
specialist for the agency bills
the recommendation did not
include the expansion but
instead provided an additional
twenty five thousand dollars in
contractual services for
additional contract financial
support service do the
difference is in the expansion
recommendation the executive
recommendation includes an
additional one F. T. E. above
the FY twenty three operating
budget where is LFC
recommendation provides a flat
FTE count analysts have come to
consensus on performance
measures and handed over to do
you go to see if he has any
additional comments thank you Mr
chair as Jessica described the
difference between the two
recommendations is really just a
financial specialist position
the executive included in the
recommendation to help make sure
that the agency is able to
maintain their independent
status similarly sized agency
budgets but generally they have
a FTE is the commission does now
but all of those agencies are
generally administratively
attached to a to a larger agency
to help them with some other
administrative functions.
That are handed over to Mr
Burciaga.
Thank you Mr chair I believe
this is the fifth time the
ethics commission will have been
in the general appropriations
act but this is the first time
we're from Senate finance so the
I appreciate the opportunity to
come into a little bit about our
agency first just what we do the
ethics commission is an
independent constitutional
agency it has a thirty to
interpret to investigate to
adjudicate and to enforce
alleged violations of our
state's disclosure laws are
states governmental conduct laws
are states procurement code the
anti donation clause and some
various other statutes is an
interesting array of duties
Mr chair we start with five
hundred thousand dollars and
since then we've been building
the the HSD up the amount of
money that we're talking about
here today from the perspective
of Senate finance in the amount
of money that that you all are
responsible for really rounding
here but but Mr Mr chair
Our current status of the
commission we have seven
employees we have eight on our
organizational listing but we
only have twenty percent five of
those are attorneys to our non
attorney staff we're at the
point now we're we need non
attorney staff just government
employees to come in and help
run the agency and you can just
run it with attorneys alone this
past this past year we have one
person who handles all of our
financial and HR transactions is
our CFO is responsible for our
audit she was on well at some
point this past year had to take
some time and that that was that
was almost destined for HSD CPO
and DFA they were great they
came and they helped us out but
the constitution says were
independent we ought to be
independent we ought to have
some government employees to
help us run this agency and
someone that can come in learn
how to do share right learn from
from when you came over from DFA
with me to start this agency and
and that's that's what I'm
asking for so full funding for
our organizational listing and
for another employee thank you
Mr chair thank you just come out
of the house do they do anything
over the weekend Mr chair the
house to the executive
recommendation which does
include the F. T. E. but that
was the only option.
Question from committee members.
This time.
Thank.
Thank you Mr good afternoon
chairman so question so you
mentioned you have an HR person
who is sick.
hopefully there there okay now
but is is this an additional
person to replace an additional
person to that person or Mr
chair and and senator correct to
replace not to replace but in
addition that would report to
our CFO or are are are and
director of administration
finance.
Mr chairman is this to do more
of that type of work for lack of
the more specific more like
human resources type of
budgeting worker.
What's the new FTE going to do
is persist Mr chair and and
senator.
just issue as you know oracle
bills are share system this or
share finance this how we that's
our enterprise management
systems so you know all of our
financial procurement HR
transactions we're at the point
now where where we need another
employee to to help run all of
those transactions manage all
those transactions go through
the approvals with the oversight
agencies learn the system from
someone who knows it well it was
the budget manager DFA
the Associated just to build
some depth in that part of the
agency for enemy just ask this
question Mr Jeremy I guess the
difference in the US in the DFA
in the executive budget was the.
LFC recommended contracting
giving you money for contract
services you're asking FOR NFT
What's what's the qualitative
difference this I think I know I
put of having with F. T. as
opposed to contract services so
thank you Mr chair Senator these
are these are both good
recommendations they help they
help the agency kind of go
forward and and building as an
institution the difference is is
what's to get that FTE on that's
part of the agency yeah with
this week's come in a few years
we don't we don't we don't know
is that we don't lose that
capacity.
What we're engaged in the
project of building an agency
from that and we're at the point
where we just need some more non
attorney staff understood thank
you Mr thank you.
If you contributed Senator
Steinborn that you complied
Senate finance me but.
When I think of the directors in
a very good when that when the
indicators right and when the
Swedes come right they want to
be prepared and and so glad
you're looking for.
The trying to get people.
And there's nothing wrong with
having my G. can have in the
future so thank you for your
presentation appreciate your
time there today.
do it merry is.
She to just.
Mr chair.
This could be helpful if they
had their hearing in the house
and the house adopted the
executive director something so
we know what maybe I didn't
catch it maybe I was my Mr chair
I did not specify I will note
that for do it did you specify
that for us so that we don't go
to work with rounding there's an
ad money.
The.
From there I tell you guys
didn't like each other but.
Well Danny's mom.
What is it.
One of space.
Instead of just yes Mr chair
members of the committee again
my name's Jessica hits then this
is for HSD code three six one
and if you're following along in
volume two is should be pages
one sixteenth or one twenty two
if interest the committee
there's information on the I. T.
policy in volume one on pages
seventy four and seventy six and
then for the information
technology report cards for
different state agency report
cards are on page one sixty one
to one sixty five no that's not
on page two of your packet just
quickly going over the
differences the legislative
recommendation Mr chair exceeds
the executive by four million
dollars this is all due to the
differences and cybersecurity
services funding provided
recommendation provides a five
million dollar increase over FY
twenty for FY twenty three where
is the executive provides a one
million dollar increase however
the executive does provide four
million dollars in non recurring
funding to kind of make up that
difference the legislative
recommendation also includes
contingency language for four
point seven million dollars of
the appropriation this is to
require the department to
develop enterprise service rates
to support those services in FY
twenty five I'm as you all are
probably aware do is an
enterprise agency that provides
services to other departments
and so again the LFC
recommendation provides that a
good portion of that
cybersecurity funding be
contingent on the agency I'm
supporting those services with
rates in the future I'm a go
ahead and handed over to
Mississippi a member matters
from DFA to speak on the
agency's office of broadband
good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I'm
just to speak on office of
broadband access and expansion
both recommendations to support
the agency requests for general
fund revenues in the office of
broadband expansion providing a
one point three million dollars
to fund additional staff for an
overall operating budget
recommendations provide a five
hundred thousand dollar increase
over fiscal year twenty three
bringing the program S. T. E.
from five to a total of eleven
am and with that I'll pass it
over to the agency.
Hello Mr chairman you've asked
about our agency action the HFC
Committee took the executive
recommendation with some notes
to look at the four million
dollar difference so that's
where that stands right now Mr
chair.
Mr chair of Humanitas secretary
designate for the.
Technology with me today is
director Danny's mother.
Our state chief information
security officer rushes and
bonding.
We also have some supporting
staff that we may call on.
Questions I refer you to the
presentation should the
purple one.
And
There's a you know overview of
what we're going to talk about.
You see for your reference on
page three what the strategic
goals or you'll see that they
align very much with the
priorities on page four.
and these priorities are.
in rural in quite a bit for
example you're well aware that.
The feds are holding out a lot
of money to get broadband out
especially to rural rural areas
unserved people when we do that
we want to make sure that it is
secure and so not only do we
have a backlog of cyber security
work to do but we specially want
to make sure that as we expand
our footprint on into rural
communities that that network is
secure as well and our third
priorities were making the
department of I. T. more
customer centric more responsive
to customer needs
For example or over one of our
rural recite functions includes
the enterprise program
management office and hi it's
become rather cumbersome and
it's really just electronic
paper and we are taking a look
at those process sees we have a
C. to approve project in place
that itself is going through the
same hurdles that it puts our
other projects through and to
modernize that effort we're also
conducting
Forms with the CIO's and IT
leaders of all our agencies and
giving their feedback on how we
can better serve them that is
been very fruitful up to the so
far I've been able to respond to
their the feedback from the
first one and we just recently
held our second one so that's
going well.
I refer you to page six as
Jessica brought to your
attention
well actually page five
you can see that
the bulk of or.
The
income and expenditures or both
in the enterprise services this
includes things like the
computers go figure Department
of IT
in the cloud hosting X. cetera
but it also includes telephones
used by state agencies and the
Public
service radio and big issue
going on there is it's called
the P. T. R. S. and it approved
interoperate between first
responders so when somebody is
out of the woods and they need
some help and there happens to
be another agency nearby they
can tell them what's going on
and get that help.
H. six is Jessica pointed out
right there at the very top you
see the four million dollar
discrepancy between the LFC
recommendation in the executive
and as you mentioned it's not so
much a discrepancy it's it's how
it's being given everybody
recognizes the the
critical need for cyber security
throughout the state not just
the executive branch of state
government
and they agree that the this
money is necessary the question
is how they give it to us one is
on going the other is one time
and the on going
as a contingency on it that we
make rates available so that the
agencies and of paying for this
and and we do plan to do that a
concern is that we can't spend
the money until we have the
range we have to go before right
committee and we've got plenty
to do with the money so we're
looking at that as well.
If there aren't any questions I
I won't go through line by line
on page six unless it's like Mr
chairman moving on.
So with the Russia the speech to
page seven please thank you
chair and members of the
committee and thank you
secretary so of the P. seven
seven two that's the co
procurement code that we have
for cyber security and
enterprise project management
able to deport up to me and
We had on multiple occasions to
talk about cyber security so
I'll make it easy and simple I
have bills to pay it totals up
to ten point six million dollars
so ten million as my eyes we can
still manage for that six
hundred thousand
we are not ready for
Charging back our audience yet
because they're not there yet
we cannot charge back the
agencies because.
half of our agencies are really
small and we we are in the phase
of building the cybersecurity
architecture and the
fundamentals of the cyber
security hygiene once we are
done maybe it may take another
couple years then we can once we
know this is what the plateau
looks like.
But the basic infrastructure in
place then we can look into that
but until then
we need to continue with that.
The general fund and also I want
to support the notion of federal
government giving us money the
answer is there's no money be
applied for a grant and we got
about twelve point six or seven
million dollars.
What a forty year period.
So the state doesn't get to do
anything with that money yes on
the hook for providing program
support and I that we get twenty
percent which is two point seven
million dollars.
The amount of work it requires
this exorbitant I'm exhausted we
need to coordinate with the
counties we need to coordinate
with the municipalities we need
to coordinate with that
get through to all and higher
education just bringing them
into the fold I'm not
understanding and talking about
what the plan looks like it's a
monumental task so
I will
One from there so my
accommodation my suggestion and
my request is to fund the
program until we get some level
of maturity before we start
charging back.
Thank you Russia Mr chair
Senators the.
We've had some great success
over the past six months in
the area of cyber security would
also had some hits
one of them is that we have
every single executive agency on
the same platform to analyze
their responsibility we have a
single pane of glass that can
now tell you
what the cyber security is of
the entire state executive
branch
we have
some agencies were reluctant to
join they did especially after
we had the bridge on on
authorized access at one of our
agencies
boy every but a lot of the
objections one way and one of
the things you're gonna see and
supplemental later on is that.
Who's going to pay for that we
don't know how many breaches are
there going to be a year we we
know that they cost about four
point six million dollars every
time this happens how many times
is going to happen we don't know
you want to keep it from
happening but we do need to all
be able to respond as well.
I'd like to move on to page
nine.
And it just Kelly speak to that
please.
Thank you very much.
We are fully staffed thank you
Mr chairman and committee
members we are fully staffed who
are operating budgets I have
eight hundred twenty two
thousand but in order to handle
all of the federal deadlines we
have six deadlines coming up
even this year to be able to
capture the hundreds of millions
of funds at the federal level so
to be able to do that we last
for us staff increase so I that
would put us at the one point
three two two six point six
million in order to have a staff
of a total of eleven.
And I believe the executive and
the LESC have both agreed.
Would you let's say anything
just go.
I'm fine then
Mr chair so the the absolute
total differences four and a
half million dollars for the
next is three and a half million
that five hundred dollars you
put about four million over and
cybersecurity everybody agrees
the justice gray and how that
should come on the R. five
hundred thousand that would be
broadband it using that to
provide more please.
On pages ten and eleven you see
what for those two different P.
codes I should mention we have
several P. codes throughout the
agency there are no
discrepancies there but for
these you're saying.
For special appropriations there
are some significant differences
on the big one being the.
Hundred forty six million
dollars and the reason we need
that.
Is so that the Feds will give us
that close to a billion dollars
so that's pretty important if
you have questions on the others
I'll answer them now.
Mr chair there's also a special
different sheep in your policy
packet on page ten that provides
a high level difference of the
the every nonrecurring items so
if you'd like to see those on
place.
This can what's your current
cash balance that we have from
three to do it for us for
broadband.
Also Mr chair Senator fund
dollars.
in terms of general fund dollars
there's been appropriations to
the connect New Mexico fund of a
hundred million dollars only
about less than half a million
has been spent of that and so
part of what the LFC
recommendation does is re
appropriate some funding from
that fund so that it opens it up
for broader uses in terms of
funds that were allocated
specifically to do it in the
office of broadband there's been
about seven million spent out of
about twelve million general
fund and then there's also other
agency broadband funds about
forty million of which about
eighteen has been spent then you
can I apologize you don't have
the sheet from the doctor.
Questions from committee members
right before Senator Padilla
walks in the.
I just don't be honest with you.
Her voice.
And lord and amazing Senator
Padilla.
Legislative bill through the
**** which I'm really excited
about financial exploitation of
seniors which will have a whole
new require a whole new IT
system to manage the process.
We have any questions other than
these guys are doing a
phenomenal job and I want to a
highlight
Madam director
I finally feel like Robbins
finally moving in the right.
Finally moving in the right
direction as a result of a lot
of hard work for her and her
team as well as cyber security I
know that we have a couple of
pieces this time around that are
going to require some action by
this legislature to stand up an
office of cyber security but
The the week when we also have a
complete rewrite of the do it
act you probably heard about
that I don't know if they
mention at all today which has
really been touched since two
thousand seven maybe a little
bit in two thousand eleven
somewhere in there so I think
we're in good shape there from
that's it.
And in those cases I mean timing
could have been any better.
But aside from those three
landmark pieces of legislation
Mr chair.
Hello a ledger on what might.
Mr chair any other questions
from committee members.
Thank you.
Senator Hemphill thank you Mr
chairman thanks for the
presentation on all of your
availability when I requested
some information you've been
very helpful I was just
wondering what measures are you
taking to prioritize rural
communities tribal communities
frontier communities can you
tell me a little bit about that
I have a lot of constituents you
reach out during the inner
us what the state is doing to
help to make sure that like
catching County does not have
very good connectivity's sos Mr
chair so love to discuss that
but I don't want to stipulate.
Okay have thank you Mr chairman
completely hello Sir okay a
little closer.
Her Daniel County.
She she tells me she's not
allowed to play the more New
Mexico.
He really get that reverse
discrimination really.
Okay thank you for that question
Mr chair and committee members
and Representative Senator
really good question okay I just
want to clarify one thing the
hundred million from the connect
New Mexico fund has not been
allowed to be touched yet this
way it's not spent it's going to
rulemaking and that goes through
the connect New Mexico council
our lawyer time sharing has been
believing that as soon as those
are proved then that fund
becomes open for grant making
but right now has is not allowed
to be taxed perspective so
that's why that one has been
spent the one that we have been
allowed to tax is the one from
treasury through the capital
project funds through the
American rescue plane Act okay
we had a hundred seventeen
million of the hundred thirty
million allocated to my office
so we have gone through grant
making on that within that
notice of funding on August the
eight and we've had to waiver
applications were it just
announced our third for able to
ferry but the first five
requests the for a wee one had
sixteen grant applications and
we awarded I and they were all
rural Senator everything I can
give you all the numbers of how
many homes in the rural areas
that can make those very rural
areas no Magdalena
places in in the county and we
very rural areas that never had
anything before so I have all
those statistics if you want to
see them but so far all I would
do Raul on we've to we got
twelve applications
we are going through this going
process right now the rule
connect to the is one of the
factors one of the big factors
in the scoring okay because we
want to reach those places that
just haven't had those
opportunities now we do have
pockets of unconnected million
dollars you.
Staff for hard to believe what
we do but the and we want to get
those addressed to but rule is
definitely a high priority thank
you Mr chairman thank you Kelly
so when you talk about your
application scoring how many
indicators are there that you're
going through it role as one of
them yeah it's it's quite a few
I can get to the executive more
but it's it it's around thirty
thirty okay.
And then of the five that were
legislative requests there were
eleven that didn't qualify is
that right and that I get that's
correct but some of the only
were good projects so we've had
some what we call office hours
where they can consult with us
on what what they were missing
and there are some of them are
going for wave three excellent
thank you Mr chairman thank you
count for that help.
Mr chairman I was for the second
time I was trying to do but I
I'm gonna ask this because I
want to make sure we're on the
same page we see that you have
approximately three hundred
million dollars between the
federal state funds right now I
don't know where that she this
year but I chairman has thank
you Mr chairman and
where are we here let's see yes
two hundred ninety seven
million.
Funding totals so help me
understand we we understand the
the need and we understand the
the importance but we're trying
to understand how much in state
funding are in one synopsis are
you looking at to be able to you
mention you need this to be able
to get federal funds like a
matching kind of thing or is it
an emission tell me what you Mr
chair Senator Rodriguez that's
exactly correct the and and it
would depends there are up to
one there are actually several
different
funding programs that are coming
out of the fits for example
getting the middle mile out is
different from addressing
digital inequity and these have
different matching rates but in
general Kelly what would you say
the match is over all that
excuse me thank you for the
question committee members and
Mr chair typically it's twenty
five to thirty percent depending
on the grant and again depending
on whether it's treasury or to
MTA or who it is that's actually
given that we can act whoever's
giving the funds there's a
different number but it's
typically around twenty five to
thirty percent.
K. for the matching funds.
Okay just a little bit of
clarification on page ten of
your LFC packet sent out the new
papers that I just gave you but
you're LFC packet there's a
chart in there in on online to
of that packet provides two of
the programs that the agency
will be applying for the first
Mr chair is the broadband equity
access and deployment work
feeding programs online to you
can see the B. match is
estimated at about seventy
million for your one however the
agent the federal agency has
noted if the state can front
load some of that match to cover
about a year and a half of the
needed match that's why the
agency requests a hundred and
twenty million for one program
as a match the agency that
requested another fifteen
million for the match to middle
model program so combined those
two programs would be a hundred
and thirty five million dollars
that would be needed for
matching funds and that is
captured in the request of a
hundred forty six million of new
money and so the LFC
recommendation Mr chair Senator
Rodriguez instead of
appropriating all new funding
the LFC recommendation supports
taking some of that hundred
million that they said is tied
up by rulemaking taking some of
that funding and opening up is
uses so that it can be used a
state match and so right now the
LFC framework includes twenty
five million in new funding for
matches but also includes twenty
five million from that hundred
million dollar pot which would
let them still have money in
that pot for grant making but we
would be able to tap into some
of that existing funding that
you identified Senator Rodriguez
so that we can use some of the
money that sitting there for a
state match as well I hope that
provide some clarity yes thank
you very much but let me ask
this question you've used
approximately twelve percent
it's eleven point nine percent
expended of the amount we talked
about so the other ninety or
eighty nine percent of that is
still all sitting there or is
that some of it encumbered.
Thank thank you for the question
Senator and committee members
just some of it did not come to
us some of it went to twenty
five million went to the schools
I'm broadband okay five million
went to tribal libraries okay so
we don't really have access to
that so that's thirty million
them and yes some of the other
ones it's either we've given
some requests and we anticipate
we have hasn't come out of our
drive down units okay because
the grant letters are in process
and some of it is encumbered.
Came.
And we do have spent plans we
submitted a spend plan through
the LFC for some of the rest of
the money so it's all planned
out.
Thank you and I think Mr
Clinton's.
Mr chair Senator so I realize
that we have a bit of a problem
with some agencies not spending
their money I assure you we need
this money we spend this money
and we revert it last year.
Fifty seven dollars it's not
fifty seven thousand that's not
fifty seven million fifty seven
dollars so you give us the money
I assure you will use it.
Thank you thank you very much
for that information all I have
Mister chairman Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman so one
more time I'll be real quick so
one thing I'm not hearing lately
when I hear the presentations on
broadband Mr chairman is USDA
dollars are they somewhere in
here and I apologize I had to be
in the other room but are we are
we going after any USD eight
dollars and a lot of that's
going to help with some of the
questions from Mexico to New
Mexico and a few others.
I can and I was a whole other
full of money out there we
eligible for any that.
So good question Senator and
thank you committee members and
Mister chair well there's three
hundred and sixty two million
dollars and forty projects that
we've won from various funds the
US reconnect the USPA the art
off we even want the PRC and
there but those aren't really in
our coffers to spend but what we
do is we can now run along side
them from technical assistance
in making sure coordinating
projects making sure there's the
American explains scene if they
need engineering help seeing if
they need project planning help
things of that sort so we're
kinda in there but that money
doesn't sit in our coffers so to
speak but we do track them three
hundred sixty two million
dollars and forty projects one
so far and some of that's the
tribal broadband connectivity
program to those are probably
the biggest ones but we've had
seven winners out of that and
we're supposed to hear about
more so we track all of that so
that we can give technical
assistance center those three
hundred sixteen million are they
from the USDA dollars they're
and they're making grants and
they're mixing give you the
whole table in fact only present
to you
tomorrow morning at may I
present to the more morning at
seven thirty you're going to see
those three tables in there of
all the different sources and
and how much money we've
actually won in New Mexico it's
quite quite nice thank you Mr
chairman so what when when they
have than you were for an active
part helping us get this done to
Mr Chairman setting up the
office I was very happy to do
that but one of the things in
the office was to be a person
that eating sleeping drinking
thinking of ways to go after
monies to come into New Mexico
do we have that and I know
you've been working really hard
to staff your office and stand
it up the right way and
everything you've you've
certainly come for the really
good plan at least I feel like
you have is there someone in the
office dedicated every single
day to these are big dollars
that we need is you know these
are somebody every.
A day eating sleeping drinking
waking up every day trying to
figure out how to bring more
dollars into the state thank you
Senator and commitment that's
the part of the five that I've
asked for that you guys of
hopefully having the plan the
LFC and the governor's office
have agreed on those five extra
people one of those is to do
that but are we doing that fully
and well now now we're too small
but the there is one fund that
has to do with the rural connect
the rural health care connect
that I'd like to put more
calories into that capturing
some more those funds the big
ones that that are kind of the
NTIA the are but we're
definitely doing a good job
there but the smaller put some
money we need somebody walked in
that all the time thank you Mr
chairman just I want I don't
need a response on this one but
if you can please give me some
info on how the recent
constitutional amendment on anti
donation in the constitution how
that's gonna play with
everything that you're up to and
and how can you leverage that to
work better for New Mexico thank
you I just some other day can
get that to me thanks okay.
New Mexico funds in yeah we
Thank you for the call we might
have to have time to answer that
one because you live around the
for me.
Senator minocin if I would could
I would like to defer that
question too our general counsel
taught there is with us today.
Mr chair I can also provide a
high level timeline so the funds
are appropriated the department
did not I guess the office right
did not have a director until
December of twenty twenty to
twenty twenty one and then when
we had management here for about
six months kind of working on
the rulemaking I can't really
speak exactly to his actions in
that time I'm in the directors
legal didn't come on until July
of twenty twenty two and so part
of it was I know obviously
leadership delays but I will let
talk speak to the operator and
which I believe started in
January of this year.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee that is indeed
correct so in order for the
rules to get it up if we had the
first half the council formed
and stood up organize pursuant
to the open meetings act and
they had to to get their parents
on what their mission was after
the I think was about a month
then we decided to initiate the
rulemaking and we needed to wait
for director for the office
broadband because the rules
affect the office of broadband
the department of information
technology and the connecting
Mexico council if played all
three of the drafting process
took about four to five months
to to ensure that all of the
stakeholders had input and the
program would be extremely
flexible but transparent fair
and consistent we had our rural
hearing today with the hearing
officer and we expect a
recommended decision within the
month next month and the not
going to affect but the under
the state rules act that time
required to get a rural from the
NOPR through an actual published
rules at a minimum this up three
to four months thank you thank
you and so one of those funds
can be used for and they can be
used for.
What is the role in the state
they can be used for so the rule
allows to connect New Mexico
fund dollars to be used in
accordance with the directions
and HB ten and that is to
support broadband requests for
last mile internet
infrastructure so it will be a
extension of the current pilot
program this using the ark of
the hundred twenty three million
dollars of arpa funds.
And Peter the hundred forty six
thousand.
Hundred forty six million.
What will that be used for.
Mr chair on committee members
thank you that will be used for
matching funds for these various
programs matching programs where
the feds say we will give you
you know the seventy seventy
five percent of all the hundred
dollars for your twenty five
dollars and that's what we're
going to use it for so take that
number and multiply it by you
know approximately four and
that's going to be the impact in
New Mexico for broadband.
Me ask on cybersecurity I know
Roger wanted to.
Thank you Jessica.
I know ros you wanted to.
All the cyber security to go
under one entity because.
Madam you have.
The poll like in the door over
there student just coming to one
by they have forty seven ways to
get in or something we explained
that to me is the four million
enough can be enough to do that
and require state agencies are
we need to do something
different to require state
agencies just use our.
Have the needs are met I guess
you're still with the minutes Mr
chair and please don't call me
Madam.
Mr chair and members of the
committee if you look at page
ten this is a good start so
we are talking about dealing
with higher educational
institution and the school
district the K. through twelve
so we will be channeling all
those monies through
over procurement vehicle to get
that one ability assessments and
the risk assessment
and that a mediation efforts
proceeded with that through the
funding so this will give us a
better insight and visibility
into what is happening in the
school district because they are
more prone to attacks.
Competitively speaking so that's
what our focus will be so this
is a start we have starting here
and slowly but steadily as we
take a closer look at our
administrative oversight process
which is called the projects
certification committee
we are going to take a closer
look at any project that has
cyber in and insight into it to
go through that and that way we
can have a better control of
that.
Here Mr chair Senator says the
you know as I pointed out
earlier we have this total
vulnerability management program
for the executive branch there
are other efforts that have been
successful one is called multi
factor authentication.
That's where besides using your
username and password you who
authenticate through some other
means we've implemented that one
hundred percent throughout the
state government
we did that at the end of last
year
It prevents ransomware the
occurrence of ransomware by
ninety nine point nine percent
just using MFA we've got some
other
projects in the work already and
is run out we don't charge the
agencies that dying for this and
yet
but one is standing up what's
known as a so
security operations center or
sock to manage our detection in
our responses as well as the
vulnerabilities well we are also
looking at what's called a tech
service management.
Where are we exposed because as
pointed out we've got a lot of
doors to watch and we're only is
as strong as our weakest link so
yes we do want to bring this all
together under one umbrella so
that we can look at it presently
we don't know how many people
within just executive state
governments are working on cyber
security we asked the question
of CPO and what came back was at
the time Roget said one person
working form and do it and we
found that there were thirty
five people with the title of I.
T. security compliance where are
they what are they doing we
don't know and then we know that
there are network engineers
there are project managers
that's their position title who
are working on cyber security so
we absolutely want to bring this
together under one umbrella so
that we can attack this problem
that affects everybody not just
state government but the schools
the tribes the counties
so that we can have a unified
approach to this.
Important problems.
Thank you Mr Jessica record
comission would like me to speak
on the differences a
nonrecurring funding for cyber
in the two rex sure and so the
LFC recommendation as noted have
five million recurring we're as
the DFA has one million
recurring and four million this
nonrecurring however LFC on kind
of to your point Mr chair LFC
provided additional funding to
do it and about the total of
fifteen point five million
dollars in different special
appropriations which includes
some funds for higher education
public education as well as
incident response of the
regulation and licensing
department of we a fund that all
have do it so to support the
centralized strategy we're the
executive I believe funds those
initiatives separately at those
different entities and then
provides our capital outlay so
those are some differences in
the recommendations okay I think
that's it thank you guys for
your.
Thank you for moody's thank you
Mr.
Get to that.
We're gonna go to the.
PRC.
Let me make one note.
We start talking about the PRC
one of us in this committee we
have a problem with the PRC
because only three members right
and so we have to members in the
room and it's considered right
and they're violating the open
meetings act.
One of us needs to look at and I
think Adrian as chair looking at
a bill where they can actually
be two people in the same room
and not violate the open
meetings act and how we handle
that so it's going to be a
problem with the PRC because.
Agencies are
To our PRC commissioners not
gonna be able to have a
communication of any type anyone
time to even talk about what's
happening so what we're gonna
need to deal with that.
mending the stars off.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Amanda Dick Peddie
with the legislative finance
committee we are joined this
afternoon by Diego Jimenez DFA
analyst as well as the public
regulation commission all
services director we're not a
period again when this is agency
code for thirty.
I'll go ahead and do a quick
review of quick overview of the
differences between the
recommendations so as you all
know in twenty twenty voters
approved a constitutional
amendment changing the PRC from
a five member elected commission
to a three member appointed
commission the nominating
committee and the governor
directed the agency to budget
each commissioner at an annual
salary of a hundred ninety
thousand which is significantly
more than the previous
commissioners salaried and that
was in order to attract
competitive and qualified
candidates both the LESC and the
Executive recommendations us
support that salary level and
budget those commissioners at
that level.
Major differences in the
recommendations over all the
recommendations are a little
over four hundred thousand
dollars part of primarily in the
program support division
entirely in the program support
division.
For the policy and regulation
program at the recommendations
were it nearly identical both
the LFC in the executive reduced
budgeted pipeline safety fees
and supported consolidating the
public safety program with the
policy and regulation program
the only difference in that
policy and regulation program is
that the LFC Rick recommendation
eliminates to political
administrative assistants and
we'll talk a little bit more
about that in just a second.
For program support the LFC
recommendation included an
additional one hundred thousand
to support personal person rate
increases a slight increase in
contractual services and a
slight increase in the other
costs category.
The LFC recommendation did not
support expanding programs
support any more than that one
hundred thousand dollars in
light of uncertainty on what the
incoming commission would need
the executive recommendation on
the other hand it supported the
agency requests to and provided
more funding and more
flexibility to fill some of
those vacant positions agency
did hear this agency on Friday
and they took preliminary action
to adopt the LFC recommendation
with instructions to take a
second look at those two FTE and
possibly another look at that
program support division with
that I will let you go make any
other comments thanks Amanda.
Madam chair members of the
committee as a matter described
the difference in the two
recommendations is entirely in
the program support program
where the LFC characterizes it
as expanding the program in
light of uncertainty the
executive perspective it is to
provide some flexibility and
meet the needs as the as the
commission transitions to the
new body and with that I'll hand
it over to the the HSD thank
you.
There we go thank you to
proceed.
Good afternoon madam chair I
just want to start off by just
expressing my appreciation for
the work that goes into the
executive in the LFC
recommendation.
I will just kind of bring you to
this presentation we should have
and I'm gonna start out on page
two of that presentation you're
gonna see listed on page two the
names of the newly appointed
commissioners they are waiting
Senate confirmation
commissioner Gabriel and deliver
was not able to be in attendance
today and I do want to note.
When they're by of our general
counsel we did notice that we
would have to commissioners in
attendance for this hearing so
we do have an attendance
commissioner James Ellison.
And then we also have our chair
Patrick o'connell.
And I do want to also if she's
still here there she is Maranda
Mascarenas might chief financial
officer is also intended.
in the interest of time because
I know it's long afternoon I'm
gonna bring you straight forward
to page five which talks about
PRC's appropriation request for
fiscal year twenty four in the
four hundred category what are
requests for fiscal year twenty
four was flat tore FY twenty
twenty three operating budget
this is the category that takes
care of all operating expenses
for the agency includes or do it
in GST Services MPs in the
contractual services category it
looks like we asked for a
decrease in contractual services
and our budget request but
actually it during the
legislative session in twenty
twenty two we did get a Senate
amendment to that added two
hundred thousand per budget but
it was placed in contractual
services but the intent was for
personal services employee
benefits so at the beginning of
fiscal year twenty three we
moved to bar to move that two
hundred thousand out of
contractual services up to
personal service employee
benefits the majority of the
increase that we're requesting
in our FY twenty four
appropriation request the agency
wasn't personal service employee
benefits and I think I just want
to note there we we submit the
budget September first of twenty
twenty two it's point in time
we're PSEB as it was kind of
point time where we were for
salary budget in August of
twenty twenty two.
I do have some concerns and
expressed to the HSE Committee
also in regards to
the LFC recommendation and the
policy regulation program P. six
eleven I know the LC have
recommend reading removing the
two admin support positions to
the commissioners we are
actually actively already
recruiting to fill those
positions for the commissioners
and then within program support
our P. six thirteen in the two
hundred category we in our
request for fiscal year twenty
four already factored a budgeted
vacancy rate and IT equates to
hundred fifty nine thousand two
hundred the LFC recommendations
us to reduce from what we
requested another two hundred
and set two hundred seven
thousand two hundred and
personal service simply budget
right now we only have three
vacant positions and and program
support and one of those is the
chief of staff position which
were actively recruiting the two
other is HR and IT position
which we expect to fill by the
end of this fiscal year and then
I also have some concerns in
regards to the four hundred
category the LFC recommendation
from what we requested had come
in a hundred thirty eight
thousand seven hundred less this
and program support we're
covering everything from IT
equipment for the agency the
building please the parking
because we're downtown all those
operating things are coming out
of program support I will say in
the past month and seen staff
come back to the building we are
seeing you know lots of orders
for office supplies had order
more paper I expect that the
parking costs will go up and
that will continue on into the
next fiscal year.
I did pass the HSA to consider
if they took the LFC
recommendations to consider
putting back two hundred
thousand and personal service
employee benefits for program
support and also fifty thousand
in the other category I do want
to know to there was in other
revenue four hundred ninety four
thousand two hundred that was
from the pipeline safety the
fund that we requested the
replaced with general fund
revenue and I'm gonna direct you
to slot page six.
And the reason that we requested
this with the pipeline safety P.
fund we wanted to align the
amount budgeted from that fund
with what we're collecting
revenues and what we collect
revenues is about one point
three million annually the last
two operating budgets we had
budgeted at one point seven one
point six million also we want
to make sure we comply with the
statutory purpose of the fund
which is to enhance staffing and
training pipeline safety bureau
so we only put that Fund the
money from that fund towards
pipeline safety and a small
percentage goes to personal
service employee benefits and
just program support in our
capacity supporting them.
On page seven we did have a
special request that's being
supported by the executive and
LESC of federal revenue for two
or forty thousand to purchase
replacement vehicles for
pipeline safety and we are
requesting bar language in
fiscal year twenty four to
increase our budget up to two
hundred eighty three thousand
four hundred this is from other
state funds this is from the
community solar Fund and this is
from revenues were collecting
one time application fee
revenues we are asking for this
our language so that we can
bring and that that the fees in
order to cover the contract for
incline Inc who is the
administrator for the New Mexico
community solar program.
Of the last pages are page eight
it's the conclusion the main
thing I want to point out here
is the two thousand seventeen
report commissioned by
Legislative Council services the
main thing that came out of that
report talked about adequate
resources in support of the
commission and that's really
important we have created three
analyst positions
those three positions we are
moving forward to recruit and
Phil in support of the
commissioners I want to note
that last bullet there you know
it kind of sums it all up that
the New Mexico public regulation
can and should be a model
regulatory agency that protects
consumers on gauging and smart
regulation that supports
economic development in New
Mexico's clean energy future
are requests for FY twenty four
bills and vestments that were
made by the legislature in
fiscal year twenty three.
With that I'll stand for any
questions with Diego and Amanda
Senator video as we run through
these agencies pretty quickly
this thank you Mr chairman just
a real quick so so did the
telecommunications
Regulation for the state remain
in the PRC with the new design.
Mr chair Senator PDA yes under
our utilities division we have
telecom.
Well I and I know the chair
wants to move quickly but can
you give us just a sketch on how
are you gonna support this very
important piece of.
The community I mean there
there's a lot there we've I I
felt like it was really under
resource and before and do you
have a plan for how this is
going to work now you wouldn't
talk about that now dollar
Mr chair Senator Padilla I think
what I could do is take that
back to the agency and discuss
that with our division director
of utilities and real coffee and
have a response back to you on
kind of what they're working on
and how they're supporting that
within the PRC thank you Mr
chairman I would appreciate that
and and and if you can also
include I mean there are several
funds that are overseen by the
the PRC the U. S. F. frontier
the rural USF fund there's a
number of things that are going
on there we kinds we have I've
every year I have multiple be
private doctor just before the
last presentation multiple
pieces of legislation on this
particular topic at the New
Mexico compact there's a number
The New Mexico rural
telecommunications act I just
wanna make sure that we're
coming forward with a budget
that we're thinking about
staffing the place appropriately
the commissioners all bring very
special skills to this this
commission but they need help
they need help to do this work
and to understand these very
complicated pieces as well thank
you Mr chair Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr yeah just kind of
pick up where my colleague left
off I know when we talked about
the PRC before there was maybe a
shortage of technical staff to
help process the applications
and permits and you know really
Those probably most important
people in the PRC frankly no
disrespect to the commissioners
but people who do the groundwork
and assess the applications into
those investigations and then
report up the food chain what
they found and so I'm really
interested in now.
You know I didn't hear anything
in your presentation that that
you're short of staff I think
we've given more funding for
those kinds of positions do you
feel like you have adequate
technical staff at this point
they're still more need to that
record.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn of a
year ago R. F. T. vacancy rate
was at twenty four percent for
now at sixteen percent were
actively recruiting six classify
positions and I examples
additions and out of those five
exempt positions are the three
analyst positions I do think
with the new commissioners
coming on board there's a lot of
assessing and needs but one
thing that the agency is very
focused on is that we understand
we have to fill the vacant
positions we have this year but
I do think as we're looking
forward to fiscal year twenty
five we are going to be looking
at what are those needs what are
the commissioners assessing our
needs and support that they need
to do the important work that
they need to get done sure and I
I think we agree that that super
important and and up maybe we
don't want to PRC that's just
responding to the leading
frankly in these areas and
telling us what we need to be
doing in the south
with that I I I I think the
barley which is probably a good
idea just because what we've
heard about community solar I
just want to ask who set the
salary level for the
commissioners and what we're
we're is that team that that was
a good level I don't know of
anyone in state government that
makes that much money Mr chair
Senator Steinborn there was an
enquiring to the governor's
office by the nominating
committee when they were getting
ready to kind of post the
position to get a feel for when
you post that position people
generally want to know what is
the salary range a letter came
from the governor's office of
giving a range of a hundred and
eighty to two hundred thousand
that came during the time that I
was working on the budget
request for fiscal year twenty
four and I think two days before
I presented the budget request
to the then commissioners I
quickly change the salaries with
and that the budget request to
and hundred ninety thousand I
just took an average of the
range that we are given.
my concern was to leave a short
budgetary relief moving forward
into fiscal year twenty four so
The appropriation request that
we did request for twenty four
does include the commissioner
salaries at a hundred ninety
thousand okay Mister I'm just
curious is that spoke them thing
I mean is that a level we
Senators executive center I
think that was set up in in the
bill to transfer the PRC.
Again a range then shaking their
head and then.
We can either increases or
decreases in the budget as we
see fit the agency requests one
ninety but we can set higher we
could set a lower depending on
what what we want to do in the
legislature as long as you don't
go below or exceed about Mr
chairman members of the
committee
Salary range for PRC
commissioners were formerly sat
in statute but when as you say
the in the in the commission
transitioned we've discussed
with state budget division that
governor has the authority to
set those salaries that being
said if it's not budgeted it
would be difficult to pay them
but it is we believe it is now
governors governors to
termination sure so if so thank
you Mr so we didn't fund that
amount then the reality is it
would come out of other things
if the governor gets upset that
position well I'm just you know
I just.
Sometimes I don't know.
It I think there is a public
service component to what we do
and this whole you know you have
to pay a king's ransom or you
don't get public servants I
don't know.
And I'll just leave it at that
but but I know there are some
highly qualified people so thank
you Mr.
I think the legislators
legislatures is true public
servants.
At the age is ten finalists for
two friends thank you for
presentation we're gonna move
really quickly the state of the
questions from committee members
thank you.
office is superintendent I see
the former office of the
superintendent.
If
we're gonna be as quick as we
can to okay twenty years then
all right I will do this Mr
chairman.
Okay so Mr chairman members of
the committee we are joined by
our interim superintendent of
insurance Jennifer contentions.
And DFA analyst I don Rivera so
as you all know the office of
the superintendent of insurance
is a non general fund agency the
HSD operations are funded
through various insurance fines
fees and taxes but revenue that
is not expended by the agency
that flows through to the
general fund and that left over
revenue equated to just over ten
million dollars in FY twenty
two.
The difference between the LFC
and Executive recommendations
looks pretty stark with the LFC
recommending a hundred eleven
million more than the executive
but the majority of that
difference is due to just
different budgeting mechanisms
so the LFC budgets recurring
health care affordability fund
initiatives in at the operating
budget and the recurring part of
the budget verses the executive
budgeting it as one time special
appropriations of which is how
we budgeted the funds last year
in its pilot here in the
program's first year.
The other key difference between
a recommendations is new
positions for the agency so if
it's more helpful than the
different sheets you should have
in your packet I believe it's on
page four and on page five to
high levels and that she was
kind of a line by line
difference in the
recommendations.
there's also a health care
affordability funds sources and
uses page in your packet that
should be on page five and it
shows that it just shows the
different initiatives that each
recommendations funding and you
can see on that page that the
executive actually recommending
spending the health court health
care affordability fund at
similar levels as the LFC again
is just in a different part of
the bill so you're not seeing it
here on your different sheets
and section five so all that's
to say it's pretty different but
it's not as different as it
seems
H. AFC did review this budget on
Friday and it preliminarily
adopted the LFC recommendation
of which is that larger
recommendation with the
consideration to consolidate
some of those big differences
including looking at some of
those key positions that the
agency requests and looking a
little bit more closely at that
health care affordability fund
with that being said I will let
ms Rivera make any further
comments on the recommendations.
Good afternoon members of the
committee chairman Munoz
one of the key differences in
the executive recommendation for
the health care affordability
fund is the executive does not
recommend moving thirty two
million dollars to I'm sorry
thirty four point three million
to the Department of Health I'm
sorry Human Services Department
because as you know this program
is funded through a surtax which
is needing to build up a fund to
be able to pay its commitments
and to be looked at for its
actuarial soundness and as you
possibly might know in FY twenty
five that funded that amount
that is going to go into that
fund is going to be
significantly reduced and so
that is part of why the
executive is recommended to
maintain funding the health care
affordability fund for the
insurance as the agency wishes
it to be used and other than
that Mr Chairman all if it's
okay with you all turn it over
to the agency.
Good afternoon chairman and
committee members and then take
a really quick minute this is
the committee my mom with
secretary of the exact room for
from the time I was eight years
old through college and so this
is a really big moment for me so
thank you for having me are you
trying to replace her.
You know but it's a this is this
is a much bigger moment that
house was for me and thank you
for having me this afternoon
with me today is my budget and
finance director Dorothy Minorca
and call in bio who is our
director of coverage and
affordability and expansion I
know you're quick you want time
but I do want to take this very
second slide that I've sent you
to highlight the work of the
staff I am extremely proud of
the staff that we have and what
they do with what we have
we start out by telling you how
many of the new week we regulate
funeral homes we had eighty six
year old homes not in compliance
they're all in compliance today
that was the work of one staffer
who dedicated numerous hours to
get that done we need to look at
the savings we had for consumers
and the work that we did over
the wildfire outreach that was
done by three staff members to
who were and activated at
certain times themselves during
during the wildfire season we
lower title insurance rates for
the first time in over a decade
by six percent and we keep
lowering workers comp and as of
next week the title insurance
bureau will be fully staffed for
the first time in its existence
that will have all four
positions filled so that some of
the bigger things we have there
on the health care portability
Fund has saved small businesses
and has been so popular we need
more money because so many small
businesses have signed up for it
on the person now I do want to
highlight that we have a seven
point nine percent vacancy as of
last week we work very hard to
re write our job descriptions
work with management work with
so get creative do what we
needed to do so you guys gave us
twelve positions last year we
just build them we we we feel as
fast as we can and we will
continue to do so if you move
forward with the positions that
we have.
Then it's just the slide three
is are projected revenues this
is from fees that we collect
For different reasons processes
with title assessment patient
compensation fund continued
education all have specific fees
that go into what they do the
rest goes into operating budget.
slide for the fund distribution
and Roadrunner we we have our
retreat we've versions are any
fees collected over our budget
so that this is the money we
collect that we don't have
allocated to us in our budget
then gets reverted back to the
state and then slide five shows
the differences between the
requesting budget the LFC budget
and the executive budget in as
Amanda said the biggest
difference is the mechanism for
which they health care
affordability fund is funded the
LFC does make it part of the
operations budget but it does
carve out thirty four million
for Medicaid.
On slide six specials and
supplementals we are asking
there's you'll see that there's
differences for different things
the patient compensation plan
LFC to sixteen point to the
executive says thirty two this
is where the executive does the
ninety two million to the health
care affordability fund without
a car about two Medicaid
so and then there's a small
request for the medical
insurance pool and on the
supplemental request that for
the health care affordability
fund that's an additional two
point three million it needed
for all the small businesses
that actually signed up for that
I.
C. speaking of the health care
portability Fund.
Since January one it hit reduces
premiums for individuals and
families up to four hundred
percent of federal poverty it
reduces deductibles maximum out
of pocket limits co pays and co
insurance for individuals and
families up to three hundred
percent.
Provides no cost options for
members of federally recognized
tribes up to three hundred
percent qualify for federal
assistance on the market place
and it provides assistance for
market place eligible
individuals who no longer
qualify for Medicaid after the
federal government require
states to begin Medicaid
redetermination so that's that
roll back that's coming down
after I have to the mandated
that stops so important for
maintaining health care
affordability fund as is those
sites we have five what the
legislature is done in creating
that fund to lower health
insurance costs for individuals
families and small businesses
it's particularly important
during the first few years as
we're doing a full collection
that we create that healthy
reserve before we start seeing a
reduction in collections and so
that we can continue with the
with with the purpose of the
fund and to meet statutory
requirements to implement
coverage affordability program
specified in our state law the
website cautions against I bring
those funds to efforts not
included in statute so in
summary.
The less I a request inclusion
of the health care affordability
fund as the executive has
requested in this in a special
and not with a car about can we
request and increased to our
staff to our staff request of at
least twelve positions I believe
the LFC had just at six and at
the exact has this at twelve
with that and when the state
thank you for giving me this
moment I appreciate it my stand
for questions thank you Senator
Hemphill.
Thank you Mr president Mr
president.
You.
Shares only to to president.
Yes we're gonna start budget
cuts in about three minutes.
Mr chair and present thank you
for the information is.
Close to the end of the session.
So for the program for the
uninsured I know the executive
request was twenty two point
eight million and LFC request
our recommendation is ten
million can you tell me about
some of the risks or how that
would affect those the state if
we go with that LFC
recommendation instead of the
executive recommendation Mr
chair Senator Hemphill we might
have to put caps on enrollment
but I'm gonna check with closed
eyes he's been oversee the
program to make sure that I have
that correct.
Mr chairman and Senator Hemphill
that would be one of the options
we might have camping in rural
then we may have to think about
other things like restricting
benefits these aren't things
that we want to have to do
especially as we're we're
launching a program but if we
don't have that budget level
when we needed that that could
be what we have to look at so
that's part of why the executive
recommendation is what what we
are supporting.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you for your response how
many people with that a fax
roughly.
Mr chairman and Senator Hemphill
it.
Currently we would probably have
about
we with the twenty two million
about twelve thousand folks
setting up the first year we
would need additional actuarial
analysis to see the full effect
but if that budget is being cut
by in half to assume that it's
probably.
Close to capping the enrollment
of about half of what we're
currently expecting okay.
All right that's helpful thank
you thank you Mr chairman and
last question I know that there
were few legislators I wasn't
one of them but I know that
there were some legislators who
provided junior funds last year
for the Health Security Act for
like a study that was done and
it that money there is a total
of around eight hundred thousand
that was sent to
the state engine are at the
office of the superintendent of
insurance and I was just
wondering whatever happened with
that I I've had a lot of
constituents reach out about
that wondering where we are in
that process it seems like it
got stuck somewhere.
You mean Senator Hemphill we put
that out for R. as P. I want to
say October November I can check
with our table and it's still.
We have a contract in place now
and so it's it's in the works
perfect thank you Mr chairman.
Close the case all right thank
you Mr chairman miss contentious
first of all congratulations on
your appointment and it is these
full circle life moments are
really cool and I know your mom
if she's with us would be proud
and and and congratulations
that's pretty special as Colin
it's good to see you again and
you know calling his work for
consumers in New Mexico for a
long time and to seeing you
there you know that a good good
things are happening for New
Mexicans and
I want to ask first what is miss
contagious I don't know that
occurred in your comments that
we heard at the end the
additional FTE ease first well
good job on your vacancy rate
that's a lot lower than the most
our lowest Sarah job could grant
the extra positions you're
you're needing what are they
for.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn a
variety of different.
So we are asking for pharmacist
to overlook pharmacy benefit
management a few complaints
officers as for companies filed
with the state we need someone
to help filed those things we
have a managed health care
compliance of consumer system as
I said earlier between managed
health care and consumer
assistance we have six total
staffers to assist the consumers
of the state so we're asking for
additional pieces there were
asking for additional pieces
from our fraud fund for our auto
theft protection coordinator and
special agents we are also
asking for what I call brick and
mortar positions are
administrative support what we
have in Albuquerque office
without any administrative
support and said just kind of
having to support the House
together kind of positions in
that sense but other positions
specifically for programs that
we have need force places we see
that coming down the line
especially with the health care
affordability we do have one one
position for that Mr sounds like
a lot of consumer consumer
protection affordability type of
I mean good staff are eyes and
and so it could us to our
current are you current still
for your outgoing.
Okay what could us to serve
because I think that the the you
know thank you for your service
and and this
And to to really start move in
the right direction and things
that you know you don't usually
see as consumers happening on
your watch so thank you for that
and now let's keep it going I
just want to ask LFC that this
this shift of funds.
In a Medicaid is a little
concerning the NMAA out of the
health care affordability fund
from its designed purpose is one
of the sponsors of that can
someone speak to that and.
Yes.
Mister chairman Senator
as we learned on Friday through
Medicaid one on one the Medicaid
expansion program that these
funds would help support is
supporting the coverage of three
hundred thousand New Mexicans
that otherwise wouldn't have
health care insurance and the
cost of that program has
continued to grow and so LFC
thought that as one of the
available uses of this fund to
help support that the by product
of that is to help solve one of
the other problems that you
heard this last fall that just
because you have insurance
doesn't mean you're going to get
care and LFC has a rather large
rate increase for providers that
will help all New Mexicans the
the fact that three hundred
thousand Mexicans do have
coverage through Medicaid
hopefully we'll get better
coverage also has a by product
of fact for the private sector
to have much less uncompensated
care which that is not passed on
to other payers within the
system which helps small
businesses and commercial
carriers thank you Mr I mean I
support obviously covering you
know full Medicaid opportunities
we get a match on that that's a
good thing to do regardless
exclusively I guess what I worry
though is that it's all money so
it's I mean if you have the
funds to be able to do both if
we're taking it out of the
affordability fund then were on
the other hand decreasing the
amount of people that we can
provide health care to that be a
fair statement to us on.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn it
would reduce the amount of funds
that go into the reserves that
we build and and support people
down the road so we could end up
reducing the amount of people it
helps down the road for sure and
there maybe populations people
being helped this don't don't
get the Medicaid.
So anyway I might my preferences
we do both and I realize that's
more money but that's my
preference so.
But.
Look for to keep continue to
learn thank you Mr thanks.
You could use your need more
money thank you for your
presentation today appreciate
your time.
We then be back before we go to
to find a budget hearings when
the budget comes over.
Thank you thank you
congratulations.
We have the possum buzz.
Is.
Very long this one.
Well maybe Dawn with north I.
forty so he's gone she's gone.
Or if the chairman members of
the committee my name is Scott
Sanchez on the fiscal analyst
for natural resources I'm
filling in for Alan today
your is me today.
Director Sloan from the
participation my counterpart
from DFA from Chavis
The demon fish Agency I sixteen
is on page two twelve point two
there's also a fund balance
table on page sixty three in
volume three.
the department of fish is
supported primarily by hunting
and fishing fees and federal
matching dollars receives no
revenue from the general fund
the LFC and executive
recommendation support
the department's request for a
total of four forty eight point
two million in FY twenty four.
Figure flat with the current
year the department's request
shifts a small amount of money
among the spending categories
those ships are reflected in the
different sheets for field
operations and consists
conservation services.
Both recommendations retain
ongoing language requested by
the department to transfer funds
to the state engineer for
maintenance of the eagles S. new
dams and with that I'll turn it
over to Mister chair is to go
over the remaining programs and
their performance measures.
Mr chair not to make it easy for
you they just request a flat
budget of FY twenty three so
it's a very straightforward and
without all those with the
traditional Senate over to a
director Sloan.
Mr chair members the committee
thank you for having us here
today as you just heard our our
budget request is flat and that
is because our
Finances are a a little tight at
the moment so we've done a
couple things we've I graduated
we have move some money into
personal services out of
contracts and others for
retention and salary increases
and we staggered the
implementation of capital
projects in order to extend the
life of the fund.
We have nine funds eight of
which are restricted so it only
using for habitat enhancement or
on Department properties really
are operating fund is the one
funding came protection fund
which currently sits at about
eighteen point four million
dollars of that thirteen point
two is currently obligated
towards capital projects or.
The only have five point to if
we were to do that all those
capital projects right away and
we need ten million dollars
going into the fiscal year in
order to make payroll pay bills
that sort of stuff so our our
cash flows become an issue.
Because of that Senator Campos
in the bill have been generous
to us and sponsored a fee
increase bill Senate bill two
fifty four I would generate
approximately ten million
dollars in new revenue to the
Department which we estimate
would get just about ten years
down the road
so that's that's kind of where
we are financially read a point
where we really need that fee
increase
And and I guess it stand for any
questions with a COVID.
Questions from committee
members.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you
Mr it looks loan if you would.
Possibly send me a list of those
capital projects that you.
That you're talking about it's
it's tough when you're trying to
build capital projects out
operation funds.
Of.
I don't know many organizations
to try to do that.
Sept me.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator as
an enterprise agency that's
that's kind of the way we've had
to operate in terms of taking in
money into projects that are
important to us we have their
canyon dam we have a Glenwood
hatchery renovation and the
native fish barrier the three
biggest ones that make up the
bulk about thirteen point two
million dollars.
The.
A notice that.
The there's a budget proposal.
For the recovering America's
wildlife act.
There was a request for nine
million and special.
To use for matching money in
that.
That's a little different than.
What this one shows.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
thanks for the question
Rawat the recovering America's
wildlife act look like read into
the last week of December like
it was going to make it through
Congress and had it gotten
through and had we been able to
get that special appropriation I
wouldn't be here talking about a
fee increase but unfortunately
didn't make it through and given
the state of Congress at the
moment I'm not sure it will any
time soon
so I think we've withdrawn that
special request and are pursuing
other mechanisms to fund our
agency.
What what was you going to use
that kind of money for.
It's not it's it's I don't guess
that matter since growth
throughout the stoning talk
about.
You don't make me mad today in
new ways.
Mr chairman I I prefer not to
make any map please don't make
and then we can pick.
So the the question I have is.
How long has it been since
you've had a fee increase.
Mister chairman Senator again
thank you for the question we
haven't had a fee increase since
two thousand six.
Have you done any surveys to see
what the three hundred and
fishing population think about a
fee increase Mr Chairman Senator
which we have not we have spoken
to some of the larger
organizations that have
initially at least supported the
increase
we have an since robust sort of
failed and it all happened right
at the last minute we haven't
had a chance to do a lot of
outreach but generally speaking
The fee increases are relatively
small
the average increase for
residents is about eight dollars
with a maximum of twenty five we
left eleven of the twenty seven
license types unchanged for non
residents it's about an eighty
dollar increase six of the
twenty license types are
unchanged the maximum increase
of two hundred and fifty five
dollars.
And I would assume some of those
maximum increase this probably
on out of state hunters correct
the non resident is the the
maximum increases to fifty five
for state resident arrest it's
twenty five.
Okay.
The only other question I have I
think is of.
With those that increases what
kind of money are you expected
to raise what how much revenue
will come in from those funding
increases Mr chairman of you in
this conversation Mister
chairman Senator we're
anticipating somewhere around
ten million dollars of new
revenue will be generated by
these increases which again we
anticipate will take us at least
ten years out into the future
before we would potentially need
another increase I also failed
to mention that the the bill
includes a twenty five percent
discount on license fees for
individuals and families
participating the snap program.
With that.
A quick reminder to me as to the
youth hunting program.
And how much participation is
there and that.
Mister chairman Senator where
they don't have those exact
numbers
I can just well that's all right
I don't have to have the exact
numbers but there is quite a bit
of participation in that Mister
chairman Senator I believe that
we have about three thousand
students that go to the hunter
education program I want to say
it's somewhere on the order of
three hundred or so that are in
the mentor to use program so
they haven't gone through a
hundred but they're going out
with a parent or guardian so yes
it's an active program we have
camps throughout the state we
have you funds that our folks
work on and help educate the
youth about hunting when we
start talking about hunter
safety programs the.
Who who sits at criteria that
the curriculum for that.
Mr Chairman Senator I believe
that that is
Largely internal but there are
national guidelines okay
national guidelines.
And how many accidents if we
had.
Mister chairman Senator I'm not
aware of any the last sort of
hunting accident that I'm aware
of was a a an individual that
was shot off an ATV near tiles
probably ten years.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Server thank you Mr just couple
quick questions
We also give up right on those
licenses to other active duty
military or veterans.
Mister chairman Senator we do
have discounts for veterans yes.
Veterans or veterans and for
specific hunts that are
dedicated to active duty I'm not
sure I don't think we have an
active duty discount for.
Let's just specific whatever you
may designate accounts that are
eligible they're eligible for
specific kinds of thank you Mr
chairman that's on thank you for
this meant Mr director do you
view Pueblo as a the wildlife is
a public trust resource.
Mister chairman Senator yes you
would you say what that means to
you.
Mr chairman Senator that means
that the state is responsible
for managing them in a
sustainable way so that they're
available.
For the.
Citizens of the state.
Right Mr chairman and I don't
mean how you all chair what is a
public trust resources but is
that the.
Mister chairman Senator to
resources held by the state for
the people of the state.
Mr chair
Short and sweet I mean you know
wildlife is on what would have
public trust resource means is
it's a resource that's not just
managed by the state for the
public's budget but it's a
resource owned by all the
citizens of the state equally.
And quite frankly we have a
department we are in the top
five most ecologically diverse
states in the country.
Only fifteen percent of our
state has.
Hunting or fishing license but
we manage it as if it's
essentially a hunting
Department.
We don't manage it as a public
trust resource management
environmental Department.
And there's resistance to that
change and so
respectfully and you know while
discussions continue on how we
can.
The management scheme that's
worthy of a state that's in the
top ten most biologically
diverse resources in the country
it's under incredible threat
from climate change and
increasing wildlife populations
and species threatened species
until we can have a modern
structure I will be opposed to
fee increases that continue the
status quo
So.
I just put that out there and I
support hunting and fishing and
work very closely with
colleagues in sports in groups
and some of the greatest
conservation south the Leopold
in the traditions going back a
long time but it's not just
about one user group and so I
think unless we're looking at
this thing holistically were
kind of missing the mark a
little bit and that's what I'll
keep shooting for no pun
intended but
Thank you Mr it's all in the
state.
Thank you.
No the game efficient I don't
knows others you know that my
dad was on there for many years
thirteen fifteen years it is the
quality waters again a bunch of
private land on the ranchers
right.
Able to serve the game in
fishing let me ask you one
question Senator Steinborn when
they traded and low for or X.
and they brought over expecting
to New Mexico those weren't an
animal that existed here before
right and those are only put on
the federal on the federal like
sands which no one can hunt.
So was that a public trust of
animal that we should be able to
to protect when it was on
federal lands that we could even
hunt.
Given that the now it's it's a
fascinating question that we see
those kinds of things continued
state we we know the department
just created a new species of an
animal that they put into a lake
in tier C. I'm glad you brought
it up because that's the same
mindset works of created plenty
of problems yeah people do love
the Hahnemann apparently or
green chili works is pretty damn
good but but the reality is is
that we should be managing
wildlife and ecosystems for the
environment and you know when we
just.
Bring a species from Africa and
put in their respective on their
affected the environment or
inventing other species.
That goes to show that we're not
managing it has pop Trust
resource for managing it as a
consumption resource for game
and that as a role but it's it
shouldn't be that the highest
priority.
When they create the quality
waters our reserves right or by
giving done or the the game
Department preserve it
acceptable in the Bernardo's
lawyer right those are all
public trust to protect public
and looking at the beginning of
the debate later but it's a long
one the wolf is in New Mexico if
we have anything to do that the
federal once protected there's
been will spot on the
reservation first time a wealthy
to a child from a native
population they'll be an uproar
on because we're not watching or
managing wildlife in New Mexico
that we have no authority over
so thank you for your
presentation today in the thank
you and Senators time morning
Avalon debate over the next
couple weeks of her game
department in game Department
history
this is Jennifer may I just say
I think that the discussion kind
of ignores the fact that we do
do work on species from human
monsters to pupfish two time
again to
Your bill's cuckoos and we do
have to have restoration for all
wildlife not just
elk and deer you see elk and
deer and those kinds of things
because they are regulated
species we go before the state
game commission is a great deal
of interest in it we do
rulemaking about that but what
you don't see is all the hard
work that our biologists do on
the ground making a difference
in our ecosystems across the
state in order to characterize
us just as a how can both agency
I think is a.
I'm.
Just remember if we do a
increases in in fees have
musician me more efficiently.
There should be more thank the
gentleman is always bounce thank
you I think we're joined for the
day I don't think we have
anything intended to moral work
on your junior bill.
Adrian is here with language to
help you do that Senator Campos
we're planning on doing your
bill Senate bill six on
Wednesday waiting to make sure
everything is tied together
and monies appropriated
application goes to the Feds and
that's the first bill we're
