job architecture implementation,
next steps for compensation
plan, paid time off, so we can
have Dylan Lang and Joey Simon.
Do we have uh
Everything uploaded, we're good
to go on the.
OK. I believe you have an
overhead.
Mr. Chairman, yes, that's
correct. The uh state personnel
office has a slide presentation
that can go on up, um.
LFC does not, but I, I, I
provided you a couple of bullets
just to give you a brief
overview of the project and I'll
just talk through a, through a
couple of issues uh related to
the work that we've been doing
over the past year, so good
afternoon, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, um, my name is
Joseph Simon. I am an analyst
for the legislative Finance
Committee and we're here today
to talk about the work that uh
Spo, the Department of Finance
and Administration and LFC have
been doing over the past year
based on some funds that the
legislature.
you're appropriated to take a
look at the state system of
compensation and classification.
So really, really this, this
project's sort of dates back to
October 2022 when LFC's program
evaluation unit did a review of
the state's, uh, system of
compensation and classification.
At that time, that evaluation
found that it's been about 20
years since we've gone and done
a comprehensive look at the
state's system.
So in response to those
findings, as I said, we received
an appropriation to go out and
and contract with a contractor
that uh we ended up choosing
Deloitte, uh, to come in, take a
look at uh our system in detail
and make some recommendations.
So some of those recommendations
included um uh if you uh go to
the next slide, uh, on the, on
the packet there you'll see some
of uh the work that was done as,
as that part of that phase of
the study, um.
And some of the recommendation
there which really found that a
lot of our job descriptions on
our classifications were
outdated. There was a mismatch
between the actual job demands
and the responsibilities and
The that that uh study really
recommended that we take a close
look at um our job architecture
and uh and consider better
defining our job families and
subfamilies which has the effect
of, you know, helping our
employees see a career path as
they work through this uh
state's system of employment. So
since September, we've been uh
undergoing some work, uh, some
additional work on that job
architecture, uh, with Deloitte.
So we've uh we've had a
recommendation that, that spoke
create 14 job families in 69
jobs job subfamilies where
similar uh types of uh jobs or
groups together, um, really just
that.
Uh, one of the, one of the
findings of the initial
evaluation is that we weren't
reviewing our job
classifications enough and sort
of a more systemic approach to
uh job classification and and
the job families gives Spo the
opportunity to, you know, be a
little more proactive on the
reviewing of those job
classifications to make sure
that we we're keeping up with
the market so that we don't fall
behind. Uh, that's something you
all have been hearing from a lot
of agencies is that our
classifications are are behind
and we need pay increases to
catch up.
Uh, so, uh, recently, as, as
part of the work we've been
doing, uh, there's been
developing a job catalog
assigning each family and job
subfamily, um, and mapping that
our current classifications onto
um the proposed a new
architecture and so um.
There, there will be some
ongoing work that um that we'll
be working on over the next
couple of months. A lot of that
involves actually going a little
deeper into the department as
we, we do those mapping, uh,
that mapping exercise, making
sure that employees uh are
actually responsible for uh the
things that are in their job
description. So that we don't
have people who are being
expected to perform certain
functions that are in a job, a
job where the job description is
completely different. So, um.
That's sort of some of the work
that's going to be going on over
the next couple of months. Now
all of this with the goal of
being able to implement uh a
recommended single salary
schedule, uh, yeah, coming in,
um,
In July of, of, of next year, or
sorry, not next year anymore now
I forget it's January, it's this
year, almost February. So, uh,
when the new fiscal year starts,
we'll be able to, uh, start with
a new simplified salary
schedule, um, one of the things
to be aware of, of in that, um,
and it's gonna take some pretty
careful, uh, communication with
agencies is there's oftentimes a
lot of concern with, with state
employees on where they fit
within that, um, the, the pay
band of
The of the job. So one of the
things that we're gonna have to,
to work very clearly on is, you
know,
Agencies, you know, and
different agencies work in
different ways, but a lot of
times when we look at the
current data, a lot of agency
staff are clustered at the top
end of that pay band, and it's
really crucial as through this
process that agencies take
advantage of the full full pay
band. So when an employee is
starting out, they're, they're
brand new. They start at the
bottom and then they work their
way up over time. So, um, that's
one of the, one of the things
we're gonna have to really, uh,
communicate with agencies and
employees on, you know, you may
be at the top of your current
pay band when we do this work,
you may not be at the top, you
may be somewhere else based on
uh uh.
You know, where, where you fit
within that structure, um.
The, the good news for that is
that gives people someplace to
go in the future, right? And so,
you know, the, the consequence
of having everyone clustered at
the top is there's not a lot of
room for growth and so really
encouraging agencies to take
advantage of that full pay band
is really a key part of this
work. And so with that, Mr.
Chair, I think we can skip uh
I've really covered the next
couple of slides here, um,
y'all all free to ask questions
on any of this, uh, information,
and I'll with that I'll hand it
over to uh.
lying with the state personnel
office.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair. Uh,
senators, again, I'm the, I'm
the proud director of the state
personnel office. I've had the
opportunity to uh discuss with
uh several interim finance
committees, uh, the status of
job architecture, uh, we're in
this new phase. I don't know
what, what phase number as, as
now we have some more funding um
to in-house Bill one to continue
this project, but we are excited
where we um are headed now
generally and, and just I know
we skipped those slides, they,
they, it's it's a nice
presentation of where our
current state is and where
we're.
gonna go. So I encourage you,
you know, to, to look at that,
um, generally. The next step in
which we have funding for is,
is, is the hard, hard part and
it's the hard work, right? The
goal really of job architecture
is to create a framework where
compensation and growth is
transparent and it's consistent
um throughout uh state um
government and so that's really
what we're doing, um.
Uh, Mr. Simon just outlined uh
uh uh the framework that will be
in place so you can see your
career growth, that'll be, um,
uh, and then the leveling would
be the same and it'll be
consistent. The next step is now
actually to build a job catalog,
um, where, right where, um,
Deloitte with uh the, the
parties involved, DFA, LFC and
and SO will take every
classification there currently
is. There's about 860
classifications uh uh for state
employment uh currently and put
those classifications um and
categorize them by job.
family by job subfamily, by
level, and in the career track,
and we take all, all of those
and put them in there, uh, we
would verify that with an agency
um partners, um, and, and, uh,
also then once we do that, we'll
actually move every employee.
Move every, we, we in the state
of New Mexico for flexibility,
especially in our higher level
classifications. Uh, we have
very broad, um, manager
classifications AO2, A01 staff.
They can do whatever the agency
decides, and that is
flexibility, but we're trying to
be consistent in, in the naming
conventions and what those jobs
actually do and then have
compensation reflect that.
So we, we're gonna build out a
job catalog, then we're going to
map those employees by
classification, what they are,
we're not changing any duties,
right? We're refining them. We
want to make sure that you're
doing the job you're supposed to
be doing if you are a management
analyst. If you are, um,
Uh
A good example, a general
manager, right? That's, that's
too broad. So what does that
actually mean? So we're gonna do
that and then we're going to map
onto the new salary structure
once we decide what that is. So
again, we're not necessarily
changing anybody's um salary
except for to bring everybody up
to the minimum of the new pay
band. That's a state personnel
board rule, and again, just,
just to be clear, cause I know
some of you were new, this is
only for the classified service
of, of employees, these aren't
exempt like um Mr. Simon and I
are are exempt employees, but um
that's, that's really the
next work and that's going to
take validation from our agency
partners and also um.
Uh, uh, members of the union and
so we were going to make sure
that we are validating that with
the goal, um, to, to have our
new um job architecture with our
new classifications and our new
salary structure by next fiscal
year and, and, and a pay package
to, to bring everybody to
minimum. At that point, right,
we would then look at more,
maybe more salary and uh
targeted salary increases to
bring those up. So that's,
that's job architecture and if
you go down to the next slide,
again, this is supposed to just
streamline and, and, and, and
And, and, uh, I guess simplify
this process. We haven't looked
at our, our classification
system as a whole since 2001.
Um, this is not the industry
standards where our comparator
states have looked at um our
classification, their
classification systems, um, at
least since, uh, in 2020, 2018.
We haven't done it since 2001,
so it's time to, it's our time
to, to actually uh modernize
itself. So currently we have 12
salary schedules and, and 111
pay bands, right? So this is
just a visual
of what that looks like. You can
see if I, um, you can
potentially I could be a 45 and
actually make less money once I
get promoted to a higher
classification in, in a, in a
pay band 50 or what the what's
proposed is one, if you go to
the next slide.
Uh, one salary structure with 2
pay bands, um, we, we like it
maybe to be a little bit more,
um.
Mr. Simon may not, but um we uh
uh this is what it would look
like. It's a, it's clear
symmetry, you can see when you
actually raise into a pay band,
you're always going to hopefully
get a raise and it's just much,
much clearer and from a spoke
perspective, managing 20 pay
bands versus 112, and that's
you, you all can, can understand
that piece. So this is, this is
really the goal is to simplify,
to modernize, right, and to give
agencies more flexibility to
pay, right? So, so, um, uh, if
they, if they need to, they can.
And so job architecture.
Hopefully we'll fix this, give
us the framework to actually
then be be way uh uh be, be
fiscally responsible when we're
giving some more salaries and
when when we're doing salary
increases or when agencies are
coming in front of you and, and
justifying the need for more
salary for their employees. So
that's, that's the visual um.
Aspect just in due to time, what
this will ultimately take uh if
you can skip the next uh couple
slides is it's a, it's a
fundamentally uh a different
change of to how we do
classification and compensation
in the state of New Mexico. We
have a current hay model, which
is great, but it really gives
you internal valuation of our
job systems and our job
classifications and compares
them, uh, uh, just internally to
all the other jobs here in New
Mexico. We don't utilize the
full market data.
Like what other states are
paying firefighters what other
states are paying, um, uh, uh,
in any classification and so
with this software that um is is
in Spo's budget and, and with,
you know, the, the, the FTE
that's requested as well. We
will be able to utilize the
market data and and the mark to
to make real-time decisions on,
on paying compensation and be
more as, as Mr. Simon said, be
more um
Not reactionary but proactive in
looking at the classification.
So we don't have this, this,
this problem where we haven't
looked at our classifications,
um, uh, uh, as a whole since
2001. So this will really
modernize and give agencies the
flexibilities they've been,
they've been wanting and needing
and the oversight from, from,
from you all and and state
personnel in a consistent way.
So that's, that's ultimately the
goal, um, and, and, and that's
where we're moving to a
market-based method of
evaluation where we still use
our internal evaluation of what
it means to what that.
what work means in New Mexico,
but then also utilizing
real-time market data to, to, to
assess what compensation should
be. So that's where we are in
job architecture. We hope to
have an opportunity to present
to you once the work starts. I
think um the end of March is
when the validating starts, um,
and, and, and, and if you ever
need, you know, please, please
call us back up to talk about
job architecture, but that's the
next and final phase, and to be
honest, the hardest.
And so Mr. Chairman, um, if you
wanted to move, move to
questions on job architecture.
There's also a piece on paid
time off that was also on the
agenda. Um, we have some
information on that, but if you
wanted to
Oh, OK, that, that's fine. Uh,
do you wanna, you wanna go
ahead, go with?
Sure. Uh, I was also asked to
talk about um uh PTO or sick and
annual leave. I know that you
all, um, uh, have heard of this,
heard this issue, um, uh, DFA
and, and SO and, and the uh
Department of Justice were, were
asked to present uh earlier in
the year before the Supreme
Court case that that came down
staying um action on this and
deferring to you all, I think
rightly. So, um, uh, I.
I, I haven't seen any bills. I
just assumed that, um, you know,
PTO will be coming. Uh, if you
can scroll down to the next
slide, uh, just very briefly and
I'm sorry if you already know
this, but um, uh, our, our sick
leave, if you would scroll down
to the next uh slide, um, our,
our sick leave, um, we're really
talking about sick leave, but
our sick leave, uh, uh, uh, the
caps, right? How much sick leave
a retiree can take or a
terminated employee and
terminated isn't, isn't as bad
as I'm trying to make it sound.
It's just when you
If you leave state employment,
right? Um, uh, and, and also
when you retire are both
outlined in statute, this is
legislative authority that you
all have granted and if you can
see the dates, 1983, 1984. This
has been the caps on our sick
leave take uh take back, uh,
buyback or what you pay out when
somebody retires since 1980, um.
3, right? Almost 40 some years
ago. And so this is how it's
always been, um.
Generally, and, and I think, and
I think you understand, but uh
this statute authorizes payments
for accumulated sick leave and
excess of 600 hours that half of
the employees' hourly rate.
So that's what it is. So you can
gain sick as a state employee,
classified employee, um, but
this actually covers, covers all
employees up until if you you
decide to change it, um, in
either branch of government um
caps it at 600, so you can gain
up to 600 hours of sick leave.
You don't get that back, right?
You can't buy it back or you
can't take any, any when you
retire, right? So it's, it's
really there for insurance.
That's what our sick leave is
and it's a very generous um uh
sick leave policy in the
Deloitte study that
Um, that we were just
discussing, they look at
benefits and, and they um uh
state that uh our uh sick leave,
um, accrual rate in, in New
Mexico is very generous and
exceeds the market. Something we
exceed the market in is, is how
much sick leave you can you can
accrue and actually an FYI 20,
you know, under um,
Uh
The governor, uh Lujan Grisham,
we actually had state Personnel
Board increased the sick leave
accrual rate for um uh employees
actually 4 hours per pay period.
So state employees are getting 4
hours of sick leave per pay
period, right? But understanding
that there's this cap, you have
to get at least 600, right
before you can either buy it
back, right? Or take any of it
when you retire.
That's our current system,
that's been the system since
1983 and 1984. If you, if you
wouldn't mind going to the uh
next slide.
Generally, so, um, these are
just some numbers about uh sick
leave generally, but as you can
see just in
Uh, highlighted there, um, those
are the, that's so 84 hours is
the average classified retiree
sick leave buyback cost in FY
24. That's not, that's not very
many.
Right, that's how much we're
paying. And then the other, and
then the other one is the sick,
uh leave buyback cost, right?
And I didn't spend too much time
about it, but if you have over
600, right, you can, every,
every January you can ask your
state agency to pay you, um, an
amount of money to get you back
down to 600, but it's at a
prorated amount. It's not your
current salary, right? So that's
how much the state has paid in
FY 24 per hour, right? It's not,
it's, it's per per employee.
Right? So that's, it's, it's
not.
a small amount, but it's, it's
certainly not a large amount. So
I want you to have those numbers
in front of you. These numbers
are, uh, from, from DFA and
we'll go to the next, next slide
here.
If you wouldn't mind, as you can
see,
Previously, right, um, uh, what,
what, what the uh judicial
branch um had decided to do was
to, to, to, to, to scrap the
current, make their own policy
related to PTO. We want to have
our own PTO system. This is,
this is a, as has cost the state
over 131.2% increase in costs.
Um,
And so I just want to let you
know that it's, it's a large,
large amount of money that we're
talking about. It's not a small
amount, um, what, what this
would also, um,
Do is create two types of state
employees, um, right now, right,
sick leave governs all state
employees where they're
classified and exempt. This is
now 2 different types of
employees to different um uh
ways that you'd have to
administer it if you are, um,
the, the state of New Mexico,
uh, regarding both calculation
and then actually pay out.
Um, so it is, it is a large
change that costs a lot of
money. So as you can see the,
the first number in, in yellow.
Or orange
Um, is, uh
Is, is what we would have paid
to um the judiciary, uh,
judiciary employees under state
law before the, the PTO um
change versus after, right? So
you, you combine the two and
that's actually how much money
we're talking about, you know,
that is a large amount of money.
I just want you to be aware of
that. I think you are, but I
just want you to have the
numbers, um, and that DFA uh
just verified, and this is the
number again for your retired
payout, right? So again, under
the previous law, you could only
get any sick leave over
600 hours. So if I had 400 hours
of sick leave and I was, and I
was a state employee, I would
get no.
I, I could not get any money for
my sick leave.
Right? On only over 600, 600
hours is is quite a lot, and as
you all know. So this is for the
retirement and, and the, and the
last slide is, is for um the
leave buyback or almost.
Uh, is to leave buyback. It's
the same calculation, um, 318%
increase in costs to effectuate
what was proposed by um the
judicial branch, um, uh, uh,
prior to the Supreme Court case
coming in which has stayed and,
and, and we're keeping the, the
payouts generally. I know DFA is
currently paying out anybody
who's who's making those
requests under current state
law. So everyone is still being
paid at the judicial branch.
They're just just not under
their PTO um policy. So again,
318% increase in the last, um,
The last slide is, well, if we
do PTO for two branches of
government, one branch of
government, what about the
executive, right? So, so DFA
calculates that the cost would
be an increase of 273% increase
if PTO was extended um under the
model that was previously
proposed. I, I know that um
that, that legislation could
change that, but it would be an
increase of, of uh
273% every year. This is a
recurring cost.
Every year to the state for for
PTO.
Um, and so I just want to make
sure you have those numbers, uh,
in, in, in front of you. I know
some of you weren't weren't here
for that presentation, but those
are the numbers for um
Our our PTO uh program, if, if,
if what the
Uh, judicial branch.
Had had uh made a rule on where
were to be extended to the
executive branch or.
You all just to understand
exactly how much money that,
that, that, uh, the increased
costs would be for retiring or
terminated uh judicial employee.
Truman, I'll just make a real
quick brief comment on on this
issue and, and that's really
just.
For you all to think about
opportunity cost. You all didn't
have recently invested a lot of
money in salaries, right? And
you know, that has an advantage.
It's, it's, it's extremely
transparent way of, you know,
compensating employees like the
the amount is on the page,
right? Um.
Uh, the our current leave
policies are are really critical
part of the total compensation
piece. They're also relatively
expensive and so, um, you know,
taking a look and thinking
about, do you want to increase
compensation to employees
through fringe benefits or
through salaries is really sort
of, uh, you know, what, what you
all have to consider when you're
thinking about um policies
relating to uh to leave or not.
Um, and I, I will just say in
the
And I following the bullets that
I provided for you. There's this
page that has um our uh
benchmarking of of leave accrual
versus the market, and as you
can see our current leave
policies are pretty generous.
Um, you know, we're the, this
only covers the classified
system, um, because that's, that
was the scope of the study, but
um we're accruing 13 days uh in
the executive uh classified
system of sick leave per year,
whereas the
It's, it's essentially doing 77
to 9, so you all have made a
decision to go above market for
sick leave to give employees the
ability to, you know, not have
to come into work when they're
sick, right? We, we know the
issues that that can cause, you
know, from recent years, um,
also to be able to take time off
to care for family members or,
or others, right? Um, that's a,
that's an important aspect of
this of the sick leave program
is, is, is caretaker leave.
So, um, with that, Mr. Chair,
uh, I think we'll stand for any
questions you have and uh leave
it at that.
No, Senator Padilla, uh, thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you
for the report here, uh, you
know, this, we seem to have this
discussion where we continue to
have this discussion every
little while and uh and I know
it's, it's a great discussion
that we keep having.
Uh, why is it taking so long to
to get uh the the the job um.
Market analysis study
implementation. I feel like
we've been talking about this
for like 2 or 3 years now.
So, um, Mr. Chairman, Senator, I
think you, you're right, we have
been talking about it for a
while, but um, you know, we
started this study in 23, um,
with the idea of implementing it
in.
At the beginning of fiscal year
26, and I think we're still on,
on track for that. So I do think
we're on, we're on the schedule
that we had anticipated. We did,
um, after, you know, the sort of
the first phase of work came
this, OK, well, we've got
additional work to do and so
we've kind of, we, we've
crunch that into the next couple
of months, but we do believe
that we'll be, we'll be ready to
implement at the end of the, at
the beginning of the next fiscal
year. OK, and, and I guess you
know, the, the next question
really is along the lines, Mr.
Chairman of are we, I hope we're
not overcomplicating this
because we're trying to get away
from the complex and the overly
complex, you know, system that
we have, uh, can you name three
items or 3 things that are just
just stand outs on how we're
going to be able to simplify
this thing so that employees
understand that when they come
to
work for the state of New
Mexico. This is a very good
thing for me. I really want that
to be the, the mantra and, and,
you know, it should be sort of
like an award in my community. I
got that job with the state of
New Mexico. I, I, I fear right
now that it's
Hard to get in and then it's
hard to understand how do I get
ahead and then it's hard to
understand why is all this
happening to me. So is, are
there 3, maybe 5 things that you
could point to that are just
Off the page, you know, what,
what, what is it that's gonna
make this so different?
Uh, Chairman Senator Padilla,
number one, it's, it's going to
be consistent, right? We will
have
All of our jobs, um, categorized
and named the same way, right?
So we will not have these
generic classifications like I
just said, I'm a general
manager. No, I'm a manager.
What level, right? And in what
department, accounting manager
one accounting, right? So
they'll be consistency in jobs
names, right? So we will know
what we can do. We'll have a
career path.
Right, where you can see when
I'm if I'm in the professional
or career path. This is the
standard education or experience
that I need to actually move up
to the next level, right? All of
this is going to be transparent.
This is going to be available on
the SO website. They'll be
handouts just like, just like
you all have here. This is going
to be a transparent way to
understand uh how I, how I
evolved, right, within a job
family and how I grow in my
career, I can, I can start at
one classification and see a
career path in front of us. So
it's transparent, everything
that we're doing.
is transparent. We'll have a new
class uh compensation
philosophy, right? That, that
will be transparent. So people
will understand what is the
basis, right, for how I, how I
get more money or how I can be
more money, uh, or get more
money, right? So I think the
transparency that we are, we are
hoping to provide in the
standardization of this
architecture framework, right?
So everyone will know that what
job they're doing, what the
classification is going to be.
So very simply, if I can just
see a job title and understand
what it does functionally,
right? That's the most important
that I don't.
need to go to that person. So
we're gonna have job, job um
titles that actually describe
what the job does, and I know
that seems uh a pretty, pretty,
pretty straightforward, but
that's not the case that's,
that's currently here. And so
we're going to standardize it.
So those are, those are the
three things, but I mean,
ultimately it is transparency,
ultimately it is as it will help
the onboarding process and
retention. If I know exactly
what I have to do to to advance
in a position in, in a career.
And, and just, just real
quickly, um, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, one of the things, uh,
um, Director Lang didn't mention
that it's, it's really good work
that Spo is doing is, you know,
it's not related to the job
classification piece, but one of
the things we found, you know,
in, in looking at the study was
we just weren't our, our, our
way to apply for jobs just
wasn't how, you know, current
employees are looking to apply
for jobs and Spo has been
working on improving those
recruitment processes. I'll just
leave it at that.
All right, thank you, Chair and
thank you, director and thank
you, Joey. Um, my last question
really then becomes one of the
biggest um issues that I hear
about is just how long it takes
to get in, uh, to, to the state
of New Mexico to work here and
then also I'm sure that's
equally as frustrating for, you
know, supervisors of people
within state agencies because
I've got to fill this position.
Hey, I found these really great
candidates or this one that I
really want to make sure we get
in here.
You know, people aren't gonna
live on air. They're not gonna
wait around for, you know, uh,
even 30 days, they're not gonna
wait around for 2 weeks and so
in my business, I, if I don't
act immediately, I will lose
very good candidates.
What are, what are we talking
about today that's going to help
us to
Shrink that time to to filling
actual positions and letting
people know what their next
adventure is in life.
Uh, Chairman Senator Padilla,
that's something that uh state
personnel uh uh works on every
day with agencies, agencies are
in charge of, of hiring, but we
provide support for them to try
to minimize that number. I think
our performance measures have
changed now to more accurately
how many days we're talking
about when the job is posted
versus when the offer goes out.
I think what we need to do is
we're just uh state personnel is
working on strategies to ensure
that that the hiring manager is
talking with HR to speed up
those processes. Some positions
are just hard to
Filled they are posted
continuous. We'll take, we'll
take any nurse, you know, that,
that, that will come through in
any, any firefighter that we
will, but we are doing a better
job. The numbers haven't gone
down as much as we'd like,
right? It is taking, you know,
uh, uh, I guess 68 in in our
latest, but most agencies are
not, not near that. I think, I
think there is a reflection of
certain uh uh most agencies are
doing their best to to minimize
that number because it is
important and and so we are
supporting, we have a whole
recruitment team that that
checks in and trains to make.
make sure that it's not a
technology issue, it's not other
issues sometimes physicians just
take longer to fill from the
hiring manager, but what I'll
tell you about job architecture
is if we can standardize the,
the classifications, right? Um,
we then we can then meeting the
minimum qualifications and
standardizing that will, will
speed up that process so it
won't be a, a, uh, uh, uh, an
issue related to the actual
classification slowing job,
slowing job filling.
down.
Appreciate that chair and and
director, um, I have to say
that, you know, 60 days is
unacceptable. It's completely
unacceptable.
Uh, you know, and, and if you
were interviewed on the front
end of the applicant pool,
really, how long are you gonna
wait?
You know, maybe it's OK for your
family situation, your financial
situation to do that, but it
isn't for most people. So I
really hope and I'm glad, I'm
really thankful and glad that
you're trying to find solutions
to that. We've got to bring that
thing down to something much
more manageable. I would say on
the high end, you know, 21 days,
3 weeks, I mean, you know, if we
can't get ourselves in gear
there, we, we, we probably don't
deserve to have that great
employee come in here because
they, they, the reason they're
great is because they're great
and they're gonna get hired
somewhere else, and we're going
to lose out on on a terrific
individual.
So, thank you for entertaining
my questions. Thank you, Chair.
Make a Senator Brent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
just have a couple of questions,
um, on, on slide, your, your
first slide where it shows, you
know, this is pretty
comprehensive study.
Um
Mm
We talked about in the education
committee a lot that, you know,
we, we actually are are pay
wasn't great for teachers, but
our benefit package was really
good, a lot better than any of
our neighboring states.
So we're seeing the same thing
in the state employees that
Most teachers as they're coming
in, they're more worried about
pay than they are benefits.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, I
would actually, so there's a
mix, there's a mix on that. So,
um,
I think we, the study didn't
specifically look at pension
benefits, but if you look at the
data in general, pension
benefits in New Mexico are, are
better than a lot of our
surrounding states where we're
starting to see a lag, and it
was looked at as part of this
study is our health benefits
have actually been
Been looked at and, and
benchmark below market, right?
So that's something that um
you're gonna have a presentation
on healthcare benefits and I
think the secretary might talk
about this a little, but uh
overall, I mean that I, you
know, I've I've heard that as
well. It's the same as you, but
frankly, on the health benefits
side, uh, that's no longer the
case.
When you, when we looked at the
Pay bands we, we put it all
together, right? We're not.
Just looking at salary, because
if we are then we forget about
benefits and just list salaries.
Mm.
Chairman, Senator Brown, we, we
are only looking at compensation
salary. We're not looking at the
benefits and, and what, what,
what Mr. Simon um has said in in
the material here too is that a
state employees, they get 40% of
their compensation through
benefits. But, but this job
architecture uh project and the
compensation study was only
compensation. It didn't uh
really look at benefits. I know
they, they did it, but um uh at
the end, but really we were just
focused on compensation pay,
base salary.
Mm
OK. Um,
And then on on slide 7.
Um, you have
People being paid
$450,000.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and uh
Senator Brand, um, there are a
small number of, for example,
doctors in the system, like, I,
you know, I think this is, this
is one of the issues that um
that the director had brought
up, uh, you know, if you look at
sort of, you know,
14 to 20, there's very few
individuals in those. There's
just not a lot of classified
employees in those pay bands,
but you know, we do employ
doctors, for example, and
sometimes those, you know,
professional, our professional
engineers for example, the
Department of Transportation
have have relatively high
salaries, right? So, um,
Uh, I would say 450 is, is much
higher than we're currently
paying, uh, but, um, that this
was the recommendation to
include, um,
Pay bands that go that high.
Thank you. Thank you.
Centered compass.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you all for the
presentation. It truly helps us
as we move forward. I'm gonna go
back to the hay study and how at
one point years back we were
working on something that was
very similar.
And, and in processing forward,
getting back, if you will to
this particular project in 26
can be here very quickly.
But in, in dealing with it,
there are always issues that we
haven't addressed or we've
addressed them.
Employees of
Work at ways to go ahead and
find themselves, if you will, in
the best pay band possible.
So within that, the first
question that I have, and it
goes back to the proposed salary
schedule.
Within that is this going to be
fixated in such a way that
It will hold true for years to
come once the pay um schedule is
is adopted or is this again
gonna have that flexibility.
And again I get back to the fact
that
As we've incorporated some of
these studies before.
Um
Almost immediately there were
adjustments and that led to
compaction. It led to change in
duties and
What we're trying to do is to
indicate to people if you're
going to be a state employee.
These are the specific areas.
This is the direction, here is
the uh the credentialing that
you need, so help me understand
this as it goes forward, is it?
Going to have that flexibility
in the future once it's adopted
and of course it's uh it's very
hard to anticipate that, but um,
that again continues to go ahead
and be uh the chief concern,
particularly by um individuals
that are going to be
supervisors, departments, and uh
and what regulation and if you
will, what uh expectations are
gonna have, so maybe you can
help me a little bit to
understand that, please.
Did uh
Chairman, Senator Campos, yes, I
mean, that's, that's the point
is this is, this really does
bring flexibility, um, and both
internal evaluation of how we
receive a job and how much that
job should be paid and how we
value it with the external now
market, real-time data to see,
hey, how much should we be
paying? What are some other data
points that we can to actually
pinpoint that, that uh uh market
salary pay, but this is very
flexible, right? Uh at state
personnel office we, we have a
whole team of classic team that
will look at the class.
ations with some of the hate,
hey, hey methods with the market
data and if we need to include,
we bring subject matter experts
in, those doing the work, right,
generally to see, so we will
have that flexibility, but this
is what it does to pay bands as
proposed, what's on the screen
are very, very wide, right? So
that allows you then not to have
to come to state personnel
office and say, hey, I need to
expand a pay band, right? So I
can pay my um
Uh, I guess, uh.
Uh, in, in any classification
you want, but um uh uh our
evidence tax more money.
Right? This why pay band will
put that classification in
there, right? And, and then you
can decide how much you wanted
to pay, and if you do actually
then need to come to Spo in a
situation where we are trying to
look at increasing either a pay,
pay band or a pay grade, we can
do that quickly and agilely, so
absolutely, it's flexible, um,
and, and it's really flexible
for agencies.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, as we go
forward and we start to take a
look at the uh salary schedules
and the pay bands dealing with
the regional comparables in, in
a couple of things that really
tie in.
As an individual gets into the
system and they continue with
education, they continued to um
increase, if you will, in the
responsibilities do they move to
that next pay band and will
there be some compaction issues
that we'll have to deal with
from what you can see, and I'm,
I'm what I'm thinking of more
than anything is.
How far ahead do we really need
to be so that we can have that
flexibility and as we move
forward, if some of these
changes begin to occur once we
adopt the salary schedule.
Can we keep up with that or will
we find ourselves again within a
short period of time, having to
start another study and create
the evidence-based piece so that
in government we're going to
keep up, if you will, with
what's actually occurring within
government, with the expectation
and then from there as we're
dealing with employees, how
we're going to give them at
least that avenue so they can
continue to increase and have
the incentive to move forward
with not only salaries, but the
benefits that we're talking
about.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Would you please respond if we
could please Senator Compos
absolutely. I mean, I think that
that's necessarily the demand of
the three.
uh, uh, um, uh, departments that
that are doing the state
personnel office, LFC and DFA,
right? We need to make sure
that, that this is done and
followed in the future. But what
I will say is that once we have
the job architecture in place
and we've standardized, right,
our classifications, our job
families, um, then it's much
easier than and leveling, right,
the job leveling, how much
education experience, skills,
knowledge ability, certificates,
um, you need for that position
that will help standardize.
And uh uh uh a more transparent
and consistent way for an agency
to ask for those increases,
right? We have it in state
personnel board rule about
appropriate placement, how much
you're going to pay, uh, a new
person you bring in your
division and then internal
alignment, making sure that
you're not creating a pay
disparities when you bring
people in and you make salary
increases understanding uh uh uh
those parameters. But once we
standardized job architecture,
then I think we can have a
compensation philosophy that is
very clear and transparent about
then how do I get?
Uh, um, to get a salary increase
and what that will actually do
with the pay band being so wide
is that then I don't need to
just be promoted in a new
position, right? I don't need to
become a management analyst 2 to
then a 3 to get an increase, uh,
the, the agency with
evidence-based, um, you know,
approaches to budgeting can, can
ensure that they are actually
compensating their, their
current employees while looking
to the, while looking to the
future at the same time. So that
will standardize that, but yes,
that, that demand to make sure
that we are not um compacting or
we are making sure that agent
agencies are considering
appropriate placement in these
budget um requests is a demand
of of of of you all of of the
state personnel office of DFAN
and the agencies themselves. So
Mr. Chairman, just in closing,
and I have several other
questions, but in the essence of
time, I'm not gonna go down this
particular routes, but as, as we
deal with this compensation
continues to be.
Not only very important, but
within the region as we see it.
How do we really compete?
And how do we hold the employees
in their positions and help them
develop their careers in the
long run, and so that's gonna be
an important issue as we deal
with it. And again, the focus
that you placed on not only the
study and what is occurring.
hope that that's gonna be one of
the major uh impetus pieces for
this.
This study, how do we keep state
employees, how do we value their
work? How do we ensure there's
full accountability and
transparency, and then
ultimately provide them with a
career so that uh they are
recognized as very valued state
employees.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Senator, uh
Senator Trill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I almost
called you Mr. President.
Mhm
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
thank you for this information.
It's, it's really helpful. A
couple of questions. I, I, I
would say you, you talked about
job titles.
Most state employees don't
necessarily know their job title
on this thing, they make up job
titles based upon the agency
you're at and the things that
they're doing. I'm wondering,
um,
Thispo have career coaches or
can employees go to workforce
development, um, to get coaching
on what they're gonna need to
get to the next level. Is that
something available?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
um, not necessarily at SO. We
are, we have over 166 uh
trainings that that we provide
um to to help uh employees grow
um within that we hope that, um,
you know, uh, we do normally
leave that, you know, with
agencies to, to try to figure
that out. One of the comments
from uh the Deloitte study
generally as we wish we had a
better, uh, uh, I guess a
branding campaign for lack of a
better word, to, to really
tether right what state
employment actually is and
that's something.
that, you know, we, we see that
spoke could be a leader in, and,
and it's an opportunity with job
architecture once we can
standardize and standardize this
when we talk about a career path
and how you move through a
career path. That's our
opportunity to then and then
create these resources, maybe
come back to you uh next budget
cycle and see what kind of um
recruit recruiter that that we
can have to help really um
support and standardize um um um
uh state employment, state
personnel office used to be 55
FTE where 35.
Um, uh, you know, so, so this
budget, um,
Uh, cycle, we, we just asked
funding uh for 6 to get us back
up to 44, but I, uh, we're gonna
write that down to make sure
that when in in one of the new
positions we do get.
Um, well, uh, whether it's, uh,
I guess through, through the
grow fund that we can ensure
that we are supporting um and
actively sourcing new employees
so they get that experience. So
they actually feel supported and
so they, they complete their
probationary period and they get
the job rights.
Yeah, thank you, um, Mr. Chair.
It, it is important. I will just
echo what Senator Campos said
that being able to grow your
career, that you're getting more
money, um, as well as job sat
satisfaction is really critical
for keeping state employees, um,
I have noticed that a lot of our
jobs.
Uh, are based upon supply and
demand.
And so when there's a short
supply of
Individuals who can fill
positions, then you quite
frankly have to look at how do
you pay them more, because
you're competing against Los
Alamos, you're competing against
counties, um, and now, um, I'm
not gonna get on to the next
part of this, but it seems as
though we may be competing
against the judiciary, um, and
so, you know,
How, how is this system gonna be
nimble enough?
That you can address that. I'll
just give you an example. You
may remember we had to begin
paying our inspectors more
because we couldn't keep them,
and that was an important aspect
of something in order to keep
the economy moving, we just had
to pay them more to try to get
them and to keep them. Will this
system allow that nimbleness so
that as the supply of
individuals in the position
drops and demand remains or
increases the salary can be used
to, I guess o employees from
other agencies.
Or businesses.
Mr.
Chair Senator Trujillo, um, yes,
that that is a
concern. I'll inspectors
generally our current system,
um, uh, uh regulations and
licensing department would need
to make a request to our
classification and compensation,
um, division, uh, fill out
paperwork, um, about trying to
raise the salary for um the
salary and the pay, the pay
grade for inspectors, right?
Then we get together, a group of
subject matter experts, right?
And we look at some of the
market data, but only the, the,
the free market data and we
And then schedule a board
meeting and actually approve
that it takes 2 months. Under
this, under this um uh uh uh uh
moving to one salary structure
with the pay bands being so wide
sometimes 70%, right? You don't,
you wouldn't need to do that. If
you believe that, um, and you're
an agency and you need to
dedicate uh uh money to fund
based on external factors uh uh
inspectors, then you can just
really do that. You don't even
need to be spoke at that
particular time using the full
pay band as, as, as Mr. Simon
said.
that hey, what, what we did,
what we did notice in, in the
study generally is that in in
every pay band,
Not every agency wasn't using
the full payment, right? So they
still have that flexibility, but
that awareness. This will give
you flexibility. You wouldn't
have to come to spoil, right,
right to increase that salary
structure that takes 22 weeks. I
mean, that takes 2 months. You
can just go and you can pay them
what you want. Um, but I will
say that part of the, the, the,
the study was uh unemployment,
uh.
survey that when they went out
and most individuals uh leave
because of the emotional needs
that they're not receiving in in
in state employment, not
connected to the mission, um,
and so this, this flexibility
will help in compensation, um,
but again, the agencies will
have to to balance if I'm going
to focus on paying inspectors
more, right? Then, then I'm
gonna have to maybe not pay um
Uh, our attorney classifications
as much, you know, as allowed
and so utilizing the trainings
that, you know, spoken have to
help make those, make those
issues would also be helpful.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, I will
just say that, you know, helping
to find that job satisfaction.
That's interesting that you say
that it's emotional support, um,
because I saw a lot of state
employees hop from agency to
agency just to try to get a
salary increase and if we can
slow that down and, you know,
you're building capacity in your
agency and long term ability. I,
I do think that, you know,
having this in uh judiciary.
PTO and um sick leave, payout,
be different than state
employees could be really
detrimental because we end up
then fighting against each other
like which agency do you want to
go to, um, to get the best
benefits, and if we're, if we're
equal, then we can all kind of
play nicely within this salary
range. Is there any, I just have
one more question, Mr. Chairman.
Is there anything that is going
to be focusing attention on.
some of those high need low
supply positions, and I just,
um, I believe them to be
financial.
HR and IT.
There's probably more, but I
know those have been very
difficult.
You know, I mean, what uh Mr.
Mr. President, Senator Trujillo,
what, what we're excited about
is when these validation, um,
um uh sessions start with, with
Deloitte and LFC and DFA but we
will look at finance, we will
look at at um technology. We
will look at um
Uh, every classification, right?
We're having subject matters
come in a subject matter experts
come in and see what we need. Is
it a problem with the minimum
qualifications. Do we need to
lower those? Do we need to
heighten those? Is this a
problem just with compensation,
but we are going to be looking
at every classification. And at
that point, we can then
establish, well, well, let's
make sure that that it's, that
it's consistent and relevant,
right, to, to hire in those
positions, put them on a salary
structure that allows them to be
paid uh uh uh as as high or as
low as the market determines and
then we can.
move forward. And again, when it
spoken can make tweaks as we as
we go along if need be, if we're
not doing it because we're still
going to be there and now we're
going to be more proactive to
actually look at all the
classifications and not just
wait for agencies to, to, to
come to us and say, hey, we need
more money for our inspectors.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and I
didn't mean to elevate to the
president
and Senator
just extremely quickly on the
PTO and competition issue. So
the LFC recommendation uh
included uh language that makes
clear that the law is the law is
written on, you know, on the
slides director Lang presented
applies to all three branches of
government.
Thank you, um, Mr. Mr. Chair, if
I could just ask, like, is that
language that's gonna be
included in House Bill 2 that
could be easily struck.
Ketoed so, uh, Mr. Chair and,
and Senator, you, you, you are
correct, it is in House Bill 2,
so.
I think you, uh, Senator uh
Gonzales.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, um, just a couple of
things that uh
Most of it has already been
discussed.
Excuse me.
So going from the current
salaryary schedule.
The bands that you have here are
1011.
To the 20.
So
Existing employees will be
grandfathered in.
Mhm
history chair, Senator Gonzalez,
yes, we're gonna map. We're
gonna, we're gonna, we're gonna
crosswalk, I, I guess, but we're
going to take every class, every
classification, every state
employee and move them to the
new salary structure. So they
were in potentially uh pay band,
you know, 70, now they're going
to be in pay band 6. So everyone
will be moved over.
Mr. Chairman, with that part, no
one will make less than what
they're making now.
Mr. Chairman Senator Gonzalez,
absolutely no one's gonna get
lose any money potentially
people will gain money if
they're to make, to make sure
they're at the bottom of the pay
band, which is a requirement.
Undersco
and uh Mr. Chairman, um.
The song's on my throat.
So is DOT still part of this?
Mr. Chairman Senator Gonzalez,
uh, DOT, uh, has a large number
of classified employees and so
yeah, they are part of the
classified system.
I guess so. The only part that I
see is um.
You know, sometimes there's
characteristics.
And I know that uh as we have
agencies come in, there's always
that vacancy.
Number
And you know, and
Going back and forth and maybe
as so.
Applicants sometimes they don't
have that kind of time to wait.
be employed, but uh with the
DOT.
Also, they have some physicians.
That are very rural.
Which are very, very hard to
feel to begin with.
And then sometimes, you know,
it's uh.
You know, experiencing some
things that we're doing now
like.
We've always been used to
inclement weather, but you know,
now we're also looking at fires.
You know, that you need someone
faster.
And to wait through the whole
thing, so we will be uh.
Any kind of provision that
anyone can be placed.
Pending
Certification pending.
Passing all the requirements,
Mr. President, Senator Gonzalez,
that's not part of uh job
architecture, but I mean, I know
that DOT um is is deploying a
whole bunch of of uh uh
retention strategies to get
those positions filled. I know
that um they are actively trying
to, to fill those positions as,
you know, as quickly as they
can. This, um,
Uh, this project won't
necessarily help with that yet.
Um, but
Um, I know that they're working
hard to fill positions.
Yeah
Very well, thank you Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, uh, Senator
Woods.
Oh ho, state personnel.
So, when are you going to
activate this system, Mr.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator,
the goal is to have the, the new
salary schedules in place for FY
26.
OK.
And just in a.
You're saying that this is, this
is
Compensation, this is not
benefit.
You're not showing the, the
total compensation, you're just
showing the
The salary schedule.
OK, on the compensation side.
On the compensation side we're,
we're talking about.
What exactly makes up the, the
benefit side. Tell, tell me.
Explain the benefit side just a
little bit more to me.
So, um
Uh, Mr. Chair and senator. So
there's, there's several
different components that that
we look at when we look at total
compensation. So we talked about
a couple of them, salary, it's
about 60% of an employee's total
compensation, you know, that
means benefits to the other 40.
So what's included in that
benefits number. So first we
have paid leave that um we were
talking a little bit about
whether it's annual leave, sick
leave, um, you know, personal
days. Uh, in addition, we've got
um
Uh, we've got pension benefits,
that's uh, that's a big chunk of
uh um our total compensation, I
think it's about 12% of total
compensation. I can give you the
exact number, Senator, uh, Spo
publishes a report on this every
year, um, in addition, we've got
health benefits and that varies
by, by person, right? Because
not every state employee
participates in our health
benefits system. Uh, we try to
get as many in there to expand
the pool as wide as possible,
but, um, health benefits.
Uh, account for a big portion of
that as well. You also have
retiree healthcare, right? So
the state contributes to retiree
healthcare, 2% of salary for uh
for all state employees, um.
You also and this is, uh, you
know, something that we have in
New Mexico that's not in every
state, uh, uh, most of our state
employees there are, there are
some classifications that not.
Most of our state employees are
in the Social Security system
and that comes with, you know, a
financial cost, uh, uh, to the
state by participating in that
system, uh, and allowing um
members to generate um retire,
additional retirement. So our
retirement benefits are pretty
expensive with both Social
Security and
pension, um, but there's,
there's one question right
there, Mr. Chair.
OK.
So
The salary you're talking up
here.
His Social Security, is that one
of the deducts off of their
salary.
Or is it considered a benefit?
Well, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Woods, it is, I, I would
consider it a benefit. It's,
it's a, it's a benefit, uh,
that, you know, you're, you're
generating additional income in
retirement,
but what I'm saying is you got
two sides of Social Security.
You're correct.
Besides that, that the employer
pays.
This is
Is not considered in the benefit
package, is it?
Or is it considered then the
benefit package. I know it's a
small percent, but I'm just
trying to get it in my head.
Uh, so, um, Mr. Chairman 6%, uh,
so I'm not, so it's, it's with
with Social Security and
Medicare it's 7.65%, I think,
and I'm not recalling but just
write it down, yeah, uh, on both
sides, yeah, um.
Uh, so it, it's OK, let's, let's
move on. You don't have, yeah, I
was, I was just gonna say, so
when we look at total
compensation, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Woods, we do include
the, uh, the employer
contribution to Social Security
in that calculation. So when,
when we say on average our total
compensation is $106,000 per
employee. That includes the
amount that the state is paying,
uh, to Social Security. OK. OK.
And do we have 401 plan, 401
plans offered to them also, or
do we just have a, a retirement
plan through the state
requirement. I mean, can that be
added in also.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods, so
Pera does have what they call
the smart save program, which is
a um a deferred compensation
plan, um, allowed. There's not
an employer contribution to that
plan,
but Para operates it to make it
available to employees to not an
employee contribution. It it it
is there's an employee
contribution, there's not an
employer.
OK.
Well, it's, it's, uh,
And I'm trying to get around to
this.
is when we start talking about
buying leave time.
Because sleep time is, is
considered that benefit.
And when we start talking about
buying leave time at 40%.
If it's $600.
It's worth
$50.
For $100 let's say.
But if you buy it,
It's only worth $40.
And, and so.
When we start talking about an
employee incentive.
There's more of an incentive to
use it.
Then to get it back, bought
back, that's for sure. You make
more money in your paycheck,
although
How's that text? Is that taxed
as just normal income at the end
of the year when you get a, uh,
get these.
Ours bought back, you just can't
carry, but 600 when you get
that.
That just normal income.
Mr. President, Senator Woods, I
don't know how it's taxed, but
you can, you can, there's an
unlimited amount of sick leave
that, that you can carry over
annual leave your only capped at
240, let's talk about annually,
yeah, it doesn't matter to me.
Well, what I'm getting at.
That annual leave was a benefit
given to you, Mr. Chairman.
Right?
But when you get paid for it.
Is it, is it figured as cash
money on your check.
In other words, uh, uh, what I'm
getting at is this. Let's say
you worked 2000 hours a year.
And you're on the job 2000 hours
a year.
So you get this amount of money.
And you texted your.
R is taxes you have.
As personal income tax for that
amount of money.
But if you take it as sick
leave, you're still considered
as being on the job.
You get 100% of your paycheck
because sick leave or annual
leave either one, it's just like
you were on the job and you get
taxed.
For that many hours.
But when you get paid,
For
The amount that you can't carry.
How's that text?
So, um, Mister, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, I don't know the answer
to that. I don't want to give
you inaccurate information but
we can, we can ask around and
and follow up on that don't
matter.
I just wondered
Uh,
let's go to the
Paid time off.
That's the interesting one,
especially because we've got a,
a bill working its way through
the legislature on a different
matter, but I would ask.
And you may know
The bill that's that's trying to
work its way through the
legislature right now.
Is it gonna also
Be an effect in
them
Or state government exempt from
that.
you.
So, um, Mr. Chair and, and
Senator Woods, the only proposal
that I've seen um in bill form
would only apply to the judicial
and legislative branch I'm
talking about uh the paid leave
time bill that's, that's.
Started in the house, uh, so Mr.
Chairman and uh and Senator,
I've not seen that bill, so I
can't, um, you haven't had any
analysis done on that bill. Now,
Mr. Chair and Senator, not at
this time. I haven't seen it
yet. OK, I'd be interested in
seeing the analysis, uh,
Charles, have you got some
thought on that?
Mr. Chairman, that bill would
apply to the state employees. It
will apply local employees,
public school employees, higher
education employees, both the
payroll tax as well as unless
there was some move.
To, uh, demonstrate to the
workforce solutions department
state was providing an
equivalent benefit, but as it
stands now, we're, we're viewing
it.
Scoring it that the state
employees and the employer would
need to pay so it would be on
top of the benefits we have
right now.
That's correct. I mean, they'd
be paying for it, but it would
be on top of the benefits they
have right now. So
that cost would increase under
that.
Yeah, and so
That's another question because
If they use that,
They're not gonna get 100% of
their salary.
Depending on how much they're
making.
Uh, it's likely that most state
employees would not be paid
100%. They'll be paid some
proportion of it or participate
so the only time it would
benefit them if they didn't have
any arms.
Because any other way they'd be
better off taking,
taking their sick leave, 600
hours first before applying for.
Yeah, unless there's some
Unless they didn't, you know, I
mean.
They've got annual leave.
That they could substitute for
that same purpose.
Or sick leave they could
substitute for that same
purpose, so essentially they're
going to be taxed.
For this fates time paid leave
time or paid.
Time of whatever the hell that
That new legislation is.
And the state's gonna have to
pay in.
On it also, but the chances of
the
State employee taking it is
pretty slim.
Uh, take up rates may be
different because of you have.
Yeah, yeah, that's what it looks
to me.
Hm
Well, I was wondering how this
balance is going to work, maybe
that's how we're gonna backdoor
balance this deal right there,
we're gonna have all the state
employees pay for it and then uh
The other guys can get benefit
from the state employees.
Hey, that's pretty sharp deal
right there. Let's talk about
the
Paid time off though, I mean,
I'll get to looking at these
figures.
Uh
131% increase on page 14.
So we're gonna pay this is
judicial employees.
So under our regular pay off
through the statutes that you
show in here the statutes that
you show on page.
No number of the page that I can
see.
But it says,
PTO versus sick and annual
leave.
State employed sick leave and it
talks about a statute here and
essentially the statute says
40%.
And then the next statute says
similar terms, so I'm assuming
40%.
Uh, so, um, Mr. Mr. Chair and
Senator, it's uh 50%, it's half.
50%, yes.
OK. And there it is, half. OK.
Now we turn back to page 14.
So the
$547,000.
is what that is.
That's, that's following that
statute, right?
So explained the $7,018,000.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods,
that's uh under the previous um
uh rule that the judicial branch
passed on, on being paid out of
uh when when they retire or or
terminate. That's pursuant to
their policy.
At the time.
So they're not living by state
law, they just put it through
policy.
Uh, this year,
so yeah,
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, yeah,
that was the, that was, um, the,
the basis of the lawsuit that
went to the Supreme Court where
the AOC um to DFA for for not
not paying out the Supreme Court
paused that to let you all weigh
in on um.
On, on, on that policy.
So that's a, that's a bill
that's coming through now.
Miss
Uh, Mr. uh Mr. Chair, Senator
was I haven't seen it, but
still, Mr. Chair and Senator
Woods, I would anticipate at
some point there, there could be
a bill. I don't believe
anything's been filed yet.
Again, I will say the LSC
recommendation included uh
language that that attempted to
make clear that uh the
provisions that you cited on
that page applied to all three
branches. So including the
judiciary. OK, got this saying.
That there was a lawsuit.
And the supreme, I mean, the,
the AOC.
DFA.
Saying
We can do this.
And what was, what was the
result of that suit.
So, um, Mr. Chair and Senator,
my understanding that the result
of that suit was that the
Supreme Court
Didn't, uh, so kept the uh
kept the DFA policy in place
pending.
Legislative action at the at the
current session so it keeps uh,
it keeps the 50,074,000 in
place, not the, not the added
718,000. Mr. Chairman, Senator,
that's correct.
And and Mr. President, Senator
Woods, yes, DFA continued to pay
out under current state law. So
any, any AOC uh or judicial
branch employee who's
terminated, retired, um, uh, has
been paid pursuant to state law,
but not under their current
policy, right? Um, I think that
DFA really argued that the
legislature holds the exclusive
power on deciding how, when, and
for what purpose public funds
shall be um applied and so the,
the Supreme Court deferred to,
to you all to try to do um
If you wanted to weigh in on
this, on this matter to do so.
So we're back to where the
statute is.
That's on the books.
OK.
So I, that's, so I don't need to
get excited about any of this.
Mr. President and Senator Woods
uh potentially um uh the the the
Supreme Court cases only stayed.
So, um, uh, either, either party
could motion the court if they
wanted to, to, to, to restart if
um.
If, if, if something happens or
nothing happens here, here in
this session.
Yeah.
Interesting what you can do with
a law degree.
Amazing.
Um, I, I appreciate the, the
questions and the answers I
appreciate the answers. You
don't appreciate the questions,
but I appreciate it.
The uh
I know that we haven't talked
much about.
And I don't think you in your
presentation right now, we're
not talking about the uh
The uh state employee.
Uh, self-insurance policy that's
coming up next.
So
I don't want to miss out on that
one.
So thank you Mr. Chair. All
right, thank you Senator Woods
and Senator Lena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
gentlemen. Um, great questions
today. I'm glad you guys are
sitting on that side of the
table. Um, I'm gonna go much
easier on you today.
So
I would like to put my business
hat on and and go through the
hiring schemes and things that
you have to go through to get
people, um,
To apply, keeping it.
In a timely manner, all of that,
but I, I think we've covered
that pretty good. So what I
would like to go into
Did you use an outside agency to
do this and who is that?
Uh, yeah, Mr. Chairman, Senator,
uh we uh we contracted with
Deloitte to do the study.
OK, and where are they out of?
Um
I, so they are, uh, I believe
they have an office here in New
Mexico. I'm not sure where the
headquarters is so they're in
New Mexico based though. And so
did they come up with the job
descriptions or was that
something?
How big a group came up with
these job descriptions,
Mr. Chair, Senator, and they're
our current job descriptions. So
they, they used what's currently
in the city of New Mexico. So
they all stayed exactly the
same. They, they right now, um,
Mr. President, Senator, they are
all the same right now. We hope
that if we, if we rename, we
look at the classification and
if we decide that we need to
change the, the scope of of
duties, um, that will be done
by, by New Mexico, by the state
uh personnel office. OK.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so the, the
reason I was asking is because I
just went through this with at
the county level.
And one of the problems we had
was each department.
has a different, they want a
different job description, a
secretary in this department is
the same as the secretary in
that department, that was easy,
but if you go from say somebody
on DOT stand out there in the
hot sun versus somebody.
I don't know, shoveling.
Digging a hole or whatever, it's
hard to keep that job
description the same. So how did
you guys go about trying to keep
Keep it where it goes across the
state level.
All agencies.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, that's
where the hard work begins.
That's, that's the, that's this
process now, but we're hopeful,
um, that, that, that we, that we
can do that. We have our have
already kind of matched similar
um jobs and ultimately we will,
we will change if necessary them
to be consistent and if you'd
like to distinguish them through
pay, you can, because right now,
even at state personnel, we have
state personnel, um, HR
classifications, which are
different and only allowed to be
used by state personnel office,
even though they perform similar
work as other HRs and.
um offices. I think that's what
you're talking about. We also
have um uh social workers that
work in uh uh um CYFD and, and,
and, and uh DOH and a whole
bunch of, of, of different
places. So we want to
standardize that and so we're
going to use um Deloitte and
then also these validation
groups to make sure that we're
standardizing that and making
sure that they're at least
they're doing the same job and
you can distinguish them in
different, different ways, but
the, the core functions should
Be the same
And then we would add them if if
need be.
Mr. Chair, and, and so one of
the, one of the issues that,
that we came across in San Juan
County.
was we, we named everything, we
categorized everything. We, we
made our pay schedule, we had
everything all set up and then
you have each department go,
well, wait a minute.
We do more work than they do.
Or those guys, every time I go
to their office, they're sitting
there with their feet up on the
desk.
And, and I just bring that up
because it
It creates a, a jealousy issue
or
You're gonna have a lot of
conflicts coming up. Are you
guys ready for that?
Mr. Chair, Senator, thank you
for that. Maybe we'll bring you
in on these validating groups,
but no, no, we are aware, right?
We are aware of the challenges
and I mean ultimately, I, I
think that's why we're doing
this with all classifications.
We're not just picking and
choosing, I mean, we have 12
salary schedules generally. So
now, so we would just pick one
at a time. We're gonna do it all
together. I think we have a
great working relationship with
LFC DFA state personnel, and a
third party. So it's not just
one of our agencies going in to
agencies and saying we're doing
this.
a concerted kind of statewide
effort, right? And so yes, there
will be some, some, some more,
more prickly uh uh uh employees
or or or or maybe some bruised
uh feelings generally, but
that's why we have our, our
state personnel class and comp
division as well to actually
look into it then, justify why,
right? I mean, this is the
recommendation. I mean, once we
move into this, but we're still,
we're still open for business.
So if someone feels that their
department is doing more. They
have a more oversight function
than another uh uh uh agent.
then, then, you know, we will
adjust at that point if they can
justify it, right? Um, with the
subject matter experts, but
you're right, they're, they're,
we, we are, um, we're, we're
hoping to minimize that, but
yeah, that this, this, um,
ultimately um we'll change it.
Luckily we're not um um really
dealing, changing with
compensation at this particular
time, we're we're dealing with
uh one salary structure in the
framework to then hopefully move
in a in a better way.
And Mr. Chair, this one's gonna
be an unfair question. How long
does it take to move up on the
pay schedule.
Is it gonna be training that
that moves you up? Is it gonna
be a promotion that moves you
up?
You know, how, how does
How to say as secretary move up
on the pa schedule without being
Promoted.
Uh, but, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um,
And Mr. Simon, you can, you can
jump in as, as, as well, but
basically we have a state
personnel board rule that talks
about um um pay and and
appropriate uh uh placement and
internal alignment, you can
progress based on your education
experience, your knowledge
ability, um, and uh your er if
you get a certification, you
advance your your education,
you're provided uh uh positive
uh performance evaluations. Um,
there are, there are a list of
of categories in which you can,
you can seek um to to gain.
compensation without actually
moving it into a new, new
classification or a new job.
OK, thank you. And Mr. Chair,
the one
Is there anybody here from
judicial?
They're, they're gonna be the
biggest fight that you have.
Because employees are gonna jump
ship and go to judicial.
Um, we had that at the county
level, as soon as they got their
raises, then we started losing
people left and right. So we
were trying to make it easier.
To move up to that pace, you
know, to move up on the pay
schedule because just giving
them raises sometimes isn't
enough.
And
Staying out of the PTO and, and
all of the benefit stuff cause
don't want to get me started
there.
How, how are you gonna retain
Medium to low level employees.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, I mean,
I think that's, that's
ultimately the challenge. We all
have the same rules right now.
Right? And so what happens when
111 branch of government changes
the rules for that. We, we
potentially could lose um
individuals to um going over to
um
Uh, the judicial branch, it's
unclear, uh, because I haven't
seen the, the bill. It's unclear
if it is pro-employee or not. I
mean, there are state employees
that have a ton of leave
accrued, um, generally and maybe
closer to retirement, they'd
have to make, make that
assessment and then what happens
if, if they go and they want to
come back. I mean, did they,
they come back as in a
probationary employee but with
how much leave. If you have 2
buckets sick leave and annual,
you combine it in one bucket.
And then you want to come back
over, what, how, how is that
helpful to the, to the
employees? So a state personnel
will really have to look at
changing the rules. I mean, DFA
as well. I mean, they'd have to
administer both uh uh two
different uh uh payouts to
different, um, uh, uh, time,
time management, you know,
platforms as well, but it's,
it's unclear to me that uh
we're, we're it's beneficial to
an employee. I think if you're
an employee just starting out,
you don't have any leave, then
PTO maybe it may be a good, it
may be a good policy to follow.
because you get a, you know, a,
a, a tranche of PTO in the in
the beginning and you can use it
freely, um.
But you know, for, for a, for a
more established 5 to 10 year
state employee, I don't know who
has leave.
Well, I, I don't know how, how
that transfer actually occurs
and and um so we would just have
to wait and see. Luckily, right
now we all play by the same
rules and we still have um, we
still do lose some, um, because
of that, but uh we'd have to
just wait and see on that.
OK, thank you. Mr. Chair, my
last question.
You know, you're the, the
Everybody's favorite department.
Right across, across the state.
How many um how many unfilled
positions do we have right now,
if you know.
across the state.
I'll have uh Mr.
Chairman, Senator, and I'd have
to look. I thought I'd have the
vacancy rate. Our vacancy rate
generally is uh about 23, 21.8
uh 21.82% statewide vacancy,
we're actually under 22, so
total position vacancies is
4,896.
All right, I appreciate you guys
coming in today. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Did you, uh, Senator,
thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just on
that point, um,
If you go from judiciary to
state, you go back on probation.
Why, if it's the same system,
why is there probation again?
Chair Senator Trujillo,
because you've become an exempt
employee, you're no longer a
classified employee.
When you work for the judiciary
when you work for the judicial
branch all of their, I'm sorry,
Mr. Chairman, all of their
employees are exempt?
I didn't realize that.
I guess Mr. Mr. Mr. President,
uh, uh, Mr. Chairman, sorry, you
made me. I was saying I'm sorry
Mr. Chairman, Senator here. I
guess they're in a, in a
different salary, um.
Structure, so I, I, I.
And so, if you didn't hear that
when you enter when you enter
back into the classified
service, you have to go back
into probation. I still think
though, I mean, we have
classified employees and exempt.
So I think I'll, I'll follow up
with you. I, I, but they are not
classified employees. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, good question. I had
several of my questions already
answered, but one of the things
that in, in, in your
presentation, you said a lot of
the jobs were clustered at the
top.
Uh, as you did your evaluations,
so.
What's to prevent this from
happening? Were people being
hired above, midpoint or what,
what, what was the issue and
then how is
This new system to prevent that
clustering again.
Yeah, uh, so Mr. Chairman, um,
that's a concern, right? Cause,
you know, we've actually seen
that happen, uh, in, in in very
recent history, so
Um, just actually as the study
was getting going, Spo took a
look at the attorney pay bands,
uh, and did kind of what we're
we're saying we should do. So
we're gonna simplify the pay
bands, we're gonna widen, make
the pay bands wider, give
agencies um more discretion.
What we saw is, you know, a, a
bunch of people moved to the
lower end of the pay band and so
what happened after that is
employees wanted to be where
they were on the pay band, so
they moved back up.
So we're now back to the same
situation with attorneys. Some
of that.
Frankly is market-based, right,
is, you know, there's a demand
for attorneys in New Mexico
right now. Um.
Uh, but, but some, but we think
some of that is, is like, oh, I
was at a certain, you know, the
jargon for it is comper ratio.
It's basically your position
within the pay band. I was at a
certain comper ratio before. I
want to be there again, and I
think that's really where um
what Director Lang was talking
about is working with agency
stakeholders and validation and
and saying, you know, understand
we're doing, we're doing
business a little differently
now and we need to use that
entire pay band. We're going to
give you more flexibility, but
you need to use that entire pay
band and.
So, you know, we're gonna, we're
gonna match the pay band to
market, and if you've got
somebody who's got no experience
and is brand new, they're gonna
have to go in at the bottom and,
you know, to allow them to move
up over time.
And Mr. Chairman, I'll just say
the pay band is really set up to
if you meet minimum
qualifications, you're at the
bottom. If you're proficient and
can perform your, your duty
without supervision. You're at
midpoint and only you're at the
top if you're a subject matter
expert, right? And so that's,
that's how it should be utilized
and again, this is a demand of
uh of you all of of of of of DFA
and and and and Spo when, when,
when looking at evidence-based,
you know, budgeting principles
and, and.
That's it.
OK, good. Uh, Senator Tobias.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so
what I hear you saying, and I'm,
I'm thinking back to my career
at Enterprise Rent A Car. This,
this scale is really metrics
based to some degree in
transparent. So if all of us in
this room are some level of
employee. If you tell me your
level, I have a gauge of your
level of experience, no matter
what department you're working
in.
Uh,
Mr. Chair, Senator, that's the
hope with job architecture, um,
uh, we've, you know, just, just
approved their leveling guide,
right? And so, um, now we're
going to use that to inform us
uh in the validating but that's
where we hope to be. OK, thank
you. I like that.
But
Thank you. I don't have anybody
else I listen. Well thank you
both for gentlemen for your
presentation. I think it was a
good conversation, good
question, so uh.
We're moving on. Thank you.
next we have the state and local
employee healthcare insurance
benefit deficit.
Secretary Armijo.
AJ Joy, Joy.
Good.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Terror
and members of the committee,
um, I'm Carrie Armijo. I'm the
cabinet secretary for the
Healthcare Authority, um, and I
was asked to be here this
afternoon to talk about what
we're doing with state health
benefits for our employees. I
really appreciated the
discussion this afternoon, uh,
just right before me. Um, I am a
longtime state employee, almost
25 years in the system and
really appreciate the attention
that you all are paying to um
our employees and adequate and
practices for them, so I really
appreciate that discussion.
There's a slide deck and
hopefully you all have a packet.
I think it looks like it's being
handed out, um, just a reminder
that, uh, the seed health
benefits, uh, for our state
employees and our local public
bodies that participate in the
state health benefit plan are no
longer with the General Services
department, um, that, uh, body
of work has shifted to the
healthcare authority, which
transitioned from uh the human
services department on July 1st
of last year. So we're now the
healthcare authority. We
the Medicaid agency and we are
also uh the purchaser of these
health benefits for state
employees. Um, and one of the
goals, as you can see on slide 2
is to leverage our purchasing
power as the state's largest
payer of healthcare, uh, to
create innovative policies and
models of comprehensive
healthcare coverage that improve
the health and well-being of New
Mexicans and our workforce.
So moving on to slide 3, I just
wanna kind of mention that I'm,
I'm also joined and I, there's
colleagues here at the table who
I think will weigh in after I
present, uh, but wanted to say
that I'm joined by my team at
the Healthcare Authority. We've
got Alex Castelo Smith, our
deputy secretary, Colin bio, our
coverage innovations director,
and Joe Li Trujillo Otino or
health state health benefits
director. And today we're going
to talk about the status of the
state Health Benefits fund
shortfall in FY 25 and FY 26,
we'll talk about our
projected, uh, shortfall as
where things stand today, um,
some cost containment strategies
that the agency is um working on
deploying, and we'll talk a
little bit about how we compare
to other states because there
were some questions about that
uh during today's earlier panel.
Moving on to slide 4, we just
want to make the point, uh, and
I think you all know this, but
state health benefits are
essential to the health and
well-being and economic security
of state employees and their
families, um, there are about
59,000 members enrolled in state
health.
benefits as of, uh, you know,
most recent calculation of data,
um, you can see that, um, right
now we have about 35,000 plus uh
state employees and independents
and about 23, almost 24,000
employees across 145 local
public bodies plus their
dependents. Um, one of the
things to note in the um trend
graph on the right is that um
enrollment enrollment in the
state health benefit package is
relatively stable, not a lot of
big swings.
Uh, but there has been a slight
decrease in the number of state
employees over the years that
are enrolled in the plan and a
slight increase in the number of
local public body employees that
are enrolled in the plan, um,
just a point to make, um, is
that our median state employee
salary is about $71,000 a year,
um, at the healthcare authority
slightly below that, but our
median um employee salary is
about $58,000 a year and I'm
going to talk about why that's
important in a little bit.
Moving on to slide 5.
so if you all are wondering what
the healthcare authority has
been up to for the past 7
months, uh, since our creation,
um, I want to talk a little bit
about our 1st 90 days and then
our goals that we really have
established for improving state
health benefit plans. We have 5
key goals. The first one, and
probably the most important is
to achieve the financial
solvency of the fund. Um, the
fund has been under um under
funded uh through premium
collection.
over the past decade, probably,
uh, and so we really are setting
the goal for ourselves of
achieving a financially solvent,
uh, benefit plan. We also want
to make sure that we have the
most accurate claim cost and
premium collection projections,
including knowledge about the
main cost drivers and the acuity
of our population. So how sick
are the people that we're
covering? What are their claims
needs? What do they need? what
kind of benefits?
And the 3rd, we want to make
sure that we implement cost
containment and cost growth
control strategies. We know that
the curve is basically going
this way, uh, in a full line up
or trying to control that cost
curve a little bit and try to
bring that inflation sort of to
the cost of the benefit under
control. Uh, we are also really
working on reforming, um, our
employee and employer
contribution levels and
modernizing our plan design,
which we'll talk a little bit
more about today and improving
our communication and
transparency.
the legislature, um, and work
with our stakeholders. So
recognize that there hasn't been
a full transparency and wanting
to make sure that we do a better
job of communicating with these
big drivers are, um, we have a
90 day plan that has largely
been executed, uh, or is in
process, um, that includes some
proposed legislation that is on
the table potentially for this
session. So we can talk a lot, a
little bit more about that. Um,
the table on the right shows
premium increases over the past
12 years.
Really minimal uh premium
increases, um, that combined
with the growth and cost in the
benefit plan have resulted in a
structural deficit to the fund
and you can see over the past
two years we've implemented
premium increases uh to the
state and our employees, um, of
about 10%.
So on slide 6, where are we
today? Um, our updated, uh, FY
26 projection show an increased
funding need. Um, so,
The healthcare authority
requested an 8.5% premium
increase in FY 26. This was
based on the best available
information and just a reminder
that the agency was created. We
had about 6 weeks, uh, to create
our budget from the time that we
were created, um, we didn't
really have the best available
data to us, uh, at the time, and
I would say that that 8.5% is
wholly insufficient to really
cover the true cost. Um, what we
now know, uh, based on the best
available
data that we have and we've done
a lot of really robust analysis,
um, is that in order to truly
cover the cost, um, we would
need a 29% rate increase or
premium increase to cover
medical costs and pharmacy
costs. So that's a very big
increase, probably not something
that our employees alone can
fully sustain, and that's one of
the reasons that we're here
today to talk.
Um, we, I would say that there
has been a history, um, and
something that we would like to
uh fix, um, of not using
actuarial supported premium
rates year over year, and this
is really kind of the main
driver of the problem. So an
actually really sound rate means
that you've set the rate.
Uh, to cover your financial
liabilities, and that is, that
is not how the premium fund or
the benefit fund has been
structured um today. Um.
Just a note that the medical
loss ratios for both state
employees and um the local
public body employees exceeds
100%, so, um, actuarial, sorry,
the medical loss ratios are
really important indicator of
financial health, um, they
should be closer to about 85%.
Uh, so when you have a medical
loss ratio that exceeds 100% and
you can see that we're at about
120%. That is an indicator of a
significant risk of insolvency.
to the fund. We also, uh, kind
of headed into FY 26 without
adequate, uh, claim, uh, sorry,
premium collection projection,
so that has been revised
downward, um, so we have a more
accurate, uh, projection in
terms of both what we will
expend out of the fund and what
we will collect in premiums. Um,
and then I think the last point
to make here is that claims are
growing more rapidly than
projected originally. So you can
see in the table on the right,
uh, for FY 25,
we are looking at about an $85
million projected shortfall.
That is tied to a supplemental
that the agency has for FY 25.
Um, for FY 26, the budget is
sort of what is accounted for in
that turquoise on the far right,
um, and then the shortfall.
On top of the budget request is
another 87 million. So we're
really talking to try and target
that 87 million in FY 26 and we
have strategies and proposals
for that. And then uh for FY 25,
we also have uh a shortfall.
On slide 7 you can just see the
cost drivers. I won't go in
depth here, but, um, year over
year change you can really see
what's driving the expense, um,
to the fund, and so you can see
that our total claims costs for
medical and pharmacy costs is
projected to be, it's increasing
by about 122 million, um, that's
a 29% increase, not seeing those
same corresponding increases on
the dental and vision benefit
package.
Um, on slide 8, this just sort
of rearticulates in budget
format, uh, our projected total
expenses in that shortfall of
87.4 million, that's built into
our FY 26 on top of the FY 26
recommendation and on slide 9. I
do have a little good news if uh
if anyone's feeling like the
doom and gloom here, um, we did
start FY 26 went into FY 26
looking at a potential shortfall
of about 120.
4 million, I believe, um, so we
are now, we've brought that
shortfall closer to that $85
million range, I'm gonna explain
why that is on the next slide.
So if you go to slide 10,
A projected deficit was 121
million, uh, when we created the
FY 26 budget, uh, we have a
fixed some issues within the
plan to sort of do things more
efficiently and make sure that
we're capturing um the full sort
of financial accountability. Uh,
so we have identified and
corrected some carrier data
integrity issues that's resulted
in about 6.5 million in revenue
back to the fund, um, we have
identified some inconsistencies
and works with our carriers in
mixing.
Um, in fixing, um, the claims
for our local public bodies,
that's resulted in about $25
million we had carriers
reporting higher than warranted
claims, uh, so we've kind of
yielded about 12 million back to
the fund there and then there is
a negative um cost that is sort
of related to legislation from
the 20, the 2023 legislative
session in which revenue from
rebates, um, was transferred
from the state.
capturing rebates from drugs,
um, to employees and so they're
realizing those revenues, um,
but it has resulted in a loss of
revenue to the fund that total
amount now has resulted in that
85, you know, resulted in um a
projected deficit that was 121
million, now at 85 million.
OK, so on slide 11, I think I've
already said this, but if I
wasn't clear, um, the FY 25
rates are not sufficient to
cover our claims. We are really
looking at about only covering
about 83.1% of the claims.
Our pharmacy claims per
employee, uh, have grown
substantially, um, we were
spending last year about $205
per employee per month. We are
now looking at about $293 per
employee per month just in
pharmacy costs and the number
one, the two cost drivers really
are the GLP1 drugs, um, so I
think everyone's familiar with
those products and um cancer
therapies, so really seeing a
lot of cost growth there.
Uh, we do project almost an 11%
increase in pharmacy spending in
FY 26.
Um, that is on top of medical
inflation, which is projected to
be closer to 7%, and then just a
little note on hospital costs,
um, because they are a big cost
driver and we have a proposed
solution on the table for that,
um, that hospital outpatient
spending has grown by close to
18% over the last 3 years.
So, on the next slide, um, slide
12, the biggest cost drivers
excluding pharmacy are really
hospital outpatient hospital
inpatient and professional
services, that's, those are the
kinds of services when you go to
the doctor, um, to kind of
important trends here are again
that hospital outpatient growth,
um, and where we see an
opportunity to save money, um,
which is around what we are
paying for hospital services. So
right now, state health benefits
are paying 3 times.
the Medicaid, Medicare rate, uh,
for the same hospital services
and we have a proposal, uh, that
we are presenting today um to
talk through what we, how we
might contain that cost.
On slide 13, um, just really
quickly wanna talk about those
GLP ones. Uh, we are uh the city
of New Mexico is covering GLP1
drugs for weight loss. You can
see the trend in turquoise
there, um, that is increasing a,
an increasing share of
The GLP1 spend is really on
weight loss.
The Dark blue is um the GLP1 use
for diabetes. So for weight loss
alone, that cost is projected to
exceed 20 million in FY 25, 25
million on these drugs in FY 25
for diabetes.
Um, and then we wanna just make
the point that, um, while there
was some really good legislation
that protects employees and
tries to pass through rebates,
um, members are receiving
additional co-pay and rebates at
point of sale, but the state has
lost the rebate revenue. So what
was previously going into the
fund to offset prescription drug
spending is no longer coming to
the state and that projected
loss of revenue to the state is
$10 million.
So, on slide 14, we do, we're
really, we're really working
hard to be transparent about how
legislation and legislative
mandates.
Contribute to the shortfall. Um,
although very helpful to our
patients and the people that we
cover and our employees, um,
they do have an impact to the
fund and so legislation that was
passed in 2023 and 2024 had a
projected cost of 14.1 million
in state health benefits in FY
25, and you can see what those
are. These are really good
initiatives. These are good
benefits. I'm not questioning
the value, um, but they have a
price tag and the
The price tag has not been
covered, um, and the way that
state health benefits are
financed is that there's a price
tag to the state as the employer
and there is a price tag to the
employee as the covered entity
and everyone's sharing in the
cost. And so the healthcare
authority is committed to full
transparency in all of our
fiscal impact reports to make
sure that the legislature fully
understands what cost is being
assumed by the state with any
benefit changes and what costs
will be transferred to our
employees.
Um, in terms of cost savings on
slide 15, um, we are going to be
proposing or implementing uh
hopefully hospital payment caps,
um, it's called Medicare
reference-based pricing, uh, we
think we can save about 40
million to the fund by doing
this and what this really means
is setting a price cap. The
state will not pay above a
certain level for a
hospital-based services right
now, the range, uh, we are on
average.
about 300% of Medicare for
hospital services, but at some
hospitals we're paying 700% of
Medicare. It's a very high
amount, uh, we think we need to
set a price cap. This is
something that other states have
done to save costs. Um, we also
are really looking to negotiate
better pharmacy pharmaceutical
products and pharmaceutical
savings over the next 2 years,
um, we are gonna talk about
Medicaid and leveraging federal
funds as much as possible on
another slide looking at sort of
modifying or adjusting those
GLP1 coverage policies to sort
of
deserve coverage, but make sure
that um we're kind of thinking
through, um, preserving uh
financial fidelity of the funds
and providing those when really
needed, um, and then we are
looking at plan design and
making sure that we can offer
additional options to our
employees as we reprocure these
products.
So, on slide 16, just a note
about Medicare reference-based
pricing, um,
We really think this is our big
opportunity to leverage the
weight of Medicaid, um, we are
the Medicaid agency. You all
pass legislation last year, um,
that will
Um, pay hospitals an extra $1.2
billion in federal funds, and we
really think that having some
savings um through better rates
for our state employees could be
really connected to that. And so
what we are trying to achieve is
about 40 million, uh, and you
can see that is a very small
slice of the pie compared to
what is really going out the
door to hospitals and so we are
uh really looking at trying to
achieve what we think is a very
reasonable amount of savings
through better price.
negotiation with our hospitals,
uh, recognizing that we are,
we've done a lot to really
improve the financial health of
our hospitals, uh, here in New
Mexico.
Um, if we are able to implement
Medicare reference-based
pricing, um, instead of needing
a 29% increase on the premium,
we would need a 20% increase on
the premium. So it starts to
kind of adjust things downward.
On slide 17, just to note about
optimizing federal funds. Um, we
have a lot of employees who,
whose children likely qualify
for the children's health
insurance program, which is
administered by the Medicaid
program. It's sort of all in a
kind of benefit package, but we
have a separate pot of federal
funding that we utilize and are
able to leverage, um, there is
an option for states to try to
achieve higher federal financing
for those kids, um, and so we
want to be able to really
optimize that federal
funding, uh, for these kiddos,
uh, and sort of mitigate the
state's obligation.
So before I close, I wanna talk
just for a couple of minutes
about addressing the
affordability of premiums for
our state employees, um,
A couple of things pretty
outdated about the way that the
current structure is, um, our
contributions and employee
salary tiers have not been
updated since 2005. So in 20
years, we really haven't made
any updates to the statute. Um,
there's been a lot of changes in
healthcare in 20 years, um, and
the way things are done. New
Mexico has the lowest employer
contribution of any state in the
country for its employees. We
cover about 65% of the premium
and our employees cover.
35%. It's very this is addressed
earlier today, very well below
the market, uh, in terms of
being a competitive employer.
Um,
In 2022,
28% of our employees contributed
40% of the premium.
Employees have kind of moved
into higher salary tiers, right
over the years and so now, uh,
60% of our employees are
contributing 40% of the premium.
So you can see we have really
shifted costs into our
employees, um, and made that a
greater share come out of their
paychecks, uh, to pay for
benefits.
Um, I do want to make the point.
Um, and I, I really appreciate
the attention that's being paid
to compensation.
Um, our employees don't make a
lot of money, um, at the
healthcare authority, we know
that at least 20% of our
employees qualify for one of our
programs. Um, our programs are
poverty-based, um, and so when
you think about that and you
think about like this is what
the state is saying is, is the
compensation structure. Um, we
have poverty-based programs and
we have almost 25% of our
employees qualifying. This is,
this is a bit of a concern, I
think, and something that we
really need to think about
together.
So we do have some proposed
reforms. Um, we are proposing to
eliminate the outdated salary
tiers and contribution
percentages for the state
employee health plan, um, the
salary tiers are not really done
most places in the country
anymore, uh, it's kind of an
outdated model.
We'd like to give all state
workers the same fair
contribution percentage of 80%
of the premium, which is much
closer to what the market is
doing elsewhere and closer to
what our local governments are
doing here in New Mexico.
And we'd like to create a new
program to cover 100% of the
premium for employees that are
below a low income poverty level
threshold. So we don't know what
that exact amount is yet. We're
still working on that, um, but
we believe that if you are a low
income employee or household,
um, and you qualify for a
programs um that the state
should really pick up a greater
share of the cost. So we do have
some options on slide 19. I will
just start out by saying options
1 and 2 do not incorporate.
actually really sound rates for
our state employees and if we
choose one of these options, uh,
the projected shortfall will
grow in FY 27, and I will be
here again asking for a
supplemental, no doubt about it.
I will, will not solve the
problem, so I just wanna be
really transparent so you cannot
tell me I didn't tell you that,
um, and you can see option one
is the red line. It has the low,
it's the most immediate option,
but it also doesn't save
anything and it doesn't bend or
control the cost.
Option 2 implements the
reference-based pricing, uh, but
again, a higher cost level, um,
I will point out option 3, which
kind of gets us to
The, the salary tiers that we're
proposing and setting an
actuarially sound rate for all
employees, um, has the lowest
long-term cost to the state of
New Mexico and um eliminates the
structural deficit as fast as
possible, as the fastest way to
get to the elimination of the
structural deficit. And the
reason that that eliminates the
structural deficit is because
under this proposal, the green
line.
Everyone is paying the right
amount, including the local
public bodies. So that kind of
gets everything to a reset and
then um from there we would
propose having an actuarial
sound rate year over year.
So you can see the cost
projections, uh, on slide 20
we kind of, again, are showing
uh same information that's on
slide 19, uh, but just again
pointing out that the longer
term strategy is really that
option 3 that presents those
actually really sound rates,
implements the cost containment
and resets those salary
contribution tiers.
On slide 21, um, I wanna just
point out one thing, and this
is, this does relate to the
previous panel, um, and relates
to the compensation study that
was done. Um, we've had a lot of
questions about whether the
state of New Mexico's plan costs
are higher than other states,
um, and that is not true. Uh,
our state of New Mexico plan
costs are lower than surrounding
states, and you can see that,
um, evidence from the
compensation study that was just
referenced earlier, and New
Mexico is that green line, so
our costs are
lower, uh, by and large than
almost uh compared to almost any
of the other um
And she's studied uh for those
PPO products a little bit lower,
but significantly lower for the
HMO products.
On slide 22, I think I've said
this already, uh, but we just
to be a competitive employer. We
want to take good care of our
employees. Uh, we are below
market, uh, for example, in New
Mexico, um,
Employees in the $60,000 and
above tier are paying $236 a
month for their uh healthcare.
Um, compared to the other states
in our region in the West, uh,
employees in those states are
paying $0 to $60. Um, for family
coverage, $69697 per family
compared to the region which is
closer to that 166 to $598 for a
family, uh, New Mexico really
stands out in the red compared
to other states, um.
23 states contribute 90 to 100%
of the employee premium, 20
states contribute at least 80%
of the employee premiums. Only
6% of seeds are still using
employee salary tiers, which are
fixed in our statute today.
Um, and then I think I'm gonna,
before I close, just talk a
little bit about local public
bodies. I've gotten a lot of
questions about what's the local
public body share of the
deficit, um, that is on this
slide, um, you can see that, um,
State employees, we've kind of
broken out the share of the
shortfall, uh, attributed to
state employees and local public
bodies in yellow, so the local
public bodies that share is
about 33 plus, you know, 33.6
million.
However, this is not the fault
of the local public bodies, and
they want to be very, very clear
about this. The local public
bodies have been paying the
premiums that the state set too
low.
And um there's been a lot of
talk about whether we should go
collect from the local public
bodies. I think those are
discussions that um I won't
necessarily talk about on my own
today, um, but there is no
action that the LPBs could take
to mitigate the deficit. This is
not their fault. This is
something that, um, the state
actually, you know, kind of
created by setting the premiums
too low. I just want to be
really, really transparent about
that.
Um, so in summary, we faced a
deficit for many years. We have
uh plans to fix it, uh, with
your help and cooperation and
thank you for your attention. We
are very um committed to
developing actuarially sound
rates and resolving our fund
deficit. We're acting to um
address underlying costs and
leverage federal resources when
they when that's possible.
And we want to take on these
affordability challenges for our
employees.
Um
So that we compare favorably to
other states and other local
governments in our community,
uh, such as like the city of
Santa Fe and Bernalillo County.
Uh, so with that, I think I will
close and um see if my
colleagues have anything to add.
Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Joyce
Parson, executive director for
New Mexico counties, really glad
to see the work of that, um, the
secretary and her department
have done to really make sure
that there is solvency and
actual actuarly sound um
assessments for premiums, um, as
she mentioned, um, there is a
deficit and just to give a
little bit of context and
history and all sort of set an
overview and then hand it over
to my colleague, um, in
2023 at the end of the
legislative session in House
Bill 2 was sort of this embedded
thing of, and by the way, charge
local governments the deficit.
Um, we are, we're not at the
table when the premiums were
determined not to be set at the
accurate levels in the preceding
years, we have always paid our
premiums. Um, we have had types
of situations like this in the
past with this fund specifically
and in those instances, there
was a phased-in approach to
correct it. In that particular
year, the notice for the
deficits came in after the
deadline for any
Of our members to have
withdrawn, protested, etc. This
is no fault of the people
sitting here today, um, but it's
something that we want to kind
of tell you what's happened
since then and how our approach
was when that happened, and if I
may, I'll turn it over um to
Grace Phillips, who was our
general counsel and now our risk
management director. We also
manage a self-insurance fund. So
when it comes to the importance
of accurate rate setting, that's
something that we definitely
know and respect. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Joy, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee.
I'm Grace Phillips, um, very
happy to be here this afternoon,
um.
I really enjoyed that
presentation and how clear it
was as Joy mentioned, I'm new to
being a risk management director
of our self insurance pool and
it's given me, um, uh.
Much greater appreciation for
solvency. Let's, let's leave it
at that, but, um, and, and I
really just have some brief
comments to to fill in the, the
history of what happened after
the um the 2023 um legislative
session, we do have 24 counties
that participate and get their
health insurance coverage for
their employees through, through
the state and um what what we
learned after the session was
that in House Bill 2, the legis
legislature had included
language that reported, I would
say to direct GST to collect
over $32 million from the local
public bodies and higher
education institutions. Um, we
disagreed with that the way that
that was rolled out and how it
happened and so, um, at the end
of July, we filed a declaratory
judgment action on behalf of
those 24 counties, and we asked
the court to declare that.
the language that had been
included in the in-house bill to
um
was ineffective because it was
not an appropriation, it was, it
was something else and um House
Bill 2, as I'm sure you all
know, is, is to be limited to
appropriations, um.
We also, uh, pointed out that in
our view, the invoice was so
vague that um it violated the
Constitution, um, that there had
been direction for the director
of GST to pass regulations and
to create a plan which he hadn't
done, and finally that there's
a, there was some legal theories
that the um that what was
contained in House Bill 2, which
explicitly said employees could
not be charged, the assessment
um interfered with the employer
employer relationship.
So it was a bunch of bunch of
theories, um, the municipal
league also filed an action on
behalf of several cities, um, a
little bit, a little bit after
that, and we, um, they, their
case actually resulted in an
evidentiary hearing, um, in, in
January, we did get a ruling
from the district judge. This is
January of 24, so just, just
about a year ago, um, and what
she, she had heard, um.
The arguments and she'd heard
testimony given by the director,
and she ruled that the invoices
were not processed properly and
state enforcement.
Um, or collection of the
invoices, and that's really
where we are now.
Um, that, that, um, decision
hasn't been appealed, it could
be, um, there are
Uh
Pending issues that could be
resolved, but today those
invoices are still in the status
of um not able to be um enforced
according to the court's order,
and
Well, the parties can still
appeal, um, we've received some
indirect indication from the
state that they have that
they're willing to accept that
the.
May not be cured and to move on
from that.
So, um, that's that, the little
footnote on what's happening,
certainly, um, as our director
said, we understand the
importance of collecting enough
in premiums going forward and um
and county counties are prepared
to, you know, to participate as
responsible members in, in
bringing the bringing the um
Program back into solvency.
Thank you.
Um, I know we have uh Joe on
here too. I don't know if Joey
is still in
OK, all right, good.
Oh, no, no, Joey Simon.
So
We're good.
OK, all right, thank you. So uh
we'll go now to committee for
any questions, so we'll start
with Senator Woods.
Why don't we just, uh, Mr.
Chair, why don't we just put all
this money on the paycheck and
let her biters by their own
insurance.
This year.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
um, there is, you know, they
would have to go purchase
insurance on the um
market uh through the exchange,
um.
You know, that's a, that's an
idea that I hadn't thought of,
um, most employers who want to
compete are providing health
insurance coverage, um.
I don't know, we are gonna be
doing focus groups with
employees, uh, to find out
what's important to them, I
think, um, if that is something
that you'd like for us to talk
to employees about how they
would feel about that, um, that
is something that we could do.
It's a, you know, it's
unconventional, uh, definitely
assumes that there will be an
exchange which you know you your
option 3 there.
It's just to uh
Ship the, the burden more to the
state.
On page 19.
That is just uh to in 20.
It's used to.
You know, the state would just
take that burden over.
And
Yeah
At its cor if those employees
would be willing to
Just take it on the check.
And let their
Find their own insurance.
Um
You know, that's quite a bit of
money.
To go on someone's check.
And of course it would vary from
individual to individual as to
What the insurance was cost and
that's why they're trying to do
it, I think, Mister Jes
socializing risk, so to speak.
Uh, but I don't think all state
employees take this insurance to
thee.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Woods, no, they don't all take
it, um, but sometimes, you know,
they're covering just their
dependents or, um, you know, a
spouse, it, it kind of depends
on the structure of the family.
I would say that shift would
eliminate the state's purchasing
power or the collective
purchasing power that we have
been utilizing, um, I don't know
that that would be less
expensive. It costs about
$25,000 to purchase health
insurance for your.
Family out of pocket, um, it's
really expensive, so I, I think
the state
is kind of doing a better job.
You can see the premiums closer
to 15,000, so probably would
result in higher out of pocket
costs to employees and premium
costs because the costs are just
higher, um,
through the exchange, uh,
because there, it's an
individual.
Purchasing strategy.
Well, right now it's costing
them about 17% of the cost.
Because we're essentially
absorbed in.
Everything else.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Woods, I'm not sure if I follow
what you mean about 17% of the
cost,
well, let's start off at the
front. OK.
We're talking on page 4.
All right, we're, we're entering
a little less than 60,000
people.
60% of them are state employees,
40% are local body employees.
Um
The state employs medium
salaries, 71,000.
The
Uh
Healthcare authority salary
itself is, is 58,000.
Uh, we are.
We figured out that uh
Some of the drivers.
Or prescription cost.
Of course they're all are going
up.
That uh you would need a 29%
rate increase in order to cover
the protected.
Merco and, and
Prescription cost.
Um
Your
On page 7, you talk about.
Hero re change of around 27%.
Um
You're talking about the FY 26
protects the total expenses on
page 8.
You're, you're expecting a
$87 million.
deficit.
Uh
In fiscal year 26.
And not in divide that out to
see how much that would come to
each employee.
But if you spread it
8 to 7 million.
They
60,000 employees, that'd be
pretty big paycheck.
Increase.
Um
I know you're trying to do,
cause containment.
I know
You try and get your handle on
it. This is the first year
you've had it.
I understand all that, but
Just transferring the whole debt
load over to the state.
Looks good on paper, but
You know, I just don't see that
to be a solution.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, one
point that I may have failed to
make is that when this benefit
package was stood up, the state
was paying closer to 80% of the
cost.
It's just that the tears were
set 20 years ago and so now
employees
are over here in this higher
compensation tier as you can
imagine, salary, you know,
$60,000 is not the same as it
was.
Same today as it was 20 years
ago.
And so I really believe the
state's intention was, uh, when
this was to set up was carry a
bigger share of the cost than
what we're paying today.
Because the way that
The package was structured was
to have a greater share paid by
the state as the employer, but
what didn't happen over the
years.
Um, and those, those mounts,
those salary amounts are fixed
in statute today. They don't,
it's not like the state could
say, well, we're gonna adjust
the salary tier every year just
for uh inflation or comp
increases or anything or fixed.
So now, the state set this up
with a with a a tier in which
most people were getting the
biggest share from the state as
a contribution, and now we have
almost no one in that tier
because over the years, everyone
has moved out and they're paying
the highest amount, so I, I
think, I mean, I really believe
that when it was set up, it was
a more competitive benefit
package. Today, we're just very
out of what the market would
dictate and I, I would also
argue
Um, that as a competitor, the
state of New Mexico wants to
compete with either private
industry or um
You know, if we want to do a
good job of even competing with
local governments, the state of
New Mexico, the benefit package
is, is pretty far afield from
what we would need to do for
that sort of competitive
balance, and I, I really don't
know of a large employer out
there that doesn't offer health
insurance, um, to employees and,
and, and currently the trend has
been to actually cover a larger
share to keep employees healthy
and they're dependents.
Well, I don't remember it being
that far back 20 years when we
set that 40, 50, and 60.
Price range where we started 80,
70 and 60%, uh, I don't remember
being that far back and I
thought it was very amusing at
the time, Mister Chair, that we
thought $60,000 was rich.
That we could afford more at
60,000.
I really thought that was.
Something, but you haven't
proposed that amendment.
And actually,
That would mean you would reduce
the amount of the employee.
and that would give you a bigger
destiny.
Yeah.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Woods, we have a proposal that
would reset the tears, and it is
um something that we hope to get
through the session. Um, and
what is that proposal proposal
would reset, would eliminate the
fixed, um, salary amount because
as you can see if you put a
fixed amount in statute, you're
gonna end up out of sync, right,
with the market because you have
to go back and rechange the
statute year over year. So what
we're proposing is kind of
getting
closer to what we think the
original intention of the state
of New Mexico was, um, kind of
set and more competitive with
what our, you know, peers are
doing out there in terms of
government and in the West, um,
so resetting those tiers, having
the state pay about 80% and
employees pay 20%.
If we do this, um, in
contribution with the in
combination with the cost
containment methodologies that
we've kind of set forth, which
also hopes to have a bill on
that hospital pricing, um,
If we do those things together,
and we kind of make this
contribute contribution that
structural deficit will go away
because the seat is committing
to setting an actual really
sound great, um, and so what we
would be saying is, we will set
the premium at the actual
solvent rate, uh, year over
year, um, and that the
contribution of the state would
be 80% and this employees would
pay 20%.
And that's really kind of what
we're putting out there on the
table, um, and that does fix the
structural deficit that's,
that's pretty amazing because
generally the, the proposals I
see is
Is uh a progressive deal.
And what you're saying that the
very highest paid employees
shouldn't pay.
Any more for their health care
than the very lowest paid
employee.
Mr. Chair, Senator, we're, we're
open to discussion on this, but
everything we've done in terms
of research indicates that
employee salary tiers are very
outdated, um, and I think
there's a good reason for that.
It's because they quickly become
out of market and so you have to
go back and change them. Um,
certainly open to discussion on
that point, but I think
You know, it's setting those
tears in statute, probably
would.
Potentially put us in the same
situation in another decade
trying to have to revise the
statute, um, and what we're
really trying to do is modernize
the program while we make it
fiscally solvent and so we've
really done a lot of research
into how other states are
structured, how other
governments are structured in
New Mexico even, um, and have
found that those tears are
really, uh,
Pretty much have gone away, um,
over the past 20 years, and they
were last set in 2005. So, so
with that thought, Mister Chair,
what is the local public bodies
think about paying.
80% of all healthcare.
Um, Senator, Mr. Chair, we, uh,
I, I believe our local public
bodies, they all set their own,
so if the state chose to do
this, it wouldn't require a
local public body to follow, but
we have um some local public
bodies that pay 100%.
Of the insurance premium and I
believe 80% would be market.
Some of that had to do with the
fact that there were years where
there were no raises that could
be given, and so the way the um
the, the employers of the
counties thought to try to
address that was to increase the
amount of, so it sounds like
we're, we're paying a larger
percentage already.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, I
think the big change for the
local public bodies would be
that the premiums would
increase, right? So we would
have a premium increase, and so
the reason that that option is
lower cost to the state of New
Mexico as a whole is because
everyone's paying its fair
shares. We would get out of this
sort of, how much do the local
public bodies owe, how much does
the state owe? How much are we
driving up the cost?
We would set the amount and then
as long as the local public
public bodies are getting to the
premium and however they choose
to divide that up with their
employees would be sort of up to
them.
Um
But we would know that we would
have a sound premium amount to
cover the cost of the claims
must be missing the way this is
done some way.
The
just a little bit
confused because we've got.
On page 2.
I believe this is.
We got
$239 million there.
Is that right? The total is
that?
No, 500.
$500 million.
Mm
That's the total cost.
$500 million.
Projected in
You've got it for option 3, so
it would be a $500 million cost,
total cost of the player.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Woods, you can see on slide 7
the the FY 20 cents 26 expenses
that
The
expenditure is in that $500
million more than $500 million.
It's about $550 million or $541
more exactly, um, projected
total and that obviously 86
million.
Well, yes, I'm sorry, I'm
looking 568 if you count um
dental and vision.
So we're looking at primarily
the primary driver of that is,
of course, the medical and
pharmacy products, which is 541.
So, but you are right, it is in
that 50 to $600 million dollar
range, the total cost in that
right now is of course split and
paid by the employees and the
state as the employer and the
local public bodies, um, so tell
me this on that chair. Don't
mean to cut you off, but my
mind's racing and
Time is short, so let me, so
other people have great
questions, Mr. Chair.
How did this $586 million.
60% of that would be the state's
cost.
Right?
40% of that would be the, the
local public government cost,
right?
And my missing something there.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator, I
think we could divide up the
cost and looking at the team.
I'm not sure we have that if if
you're asking they.
Um,
And I, Mr. Chair, with your
permission, I've got some folks
who can answer the question. I
think you need to have a side
conversation with that. I think
it'll be better because I, we
need.
Need to move along, need to move
on, OK, Mr. Chair.
Get with me.
At your pleasure and explain
this to
Thank you Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, uh, Senator uh Woods. So
before we go on to the next
question. I, I
I apologize. I, I skipped over
uh Mr. AJ Forte on the municipal
League.
So if you can maybe share
the municipality's perspective
before we go on to the next
question. I appreciate that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The municipal police's
perspective on this. And Mr.
Chair,
If I may, I want to
Give a little history on this
from our perspective.
Part of this is, this is not the
first time I've been in this
seat talking about this issue.
2012, 2013.
It seems that every executive
seems to do this to the
legislature.
The Last time I sat here.
It was the
Richardson administration
decided not to raise rates.
And Chairman Burrell at that
point.
Took it on to say we're going to
protect employees. We're going
to
bail you out.
GST employee group benefits
fund.
And at that point in the
secretary showed this on the
charts.
Part of the tough decisions that
were made.
is we did 2 15% premium
increases followed by a 10,
followed by a 5, with plan
design, which means cost
shifting to employees. This was
not fun for anybody at the time.
Fast forward to the end of the
Martinez administration.
Same exact thing happened.
We don't want to increase
premiums because that's eats up
general fund capacity. Let the
next governor deal with it.
And here we are again today.
You all have to continuously
bail out.
The executive on this issue.
Right, the city's lawsuit.
Made the case that the process
starting with the employee group
benefits process of the group
benefits advisory board makes a
recommendation at the end of the
day in my experience, either as
the risk management director for
the state or the state budget
director or deputy secretary of
DFA. There's one person that
makes the decision on what the
premium increase is going to be
for the state.
And that's why we continuously
are here asking for a bail our
request or ask to the
legislature is stability.
We know what's happened in the
past.
There's a cliff, every 8 to 10
years, you bail us out, we do
massive premium increases.
And then we're good for another
8 years.
Our solution would be
Take it away from the current
process.
Do a statutory fix for what the
premium increases need to be I
think 6%.
I is the number that can be in
statute.
That stability for local
governments, with several of the
presentations touched on, we
cover 100% in most cases of
premium.
Local governments have made that
choice to cover that for
employees.
So when we see a 30% premium
increase.
Local governments eat that in
its entirety.
Right? The state gets to do a
cost share with employees. We
don't have that option. So this
We put are put in a position
where
We ask for the 30% premium
increase, because if you don't,
it's going to be 36% next year,
42% the next year if you don't
do it. At some point,
Revenue has to meet expenses.
And you can only do that through
a premium increase.
Our ask is stability, have that
be in the legislative control of
a statutory increase.
Obviously, the deficit piece. We
cannot pick up.
It is not legal to charge us
retroactively. That was the
whole crux of the lawsuit.
Respectively, we're in.
We believe in a larger pool,
right? The, the, the
conversation of do we want our
own.
Individual help plants, no, we
don't.
We used to run a health pool.
We chose to join the state. We
want the state to have the
largest possible pool possible.
That are buying power more
efficient.
We just want consistency so we
can budget correctly.
And have more parity with what
state employees get right down
the street, there's the stable
health center.
Wonderful model.
State employees or anyone in
this area get free health care.
No copays, 3 point of care
drugs.
Almost immediate access to
healthcare.
No one in your real communities
have that. It's only in Santa
Fe, but paid for with all of our
premium dollars.
If that could be done more on a
statewide basis, so everyone has
access to the model of access to
healthcare with no barriers, we
would greatly appreciate that.
a better way to control the
costs.
These are the pieces that we ask
for, right? We don't want to be
here every 8 years asking for a
bailout.
We don't want you to have to
give up.
Last time I was here, it wasn't
$120 million. So the cliff gets
bigger every time you have to do
this.
Um, so our ask is what the court
has said prospectively.
Yes, take care of the deficit.
Charge us what needs to be
charged perspectively, and we
want to stay in the pool, and we
want to pay the premium that's
ultimately built in.
And that we budget for.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank, thank you. It's a good
perspective and I appreciate it.
Sorry for skipping over, you
were on the list, but uh I think
I fell asleep for a second there
and just, you know.
And with that, we'll continue on
with the, I have Senator
Trujillo and then Senator
Tobiasson and then uh.
Interesting.
Thank you and thank you for the
presentation. It's really
detailed. You helped me
understand a lot of things, um,
uh, you know, you kind of went
through a number of pages, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. I didn't, I forgot to
say Mr.
I need to be somewhere at 5:30.
It's already pre-meeting
scheduled, so just be mindful
that if we can get her in about
the next 15 minutes.
Appreciate that because we have
one more from Erika
Shani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'll be quick. Um,
Are we, uh, what is the average
age?
Of our state employees, local
public bodies. Are we aging?
Are we getting sicker or costs
just rising, or is it all three?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
the question about age, I'm
actually we can get that, but I
don't know if we have it right
here. We'll follow up with you
on the average age we are
probably getting older, uh.
just like the rest of New
Mexico.
Um, and
so I don't think that would be a
surprise, but we will get you a
follow up on that, um, average
age, um, one thing that I think
is really um this is true across
the health market, you know, we
also administer the state's
Medicaid program and so kind of
pretty familiar with like trend
overall, um, there, there was
like a
You know, during COVID sort of
this dip and utilization, and we
saw that kind of everywhere and
then a spike in sort of pent up
demand, higher acuity, things
that got postponed, uh, tests
needed medical tests, uh, harder
to get an appointments. We know
all of that and that has
resulted in higher acuity in the
population, and then you also
have these, these new drug
products that actually um many
state employees are utilizing,
uh, for weight loss.
And diabetes, we do, I do
believe and we can get you some
additional information on the
acuity. We've done a lot of
Real deep dive into that because
um,
You know, I think that's a very
big driver and it's, it's
actually one reason that I do
respectfully disagree with the
idea of having a fixed premium
amount in statute because you
really don't know what your
costs are gonna be, um,
completely, and so you really
need to tie that to your
actuarial soundness, um.
So we'll get you some
information on the acuity, but
we have seen that growth in
outpatient hospital services,
which is telling us something
about, you know, utilization,
those GLP1 drugs are kind of
telling us a little bit about
the health conditions, um, and,
you know, these products, uh,
you know, we do know state
employees just like the rest of
the population, probably
pre-representative of the
chronic condition, um, sort of
population.
30% obesity, things like that,
um, pretty probably pretty
typical across the employees.
OK, and um I'm not sure what you
mean by cutie, so I'm gonna look
that up and see what that
actually means, um, but are the,
um, the other, the last two
questions I have on one like the
GLP one, are we seeing that
there's some reduction in um A1C
in weight, are there some
improvements and can we measure
that?
Um,
Um, I'm sorry, Mr. Chair,
Senator Trujillo, um, just
really quick, acuity acuity
really means how sick your
population is. It's really
talking about like how, what's
the disease state. How, how much
services do they need? How, how,
what's, you know, how many have
cancer, how many have these like
chronic conditions. That's
really what acuity is referring
to, um, in terms of your second
question, which was related to
the GLP Mr. Chairman of the GLP.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
it's a little bit early to tell.
I think the cost is sort of
outpacing the cost savings right
now and this is very typical
with healthcare, so you have
these investments, you have
these products that can really
improve over the long term that
health and disease state of your
population.
But you got to pay the price tag
at the beginning. There's a lot
of really good evidence for GLP
ones, particularly around
diabetes. Um, I don't know if
they work as long term for
weight loss. I think, um, some
indication that once you go off
of them, you know, they really
kind of have maybe need to stay
on them to maintain that weight
loss. But, um, you know, any
information we have on that will
get you where I've been curious
about that too because we want
to make these investments in the
front end, um, upstream
investments, but
you know.
kind of associated that with
that, and this is true, all of
these innovative drugs that are
hitting the market come at a
very high cost, and they can
really make a big difference for
people's lives, but
Um, the price tags can be pretty
high.
Well, I can tell you there's
about a 10 times difference
what the insurance covers and
what the compounding.
In Albuquerque cost is, um, and
then the last question I have is
in regards to the increase in
cancer causes. Again, is that
like we're having an increase in
cancer, um, are we having an
increase in diagnosis? Is it
because of aging? Is it because
of unhealthy?
I mean, can we, do we know those
um
And can we do anything to
prevent it, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chair, Senator Trujillo, great
question. I think it's probably
mostly driven by new innovation
in cancer treatments, uh, lots
of new things kind of rolling
out. You probably see those
commercials all the time.
There's lots of uh innovation
happening in cancer treatment.
Um, and so I think that's
probably what it is. They're,
they're definitely was.
Sort of a postponement and I
think this was nationally, you
know, those postponed medical
tests that people didn't get,
um, those, those did kind of
increase some, you know, there's
some anecdotal data that there
were increases in cancer
diagnoses is really related to
like postponing me treatment. I
mean, I don't think that's
really driving the trend. I
think that it's probably more
related to the cost of
treatment.
Thank you.
Thank you very much and thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Tobison, then
we have Senator Steinberg.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and AJ,
thanks for your perspective on
that, and I have no idea why you
would not want to go through
this every year.
We're all having fun, um, OK, so
your friend that left, I don't
know what her name was, but she
did answer one of my questions,
which was, if you have um
salaries fixed in statute in
years, then you, you're not
giving raises, right? So art is
the benefits package being used
as a pass through to
You know, give some kind of
race, right? Is, is that what
she said? Am I understanding
that correctly?
Mr. Chaniner, that is correct.
So that's something that local
governments can do is increase
the benefit percentage that they
cover on those years where they
cannot include um an increase in
compensation.
OK, thank you. And Mr. Chair,
what is the average deductible.
On our state plan.
Or is there an average
deductible? Are there different
deductibles?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Sbias
Tobias,
OK, um, uh, I believe.
2000
For an individual.
It's $2000 for one individual.
goes up for household or family
coverage.
Mhm
So for so on the HMO it's 2000
individual, 4000 per family. And
then is there a PPO option?
And what's that?
Mr. uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
I'm
just, um, they have the direct
answers to these questions.
Traditional.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
representatives if you can if
you can introduce yourself so
that the public know who's,
uh, the Healthcare Coverage
innovations director for the
Healthcare Authority. Um, so.
Uh, would you like the, the
individual deductibles for each
plan, uh, there's a lot of
information on these, so how
about this Mr. Chair, I, and
tell me your name again, Colin,
um, so the HMO, let's just work
with the one HMO if there's more
than one. The HMO is $2000
deductible per individual, $4000
per family. And then, Mr. Chair,
you have a PPO. What's the
individual deductible.
And I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, and uh
and Senator um the deductible,
um, actually the, the higher
deductible is on the uh PPO
plan. And so that is actually
$700 if uh if you are in network
and 3000 if you're out of
network, um, for the HMO plans,
it is um $500 or uh sorry, for
both, both HMO plans, it's $500.
So Mr. Chair, I think.
Let me make sure, cause now I'm
confused. What's the 2,004,000.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair and Senator,
we apologize that actually was
not accurate information.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. So I,
I'm trying to relate this
because I think I heard Mr.
Chair, um,
Secretary Armil.
Um, you said that it's $25,000 a
year average for this coverage
for an employee. Um, Mr. Chair,
welcome, Mr. Chair. uh, Mr.
Chair, um, Senator Spiason, um,
So if someone were to go
purchase coverage for their
family on the private market.
They're out of pocket premium
would be about $25,000. That
doesn't even count their
deductibles, um, so that's just
what they would pay in premiums.
That's without the state. The
state, um, and that's that
information about costs for
employees on slide.
I'm sorry, um, slide 21.
You can see what we're paying on
the average per employee per
year.
Um, about $14,000 on the PPO and
$12,000462 on the HMO.
OK, Mr. Chair, that that makes
more sense to me. I thought you
were saying before that it's
$25,000 cost to the state and I
was like, I can probably help
negotiate better rates for you,
um, because I myself, I'm on a
PPO plan with my husband, just
the two of us on a small
business plan, Mr. Chair, and we
pay about, what did I figure
out, we pay almost $39,000 a
year.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think that
earlier figure was referring to
if we didn't offer student
coverage and people had to go
pay for their own coverage on
the private market, a family
would cost 250 to $30,000 a
year, um.
OK.
And let me make sure I didn't
have one more question here
because I've taken a lot of
notes.
Mr. Chair, um.
So
You said in statute, salaries
are fixed.
Does anyone get like an
inflationary salary increase per
year in, in New Mexico, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Syson, it
really kind of depends on the
year. There have been in recent
years, um.
Salary increases, they're not
fixed in statute, so it's not a
definite, uh, that there would
be a compensation increase, but
over the past several years,
there have been increases, uh,
passed by the legislature. I
have been a state employee for
almost 25 years. I have
experienced years where there
were no increases, uh, and
premium increases, premiums to
the state health benefits
increased, uh, with no
compensation increased to state
employees. So that has happened,
but not in, not in a number of
years.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. One more
question. Did I hear that maybe
you and AJ are not in alignment
with the best practice moving
forward for the legislature. Um,
Mr. Chair, Senator Tyson, I
think, I think I, I don't wanna
speak for, uh, Mr. Forte, so I
really, I don't know, it sounded
to me like the recommendation
was to have a fixed premium
increase per year in statute,
which I understand.
is around the the sort of
predictability.
My concern with that is that.
It's not that different from
having a fixed salary in
statute. It could be out of sync
with what the market requires.
And so while I very much
appreciate the point about
predictability. I think there
are a lot of factors at play,
um, the healthcare authority is
really trying to make sure that
not only do we focus on the
premiums and the actual
soundness, which is really
important for fiscal solvency,
but that we are also doing cost
controls and cost containment to
sort of mitigate.
and create that greater
predictability over the long
term. So there's really no trend
line.
In the world in which healthcare
costs are going down right now.
I would say that that is what we
are trying to do is kind of take
it from a straight line upwards
to a curve, like, you know, to
sort of a more manageable place,
and that's why we have a list of
cost containment measures, um,
so that we aren't doing these
big premium increases that I
wholly agree with what AJ said
about being on this cliff.
The legislature having to bail
out the state, um, and that is
largely driven by the fact that
the state has not set actually
sound rates in many years, and
that is driven by a lot of
factors. For the first time, I
think the state really has solid
data around the population, what
the real claims cost will be and
what the actual premium
collections are because it's
really just basic math, you
know, how much are you
collecting and how much, um, are
you gonna pay out and how are
you gonna make up the difference
and so it's really how we make
up that difference.
and we're just proposing sort of
a different methodology, but I,
I could 100% agree with what was
said about predictability and
trying to make sure that um
We're sort of controlling this
for the future, um, and that is
really, really important to me
as this.
OK
Thank you, Mr. Chair and secret,
I, I appreciate the explanation.
OK, uh, final person Senator
Steinborn.
You, Mr. Chairman, and good to
hear from you all today. Um,
secretary, we've been here for
several years about cost
containment.
And I passed legislation many a
year ago, creating a
interagency purchasing council,
I don't think it was frankly,
they did a real good job and
Um
Driving, driving, you know, hard
on that, you only get out of it
what you put into it, and you
got to really lean into it in
order to get results.
But I mean, you, I know you,
you're not brand new, we've been
talking to us about cost
containment for several years.
Now we're seeing costs go up, by
the way, right on, I agree with
all the the reform proposals,
um, so I support it with cost
containment becomes even more
important, right? To, to manage
those rising costs. So my
question to you is we've been
talking about multi-state
purchasing collaboratives, you
know, leveraging the billion
dollars of purchasing powers the
state, including Medicaid, um,
for, um, this pharmacy.
ce ut ical s what have your
department actually done on the
cost containment front.
What results have we got?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, so just a reminder, I
think when we've been talking
about cost containment.
That was the human services
department talking about
Medicaid.
We are now, I, I, I really can't
speak to sort of historical cost
containment efforts related to
the state health benefit package
that has only been in the agency
for a few months, um, and sort
of in terms of those levers, I
think, you know, we have two
very real proposals that we've
put on the table today. One to
save $40 million through setting
price caps, um, one to leverage
federal funding for uh kids who
are eligible for CHIP. It does
take, you know, it takes a few
months to execute these
strategies, but we are
ly doing them, and I think for
the first time we actually have
a cost containment plan for
state health benefits. I really
can't speak to sort of prior
years and what conversations may
have happened in terms of cost
containment on the state health
benefit package, specifically
because they're just not
knowledgeable about what those
conversations may have entailed,
but I also think it's really
important.
Um, you benefit design changes
have been passed by the
legislature year over year over
year and those things have a
cost to the state and we have to
really be responsible and make
sure that it's very transparent.
Um, you can't do cost
containment and add things in
healthcare at the same time,
it's really, you know, it's
really sort of incompatible to
do that. And so I think we have
to be mindful as a state of what
we're adding and what
responsibilities we're taking on
and what we're passing on to
employees and we're trying to be
very transparent about that. So,
um, in terms of the pharmacy
purchasing, we are really
looking at potential collab
collaboratives, um, we're
looking at multi-state
purchasing options. We are
looking at all of it right now,
um, and really trying to dig up.
that's the best option for the
state of New Mexico. Um, we have
a pharmacy procurement coming up
with the IA uh entities that I
think we would have a new
pharmacy contract, uh, a year
from now. So that is gonna be a
big heavy focus for um I know
you and I know we have limited
time, so I'm just kind of trying
to wrap it up and if we could be
real succinct, so for what it's
worth and calling, uh, he may
know it well because he's had
different roles over the last
few years, and it's great to see
him in this new role, but you
might look at that bill for
what it's worth, the one that we
had introduced because it
outlines a variety of strategies
that included, by the way, all
the state agencies were around
the table and that bill included
a lot of input and
Checked off a lot of different
cost containment strategies,
some that may be on your radar,
some that might not be, um,
including the IBA doesn't
include Allstate agencies. How
do we leverage the purchasing
powers of other state agencies
not included in the IBA and do
joint procurement.
Not in a way that does one size
fits all, but leverages the
purchasing power of them all to
come up with a product that
meets all their needs, but it
gets us a better price, right?
So we got to really lean heavy
into this because even saving a
few percent can save millions of
dollars, right? And make
everything else more affordable.
And again, I support all the
reforms you're talking about
because number one, as you
pointed out, it's competitive.
Number 2, it's about equity,
because as the question was
asked, do, can people opt out of
not buying insurance. My
experience is low income people
may not buy it because they
don't have the money. It's like,
yeah, I could do it, but I'm
broke, you know, like we're,
they're living on the poverty
level.
So your plan about helping them
fully cover it is is equity, and
they get more quality of life.
They do a better job for the
state. It's the right thing to
do and um their families will be
better, which is kind of my
final point on the GLBT, which
is really like,
Game changer in so many ways and
the economics of it.
National international is really
fascinating, but as it pertains
to New Mexico.
You're saying that we cover it
now, which is pretty amazing. So
it's more generous as a state
policy than most insurance
plans.
Um, which is great, I mean.
Um
But I guess I'm really wondering
you had said some things that
kind of a little bit of
cautionary when you said.
But you want to reform it and
and provide it only when it
really matters. And I'm curious
what you meant by that. We don't
have to go into that, but I
mean, is it when it really
matters just someone with
diabetes, to someone who's
overweight, will be
pre-diabetic. You don't have to
answer that. But from my
perspective, when it really
matters is when it can be
interventional and help them
from progressing into a worse
health situation, not just
diabetes, which is the insurance
point of view now.
Then if you do that,
We're saving money, right?
Because now this is someone
who's not on.
Maybe certain medications.
Lives longer or whatever, more
productivity. So I would wonder
if on the back end we end up
seeing savings if more people
are healthier.
We see that ultimately come back
to us and lower.
Yes. Mr. Chair, Senator, just
really quick on that point, um,
what I meant was that anyone can
go get it right now. Um, I, I
think there's no BMI
requirement. There's no, you
know, I think I could go get it.
Uh, I don't know if I need it.
Maybe I do like some argument
there, but um I don't know if
that's the right intervention
for everybody, and so we're kind
of thinking about what's the
reasonable clinical indication
for that, and that's all I
meant, um, really trying to make
sure that, you know, someone who
needs to lose 5 or 10.
pounds isn't really, that's not
the first line of treatment for
them and that's not clinically
indicated, but um that is
potentially happening right now.
That's all he was really talking
about fair enough, yeah, it's
kind of like maybe everybody
thinks that they have it or want
it or, you know, but they really
don't. Um, and that's a fair
point, and that's
Really all I had, Mr. Chair, and
thank you for this work. I think
this is really great work and I,
and I hope we embrace those
reforms that you're
recommending. I support them.
Thank you.
All right, thank you. Uh, we're
gonna roll over the behavioral
health needs gaps till Tuesday.
I hope Senator Truman for final
question. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Isn't a statute
required to do rate increases
annually.
Um, Mr. Chair.
Senator Munoz,
uh, we want to call me, just
don't call me madam.
OK, Mr. Chair.
Um, I don't believe so. No, not
in statute. Uh, we are
proposing.
Um, uh, bill that would
Require an actuary sound rate
for the the premiums to be set
at a actually really sound rate
every year.
And so you're bringing that this
year?
Uh, that is what I anticipate.
Mr. Ja.
And so she anticipate, are we
doing it or not doing it. So yes
or no answer.
OK.
I mean, we're at the point where
you got two choices, right?
Either reduced benefits, right?
You cover the cost.
So
That's where we're at total
54,000, right, deficit between
cost of drugs and the cost of
insurance.
Correct.
Uh, Mr. Chair, the deficit is
projected. It's currently 85
million and the projected death
in for FY 25 and the projected
deficit for FY 26 if we do know
reforms is 87. So that's, we
are, um, you missed the earlier
part of the presentation in
terms of our proposal to wipe
out that structural deficit, uh.
This year.
I'm looking at slide 6 and and
it's a bullet point number 2, 18
those with an updated claim
analysis, 29% rate increase will
be needed in FY 26 to cover
projected medical and RX you
know total 541 million. So
that's the total shortfall,
that's the total cost.
Uh, about 550 million in medical
and claims costs projected this
year compared to what we're
collecting, yeah, OK, that's why
you to subtract that from 85,
and, and so the the legislature
was on.
In tune and said, OK, if we want
to get to the 29% rate increase,
and we're gonna pick that up
just to get you back to 0.
What would that number be?
Mr. Chair, um, to get the so to
address the
I don't know what 29% of that.
Mr. Chair, it's um 85 million
for FY 25 that wipes out the
deficit for just for 25, but it
doesn't address the problem for
26. So
But I'll be here again next
year. That's really what we were
talking about is sort of trying
to do.
A structural reform now that
really gets to a place where we
are really trying to be a
competitive employer and
restructuring the benefits.
That's fine.
But
That may or may not happen.
Doesn't sound like you're even
drafting it now.
But it sounds like you're
thinking about it, but it
doesn't look like it's gonna
happen. If I wanted to get not
to do a 29% race increase for
next year, right, to get them
caught up to say we need 29% for
how many years to get you to a
level 10% or 6%, whatever that
would be.
What would that number look?
Mr. Chair, and if you don't know
you can have a bunch of, we have
multiple options that are kind
of set forth on slide 19.
We have a, we have a whole lot
of um different options and ways
to cost this out, but I think
What we are proposing actually
is going to be a bill that
resets the tears.
And the employer contribution
with cost containment, actuarial
sound rates and then that kind
of creates
That's the longest term
solution. So if you look at
slide 19, that green line is
what we are proposing and we
will have a bill related to
this, so, um, that is, that is
the proposal and that is an $80
million less expensive, that is
saving $80 million to the state
of New Mexico because it
addresses the structural
deficit.
And it means that
Starting in FY 26, the local
public bodies would be paying
their share. Everything would be
correctly set and um, but it
does sort of reset everything
and so we are proposing a big
reset, uh, this session, um, and
so you will see a bill related
to that.
OK
I look forward to seeing you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK, thank you. uh, thank you,
uh.
For the presentation and we
will.
In this session. So thank you
all for being here. Good night.
Thank you committee members.
