And then you can come back
quarter time.
Or if you make less than $15,000
so that 15,000 has not been
changed in many years. This bill
increases that to 25,000. We're
talking bus drivers.
Security personnel.
Even educational assistants.
We're not changing the quarter
time, still work part time. This
is really good for the uh higher
ed, um, because they sometimes
need instructors, you can just
do one course.
And the other change in this,
this is also the provision where
uh we can have a return to work
educators can return to work if
they only if they can't work on
in the 36 months and an
amendment in education move that
to 60. So that's all this does,
all the changes are on page 4,
moving that.
Uh, lower income amount you can
make up to 25,000 and extending
that return to work for another
60 months rather than 36 months.
education communities asking for
that and I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you, we'll go to the
audience. Anybody in support?
Nobody, anybody in opposition?
Anybody on Zoom?
No questions from committee
members.
Senator Woods.
Be put you chairman.
So, the main thing that I worry
about on any of this and, and
apologize.
I was preparing for another bill
so hard.
That are overlooked yours, so.
Please forgive me.
The, the, uh
The retirement.
An educator's retirement fund.
Is my main.
Worry on anything we do on this
change to work, so.
Are we changing the factory I
apologize again for not this is
something I should have read and
prepared for,
but are we changing the, the uh
requirement to contribute to
The retirement
Of Mr. Chairman Senator Woods,
no, we are not. If you're
retired and you're getting a
pension and you're working a
little bit, you still have to
put into that retirement fund,
as does the education community
you work for, and yet you don't
get an increased return so not
everybody does this. Uh, this
came from Stewart Ingle. I'll
just tell you, uh, having
trouble let me read it harder
drivers and that's the case.
all over. So trying to lure
people back into a tiny little
bit of work with this bill, and
I understand we're trying to.
To make up for the fact that
we've got set we're shy 700
educators, uh, uh, certified
educator center teaching system
and we're trying to lure some of
them back that are that are
qualified and have their
teachers certificates and
everything to teach. I
understand where you're going,
um.
But at times, you know, my
constituents call and tell me,
well, you know, if I'm not going
to benefit from the, the
retirement, why would I do this?
And I was just wondering because
I haven't read your bill, that
question. So nothing has
changed, only the length of time
from 36 to 60.
Well, all the length of time
from 36 to 60, but then we're
also allowing these folks that
are coming back, uh, part time
to have 25,000 instead of
15,000. So these are the lower
paid employees that might only
make 30,000, so a quarter,
30,000. It's not very much. So
if you're, you're an educator
and you're going back, you work
full time, you get your full
salary. You still pay into the
ERB.
As does the district that you
work for, uh, for the other, uh,
still paying to ERB as does the
district, but these bus drives,
etc. could make more than
15,000, which is what we're
we're
this is covering more than just
the school teachers, and this is
the bus drivers and the
maintenance staff and and those
other lower page scales that are
out there. Thank you for
explaining your bill. Thank you,
Mr. Senator Tobison.
You caught me with
a pastry Mr. Chair, I'm good.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
They're really good, by the way.
OK, so my question, Mr. Chair,
is, um, obviously I don't have a
lot of background in this.
But it seems to me if we have a
system where if someone's
working and they're forced in
the school district is forced to
pay into the fund, but it's,
they're never going to realize
the benefit of that, the
additional benefit of that is
that because is the retirement
fund not in great shape or
Mr. Chairman, the uh ERB fund is
in better shape than the para
fund. We have tied cola to uh
the solvency of the fund for
much longer in ERB than we have
for Para. The fund is good. This
helps the fund, and, you know,
frankly, my personal belief is
these are retirement funds we
should use them when you're
really retired, but we have this
system, uh, you can do a little
bit more work when you're
retired, you still get your
term uh benefits, but you still
have to pay in.
And your retirement doesn't go
up under this process. It's, we
don't want to encourage
everybody to quit and then come
back to work and you know make
money off the state.
I see. And Mr. Chair, you said
that this is really focused
towards um,
The lower wage workers, not
necessarily retired teachers.
Mr. Chairman, there's two
provisions in this bill. They're
both on page 41 is to extend the
time that teachers could come
back, get their retirement
benefits, work full time, from
36 months to 60 months. They
have to wait out 90 days. The
other part of it is to have
those those lower income folks
be able to come back with a
salary that will uh uh.
them to come back. We're having
trouble with bus drivers
sometimes. So with the security
personnel, um, other custodians
even. This will help everybody.
I see. Thank you for the
explanation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Lanier.
You're not eating anything, are
you?
No. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning. Good morning.
So I just have one question,
retired school teacher.
And I, and I looked through the
bill trying to find this.
So it may not be in there
anywhere at all, so be patient
with me. So I retired as a
school teacher.
Then I went to the county.
Worked for the county.
And I could not I could not put
in to retirement on that side.
So Para and
In
Once, once you retire from a
public retirement, you can't
double dip.
Into that. So this doesn't
change that, does it?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, no.
You know, if you were
Both ERB agencies and then at
retirement, they look at the
proportionality of those two
systems because Pera is more
generous, so you get some from
each when you retire.
OK, thank you. And Mr. Chair,
the last thing is I just, I
appreciate you coming up with
this, coming from a rural area,
um, I understand the bus
drivers, the custodians, the
grounds work. I mean, we, we go
through that year after year
after year. So I really
appreciate you doing this and uh
you'll, you'll have my support.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Chairman, I move that um.
Senate Bill 133 as amended.
do not pass. I, I have one
question real quick. Is Greg in
the room?
Mm
Uh, parent told me 4000 people,
roughly around 4000 people.
I mean
Right now, uh
work program.
of this last fiscal year, this
last fiscal year in total
between the one-year layout
program and those folks that
were grandfathered into the
program, the folks under the
0.25, the less than 15,000, and
now the 36 month program, we
have about 4000. So it's, it's
working.
And it's basically the same they
they can pay in, but they don't
receive the benefit, but they
receive their retirement at the
same time, right? And that
actually helps the funds.
Mm
Great. Thank you. The only
question, Senator Gonzalez has a
motion for a due pass. have a 2
senator, Senator Woods.
Toro.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes
yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin, Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator
Trujillo, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes. Senator
Shendo, Senator Shendo votes
yes, Senator Munoz, Senator
Munoz votes yes, we have a due
pass 6 to 0.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam.
Center work before we start, I'm
gonna set some guidelines on, on
the Zoom stuff for
participation, right? We'll hear
34 and 3 against, uh, if you're
on Zoom and you're a registered
lobbyist, uh, and you're not in
the room.
And we won't take you, um.
You should be here, you're
getting paid to do your job, uh,
if you're a constituent and
you're for or against or.
We'll hear you, so just so be
aware of your registered
lobbyist, uh, we won't call you
on Zoom.
Then what you want to go ahead
and tell us about?
In the middle of 21.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
members. This is Senate
Judiciary Committee Substitute
for Senate bills 21 and 22. Uh,
let me give you an overview of
what.
The policy reasons are behind
the bills. Let me talk about the
process that brings us here
today and then what I really
want to focus on are the fiscal
issues kind of exactly what's
been appropriated to date, a new
fund we're creating, um.
Some of the language change
that's gone in and the
amendments to deal with the
issue of the
The fees and funding this
program. I want to explain that
and then there is a uh friendly
amendments, uh.
There was uh for some of the
The fines there was language in
here that was gonna move those
fines into the new fund we're
creating. We are OK with taking
that out and having those fines
go into the general funds, so
status quo and I can cite to
those two sections, uh,
something I think I know this
committee is, is interested in.
work on that amendment. We don't
care as long as the, if the
funds build up, the fines build
the funds, but they're
non-transferable for anything
else. This is the situation that
we got us in the beginning of
the session, where the fund was
used for other purposes in
operational. Same thing with the
contamination fund. I can't
remember the name of it.
right off the top of my head,
but money has been moved out.
Or FTEs or for contract and
those funds are not building and
then they come back and say, oh
we need more money for the funds
and the the department is doing
that to themselves. And so
that's our main concern.Buil,
you can build the fun and use it
for its intended purpose, but
don't and, and don't ran
non-transferably is very
critical to us because then we
have to backfill, um.
And then, uh, on the fines, we
want those to go to general
fund.
So we can appropriate.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and I think
that's the direction we're going
here so we'll we'll get there.
That's good news.
Uh, so I also wanna note Senator
Gonzalez is sponsor on both
these bills along with
Representative Ortiz with me
today is Shelly Lemon, uh,
Environment department surface
Water Quality Bureau Chief, uh,
and Jonas Armstrong, who is a
division director.
Uh, who I think we all know.
So let me do this, uh, talk kind
of globally about what, what the
subsuit does. 3 primary things.
Number one,
Uh, under this bill, New Mexico
asserts primacy or the federal
Clean Water Act. We're one of
only 3 states that doesn't do
that.
Uh, Basically the status quo now
is that decisions under the
Federal Clean Water Act are
being done in Dallas by the EPA.
Um, this bill would bring this
back to the New Mexico
Environment departments, um, and
I think.
New Mexicans doing our water
makes a lot more sense than
Texans managing our water, uh,
and so.
That's the first big thing that
it does. The second thing it
does is address a Supreme Court
decision in the Sackett case in
2023. Basically that case
interpreted the scope of the
federal Clean Water Act.
Prior to Sackett for the 50
years that the Federal Clean
Water Act had been in place uh
it had been interpreted to apply
to ephemeral streams as well as
free-flowing streams.
Uh, the sacket decision narrowed
that substantially.
And basically said the
definition of waters uh is
limited to those described in
ordinary parlance of streams,
oceans, rivers, and lakes, uh,
and to adjacent wetlands that
are indistinguishable from those
bodies of water due to a
continuous surface connection.
The problem with that decision
is that about 90% of New
Mexico's waters are not free
flowing or not connected for 50
years, those waters were all
regulated uh by under the
Federal Clean Water Act, uh,
based on this decision, what's
left is just.
The remaining 10%, 5 to 10% of
free flowing streams, uh, that
are covered by the Federal Clean
Water Act. So this substitute uh
would establish a new program
run by the environment
department to manage those
waters. I really look at this as
a status quo. Everyone lived
with us for 50 years. We're just
taking and putting the state in
the place of what was the
federal government.
What right now the last two
years has been a complete
deregulation.
Uh, the third thing this does is
create a a program to hold
groundwater.
Looters responsible similar to.
Or would parallel the federal
circle.
A law which is a superfund law,
and
Basically
The third part of this and the
fund that's created in here is
to um have funding so that we
can go in and hold those sites
and get them cleaned up.
So that's the, the overview of
kind of the policy issues on the
bills. Let me talk about the
process.
Um
EnemyD convened a surface water
advisory panel.
Uh, in the fall of 2024 that
meant six times with 49
participants, uh, the members
that participated included
diverse interests from industry,
oil and gas mining,
construction, agriculture, or
conservation districts,
environmental groups, tribal
governments, local governments,
uh, irrigation districts.
Federal facilities Los Alamos,
Sandia National Labs, Watershed
and wetland restoration
professionals.
And so that work was done, um.
Again, as a lead in to these
bills.
Uh, these bills were referred to
3 committees.
Uh, and that needed to be
referred to 3 committees. We had
extensive hearings in the Senate
conservation, uh, committee.
Um
Then basically we had 2 days of
hearings in the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
Uh, to address the legal issues
there and the water issues in
conservation.
We're here today to talk about
the fiscal issues and uh have
that discussion and I want to
just go through the fiscal
issues that are in this bill.
Number one, on page 35.
It creates a new fund, the water
quality management fund.
Uh, initially the bill had a $50
million appropriation we took
out that.
appropriation, uh, it's my
understanding that the $50
million is in House Bill 2
that's coming over.
Um, so that's issue number one,
a big issue we heard during the
journey on this bill is that
there was concern about this
program being funded solely with
bees.
So there was a change in the
substitutes, um, in section 4.
Uh, subsection C.
Um, which is on page 7, line 12,
uh.
Previously referred to pay and
we changed that to support the
purpose of that is to make it
clear that there is an option to
do a hybrid of a fee plus some
general fund support.
Um
Basically, I think that's a
decision that this body's gonna
need to tackle. It's not an
issue for FY 26, uh, again, so
there's no impact on the budget
this year. This is something
that will be down the road and
I'm hoping during the interim
there can be a substantial
presentations on that to figure
that piece out.
And the final thing which I
talked about are the.
The penalty language and I want
to refer on page 40. I think Mr.
Chair, this is addressed
addresses your comments on page
40.
Um
Line 17, the basically the
penalties this states that
unless otherwise required by
law, money collected pursuant to
the section for surface waters
shall be deposited. It used to
go to the general fund that's
crossed out to the water quality
management fund and these are
finds. So I think this is one
where you, these are the fines
that are incurred. I think you,
you indicated you do want those
to go to the general funds, so
we'll need to tune that section
up and then on page 57, there's
a second provision on line 20
unless otherwise required by
law, money collected pursuant to
this section which are
additional fines shall be
deposited into the water
management fund. So I just want
to reference and I think that
spoken to the environment
department, they are open to
doing that. So that's generally
what, where we are.
Uh, on this bill, the focus.
Again, I think the issues for
this committee, given the fact
that we dealt with the water
issues and conservation. We
dealt with the legal issues, 2
days of hearings in Senate
Judiciary.
The question now becomes the
fiscal piece of this and putting
this plan in place, uh, I do
think it would be helpful for
Miss Lemon and Mr. Armstrong
just to go over the
appropriations that have
occurred already for this
program so that you all have a
sense of the money that's here,
uh, and then I think we can
certainly hear from the audience
and answer questions, so I might
just yield to them first just
for that purpose and there here.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
senators, um, my name is Shelly
Lemon. I am the surface water
quality bureau chief for the
Environment Department and so
far we've received 3
appropriations for development
of the surface water quality
permitting program. The first
was in 2022, we were um given a
special appropriation for
$680,000 to start working on
this program.
In 2023, we received another
appropriation of $600,000 to
continue the work and to help um
begin developing a database, a
permitting database for both
surface and groundwater, and
then last year in 2024, we
received a $7 million
appropriation to kickstart the
program and help with
development and capacity
building.
Mr. J, we're happy to go off the
Stan.
Thinking we're gonna go to uh
Zoom first and we'll take.
3 in support.
And 3 in opposition.
So if you can hear me on Zoom,
if you're a registered lobbyist,
we're going to hear from
constituents so Barbara, you
read your love. If you're not,
go ahead.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members.
I'd like.
Can you hear me?
Hello? She's talking, but she's
not coming through.
No.
Can you, can you hear me now?
So I'd like to inform you, Mr.
Chair, that I am registered and
uh I'm a registered unpaid
lobbyist for the League of Women
Voters of New Mexico.
I'm just
I'm speaking in support
Yeah, you got, you got one
minute. I'm speaking in support
of Senate Bill 21, the league
supports stringent regulations
to protect ground and surface
water quality from pollution
that can impact human health as
well as the natural flora and
fauna and believes that such
regulations must be strictly
enforced. The league also
believes that government should
monitor and measure all water
resources and and uses.
publish this information,
minimize water contamination in
order to protect the health and
safety of all life and preserve
and restore rivers and
watersheds. Please vote do pass
Senate Bill 21. Thank you.
Thank you. Let's make that clear
for the next one, right?
The the the Zoom meetings or the
Zoom comments were made for
people that couldn't make it to
the Capitol.
And didn't have that.
So who do we have next?
Alexa, are you there?
Yes, good morning. I'm here.
Good morning. We can hear you.
Morning, chair and members of
the committee. Um, my name is
Alexa Tubbs, and I'm the owner
of Open Space Brewing in Santa
Clara, New Mexico. Open Space
brewing is a craft brewery that
combines love for beer, the
outdoors, and a commitment to
conservation.
Each year we dedicate a portion
of our own proceeds to trail
projects and environmental
stewardship.
As a business owner and someone
deeply invested in New Mexico's
natural resources. I see
firsthand how water quality
impacts our communities and
local economies.
SB 21 aligns directly with our
values, and we stand in strong
support of this legislation.
Water is fundamental to all of
us, but it's also the most
important ingredient in craft
beer.
Clean water is essential to our
business and our communities. SB
21 will ensure that these vital
waters remain protected and
prevent pollution events before
they occur.
We respectfully urge the
committee to issue a do pass
recommendation and protect our
waterways, our businesses, and
our future here in the Southwest
New Mexico as well as beyond the
state. Thank you so much. Thank
you for the infomercial and the
comments.
You got
Who's next?
Carlos, are you there?
I am here. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, committee members, my
name is Carlos Matutes. I am the
New Mexico community advocate
for green Latinos. We are a
national organization dedicated
to the environmental justice
fight for Latina communities and
other communities of color.
Senate Bill 21 is absolutely
essential to the health and
well-being of all New Mexicans.
Having the power and ability to
permit discharge.
In New Mexico to protect New
Mexicans, to protect our way of
life, to protect our air, our
water and our healthy soil is
absolutely essential.
The Supreme Court's recent
decision took away 95% of our
surface waters protection from
the EPA. It is absolutely
essential that we protect our
own water for our own people.
Thank you very much, and we do
urge that this committee vote do
pass on Senate Bill 21.
OK, 3 in opposition.
I, are you there?
Sam
Right.
Good morning, uh, panel. My name
is Liz Newland Taylor, and I am
a board director of a director
of the AAFA Albuquerque's flood
control Authority and uh we have
been working with uh New Mexico
Environment Department on some
amendments, uh, to the bill, one
in particular would um allow
AAFCA's current permit to
continue, uh, which is what we
need, um, to avoid some other
technical problems, um, and we
do appreciate working with
The department on some
amendments, but until the
amendments are, you know,
written and, and adopted, uh, I
must stand in opposition to the
bill, uh, but I do appreciate
working with New Mexico
Environment Department. Thank
you very much.
the audience will take 3 and
support and 3 in opposition.
Um, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Anna Hanson. I am a
registered lobbyist for the
Pueblo of Paaque, um, so, um.
SB 21 transfers permitting
authority to the New Mexico
Environment Department which has
20 field offices located across
the state. This enables us to
account for needs that are
unique to New Mexico, including
the needs of New Mexico's many
tribal communities including the
Pueblo of Puake.
This bill will enable the state
to establish a comprehensive
state surface permitting program
that ensures the state waters
that flow onto tribal lands are
protected and clean. I'm also
the chair of the coalition of
sustainable Communities of New
Mexico, which represents close
to 50% of the population.
And we stand in support of this
bill also and for the past 10
years I have served on the city
of Santa Fe's River Commission
which the river Santa Fe River
is unprotected and is used by
all of our constituents thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you to Peter Worth, uh, Senator,
for his work. Thank you.
On behalf of the Albuquerque
chamber.
Oh no, OK.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. My
name's JD Bullington and I am
authorized to speak to you today
by Harry Antonio Junior, the
honorable governor of Laguna
Pueblo and also the tribal
council which comprises the six
villages of Laguna Pueblo, long
before there was European
contact. The people of Laguna
depended heavily on the waters
of the Rio Rio Machino, the Rio
Powari, and also the Rio San
Jose and that dependent still
continues today.
For the last 50 years, there's
been federal protection of these
waters, but that's now gone away
with the sacket US Supreme Court
decision.
What Senate Bill 21 means for
the Pueblo of Laguna.
Is that any time there will be a
permit application submitted.
For any kind of activity that
could potentially affect that
surface water.
That whoever's submitting that
application is going to have to
ensure and approve to the New
Mexico Environment Department
that their activities are not
going to adversely affect those
waters that are falling, flowing
on the tribal lands into the
Pueblo of Laguna. The pueblo of
Laguna respectfully requests
that you approve this
legislation.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Vidal
Gonzalez and I work for the New
Mexico Asecu Association as the
director of policy and planning.
I'm a registered lobbyist. I'm
here to speak in support of
Senate Bill 21. This bill has
broad support among
organizations representing a
broad cross section of New
Mexicans working together to
protect our water.
Senate Bill 21 is critical for
protecting New Mexico's waters,
Asea's farms, traditions and
culture. We wish to highlight
that this legislation is needed
to have a New Mexico-based
process for protecting clean
water in both rivers and
Araseass while upholding the
needs of agriculture so that it
can continue to prosper into the
future.
We need to pass legislation that
protect our waters, traditions,
and customs into the future,
which is what makes New Mexico
so unique in the line of
enchantment. I also wanted to
thank the New Mexico Environment
Department and the sponsors of
the bill. Thank you for your
time, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee.
We're gonna hear one more and
we'll balance it out in a
minute.
Good morning, Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Milton
Herrera. I'm the former governor
from the public of Tsuki.
We support SB 21.
But we're asking if there's any
kind of violations that should
happen. We want to have
consultation and mitigation as
soon as it happens with, with
any kind of uh violations. Thank
you.
Thank you will take foreign
opposition.
Good morning, Chairman and
members. My name is Matt
Thompson, representing the New
Mexico Mining Association.
Um, like was, uh, mentioned
earlier we'd like to think
leader worse and the department
for working with us on ongoing
efforts to improve the bill, but
we stand before you today with
some concerns around the fee
structure, primarily the
striking of the not exceeding
the estimated cost portion,
which is on page 28 of the sub
and replacing it with vague and
overly broad support the cost
language. Uh, unfortunately,
it's our view that this change
would relieve this co-equal
branch legislative body of some
of its main appropriation.
Responsibilities.
Um, second, uh, the bill would
give the department
administrative penalty authority
with no cap.
These two items combined could
allow the uh the department and
the funds to accumulate tens of
millions of dollars, thus
reducing the need to come before
either the House appropriation
Finance Committee or Senate
Finance and uh work things
through the appropriation
process. So thank you very much.
We uh we respectfully staying in
opposition.
Good morning. I'm Terry Cole,
president CEO for the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
With all due respect to the
sponsors on this bill. I do
stand in opposition today on SB
21. It's a very big leap we
think to immediately take over
federal regulation as business
managers we can tell you that to
move this quickly is likely to
result in missteps in mistakes.
Adding 50 employees is a real
challenge in today's workforce
environment especially when it
has to be done quickly.
Where will they qualified
employees be found?
Nearly every department already
has high vacancy rates.
The quality of the workforce
matters as they will be charged
with the important rulemakings
we also question why it's
necessary to move oil field
regulations from OCD to the
environment department, OCD
already has the expertise to
provide necessary regulatory
oversight, so again with all due
respect to the sponsor, we do
urge you to vote no this
morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Beverly Itzinger, executive
director of Dairy Producers of
New Mexico. We respectfully
stand in opposition to Senate
Bill 21. The dairy rule was the
result of a compromise between
dairy NMED and the
environmentalist coalition. It
ended up giving New Mexico's
dairies the most stringent
regulations in the entire
country. During this time, we've
lost half of the dairies that we
have in the state due to various
reasons, not just the
regulations. However, we've had
no new dairies come to the.
state, mostly due to the
regulations that we have here.
Send Bill 21 could require us to
get two new permits that do the
exact same thing that we're
already required to obtain. This
is duplicative permitting. If
you were to operate any business
in the state where the
regulations were 3 times more
stringent than any other state
would you operate your business
here. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of the San
Juan Water Commission and the
Associated General Contractors
in New Mexico. Uh, we appreciate
the work being done on the bill,
but we still have several
concerns and to speak
specifically about cost
escalation and construction,
which we know has been a concern
of this committee and the LFC in
general over the last year as we
have seen in Mexico already
experienced a significant
increase in the cost of
construction, largely due to the
labor shortages and supply chain
issues, uh, in this bill does
introduce additional permitting
and.
li ance burdens that will
further increase cost on
contractors and public work
projects statewide. New fees
that we did not have to pay
previously under the federal
program compliance mandates and
liabilities will drive up costs
and strain already over extended
public budgets. The expanded
regulatory framework will add
months to permitting processes,
delaying critical infrastructure
projects, uh, for example, if we
need a new permit for accidental
soil.
Movement into a water system
under the dredge and fill
provision or of every action
with the possibility for
discharge, we'll need a new
permit, um.
And we have to do this in
Albuquerque, for example,
through AAFCA, if they're
delayed due to their permitting
processes and increased costs
that will further delay
construction projects as well.
Uh, this increase uncertainty
will ultimately inflate costs
even further. So New Mexico
already faces higher
construction costs due to
inflation and labor and this
bill will exacerbate those
costs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members.
Mr. Chair,
just clarify the new fund that's
being created is on page 43 is
the neglected and contaminated
sites fund. I just want to
clarify that. Let me ask one
question, Senator Cervantes vote
for this.
Absolutely, twice.
Question from Senator Lanieri,
raise your hand.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well, there's a lot to unpack in
this.
Right here.
Um
I'm not even sure exactly where
to start. There's so much.
Why
Doesn't the EPA already have
this regulation?
Mr. Chair, uh, they do with
respect to the small percentage
of free flowing streams. As I
said, we're one of only 3 states
that doesn't exert primacy.
New Mexico, New Hampshire and
Massachusetts.
Uh, all the other Western states
do this in-house. It's been a
discussion that's been around
for a long time and then after
the second decision, they do not
do anything with respect to the
remaining 90% of the water.
But isn't it true, Mr. Chair,
Isn't it true though that this
will be the most overreaching.
Legislation in the Southwest.
Mr. Chair, I have no
No, no sense. I'm not, that's
the first time I've heard. Well,
those other states, right?
You, you
You must have coordinated with
the other states to see what
they're doing, correct? So Mr.
Chair, I think all the states
are, first of all,
The other, all the western
states already do the primacy.
So that's what the first, that's
what the original 21 does with
respect to 22 which is filling
in the regulatory gap. I think
that's something that each state
is going to look at and make
that determination whether as a
policy reason, we want to leave
all that water that was
regulated for 50 years.
1972 to 2023, everyone lived
with it. We understood it was
covered.
And then it was deregulated and
then that's the policy decision
we're making with this bill.
Do you, Mr. Chair, do you have
any numbers on how many
violations there has been in the
state of New Mexico and say the
last 5 years.
Mr. Chair and Senator Lanier,
um, we would, that information
is available online through the
EPA's website. I don't have it
available in front of me right
now. Jonas, you have your
computer, you can pull it up and
answer it.
You can ask your next question
while he's pulling it up yeah
yeah if you could get with me on
that, I would, I would
appreciate it. Um.
One of the things that you took
out, and I, and I think I'm only
gonna bring it up because I know
it's not in the bill anymore,
but I want to bring it up
because I, I, I think it helps
to find how overreaching this
could be.
In, in the first bill, you had
in there that you could, let me
make sure I get this right.
That you could access private
property.
For the purpose of carrying out.
This act.
And I know you took that out,
but I, I wanna show.
Overreaching this bill started.
Mr. Chair, if I could, uh, I
don't think it was overreaching
at all. It mirrors what was in
the federal law and is currently
in the federal law right now and
we can cite you to the exact
section. We went through this
whole analysis in judiciary.
There's language in here that
does make you pause.
Uh, but once you track and
there's, you know, exact
parallels. There's things we
have to put into this in order
to get primacy. The big thing
that came out of this bill was
what I heard from
Folks on all sides in municipal
government was a private right
of action.
And that was something again
that EPA either requires a
private right of action.
War, having the environment
department be aware of
complaints and respond to
complaints as they come in. We
took that out and so that was a
big
This bill has evolved a lot in
its journey through both
committees, uh, but again,
Much of the
Issues like the one you discuss
and we can cite you to the exact
federal language in the current
law, federal law that does allow
for
That enforcement, and I can
yield to miss.
Lemon, who's
doing something Mr.
Chair, kind of on that same
point, are, are we creating a
tattletale system?
Where anybody can call in and
go, hey.
I'm mad at my neighbor for
playing his music too loud, but
he's watering his grass and it's
running across the street and
it's dirty water now.
Mr. Chair and Senator Lanier, we
received complaints right now
from the public, that is already
in existence, we verify those
complaints by going out on site
and seeing if it's a real
complaint or not.
But Mister Chair.
Now
You're gonna have teeth in it.
Now you're gonna be able to
Administer fines.
And things like that.
Is that, is that the case today?
Can you, can you find somebody?
Mr. Chair and Senator Lanier,
yes, we can. We do have water
quality standards to protect our
waters, and we can issue fines
or penalties for violating those
water quality standards.
So what would that, Mr. Chair,
what would that standard be?
For my scenario.
What would
Because you have somebody that
reports it.
Somebody's watering the grass.
It's going down the street.
Where do you, where do you test
that water?
How, how do you investigate
that?
Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier,
somebody wandering their grass
is not a violation. Somebody
dumping sewage into a river from
a septic.
Uh, collection, like illegal
dumping would be something that
we would investigate. We've
received complaints about
dumping carcasses into streams
we've received complaints about
dumping sewage into streams. So
there are
Um, broad categories of
violations, we when we go out
and investigate, we look for a
um responsible person if we
can't identify that person. Um,
we talked to the landowner, we
try to get voluntary compliance,
um, it in certain cases, we've
issued fines, um, and penalties,
and then, um,
For, for the most egregious
violations, um, dumping and
violating water quality
standards for over a year. We
have data that shows that a
certain, um,
Entity
What's violating the water
quality standards for over a
year. We've had situations where
there have been spills that have
occurred and we've um
Mandated that the person
responsible for the spill clean
up those spills, so there's a
wide variety, um.
Right now, typically we don't do
penalties except for the most
egregious cases.
OK, and Mr. Chair, so
So agriculture is a huge part in
my area and, and actually in, in
most.
Most folks that sat on this.
And so I think that's one of the
things we need to really look at
and be concerned with not only
the dairy issue that they're
talking about, but also, so let,
let me give you another
scenario.
Let's say we are.
We're in hatch and we grow green
chili.
And we harvest our green chili,
and we need to rinse it off. So
we rinse it off with water.
Right?
That tell water then goes back
into
The system goes back into a
ditch or the river, where you
want to look at it.
Would that fall under the fine?
Mr. Chair, can I address that
because that's a specific
example that Senator Cervantes
discussed were his family farm
had to pay a.
Big fine to address that under
the current law.
We're trying to mirror what's in
the current law. There's also
exemptions for many farming
activities in the current law
which we're carrying over, that
was another change that was made
as this bill moved forward so
that it mirrors exactly what is
the current exemptions in the
federal statute.
So yes, that's a situation and
he in his specific case, he
talked about it.
It was a rinsing of chili that
was brought up and unfortunately
that got discharged.
They ended up paying a penalty
under current law with EPA as
the as the governing entity.
And Mr. Chair, would that
include the dairies, with the
dairies fall under the same.
Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier, the
dairy, um, currently have an
NPDES permit. It's called a
concentrated animal feeding
operation permit. I believe
there are 20 or 21 in the state
right now, they are also
regulated under the groundwater
Quality Bureau as, um, Senator
Tobiasson, I believe, said, you
know, there are um regulations
under the groundwater Quality
Bureau with the dairy rule.
OK, thank you. Uh,
Mr. Chair, so it
So if we go back to Hatch for a
minute.
If
If I'm a company wanting to move
in here from say, Texas.
Mm
In this bill, what would attract
me to move to this state.
So Mr. Chair, what we're doing
here is basically you know we've
really tried hard to maintain
status quo in terms of the
regulatory oversight that
existed up until the Sackett
decision. There's no question
that the Sacket decision
basically deregulated all of our
ephemeral streams, those that
are not free flowing.
Um, so again,
We passed this bill.
Company moving here is gonna be
moving to the regulatory scheme
which
Companies live with for 50 years
here.
Without it being an issue.
So again, we're trying to line
it up the primacy issue is the
same thing that Texas has
already asserted privacy, so
there's a parallel right there.
Uh, again, you're gonna have New
Mexicans regulating New Mexico's
water instead of Texas EPA
regulating New Mexico's water
with respect to free flowing.
But again,
Texas, I'm sure will make the
decision on whether or not
they're gonna
The regulators are going to step
in and do the sack and I can't
tell you if that's happened or
if it's gonna happen, but.
Uh, again, I think
Lots of other states are looking
at exactly this type of
Regulatory bill.
So, Mister Chair.
So our fees
Is there a cap on the, let's
start there. Is there a cap on
the fees at this point?
Mr. Chair and Senator Lanier,
um, the fees will be established
through a rulemaking, uh,
hearing, so they are not
currently established, but there
are, um, what we've been
considering are having caps on
um the amounts, uh, no more
than, but there are also other
considerations that are
associated with the fees, you
know, the, the size of the
discharge, what is in the
discharge um.
those types of scenarios.
Other states, um, that we've
looked at have also provided
exemptions to certain
categories, um, um, for the
fees, so there are things that
we can look at, um, when we
establish the fees to help um
bring the fee costs down and
have it be a reasonable fee for
service.
So Mr. Chair, that kind of
brings us back to
The economic development part of
it.
Again
Why would a company want to come
to New Mexico when they don't
even know.
What the fee could be.
Do we know what the permit fee
is or are we gonna know what the
fine is. I mean, I, I know
they're not coming to this
state. I wanna clarify this.
They're not coming to this state
to
illegally dumb. I'm, I'm not
saying that.
But, you know, when things
happen, again, why?
would accompany moved to New
Mexico. So Mr. Chair, I think
one of the decisions that we're
gonna need to make as a body is
we have choices with respect to
how this program is funded.
It could be fees, it could all
be general funds if you've got
that issue, we could make a
decision. Some states do it that
way. Most states have a hybrid.
We made sure to change the
language and the substitute to
make it clear that there could
be a provision for a hybrid fee
that's a fee plus some general
fund, that needs to be worked
through, uh, and it's gonna be
worked through before this
program.
Kicks off and starts up, it has
to happen.
Mister Chair.
The leader works and I I think
you understand why I'm asking
the questions. Um, because this
is very important. Have we had
any other
Um
Bills like this or any other.
Things in the environment
department.
That we've tried and hasn't
worked.
For example,
Air pollution.
Something like that.
Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier, um.
I'm, I'm not sure about your
question, but I do know that no
state who has exerted primacy,
has returned it back to the EPA.
OK.
Has
Did New Mexico have its own air
quality program?
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Senator Lanier, yes, the
environment department has an
air quality program with a range
of programs from air quality to
solid waste to hazardous waste
to our OSHA program, to our food
safety program. Uh, we make sure
pools and spas and hotels and
public facilities are safe, um,
we make sure drinking water is
safe. We make sure groundwater
is protected as much as we can
under existing law. We make sure
surface water is protected as
much as we can under existing
law, um.
We have a range of programs and
to the chair's point earlier, I,
you know, it's key in statute
that those funds be distinctly
separated for each of those
programs and I understand the
legislature's concerns and
specifically this committee's
concerns with uh the Air Quality
Bureau and what's been going on
there, but respectfully, that's
a completely separate program
from the water protection
division.
Mr. Chair, I understand that,
but
How is that program doing?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Lanier.
I'm not the best to speak to
that, but at a very high level
my understanding is the program
asked for some fee increases
last year from the environmental
Improvement Board, uh, the board
denied that request, advised the
bureau to come back with a new
request with some more data, uh,
to support it. They've seen an
enormous increase in terms of
workload, uh, since the since
the boom in oil and gas
production and have not seen an
increase in fee revenue to
support that work.
Uh
That's my understanding of it.
They, they have not yet
submitted their request for the
uh their second request for the
rulemaking and in lieu of that
fee revenue again my high level
understanding is they submitted
a budget adjustment request to
access some of their fund
balance.
And that's what the the
legislature in this committee
took issue with.
So, Mr. Chair, is it fair to say
that program is not
Doing great.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I'm not
in a position to judge that.
Financially
Is that programming is that
program doing great, Mr. Chair?
Again, Mr. Chairman Senator
Lanier, I'm, I don't manage that
program. I'm not familiar with
their specific numbers. Aren't
you the deputy director?
No, no, Senator Munoz, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I am the director of
the water protection division.
Just want to clarify.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So if we go back to
And I hate using other states. I
want to be our own state. I want
to be on top of the world. I
want New Mexico to be doing
great.
I mean, that, that's the goal
of, I would think most people at
this table right here.
My, my problem with this is, you
know, and we sat and we listened
to all of these different
Groups come through here,
departments come through here.
And
It's our job to make sure that
what we're voting on.
is on solid ground and is going
to work.
And I really have issues with
this one, especially since at
the federal level, it's already
being done.
I don't understand, you know,
why we have to go above and
beyond, but with that being
said,
The other state like.
California overregulated.
And I don't, I don't want us to
get to that point, but we start
regulating every single thing.
You know, I don't want to have
to pay to go to the bathroom.
So
We, we have seen just droves of
people leave California.
Because it's over regulated. I
mean, it's, it's not rocket
science. I think anybody,
anybody can see that, and it's a
beautiful state and it's got
great weather.
I think New Mexico is just as,
as great, if not better.
But we're very poor state.
And, and I hate to keep bringing
that up, but we, we have issues,
we have, we're so poor people
can't even move out of our
state.
But from an economic point.
We've got to start attracting
people to to come here.
And I think by, by creating more
and more.
Um, regulations and bureaucracy
were just
We're hindering ourselves by
over governing.
Do anybody have a comment, I'll
respond back. I mean, I think
the issue of water having clean
water in our state.
Given that experts are
predicting 25% less water in our
state.
I think having clean water can
be a huge economic development
driver in itself.
Mhm
Again, it's a policy decision
we're making here and to leave
90% of the state's water
unregulated.
I think is a is a tremendous
risk.
also to a whole bunch of.
Businesses that might want to
locate here.
But if there's polluted water,
how in the world are they gonna
be able to do what they need to
do and get clean water. I mean,
we're talking about clean water
here and folks.
Dumping into our water systems
and trying to, and again I want
to be also be really clear for
50 years everyone lived with the
regulatory oversight and what
we're doing with the second part
of the bill and it's not true
that the EPA is still would
handle this. They could, we
could leave, we could not assert
primacy and stay with
Massachusetts and New Hampshire
and have EPA in Dallas dealing
with the 5 to 10% of the free
flowing rivers.
But that would leave the rest of
the waters.
Completely deregulated.
Uh, it's a policy decision.
And I think it's important that
that we as a state step in.
Mr. Chair, let me push back on
that just a, a little bit later
work.
First, are, are you saying our
water is not clean now?
Mr. Chair, I'm not. I'm what I'm
saying though is that it's very
important that we have an
overlay in place and the ability
to address situations that occur
like the one that that senator
Cervantes described, which you
used as your hypothetical. That
is the perfect example.
And I just think it's important
that folks understand what the
rules are.
And when there's uncertainty.
But right now I think there's
uncertainty and let me say that
the secretary was in the prior
hearing talking about without
this bill, you're gonna have
RICRA, which is another
hazardous waste bill,
potentially additional permits,
some of the, some of the
discharges will be treated as
hazardous waste.
Uh, so I, I'm super concerned
we've got the Santa Fe River,
which is not free flowing
through the middle of our town
we've got our municipality
discharging it's treated.
Sewage into that river.
I want to make sure that there's
an oversight there, that
someone's watching and paying
attention.
But Mr. Chair, in their own
oversight?
Did the federal government over
oversee all of that, Mr. Chair,
they did until 2023 when it was
deregulated. The Sacket decision
basically said that's not a
free-flowing stream, therefore,
the the federal Clean Water Act
no longer applies.
But we're gonna put an umbrella,
Mr. Chair.
Over all of it now.
As a state, there was an
umbrella over all of it until
2023 under the federal law. What
we're trying to do is status quo
back to 2023, which again, and I
respect it, it's a policy
decision.
We don't do it.
Basically, there's not any
regulation there for, for all
those ephemeral streams.
Or I would contend and the
reason I'm supporting this bill.
As we put in place that same
oversight that everyone lived
with for 50 years, the world
didn't end, and it was the
federal government.
You know that was doing that
broader interpretation.
But again, based on that Supreme
Court decision, things have
really changed. Well, in this
chair, I, I don't disagree with
you a whole lot on that other
than the financial part of it.
I mean, that's, that's
everything you said makes sense,
but we're leaving out the
financial issue there. And so
with that, my, my question.
would be, so on one of the
handouts that you gave us.
Um, it's talking about
Pollution threatens groundwater.
So if you go, if you look at the
top there, it says Berna Leo has
51 sites.
What, what would be an example
of one of those sites?
Mr. Chairman Senator Lanier, an
example would be an old dry
Hazardous they were to our
groundwater, uh.
And they need to clean those up.
That's that's one example in
Bernayo County, and there's
hundreds of examples just like
that around the state.
OK, so Mr. Chair, if, if we keep
going down the list there, you
go to Guadalupe.
And they have 0.
Mr. Jerison learning that that's
correct, uh, with the study that
we did just a few years ago.
And what year was that?
2022, sir.
2022.
Right, so my last line of
questioning, Mr. Chair, I know
everybody's getting tired of
listening to me.
So you're asking for or it's
estimated.
50 to 60 additional employees to
implement this.
FTEs.
Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier, yes,
that is the um
The numbers that we've
Estimated based on the program
requirements and looking at
other states, um, the average,
uh, nationally is about 60 FTE
um regionally, it's a little bit
less around 30 FTE. So we're
estimating around 50.
OK. So, Mr. Chair,
Again, every department that
comes in here, we talk about
FTEs.
Every single department has
Went on and on about how they
cannot fill positions.
They cannot fill.
How are you going to fill 50 to
60 while you're competing with
every department.
In the state of New Mexico right
now, I think we're over 300
folks down.
Think things, uh, Mr. Chairman,
tenderly, it's a really good
question.
We were one of those agencies
last year, uh, we came to the
legislature.
Uh, with a request for $6.2
million to help us pay our
employees what they were do
based on the state personnel
office classification system and
their years of education and
experience, uh.
With the support of this
committee and the rest of the
legislature, we received that
appropriation. We were able to
implement what we call
appropriate placement, uh, at
the very start of this fiscal
year.
Since then, our vacancy rate has
declined our funded vacancy rate
has declined from uh the high
teens down to 5% at the end of
2024. So we've been really, you
know, fortunate from that
increase and we've seen how
effective it can be with
recruitment and retention. I
know other agencies have seen
that too, and they're asking for
funding similar to this year and
that's probably where you've
heard a lot of that. The other
thing I would say, um,
In terms of the pool of
employees, you know, they're
I think there might be some
folks.
who have some experience at the
federal level who might be
looking for some work and we'd
be happy to have them.
Mhm
Well, Mr. Chairman clarify
something on the pay, the
environment department was about
to go get a lawsuit against him
from the CWS because they didn't
have their employees classified
correctly. They had him working
two jobs.
Director jobs.
And so they came to us, but they
were basically going to get sued
over it, or they had a claim.
They did have a claim, and so we
fixed that for the environment
department.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, that, that
helps a lot, that clears up 33
of my next questions. You just
took care of, so I know that'll
make you get number 4. No.
So
So Mr. Chair.
Let's assume you get the 50 to
60 hired.
Which
I, I hope you do. If, if that's
the case, I, I hope you can get
that taken care of.
Cause we def we definitely don't
want you understaffed and
regulating all our water.
But
Have you taken into account if.
Say the minimum wage bill
passes.
What is that gonna do to your
apartment?
shared gender, I, I would say
that, you know, I.
Without looking at the payroll
list in front of me, uh, with
the classifications we have
folks frequently have to have
bachelor's, if not master's
degrees, um, and are above the
minimum wage, so I, I wouldn't
expect them to be so it wouldn't
affect you at all. I wouldn't
think so. All right.
Mr. Chair, so what's the 50 and
60 employees.
What's that gonna add to the
budget?
Mr. Chair and Senator, um,
It
The full program once it's built
out and we have, um, more
implementing the full program,
it will cost about $8 million
per year. We currently have
around 900,000 that we use to
help EPA and the Army Corps of
Engineers do the work, um,
So that leaves the difference is
7.1 million.
7.1. All right, thank you. And
Mr. Chair.
Um
Are you gonna be back next year
asking
So Mr. Chair, I think they will
definitely be back and I think
we need to as a body make a
policy decision of whether we
want that.
Recurring costs for these FDEs.
be funded exclusively through
the fees.
In a hybrid,
Or if we simply want to
appropriate the money.
So that there's a recurring
appropriation.
In which case the agency would
not have to charge a fee.
That's on us to decide.
When this program kicks in and.
FY 27.
So much. It's just, it, it's
another unknown.
Mr. Chair, we know the cost of
the program.
The way the bill was drafted, it
was gonna have it.
Basically the language there, a
lot of pushback about just being
fees.
Again, we've got to make this
policy decision as this moves
along. We're not asking today to
make it because there's no
impact in FY 26 program's not
gonna be up.
Being built up, but that is
definitely something we're gonna
need to
Put in place, and I, I would
hope that an issue for the LFC
to work on.
Uh, so we have plenty of input
and all the parties can be part
of that.
All right.
Thank you. uh, Mr. Chair, just
in closing, um, I appreciate you
guys coming in and, and going
under fire and and taking
questions. And, and I know you
put a lot of work into this and
And we all, we all do want clean
water.
Um, I, I just wanna make sure
that the public understands and
that the rest of this.
Committee understands.
Economically, this is not.
A good situation.
Economic growth wise, it's not
the funding that we're gonna
have to put in, the unknown
funding, there's so many
unknowns in here. We, we're just
not even sure what this is gonna
cost us say over the next 5
years.
We don't know where.
Where it's going to end up.
So I, I would just, you know,
encourage this.
Um, this committee to really
think about about their vote.
And we all want clean water. I'm
just not sure that this is the
way we want to go about it.
So
But that I
Thank
Thank you, Senator Bran.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um.
Senator, it's good to see you.
And try not to go off like I did
yesterday.
Probably haven't had enough
coffee this morning. Uh, I'm,
I'm concerned about and I, I
know part of this was removed,
but, but then in your
explanation of the removal of
the, what I see is violating
people's property rights.
Um, you basically said you have
the right to do that now.
So, can you help me with that?
So, so the environment
department can go onto my
property without my permission
or without getting a warrant.
Mr. Chair and Senator Brandt,
let's, let me have them go
through the exact language now.
With respect to what the EPA can
do.
And then cite you to the
parallel in this substitute,
except you've already said the
EPA can't do it now.
No, the EPA right now can
come onto my property without
any. Well, let me give you the
exact language
I think that's important.
Mr. Unbrand, I'd start with uh
page 36 is actually existing.
State law, uh, under the Water
Quality Act.
That
At reasonable times upon or
through any premises in which
the water contaminant source is
located or in which are located
any records required to be
maintained by regulations of the
federal government or the
commission provided that entry
into any private residence
without the permission of the
owner shall be only by order of
the district court or the county
in which the residence is
located in that in connection
with any entry provided for the
subsection.
The constituent agency may.
It goes into a little bit more
detail.
OK, thank you. I appreciate that
and, and, uh, Mr. Chair and
Senator, so I'm not an attorney,
as you know. I feel like I could
probably pass the bar as long as
I've been up here now, but um
You know that's a joke, but uh.
Help me with
What, what's the definition in a
private residence? Is that my
home or is that
My entire property.
Does that make sense?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, I
I
Don't know how that's been
interpreted by the courts.
That's why I was asking the
attorney. Yeah, I think, you
know, private residence is, is
where you live,
how big of land do you live on?
What part of that land is
accessible. I'd have to get back
to you on that. So, so when we
look at and you understand where
I'm going on this, right? So
when we look at
Police officers, right?
Unless they have a warrant, they
can't really come on my property
without my permission.
So is that would that be the
same?
Mr. Chair, that is exactly what
this says.
Entry into a private residence
without the permission of the
owner.
And we can all make the
decision.
shall be only by order of the
district court.
So basically, if you, I don't
have any property with.
The only time there's water
running on it is when it's
running off my roof.
Mm
Don't think we're
Governing that, although there
was some people that thought
that that was.
Um
But, you know, if I, if I owned
a piece of property on the
You know
Chama River. I love the Chama. I
go up there, I love to fish it.
Awesome.
So if I owned a piece of
property and if anyone's selling
some, please let me know, um, on
the Chama River.
Then
You
I thought maybe I was
Dumping my camper into the.
sewer from my camper into the
water. I would never.
do, but
You got a complaint, then you
would
probably come knock on my door.
We'd like to look. I'd say no,
cause I'm just that way, and I'd
say no, you have to get a
warrant, and then you go to the
court.
And show them their evidence,
get a warrant, and then you
could come look. Is that all
right?
Just clarifying.
Mister
Cha and Senator Brandt, yes.
Awesome thank you. I just wanted
to make sure of that because
that was one of my concerns when
I saw that and then
You know, this has been changed
so many times that sometimes the
analysis doesn't catch up.
Um, you know, I, I think that,
you know, like Senator Lanier
said, we all want clean water.
I, I don't even, I don't even
think any of the industries that
are concerned about the over
what they believe is the
overarching, you know.
Um
Overreach of government here is
doing.
I don't think any of them want
dirty water. They all live here,
their families live here, just
like we all want clean air.
I think we're Senator Lanier was
going and maybe I'm wrong.
But didn't the air quality board
just decide that 40% of vehicles
in the state has to be electric.
Jesen brand. I, I don't know the
details of that actually. But
isn't that under your
department?
Mr. Chairman, respectfully, yes,
it is in my department, but our
department is wide ranging our
duties and uh responsibilities
are.
Different and specific in
different divisions and air
quality is not within the water
protection division.
OK, so you're just with the
water protection division. So I
think one of the concerns that
we have on this side.
Is we saw just.
Months ago,
The water quality division.
do something that will
completely destroy the
automobile industry and state of
New Mexico, and by the way it's
completely not doable. We don't
have the infrastructure for it.
We don't have anything we need
to do what they've
are requiring
Us to do.
I think the concern is you're
gonna do the same thing when it
comes to this.
Does that, does that make sense?
because we've seen your
department.
Do that.
And so I think that's the
concern.
I was like we can trust the
government.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brandt, I,
I respect your.
position on that. I would just
want to say, you know, it.
And I'll have to find the
existing language, but
What this bill does on surface
water regulation is actually
provide a lot of guard rails and
specificity from the legislature
to the department right now, uh,
the water quality control and I
I see the department, it's, it's
to the water quality control
commission who makes these
regulations, but the existing
rule or law.
Has a very broad statement that
just allows.
The commission to make rules
regarding surface water
discharges.
Period.
That's it.
This bill puts a lot of
framework around that in terms
of what are the exemptions, uh,
what are our protections for
downstream state and tribal
water quality standards, uh,
what are the
Hearing uh in in permit
notification processes, what are
Those daily caps on violations,
um, so I absolutely respect your
philosophy and your position on
that, and I would just hopefully
give you some ease in saying
that right now you could drive a
truck through the statue, um, in
terms of what authority gives
the water quality Control
commission and this bill is the
department coming to you all
asking for buy in on the huge
policy decision that Senator has
described.
And soon worth, you understand
what I'm saying about, you know.
And you may disagree with me on
there being an overarching, it's
impossible to do what they put
in rule. I, I get more and more
concerned about the rulemaking
authority that we allow as a
legislature. I wish we'd go to
like a lot of other states have
done to where they say, you
know, you can propose rules but
they have to come back to the
legislature for, for final
approval because
You know,
I'll, I'll call out another
department. I don't mind.
I'm not running again. I don't
care who gets mad at me.
I'll call out another department
pet.
They completely ignore what we
put in law and just write their
own rules.
what they're gonna do.
They don't care at all.
We never do anything about it as
a legislature. We just let them
do it.
Let him walk all over our
authority.
We never do anything to hold
them accountable.
And and that's where my concern
comes in.
I
sometimes, I know we get the
emails throughout the year and I
I try to look at all of them.
But uh you know,
We're volunteers, we all have
lives outside of here.
You're trying to change that and
I'm working with you on that,
but, you know,
We're volunteers.
And, and we're supposed to read
through all the rules and
understand every rule that's
being proposed by every
department.
And a lot of them just clearly
violate common sense, and they
violate the laws that we've put
in place. So I'm very hesitant.
So I, I appreciate what you're
saying. You're saying right now,
we're saying you can write
whatever rule you want.
And, and you're actually saying
what we're doing is putting in
some, yeah, you can write your
rules, but they have to fit into
this.
Is that, is that the way I'm
understanding it, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator B guardrails.
But, but let's think about
adding another guardrail and a
piece of law in the future, you
know, I've got 3 more years, so
let's, let's work together.
And start making the departments
come back for the rules to be
approved, because we have
departments.
That have gone completely rogue.
And again, I'm talking about the
head and I'm talking about the
air quality department. They've
gone completely rogue, putting
things into rule that I don't
even believe the law.
Allows them to put into the
role.
We don't ever do anything about
it.
And it just concerns me how much
rulemaking authority that we
have given.
To the departments.
Um
If we're really going to be the
legislature.
This is really for me, for
Senator.
Worth.
We're really gonna be the
legislature. We need to be the
ones that are controlling what
goes in and what, what dictates
to our to our people we're the
ones that are elected Mr. Sharon
Senator Brand.
comment though
us being volunteers with lives.
I can't even imagine us trying
to get into the intricacy and
the level of.
involvement that's required on
some of these. So it's a balance
and I and it's been here long
enough to see the pendulum go
back and forth and it's a, it's
an important discussion though
because I think it really does.
Get right to our power as a
legislative branch and I would
say I know there was one big PED
rule that just was set aside by
the courts, which again they
play an important role as being
a chat.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. True.
There's more.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
Leader, thank you for, for
carrying this bill into the
Environment department. It's as
you point out, it's unfortunate
that we have to do so because we
had this coverage and now New
Mexico has been left vulnerable.
Um, I would kind of
Disagree though with the notion
that that protecting water would
be harmful to our economic
development as a state. I think
for the reason you said, Mr.
Leader.
And we've heard it in this
committee and thank you for
having that presentation, Mr.
Chairman, about kind of talking
about what's driving economic
development and the number one
factor was quality of life.
That people want to live in a
place where you have amenities,
where you have, frankly,
recreational opportunities.
Certainly we have protected
water. They don't want to move
to a place that's kind of a
contaminated wasteland. And I, I
have the uh privilege. Thank
you, Mr. Leader, cause you
helped give it to me years ago
and I in way to chair or having
chaired the state's radioactive
and hazardous materials interim
committee, which for the new
members, we have an interim
committee that has oversight
over our uh nuclear labs, waist
is.
plant and we deal with
contamination issues all over
the state. And what I have
learned that you probably
wouldn't know unless you're on
that committee, is we're, we are
fighting a losing battle in many
cases with contamination across
the state.
Whether or not it's chromium
spill from the national labs
that threatens the Sanel Alfonzo
water supply, whether it's PAS
contamination, which is a
forever chemical that is
contaminated the waters of some
conservative areas, Clovis, uh,
or, uh, some, some private
agricultural users no threat to
the water supply. I wanna make
that clear, but we want to
prevent that from happening.
These contaminations when they
occur.
I think the first thing that the
people affected by them do is
they say, why didn't the
government protect us from this.
That's the irony in it is, is
they want protection after it's
occurred, and they, they're,
they're very upset when it
didn't happen. But the cost of
inaction, the cost of cleanup is
so expensive.
You know, you just can't compare
like spending a little bit of
money on the front end to
protect it versus the cost of
remediation on the back end,
which can take decades, um.
So, you know, this, this is
vitally needed, this legislation
to protect New Mexico
communities and ours and our
land grants and our tribes and
our communities and our economy,
uh, to purchase, protect our
water quality, and I, I support
economic development, but I
never believed we should do it
at the expense of our
environment. And so this is a
really important bill that gets
that balance right and protects
New Mexico before the
contamination occurs and really
protects our most vital
resources such as water.
So thank you, thank you, Mr. E.
Thank you, uh, see everybody
else on the list. Let me, let me
ask you because, uh,
You were shaking your head when
the dairy producers came up and
they said this is the same role
that they're already applying
to. Are you gonna keep that rule
under here? Are we're going to
clarify that right now for them?
German I think Shelly, Ms. Lemon
pointed to this earlier that
dairies already have to get a
clean water Act rule for their
as a KO, um, they might also
Sorry, permit.
Uh, they, they also might need a
groundwater permit under state
law. There's not gonna be, I was
shaking my head because there's
not gonna be situations of
double permitting for the same
discharge. Um, if there are two
different clarify that. Let me
ask you that I don't.
I, I like a camp, but I don't
like a camp, right? Because it
depends how bad the spill is in
the city of Santa Fe, I think
they're sort of plant runs sewer
water down the.
Santa Fe River at certain times
that's uncleaned up.
The county commissioner shaking
her head behind you, a former
county commissioner. I mean,
they would be fined immediately
anytime that happened, correct?
Any, any city municipality that
they're sort of plants or uh
Or, uh
or found that they, their
systems weren't working and they
had to overflow and dumped down
the river, they would be fined
immediately, right? And what
fine would that look like for
municipalities?
Because you've got to have some
type of find your thinking in
your head as we're going through
this process. Um, Mr. Chair.
They may not be fined
immediately. Again, it depends
on the um level of
contamination the days.
Right, um, and we currently are
in an enforcement action with
the city of Santa Fe. The
department is, um, but our
enforcement, um, in the
enforcement section, there are
fees for per day violations, and
so that is in SB 21, what those
penalties would be per day of
violation. So what does that
look like for like the city? I
mean, it happens in sewer plants
all over the state. I mean,
something breaks, they can't get
the.
part, there's probably some
leeway to fix that, but I mean,
I continueation of that system.
What is that daily fine or fee?
Well, it shouldn't be a fee, it
shouldn't be a fine.
That they are paying.
Currently, but Mr. Cha, right
now they're not paying. It's my
understanding they're not paying
a fine because they're
negotiating. We've got a
situation with an antiquated
plants that needs to be replaced
and it gets tuned up and it
works fine and then something
happens and it's a little bit
off. It's a it's a huge issue.
That's why I'm asking that
question because there's
probably there's other ones, I
think it happens once in a while
in Gallup, but I mean they,
they've been on top of that. I
mean, I just don't want to say,
OK, here's a $40 million fine
because the agency decided for a
city and municipality that they
can be
for this at a at a rate, I mean.
The agency is not known for
listening to how people plea
their deals, so I mean.
What is that currently look
like? I mean, they're trying to
comply with the end it's like
they have an antiquated system
it keeps happening. Something
breaks, can't find the part, I
mean, what does that look like?
And that's why you, you want a
cat, but you don't want a cat.
Cause if something is so old and
and can't be replaced and the
funding doesn't exist to replace
it. You do want a cap.
But then if the so egregious
like the POS stuff that's
happening in Clovis and
Albuquerque, then you don't want
a cat to to do that, and so.
I'm trying to understand this is
what the agency is going to be
looking at for.
So, Mr. Chair, um, in the
example with the city of Santa
Fe when we issued our compliance
order, we also issued a $2
million penalty for violations
that occurred over, I believe
that was a year and a half. So
we had data for a year and a
half, EPA didn't do anything. We
were telling them that they were
in violation, and we finally um
used our water quality standards
as our mechanism for.
enforcement because they are
violating our standards. So with
this, you look at it per day
cap.
On the violation. So there's a
process, um, you know, how
harmful is the discharge and
violation. How many days does it
occur, um, and we have a, a
penalty policy that we use
that's also described in SB 21
for the cap on per day
violations. I feel like I'm not
answering your question. No, no,
you're answering my question,
but I mean, we're not resolving
the issue, right? But you have
money as the environment
department for sewer.
Right, Mr. Chairman, you're,
you're absolutely so why would
we not say here, you're in an
emergency situation. We don't
want to find you. Here's the
money to fix your system. Here's
the time frame. I mean, we got
to solve problems. If we don't
solve the problem, there's no
way the city of Santa Fe
compared to, to more they
probably can, but $2 million
fine this month, next month, 6
months from now, and, and keep
repeating that. We're not
solving the problem and that's
what I wanted, I mean, there
should be, that's why I say
there should be a cap, but then
there should not be a cap. I so
I want to understand.
I, I hear you, Mr. Chairman, and
I agree and I that's why I think
daily caps are kind of the
middle ground, right? There
there's the certainty of, OK, if
I have a violation, it's gonna
be this much every day, but if I
have that continued violation,
it's gonna stack up. I would
also say the city of Santa Fe
exactly to your point we've had,
um, and, and I, you know, I'm
not pointing fingers, there are
negotiations that need to work
out there bureaucracies that
need to be worked through, but
we've been talking to the city
of Santa Fe about uh around a
$100 million loan for their
plan. Yeah, I mean that's.
what should be done. That's what
should be done immediately
saying, here's the funding and
here's how we fix the problem
and
And here's a loan, but I mean.
Now that nobody wants a loan to
fix their problems, and they
all, everybody wants free money,
and we give them the winning
lottery ticket with Cap Oley and
they still don't cash it.
Mr. Chair, the city up and he
needs both.
I mean, the loan program is
actually very favorable and I
think they're looking at all
options and they need to get
that.
You know, we need a new plant is
really what it comes down to. I
mean, we wanna fix things while
we're.
Fixing things.
Uh, let me ask you.
Uh, the other question, what if
there's an accident and there's
one that happened in Silver City
or Grant County, where a truck
driver went up the wrong road,
tipped off and, and spilled into
a river.
And when there's an accident,
how hard are the fines in the
feet, the fines gonna.
To come into play.
Mr. Chair, again, it goes
through the same scenario, uh,
as any type of spill or
violation, so there is a per day
cap on um the violation, um, in,
in that instance, you know, we
issued a compliance order with
the penalty. We worked with the
responsible party, they, um,
submitted some work on
restoration. They also did some
extra restoration to cover.
those
penalty costs, so it was um
negotiation with the responsible
party in that instance, but it
was an accident.
It wasn't anybody's at fault,
right? And then you still find
him over an accident that
Was it
was a total
I mean, the GPS coordinates it
happens in Galup all the time.
GPS coordinates go over here and
take the wrong the GPS
coordinates and send them into
an accident. I mean, those are
some of the things that you want
to look at like is an
intentionally caused and so
that's one of the other things.
Let me ask you on, and so we, I
mean this is my personal story.
We just bought a a batch plant
the other day.
And so we know we have to have
an air quality permit, right?
But we also know in the back end
when we send the dump trucks out
and clean out, we have to buy,
believe it or not, I go to
Walmart and buy 50 kitty the
polls a year, so that they have
to clean out their concrete
trucks into the pool, but then
it can dry up and then we can
put it back in the batch plan or
something, mix it in somewhere
else.
How, how hard is that going to
affect, I mean, if you have to
set up a temporary batch plan,
we have to follow a slip plan
instead of the fencing the
perimeters and all that and what
if something happens in, in
that, that leaks out of the slip
plan or all of a sudden we gonna
be seeing all these vines for
Not qualifying. I mean a
rainstorm could come.
Monsoon rainstorm could come and
wipe a lot of that out, I mean.
How hard are those findings
gonna apply when there's no
intentional cause.
Mr. Chair, I believe.
In that scenario, one of the
things that we added to the bill
was the authority to issue
general permits for categories
of discharges, so
The Permitine knows what the
requirements are of the permit
before they even apply for
coverage, um, and those general
permits typically have what's
known as best management
practices to prevent storm water
from running off, you have a
storm water pollution prevention
plan that you put in place and
so if you have those things,
then you are compliant with the
permit, um.
OK, I'll stop there. I'm just
trying to get through this real
quick, so a data center in Los
Lunas, New Mexico is using water
for cooling. That water goes
through the system, it goes into
another system.
How hard are you looking at that
water and what's coming out that
you guys tested sort of pipes at
high school to see how much
drugs were coming out, how much
testing are you doing on, on
that water coming out of data
centers.
Uh, Mr. Chair, right now, as far
as I know, we're not testing.
The surface water quality bureau
isn't testing that water, um,
they may be required to have a
discharge permit from EPA right
now, and depending on where that
discharge is going, and that
would have requirements for
monitoring and reporting.
But you will be doing that under
this.
That's why I'm asking that. I
mean, there's a trending of data
centers coming to to New Mexico.
A lot of them are, believe it or
not, are looking at air cooling
now and not using water. I mean,
there's one gonna go up in
center accomplices' district
that uses air cooling, uh, cause
the chips generate enough heat,
but it's cool enough up there
that the temperature doesn't
rise enough that they can cool
the the the chips down during
that sun to help, I mean, that's
the question, how hard you will
take over that. And so then the
data centers and that's kind of
our.
trending in the US right now.
How hard is that going to be
looked at?
Uh, Mr. Chair, so that permit,
it, it depends on where they are
discharging. If they are
discharging directly to a
surface water, then they would
likely get an individual permit
that has requirements based on
the um industry, right? And what
would be expected in the
effluent, um.
If they are discharging to the
city system.
Then it's under the cities.
Permit and the city would be
working with those industries,
what's known as the
pre-treatment program, um, and
so that is also under this
program, but it's up to the
cities to if they're receiving
industrial wastewater that
they're working with those
industries to make sure it's not
going to upset the wastewater
treatment plant or violate any
of the conditions of that
permit. OK.
Um, let me, I'm, I'm, I'm gonna
throw all these out there at one
time and then they're kind of
all kind of in the mix. The
railroad spray for weeds. People
spray solar fields for weeds,
right? So fill construction and
wind turbine construction are
all kind of roller roll, right?
And so when they come in and
they build wind turbines, they
large concrete.
Heads that they set them on,
right? If something happens
there if um something happens
when the railroads springing
weeds that all drains off and
goes straight into to ditches,
uh, when solar fields are built,
they're continually sprayed
annually with weed killers,
right? So the weeds don't come
up and those automatically leach
or run off into, into the
ditches. So what, what is that
role gonna look like and what
that cost.
So Mr. Chair, currently there is
a pesticide general permit that
the EPA issued, so the general
permit is for pesticide
applications that
Will
Impact surface waters and so
that general permit, um, has
requirements, again, you're
making sure you're applying at
certain times of the year,
you're using best management
practices at for the application
and so that would cover um that
type of activity.
OK.
I mean, I don't, I don't have a
problem with what you're trying
to do. It's, we need to trust
the agency to do the right
thing.
In certain situations, the Santa
Fe situation, other situation.
That's where we got to have the
trust, right?
And, and I don't know if that's
there. I mean, there's a fight
that just came out right when he
came into session where a
company purchased another
company and then reported the
violations and tried to through
you and try to clear him up, and
then you came back and issued a
large fining I'm say the wrong
number, but I mean they were
trying to do the right thing. It
was in the in in a purchase.
They disclosed once they find
out that the purchaser didn't
disclose it to him.
And then you came back and you
find them even self reporting
knowing that they weren't
disclosed in the purchase
agreement, and, and now you find
a company that purchased the
assets of somebody else and the
finding now relies on them
because they can't go back
because probably in the closing
they so they signed the due
diligence, uh, it wasn't
disclosed and so now they're
paintifying. It really doesn't
belong to them and, and that's
what I don't want to happen is,
is for you to get egregious
finds when when people are
trying to do.
I we try to do the right thing
every single day, right?
Accidents can happen. It's like
the one.
Mentioned in other things, city
of Santa Fe, it's not, they
don't do it on purpose.
And I don't want to see a large
fine.
On somebody that says, oh well,
you haven't done this when you
have the money to help them. And
when there's an accident, when
there's uh things beyond our
control that you guys come back
and then find him very heavily
on, and that's my main concern,
and then
You know,
The transfers that that take
place are are very worrisome for
us, especially as we funded this
agency over 100%, uh.
And they didn't get what they
wanted from their own board.
And their own board rejected it,
and then they figure out a way
to to move money out of funds to
pay for FTEs. I mean.
It's not the way should either
work worthless or you're gonna
work against us, but we've got
to work together if we want to
resolve all these issues in the
state to bison real quick
because we're gonna wrap up.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
um.
So my first question is, why is
my home
Have a red dot on it it says
neglected sight.
I just,
I just thought that was really,
it really looks like it's on my
home. Um.
Because I'm in the Senate, not
taking care of my home, that
could be true. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, why would a maska
take exception to this bill.
Mr. Chair, Senator Tobiasson,
um,
From what I understand, they
want their permit to continue
the way it is.
So that's, that's their concern.
They, again, it goes back to the
trust issue that Mr. Chair was
talking about.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think.
Many of us have those concerns,
especially when it comes to
different businesses,
industries, economic growth, and
Not to say that we're not all
concerned about the quality of
water because we all need it to
live, right? Um,
But I don't hear very specific
answers in how this will be
structured, the fees, the caps,
it.
What leaves me uneasy and
probably a lot of other business
people around the state who rely
on water to make a living and
produce their product and
distribute their product, um,
What happens if this passes.
And
This is a trust issue. You won't
go rogue and all of a sudden,
industry is crippled.
Um, trying to do the right
thing, but
Crippled and
When these things are brought
forward and there's a lot of
work here. You all have a pretty
comprehensive package here, um,
but we still, it still feels
nebulous in some categories, so
Why is, why aren't those things
ferreted out before you bring
them forward.
Mr. Chair, Senator Tobiasson, I,
I would.
Say that in the buildup to this
bill, we did what was called a
surface water advisory panel
process where we brought
together uh 26 different
entities, uh, over 50
participants uh for 6 different
meetings on what would go into
this bill. We've heard from
folks on all sides that
They aren't happy with
everything in it, um.
But we do feel like we've
Done a lot to, like I said
earlier, put in some guardrails,
uh, where there aren't any right
now in current statute on what a
surface water permit rulemaking
could look like.
By the water quality Control
commission. Those include like
Ms. Lemon pointed out, general
permits, which are uh, you know.
Gonna be the majority of what.
Falls under this uh regulatory
structure.
And
Amasa.
Their permit
Is an EPA permit.
It would transfer to us upon
acceptance of EPA of our
application to have state
primacy, um, that's a.
Couple year process, probably.
Uh
Hopefully after this bill
passes, and there's no reason.
For our, on our end.
expect that permitted change
other than which agency is
administering it.
OK, thank you very much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and can I move
for due pass?
Uh, Senator, what's, you're
next.
OK
First thing
You sure that Senator Boone's
district.
not mine.
That uh because thank you River
doesn't run through my district.
Uh
I
You know what I was thinking
about how many
Dry cleaning.
establishments it's ever been in
my district and
Anyway,
Um
Two things.
And we keep talking about the
sackett decision.
In the ruling of the Supreme
Court and how terrible that was.
And when the thing says.
Navigable waters.
The law saided waters in.
the judges said.
The judges said.
All of a sudden
I'm gonna redefine that.
The other thing I want to bring
up, if this thing is supposed to
be exactly like what it was
before.
How can we raise so much money
with you?
Nothing changes.
All of a sudden we're raising
$37 million with it.
So I've got a problem with that.
That's all I got to say. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
uh, Senator Gonzalez wanted to
vote, so we're trying to gather
him up real quick, um.
I guess I'll try this stalling,
I mean, our, our
Good.
Chairman, all those that do pass
we had 2 Senator Tobiasson was a
motion for DuPin. OK, we have
motion for do pass by Senator to
bison.
Taking place in in Padilla, what
you call the wrong.
Senator Brent, no, ma'am.
Senator Brandt votes no. Senator
Campos. Senator Campos votes
yes, Senator Gonzalez.
He's coming, so let's see
Senator Lanier. No, Senator
Lanier votes no, Senator
Padilla. Senator Padilla votes
yes, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin. No.
Sinner Tobias and boats no.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Center of the woods, boats, no.
Senator Gonzalez.
He's not
Senator Shino, Senator Sendosia,
Senator Munoz. Senator Munoz
votes, yes, we have a DuP pass,
6 to 4. Thank you. Uh, one thing
I do want to mention your
neighbors do rat you out.
competing businesses do ratchet.
I mean, I had one in instances
where the environment department
showed up at my office and uh
the only thing they found after
looking through everything but
the trash can was I had one
bucket without a lid on it, so.
Be prepared for your neighbors
to rat you out even more.
Senator Padilla, you're gonna be
really quick and then we're
gonna
Yep, you're up.
This
is.
Certain vehicles and this is uh
Senate Bill 92. I have an
expert, uh, Bred Heinrich
Sunland Park in the industry, as
you know, we did, uh, pass this
legislation a couple of years
ago, all we're simply doing is
establishing the fund funding.
To finding the resources and
exactly how the fund will be
administered. Thank you.
See no questions from committee
members who can have a motion a
motion for do pass
and the second by center Padilla
called the role.
Uh, Senator Campos made the
motion. Senator Padilla
questioned.
This is the track bill we heard
last year, DFA could not make
the transfers and so we're just
doing the exact same thing
that's exactly what
Senator Brandt. Senator Brant
votes yes. Senator Senator
Campos votes, yes, Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier, Senator Lanier
votes, yes, Senator Padilla,
Senator Padilla votes yes,
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes, yes,
Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Trujillo, Senator
Trujillo votes yes, Senator
Woods. Yeah.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Shando.
Senator Cunnos Senator
Sendo.
We're on a do pass. Yes, Senator
Shindo votes yes, we have a due
past 9 to 0.
Sorry for the delay couples
should jump up their necks in
Shindo.
We're gonna try to run these
through these real quick.
Is this an LLC. This is an LLC
endorsement.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
Senate Finance Committee, yes,
it is. Uh, so in essence, as we
go forward with this uh with
Senate Bill 162 does.
Turn your mic on.
It, it's on.
Yeah
Uh, thank you very much Mr.
Chair, members of the Senate
Finance Committee, uh, Senate
Bill 162 makes changes to the
severance tax permanent fund to
increase the share of the fund
that is invested in market rate
investments, uh, just to go
ahead and go briefly through it
and then I'm gonna turn it over
to my expert who is here with me
today, and he is not taking a
stance one way or the other on
it because he is employed by LFC
but is here to provide technical
information.
Uh, in essence what this bill
does is it goes ahead and it
helps us, uh, in a couple of
ways, uh, 2024 LFC report on the
State Investment Council found
that the uh er tax permanent
fund is underperformed in the
state's largest permanent fund,
uh, which is the grant permanent
fund and it's lagging
performance will reduce balances
of that fund by 11 billion by
the year.
Fiscal year 50, in essence with
this bill does is it helps us so
that we will have the resources
to continue to go ahead and fund
government.
At the same time, uh, to go
ahead and put a cap, if you
will, currently on the uh.
And uh the the fund that it it
affects and so within that, if I
may, I'd like to just briefly
defer to the expert to further
explain what this bill is going
to be doing. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, committee members, my
name is Brendan Gray. I'm an
economist at the Legislative
Finance Committee as the sponsor
mentioned, this is LFC endorsed
legislation, some testifying,
um, here in support of the
senator, um, I, I think he did a
great job summarizing it. It
changes the allowable allocation
to the New Mexico Private equity
program from a maximum of 11% to
$1 billion. Um, this is in
recognition of the amazing work
that the legislature has done to
set the state up for it.
Long term fiscal health, um,
the, the severance tax burn fund
has changed dramatically over
the last 5 years, but SIC is
still investing with the same
strategy was 10 years ago. Its
performance is very poor. We
believe this can help improve
its performance. Thank you. We
do have an amendment to strike
the uh verbal amendment by me to
strike the uh
Senate tax, so moved.
a second on the versed and the
2nd on the motion. Any objection
to the motion? What it does is
it reduces it back down to 700
million from a billion on the
increase.
Any questions on the bill?
See none can have emotion.
What would you pass
motion for second by Senator
Brent Heal the role.
Smile Brandon, we were, we were
saving money today.
Sandra Brent Senator Brandt
votes yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes, yes,
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier.
Yes. Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes yes, Senator Steinborn,
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin.
Tobias and Bosa, Senator
Trujillo.
Yes, Senator Trujillo votes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Shando.
Senator Sendo votes yes and
Senator Munoz.
Yes, and you did record the
amendment.
The verbal amendments strike the
Senate tax business amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the Senate Finance Committee
I move do pass on the bill is
amended.
Oh yeah.
Sorry, we forgot that. So we
have 2.
In the second
That's on the amendment. So
let's reflect that one was to to
adopt the Voice Amendment
removing the Senate Business and
Tax Committee.
Steinborn. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I'd just like to know what
that amendment did, that
amendment allowed them to go
from 700 million to a billion in
investments in in the LFC
support the amendment. The bill
came in as 700 million.
Just ask Neil and see. So, so
thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Senator
Steinborn, uh, the bill came in
at 750,000. That's what we were,
uh.
Using within that they wanted to
go ahead and increase the
threshold, but this does is it
takes it back down to the
recommendation that the
legislative Finance Committee,
uh, had adopted.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, thank
you for a statement on it.
Mr. Chair, the LSU endorsed
version of the bill was at 700
million and defer to the
committee and this fixes it back
to the LFC endorsed version, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Senator Steinborn,
yes, it does. OK, that's all I
was looking for. Thank you, Mr.
Cha. Thank you. We're back to
voting on the bill.
you called her around.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes, yes,
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier, Senator Lanier
votes yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla votes yes.
Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes yes, Senator
Tobiasin. Senator Tobiasson
votes yes, Senator Trujil
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Shchino,
Senator Shindo.
Yes.
And when you have a past 10 to 0
Senators, I'm gonna need you to
chair and then uh Senator
Shindo, you're gonna explain
this bill. This is an LLC
endorsed bill, correct.
Like
150, uh.
uh,
ensures that all current data
reporting practices on the uh.
Or, uh, as well as our JTI
projects will continue.
Uh, I know that the uh.
Both um programs internally
collect and monitor performance
data for Lita and JTip by
practice, but this bill is doing
is just formalizing the practice
into state statute, ensuring
that the current data that uh
She practices uh will continue.
Uh, this will also, um,
Strength in all of these
evaluation development programs,
uh
or economic analysis software,
uh, as well, so.
If you have any questions, I
have my expert.
here we go see what Julia
Rodriguez. Uh, thank you very
much, Senator Shindo, thank you
for the explanation. Uh, is
there anyone who is in favor of
this particular piece of
legislation.
See none then, anyone who is
opposed, do we have anyone
online?
Seeing that there's no one
online, no opposition. We're
going to questions from the
committee. Senator Woods,
please.
do fast,
so, uh,
right before we have a motion
for a due passed by Senator
Woods is seconded by Senator
Padilla. Any other discussions
seen on then, the clerk will
call the road.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes, yes,
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier, Senator Padilla,
Senator Padilla Bosia Senator
Steinborn.
Yes
Senator Steinburn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin. Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator
Trujillo. Senator Trujillo votes
yes, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Schendo, Senator Shendo votes
yes, Senator Munoz.
We have a due pass, 8 to 0. Uh,
thank you very much, Senator
Shindo, by a vote of 8 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative,
you have a due pass. Thank you
very much to the members of the
Senate Finance Committee.
We stand in recess at the call
