We'll hear that at the end and
then the Senate will talk about
the sub student amendments for
that so that I'll give my
schedule and and the sponsor a
little bit of time
Senator Candelaria I see you
Senator Campos and center
Rodriguez function tradition
itself and then we'll.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Senator Jacob R.
Candelaria representing the
beautiful west side the City of
Albuquerque thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
senator Pete Campos representing
all or parts of seven counties
in northeastern New Mexico they
include Colfax was a little bit
Harding more way Sunday again
and tells counties it's great to
be here with you today and I'm
really
excited about our topic again
education and how we continue to
extend if you will of the
learning time for students thank
you Mr chairman thank you
members of the Senate finance
committee.
And then the Senator Nancy
Rodriguez district one point yes
thank you Mr.
Senator Hemphill center diamond
and Senator Woods in the next
three that I see.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm
Senator Sarkar Act and fell from
Silvercity I represent Senate
district twenty eight which
includes Grant County catching
County in most or.
Good morning Mr chairman are
good afternoon Mister chairman
Senator crystal diamond which is
district thirty five had Dogo
Luna Sierra and Dona Ana County.
Mr chairman Pat Woods Senate
district seven curry where in
you.
Senator chair I think you're the
next one I see and then Senator
Steinborn.
Morning this is a bill share
from a Senate district one which
is Farmington.
Definite everybody senator Jeff
Steinborn from Dona Ana County
thank you.
Senator Gonzales here there.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
the number so proventil Bobby J.
one Senator districts that
Senate district six
Santa Fe Los Alamos Rio Arriba
and Taos thank you.
Thank you.
I don't see Senator Burt fees
they're still scrolling through
names cemetery there.
If not will kind of get started
I'm senator George Nelson I
represent McKinley St want to
see what I counties in the
western part of the state I did
notice one thing this morning
from from everybody starting
off.
On the side of the state they
made a lot of counties on the
west side of the state they made
very few because you can go San
Juan McKinley.
Grant County and Luna there's
only I think there's one in
Catrine may be in the mix that a
little bit there's only four
counties on the west side so.
They must like to cut up the pie
on that side and then I guess
for a Senate finance members
some of us will be getting
everybody to watch because every
every time I heard
good morning it's it's one of I
saw.
We'll get started here this
morning
Caitlyn are you with us.
I don't think the secretary John
are you with us.
John the Antonio are you with
this.
Yes Senator Stewart I see here
they're off that meeting so I
guess let's let's talk about
Senate bill forty real quick and
we know you have a substitute or
amendment and in our committee I
guess when the Serbs to process
your enrollment processes this
is rather large and that in and
haven't seen it we discussed it
today but I haven't seen it
will I want to roll it over
tomorrow so the public can can
get a copy of that amendment.
Senator Stewart you want to
start with Senate bill forty
will or waiting.
I yes thank you so much Mr
chairman so Senate bill forty
originally of required of our
school districts to do some
additional extended learning
next year yes we're back in
person.
So certainly check single tenant
mentioned repeatedly the
academic achievement that
students gained by using K.
three plus an extended learning
programs so we she also
mentioned that the problem with
our K. five plus extended
learning was we did not offer it
to enough children that we had
thousands of children eligible
and they were not offered
program so when we started
twenty nineteen with our new
governor we actually put
significant funding into both of
those programs we had a a kind
of a slow start the first year
and then they share the pandemic
hit and those programs basically
had to sit idle so this bill
says that if we're back in
school full time in person in
the fall then schools can choose
to do either extended learning
for all students they can or
they can do a combination
extended learning for middle and
high and K. five plus for
elementary.
So as you can imagine we heard a
lot of the push back on this
bill well that's why we have
brought you a committee
substitute because we make
changes to the original statutes
on both of those programs both
K. five plus an extended
learning.
So the first part of the bill is
both of those statutes with
changes and the last part of the
bill sex the last section is a
temporary provision to use of
both programs in every school
with every student next year if
we're back in full time.
So I'm just gonna go over us
some brief changes we did for
both of those programs so for K.
five plus an extended learning
we insure that if they had
already done ten extra days last
year big standard learning we're
not talking about another ten
days we're talking about the
original extension remaining
keeping that extension of for K.
five plus the same issue people
had problems with the
application process so we took
away that application process
for next year because if the
bill is passed and signed and
everyone will be doing one of
those two programs we make sure
that those districts that only
have a four day week of were
were and there were issues were
answered so that for them it's
two weeks but it's only eight
days because they teach so much
longer and for K. five plus
although it's it's twenty five
it's five weeks it's twenty
dates so we ensured that that
was part of the new law well we
took away the requirement for.
We up in the middle and post
testing for K. five plus and
left up to the PED that was
another issue that schools have
we insured that if if districts
want to do both of these
programs if we have the funding
they can of.
So I've probably missed a few
things but in general we really
try to listen to the complaints
and to adjust of the the
statutory requirements for both
of these programs to make them
easier to do and to not have
people of a wonder about what
what what we really need what I
mean by this is this bill is a
centrally calendar reform that's
what it is it says to school
districts make your school year
longer if you've already done it
with extended learning just
continue doing that if you've
already done it with K. five
plus just six continue doing
that if you haven't done either
we've tried to adjust it so that
it's easier for all schools to
do.
so that's generally Mr chairman
of what this bill does and I'm
I'm happy to answer questions I
do have the director of L. E. S.
C. Rachel federal online and
Emily Hoxie who also has been
working on this bill those are
my expert witnesses Mr chairman.
Thank you
okay.
Nation you could do have some
public comment on this bill.
Mr chair members of the
committee that yes we do have
the public comment on that bell.
Other than call with that we
have in support of this bill
Amanda are gone.
Just.
Morning Mr chair or good
afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee my name is
Amanda I want I'm the executive
director of New Mexico kids
can't which is a statewide
education advocacy organization
we stand and support and want to
applaud Senator Stewart for
bringing this bill forward.
We can't under estimate the
amount of learning across our
students are three hundred and
thirty thousand students are
going to experience as a result
of COVID nineteen and we think
that we need really bold
solution so while this may be
challenging it is absolutely
necessary for our students and
we ask for your support thank
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee joining up on the damn
call we have they're at the
Gerald here VP of policy
research institute of
communications at the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce.
All.
If it's Gerald.
You come to be up.
I'm sorry.
I'm.
The committee that if the.
At seven at members of the
committee that probably haven't
and the public comment but it
felt.
Okay.
Thank you.
I guess Senator Stewart it's a
substitute correct.
Mr chairman it is because we
made the changes to the current
program so I'm I've failed to
mention one item.
Now yeah go ahead so part of the
the complaint if you will about
K. five plus is the requirement
to have students stay with the
same teacher
the reason that such an
important part of K. five plus
is that's what the research
shows to be of the the most
effective way to improve student
achievement is to really just
extend your school year
it's not summer schools not the
extra boot camp program it's an
extension of your school year so
we try to address that in the
original of the statute also we
think by doing this kind of
requirements for the schools it
takes away some of those
problems because districts will
just extend their school year
and we're allowing them to do
that any way they want there is
some districts that have three
weeks off the Christmas they can
use one of those weeks there's
other districts that want to do
a little bit in the beginning a
little bit at the end we really
don't care how they do it
because it's an extension of the
school calendar and we have put
in language for the K. five plus
program that they have to find a
good faith attempts to keep
those students together but if
they need to move them because
of individual student needs that
perfectly fine that was in there
before and that's an important
part could be in their.
Thank you can have a motion to
move the substitute for
discussion purposes and I know
she are explained so Mister
chairman.
Motion by Senator Campos second
by Senator Rodriguez.
Madam pro tem I think I guess we
have the substituted and they'll
they'll put it up and then
we'll hear the the whole thing
tomorrow that way the audience
or the public can see what the
Serbs to did and they can go
through it and and we don't have
any issues so I guess we'll roll
this over till tomorrow and then
have committee members read
substituting and and go from
there.
Perfectly fine thank you so much
Mr chairman of the committee for
today thank you.
John are you on with us and
Caitlin are you on with us for
a.
State engineer.
Mr Chairman this is David and I
think the state engineers up
tomorrow so I think it's R. O.
C. today.
Thank.
I'm sorry they gave me the wrong
package so.
regulation a licensing are you
there and and who is analyst for
that would be also get calls out
there she is what rates are.
Thank you.
Thank you hi.
Mr Chairman would you like me to
start.
Yes go ahead yeah you can add on
pack.
You're good afternoon members of
the committee my name is Allison
Nichols and the LFC analysts
regulation and licensing and
then I also see Donna Rivera the
DFA analysts for regulation.
this briefly go over the
recommendations that eight
percentage HSC a couple weeks
ago so do Executive
recommendations RLD includes a
flat general fund budget and the
LESC recommendation decreases
the general fund budget by about
three percent or a little over
four hundred thousand dollars.
Overall the executive
recommendation represents a one
point two percent increase and
the LESC recommendation
represents a point three percent
decrease
The executive recommendation
provides an increase of about a
hundred forty thousand to reduce
vacancy rates and
both recommendations include
three hundred six point six FTE
and that's reduction of six from
FY twenty one and that's to
account for I'm in active
positions.
Member the HSD had about two and
a half million dollars a vacancy
seating FY twenty one operating
budgets
for the construction industry in
manufactured housing division
LFC recommends I general fund
revenue increase of one point
five percent and the executive
recommendation recommends that I
general fund budget
recommendations allow that
division to reduce its
and the LFC recognition provides
three point seven percent
increase in person and the
recognition that they ate that
that division needs to be able
to meet the needs of industry
during that time of destruction
this.
Mansions additions LFC
recommendation provided two
hundred six thousand Lassen
General Fund in the executive
recommendation analysis
recommendation also included
four hundred fifty five thousand
dollars from the mortgage
regulatory fund for foreclosure
settlement programs that
district courts and
recommendations had transfers
from that funds for program
operations the mortgage
regulatory fund had a balance of
nearly nine and a half million
and member and that was an
increase of about two million
from the prior year.
See our boards and commissions
the executive recommendation had
higher much higher revenues
reflecting higher projections
for how much point we're going
to bring in and ROZ also
requested two hundred eighty
four thousand to address FY
twenty deficiencies and work
towards.
I'm not too over and review the
Levin R. O. G. boards and
commissions as part of the funds
that review and all eleven are
now included in the sunset
renewal bail on that Senate bill
one forty fives after meeting
the requirements for meeting
frequency and filling support
agencies
RLD's also in the process of
replacing Senator existing
software systems I believe until
now they've replaced us with the
boards and commissions that are
working on replacing similar
systems within other divisions
an estimated total cost of about
eleven million over three years.
And when at HSC map a Dr Dallas
the recommendations for Garcia
and all pipes here and see if
daughter Amarah has she looked
at thank you.
Are you there I'm here thank you
Mr chairman and senators the
executive would like to point
out a couple of important things
that they feel the Senate should
be aware of for example
within a couple of the eight
divisions we have a request we
formally requested to maintain
their funding level at the FY
twenty one amount is specially
in specifically for the office
of the secretary which also
includes
sufficient support to help with
their I. T. development the
staff that they need to help
oversee the boards and
commissions and the other part
is the agency division secretary
securities and exchange division
that particular division is
reduced close to two hundred
thousand dollars in general fund
and yet they bring and return to
the general fund twenty three
million dollars each year and so
too short this particular
division does not necessarily
help this agency meet its
requirements that it needs to
correctly supervise that part
those particular securities and
exchange
people the other thing that the
executive feels is really
important the Senate understand
is that the LFC recommendation
to fund first of all with their
excuse seeing they're requesting
to use the mortgage regulatory
fund for a recurring expense for
positions in the other the two
point and that is not a regular
consistent funding source the
other thing that is really of
concern is that it the eggs the
LFC is request to fund the the
deficiency for the boards and
commissions.
Is actually not in complying
with the statute that was
created to to start this fund
the mortgage regulatory fund
that fund is very specifically
for the application licensing
renewal and the cost of
administering the New Mexico
mortgage loan originator
licensing act it's not for
supporting the other boards and
commissions so we respectfully
request that you replace the two
hundred eighty five thousand
dollars that the LFC and the HFC
have recommended the that should
be general fund thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
The secretary
Senator Hillary that paying with
us you'll go ahead and start
your record.
Thank you.
And and members of the committee
and Mr Chairman congratulations
on your Committee
thank you pretty exciting.
This is my first opportunity to
present here so I'm I'm glad
that you have a friendly face on
the other side we're both
rookies.
Exactly.
So I just want to point out a
couple of things that the
Department is been working on as
was mentioned we're moving from
multiple older online systems to
consolidating into sales force
and we believe that that is
going to make our licensing
customer service a lot better
individuals who are applying for
of licensing applying for
renewal are of line for permit
are going to be able to do this
almost exclusively online
they'll be able to apply you'll
be able to track where their
applications are at which is a
good percentage of the customer
service issues that the
department runs into is of
people are just trying to figure
out have you got my application
is it missing anything where am
I where am I at they'll be able
to pay and then they'll be able
to get confirmation that their
applications has been approved
is been denied and then we move
forward with that.
The other thing that we did in
the last six months is we
updated our phone system with
boards and commissions
unfortunately through the
pandemic we didn't really have a
way for our staff to answer the
telephone at home so telephones
have been put into voice mail
voicemails were being passed on
via email and then our staff
didn't have the ability to
respond other than email so we
set up a whole new phone system
all of our staff in boards and
commissions now have access to
an online answering system
they're answering telephone
calls live there responding to
those telephone calls live on
from their homes when they're
working remotely we have
continued to do inspections are
are present cosmetology.
Sectors that been out in the
field and they've been also
implementing the public health
orders in regards to hair salon
nail salon
the.
Body art so establishment and so
those that have been really
helpful in addition we've had
our inspectors for construction
industry of them out in the
field during the empire time
that the government has been
working from home and we have
literally we've done our of
we're not missing a beat on that
it in fact I'm proud to say that
when we get complaints about an
area that is not getting a
response what we're finding is
that that the home of the it's a
community that's doing their own
permitting so we're really happy
with the work that those folks
have been doing out in the field
we've implemented the tobacco
drugs act and you know we're
we're looking for some extended
funding for that because right
now we're we're doing that yes
excel spreadsheets which is not
the most convenient way to
license and industry we are in
adopted the Energy code over the
last year and the last thing
that we're really spending a lot
of time on is updating our
website and that's within a
couple of months probably of it
going live but really our focus
Mr chairman members of the
committee has been customer
service and to improve our
response to the public.
Month that we stand for
questions.
Thank you.
But I can't forget is madam
secretary
Our intended I'm sorry
superintendent thank you.
Questioned from committee
members.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman good afternoon
superintendent to hear nice to
see you.
Senator.
Thank you for your work my
goodness you've been so busy
from all indications you know on
your updating of your website
that is I'm so happy you're
working on that that's always
been a real deficit in the in
the regulation licensing
department and transaction the
issue going to be huge conduct
now that you're changing to this
new system so I'm really happy
to to hear that and then one
last point Mr chairman in
superintendent is I think that
has to do with the last point on
our sheet about you replacing
Senator existing systems within
boards and commissions and these
other divisions for a total of
eleven million dollars over
three years is that built in
there which you just talked
about superintendent
Mister chairman Senator it's a
built in in a phased in approach
and so I believe that there
somewhere in the neighborhood of
about two point five million
dollars of my HSD director could
give you the exact number for
that but we've got two million
that we're working with this
year and we've already
implemented manufactured housing
we're working out a couple of
bugs in that licensing we're
moving with construction
industry that's not not ready to
go live we're we've done a deep
dive but now we're looking at
the specific license you know
how do we get those online and
we're also getting revving up
the contract for the boards and
commissions so while we've done
a deep dive for boards and
commissions we haven't started
moving them on to sales force
and we'll start with six of the
time so there's this is really
it is a three year process but
will be up to almost five
million dollars if the
appropriation for this year is
approved in addition to what
we're working on for this
current fiscal year.
Thank you very much for that you
great work we don't miss the
work that.
Thank you Mr chairman and if I
could just add one more thing
we've got a new CIO that is
incredibly dollar conscious and
understand how government works
and understands how technology
works and you actually as we
speak looking for ways to reduce
that number we he thinks and we
trust them that it shouldn't
cost as much as our quotes of
given we've been given to us so
we're looking at ways to still
do the same thing but do it at a
at a lower cost.
Right thank you.
Senator.
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr chairman and madam
superintendent as as we move
forward and and of course
request to the resources to
continue to improve your
online services as well as.
Modifying this you will our
technology in the department and
I really appreciate that but it
moves forward particularly with
our plan permitting and the that
whole process and in
particularly as we see that
there is going to be a stronger
rules if you will to move
forward with the resources that
that we do have one is we
moves into the months to come we
want to ensure dollars get out
so there's going to be
construction
what is the plan overall to
continue to improve the
permitting process and the
turnaround process the
turnaround time process for that
as we do bills forward I know
that over the years that has
been an issue and I'm hoping
that as we do move forward that
there will be issue Wilson
changes as we improve that
process particularly because of
the resources that are being
held but I believe once a
planned permitting this is a
curse and we continue with the
construction that's definitely
going to improve our overall
employment.
Of course job creation within
the state it can you can you
give me just a synopsis in terms
of what you're doing now and
what some of your plans are into
the future to improve that
particular area.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Campos that is a high
priority for us we've recognized
throughout this pandemic that
construction has been one of the
economic drivers for the state
of New Mexico and we believe
that that will continue to be
the case and so it has been a
priority for us to keep those
permits rolling and to keep the
inspections out in the field
moving as we move into the
digital market place with the
sale for it is our hope that
we'll be able to do much of that
online right now we're doing
Walk up the.
Walk up appointment only for
individuals who are turning in
applications for permits and the
the the relevant information so
we have those all three offices
are open in Los crucis in Santa
Fe in Albuquerque and we tried
to do a per you know appointment
only but we determined that
those individuals who are
working in the construction
field don't necessarily have
time to schedule an appointment
a week out and so that's why we
turn to this really creative
walk up appointment we have a
security individual who's
stationed out the door at each
of our offices and we allow
three individuals in the
building at the time we have
typically to Pete to staff in
the office throughout every day
and they're socially distancing
you know everybody has to wear a
mask we're taking temperatures
when they come in so we've tried
very hard to to keep that moving
right now but the goal is to get
that so that it can be done
online and there's two aspects
to that one is that we get the
sales force system up and
running the other is that we
provide our employees with the
the necessary hardware so that
they can see these plans and
that they can see them large
enough that they can do a review
so as we that that's really our
long term goal is to get much of
this online as possible so that
people can do the work in
interactions at anytime of the
day or night.
I really appreciate that and a
couple of things that are
related to what one of our
agency in regard in sections and
the is is that being done in
your opinion on a timely fashion
or are there are some issues
that we still need to resolve
their and then secondly do you
have enough of the schools and
of the eight in order to provide
the services and I always go
back to this because as we move
forward what we're gonna see
particularly with the resources
that we do have available we
want to get dollars out the door
and want to ensure that our
construction loans isn't very
stage session but if you can
help a little bit with that CS
to trigger a quest for a
resources if we just use our
adequate force to the
inspections are taking place in
our matter thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Campos yeah we.
Never been you'll turn down an
opportunity for more FTEs so
that being said we do continued
to make hiring those positions a
priority and it when I first
started at are of the back in
July well we made it a priority
for us to get those vacant
positions I believe I might
director is on line to we can
correct me if I'm wrong but we.
Made a point to fill twelve
positions that was priority and
and I can tell you that there
are other divisions in the
department that needed and
expressed the need to have
vacant position still but in in
in the time that work and we
unanimously you know the former
superintendent and myself made
it a priority to put the ID and
MHD at the top of that list and
so that is and will continue to
be a priority just for the very
things that you're talking about
I do believe that the request
does have a slight increase for
C. ID and and we're anticipating
hopefully that that will happen
and that we will be able to hire
some additional position because
we we we we remain with
vacancies that we don't have the
funding to fill.
In terms of the inspections as
they occur.
The are you having any areas
where it's not necessarily a
weakness but where there is a
delay and scheduling those
inspections.
So the biggest to lay that we've
had has been in relation to the
manufactured housing and there's
a of a one permit requirement
and yet that one permit covers
of a multitude of inspections
and so if you if you've got and
you know you go out to do an
inspection and the mechanical or
the electric or something hasn't
been completed then we've got to
go back out and so that can
cause some delays that we're
working to try to eliminate and
we're working with the industry
to try to come up with creative
solutions so that there's not a
delay.
So with the manufactured housing
are all the work positions trail
or there there yes yes Mr chair
Senator the positions are full
appreciate that thank you very
much Mr chair thank you madam
superintendent as we move
forward I realize it be a lot of
work ahead and so while we're
there to support you thank you
very much thank you.
Thank you senator Kamel Campos
Senator Woods.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
What's the pleasure to see you
Madam said.
My my good Senator Woods.
We had a lot of good sentiment
we did hope there's many more to
come I hope so I'm I did want to
ask you one question I noticed
on this.
Of some of our paperwork here
that we get from.
Council service that you did
revert one point two million
dollars.
I know that you needed to use to
to conduct the many inspections
and many awards
What happened what we wanted we
wanted you have to revert so
much.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
may I have of our is the
director response about if you
can explain which divisions that
money was reverted from okay
okay Rick.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Woods my name is Rick Martinez
is director of our IOP great
question so the one point two
million we just round up to
about one point two million of
reversion is we got a look about
six hundred fifty thousand
dollars to seven thousand was
kind of a it was when the when
the COVID hit all agencies were
asked to pay for the current
fiscal year which would have
been FY twenty.
Try your best to ride for the
for the great the the greater
good of the state's report river
at least five percent back your
general fund.
So we did our best we did our
part and then you add in a
hiring freeze right so at the
time when the hiring freeze drop
for us we actually had about
sixteen positions kind of in the
pipeline going through being
advertised so seven hundred
thousand dollars of that one
point two was kind of the the
the part we did for the state
right to to ensure that the the
the budget stays all the budget
is balanced for FY twenty.
The remaining five hundred
thousand dollars of that we can
look at that we got two hundred
thousand dollars of general fund
for home inspectors to to kind
of the start up for the home
inspectors new act we only use
about ten thousand dollars of
that because it took a lot of a
lot took a lot longer to get so
we so hundred ninety thousand
dollars of that was reported as
well same goes for about fifty
thousand dollars for the all
call of beverage control
division we were we were given a
hundred thousand dollars for a
supplemental they are both the
second LFC and and and the
legislative process saw that we
were going to be short and
current FY twenty by about
ninety a hundred thousand
dollars we will use forty
thousand that so we reverted
about sixty thousand dollars
that so out of that one point
two million a look at this here
quickly only about two hundred
and nine thousand dollars was
true general fund reversion that
we truly just and spend and it
really does boil down to thank
you the hiring freeze really
stops a lot and we kind of look
at it was the whole last quarter
of FY twenty.
And and asked that itself right
there that that is that's we
just put would put the brakes on
a on a many many positions so I
would say two hundred ten
thousand dollars truly what are
reversion would have been.
Okay what thank you for that
explanation and that makes a lot
of sense I worry terribly about
a bill that's going through that
that is going to
Essentially.
Give a pass to the alcohol
license.
Of the.
All
season and I know it's going to
hit you pretty hard.
And the.
I guess there's nothing nothing
you guys can do about it and but
I just.
No I realize that that that's
where you get your money from
these license fees is is a big
part of your budget so.
I guess I just guess I note that
Mr Chairman thank you very much
Madam superintended so was good
to see.
I don't see anybody else's hands
up I'm having trouble switching
back my video back and forth.
I don't see anybody else's hands
up
I'm superintendent I I got a few
questions and sometimes I.
I live in that contracting world
sometimes I know we I know we've
had some issues with C. ID and I
know we had some issue with
manufactured housing the time
frame in inspections and I know
you're shorten inspection
inspectors in in.
Comment kind of around that
little bit or awry have we begun
to fix those problems in CID in
manufactured housing.
Special with guests inspectors.
Mr Chairman yes we believe that
we have we really did
prioritized ensuring that those
positions were filled it is not
an option for us in our money
to not continue to have those
positions filled there has been
some turnover here and there in
those positions but as one it as
as an employee leave again
director daily and I sit down we
meet we have a plan and our goal
is to have that department that
Division staffed up to its full
potential we only have at this
point one MHD position that
vacant and I believe that's the
director position and director
Bailey is doing double duty for
us until we can find the right
person to fill that position.
And so what I know and record
you have something to address
any kind of wave your hand glad
I yes Mr chairman thank you Mr
chair members the committee I
want to point out that's a great
question Mr chairman so kind of
a little highlight that I I I
think that it is close to you
guys ride both the executive and
the and the and the provided and
the houses and you guys have
been really really supportive
really over the last three four
years a quick little highlight
is from FY eighteen to current
year what is been recommended by
the LFC and so far passed the
house the difference of a
increase about one point two
million dollars which we're so
so very very thankful for with
that we're down to eight seven
and a half vacancy rate right
now which is a starkly the
lowest that CHD MSD's ever been
I I would I would easily put
money in the last ten plus years
so and even even and we even
have the funding currently to
move for with another two or
three so when this happens we we
will be down to about a five or
six percent vacancy rate in a
five percent rate five to six
percent vacancy rate is almost
you could almost consider it you
know you know near fully funded
because we natural churn it just
there's gonna always be people
leaving right people advancing
people retiring people moving on
so
that has helped us really the
bodies getting the bodies in in
C. ID NMSC has really just turn
things around and I think you
know I know it's always kind of
a contentious thing was the idea
which is right but I think yup
with the funding levels that
we're at now supported by you
always so appreciative I think
it's gonna be a different
conversation next go around so I
just want to say thank you on
that that we're we're getting
the bodies in again for a seven
fifty percent vacancy rate
historically the lowest it's
been in ten plus years
We the the vehicles you guys of
supporters of supporters with
the last two years were very
appreciative so finally got that
solid foundation that we feel
that your reserves are rolling
for us down and so I just kind
of wanted to point that out
there's been a huge support from
from both sides over the last
you know for five years so if
everything's looking up I just
want to.
The same I thank you for that.
Well I hope so but you know how
you know how it goes I mean I
know that our mobile home
inspectors were coming from
Farmington or even further
places at some point and we're
two weeks behind in some of
these people were during the
COVID I mean there are rushing
to get into homes and and get in
the mobile homes and and that
like real behind
I know that in that and I don't
I'm trying to remember if if C.
ID and MHD had a combined budget
if they separate those budget
but there was always an issue of
somebody was still in somebody's
money doing resolve that issue.
Mr chair members committee yes
so as the state kind of right
timing is everything if we have
this conversation a month ago we
would I would tell you and the
state was is fully staffed
but but we're again we're just
missing the director which is a
it is an example session so once
we have that we will be fully
staffed we have of the ten
vehicles that are in a major
city we've pumped up with the
money you guys just give us half
of those are brand new vehicles
we recognize that image the you
know with this fifth largest
state and and and and country
travels the most mileage we did
a lot of analysis so we're
quipping and with you know kind
of the top notch trucks we're
putting a lot of resources we
make sure that we did there
their new Permian inspection
system first which we just
successfully finished in October
so that is changed you know for
the better as well so yet the
yes it's been resolved they're
fully staffed we're making that
a priority we're going to kind
of make it part of that they
will continue to be fully
staffed for funding wise
and that that all the resources
are there and everything that's
needed to to carry out kind of
the the statues were ensuring
that all those funds resources
are there.
And then you know and then
superintendent you may not know
this year your new and this is
not part of part of the issue
your issue but the testing
company that we're using.
It is very complex and it is
someone that uses the system
it's it's pretty horrible and
deplorable
specially contact instruction is
saved us and and there's a few
people want to get in the
construction business but the
testing system is so difficult
to get through and it's it's
actually the whole C. ID system
is set up for for the big
contractor so the small
contractors never get a chance
they fail on the testing to make
testing difficult and so the new
contractors that that law to
whatever they want to build
commercial residential.
It makes it so difficult for
them to get into the industry.
just like they've done with
appraisers and architects and
engineers and they made it so
hard for people to get an
appraisal business if they don't
have the three years.
Up under somebody else and I
hear there's a bill that says
all contractors need you to hire
apprentices
pretty hard to hire an
apprentice I mean pretty hard to
hire.
The prince did did did sticker
or a guy running I mean there is
so that that would be such a
hard program for contractors to
to put in place
but but that testing system are
testing company is not good at
all.
I have another son is given its
past license should the FAA uses
the same testing company and
it's so hard to schedule and get
in and get out and and do that
so have a look at other
opportunities for testing
companies around New Mexico
where to when is our contract
expire and and how does that
work.
Mr chairman that's a really good
question and I'm gonna leave
back to director Bailey to
answer but before I do I just
want to say that director Bailey
and I actually started a
conversation about a month ago
before the session started that
we're going to be looking at
that very thing after the
session is over right now
similar to what you all are
doing we're kind of holding on
by a thread just to get through
the session and not really
starting new projects like that
but we have I have every
intention of revisiting that
after the session is over and
things calm down and we can
really take and and a really
serious look because I've heard
nothing but complaints about the
system director Bailey did you
have anything to add.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
companionship and and it
Trujillo
as a superintendent has
indicated we have visited and
talked about the issues we have
and senator Munoz chairman I
understand of some of the issues
we have had we've met with our
vendor at times in the COVID is
even built into the even tougher
below high times you know when
they're not in an office and
that types of destination stuff
we could see that he has stepped
up when we do get opportunity or
something gets to the problem
that reaches at my level of
superintendents we reach back
out and get after getting back
on track trying to get him to
work with us but as the
superintendent indicated there
are plans to to try to deal with
some of these issues.
After the session gets over and
and hopefully we can resolve
resolve it we are working
diligently every time and ensure
complaint comes to us to full
fill and go through it now I can
say not every time is it yes I
am in recently I read received a
complaint that they did allow
gentleman have a mask for books
keep in mind when you walk in
these these offices here on
camera and if if you did have
your mask in your book so not
everything is honestly put
forward the way it should be but
we do have some issues there and
we are working diligently to try
to help the contractors and our
industry as you indicated this
industry one of the things that
has moved forward throughout the
COVID and we're very proud of
our inspectors in our people
more frontline staff that has
made it possible to keep us
moving so with that thank you.
Thank you and so again and I
just want to make you aware this
and I mean and I don't know if
it's a company set those testing
up to fail so they can have
reoccurring revenue to be yes
people but it's very odd to me
watching someone go through the
process of what's happening in
those tests is the testing
facilities and and how those
tests are done I mean their vote
but yes so they should have been
allowed to take a test the book
in I don't know you know it's
it's hard to say but it doesn't
make a whole lot of sense I
realize that you know you have
to have knowledge of of what
you're gonna do in and pass a
test and and have the skill
level I don't have an issue with
that at all my name is when it
comes to the testing and and
something just is not right that
system there it's it's very
profitable
I also wanted to touch base I
mean you're gonna get complaints
about inspectors no matter what
that's just that's just part of
the game any any inspector that
walks in is usually given us the
third degree and they're doing
the job and that's what they're
supposed to do and that's the
way to the systems designed to
work in and although we do get
the oddities once in awhile
Wanted to ask you a little bit
about this mortgage fund
mortgage regulatory fund how
much it is nine point five
currently in their what does it
take to operate that annually.
Mr Chairman
Senators I'm gonna let Rick HSD
director Martinez answer that
but we agreed with DFA and you
know there's a number of bills
that are going through the
Senate right now that we have
had to write analysis that it's
going to take a number of
employees because we are so bare
bones in the financial
institutions division that I
just in good faith cannot ask
them to just take on more
responsibility and so you know
that money could be reinvested
back into the department we
would be so much in in such
better position but of director
Martinez can you respond to
that.
Mr chair members the committee
yes thank you it's about a one
point four million dollar budget
annually to operate Murph
up but added over the last four
of fiscal years now that Murphy.
A fund balance I guess if you
will actually subsidize is part
of the financial institutions
program as well so F. I do so
within within the financial
solution division there's five
different departments.
One of them is more for in one
of India's culture street
financial institutions and so we
get about.
in a thousand dollars of general
fund there and they have about a
one point five million dollar
budget for straight from
institutions seven fifty co
pulls out from the Murph to be
quite to the one point five
million Joe was gonna look at it
like we are spending about two
two and a quarter million
dollars a year from the more
funds also in the last three
years past the murder Fund we
were transferring one million
dollars to the Attorney General.
Three years ago we did one
million dollars two zero seven
fifty and last fiscal year seven
twenty five thousand.
So it's it's kind of been you
know
it's although Murphy itself more
direct was only one point four
million dollar budget you added
the seven fifty that we're using
to subsidize part of the same.
Program code in addition
transferred over one million to
seven or fifty thousand dollars
Attorney General it was equating
to you know three point five
million dollars a year that we
were kind of consuming of that
fund.
So again I'm I'm looking at that
and and so looks like you had
about three point three in in
revenues into that fund this
year
and you're only taking two point
two operational so so it's built
up over time
you not making those transfers
so I mean it is what it is many
can not sitting government and
do good.
I know everybody likes to keep
their eighties but sometimes As
again and get cracked.
And so what was the don't like
our transfer but you transfer
the term general you have such a
high balance I think that's
something that we need to look
at.
You
madam superintendent there's
there's tons of all coal bill's
going to the session.
a change a licensing and you may
or may not be able to comment
are we creating an inequality
war with someone that may have
paid the.
A value of you know two hundred
fifty two million dollars and
now we're gonna say everybody
can have one for seven fifty
that's in the restaurant
business
what's the what's the
Department spots on the all call
bills.
Because the last place that
money into this in a lawsuit
because nobody wins.
Mr Chairman Senators that is the
that is a as Senator Woods would
say that is a help file that I
would rather not stepped into I
I do think that I can tell you
that the department has been
involved and has provided expert
in you know information we've
provided you know our input we
analyze the bills
it you know trying to look at
all aspects we too are not
interested in lawsuits that are
going to cost the state.
Any additional money but how
that gets resolved it is really
it has been an ongoing
discussion since even when I was
that regulations licensing
department back under governor
Richards and Administration but
we will continue to provide our
expertise on how the reality of
the bill might affect the state
and or the department I will
point out that you know center
would mention one bill that
would eliminate of licensees for
one year additional one year I
think that was the bill that he
was looking at and the the while
our boards and commissions our
enterprise funds in that they
survive off of the licensing
fees that they bring in alcohol
beverage control is not that way
that money comes in and it goes
to the general fund and then
general fund is appropriated to
for you know for the the
division to function.
So the licensing for the the the
drop in licensing revenue
impacts the general fund.
Yes I know we did pass a bill
was some credits but I think we
backed bill that.
I also agree with Senator Woods
and and you that may be a cow
pie we don't really want to step
in yeah because there's no real
winners and losers and and will
end up in court I don't see much
for I. T. other than for C. IDE
an image in HD
are all the other agencies with
your I. T. staff good I mean ABC
is alcohol remind me.
There.
Yes ABCD is it is now the new
you know I'll call in gaming
it's hard for me to remember
that but I I write it down just
so I don't forget Mr chairman
but the actual money that were
requesting
is dominantly for the boards and
commissions so the I think point
five is to supplement moving the
rest of us do I do over
to still force women and
additional two million to add to
the two million that we
currently have authority for to
help us keep moving forward with
the thirty plus boards and
commissions in that division we
do have I'll just since you ask
Mr chairman I will say we got
about two hundred and some
thousand dollars last year to
update our
the ABC.
Our technology systems and low
and because the system had not
been updated for I'll just say a
number of years it is and
because it has some special
programming that is really
extinct at this point
we have.
Through the course of the last
couple of months we have been
working with the company it is
we're not gonna be able to use
the money to update like we
wanted to in a timely manner we
have to upgrade the system
before we can begin upgrading
ABC and it I'm not a technical
genius in this bunch at all but
I take
I take the information from our
CIO and from our HSD director.
And from the company that we
cannot accomplish this before
the end of this fiscal year
which is when that money has to
be spent so we have asked for an
extension another year so that
we can enter into the so we can
finish up the the upgrade of the
system and then we can move into
upgrading the alcohol
beverage control so we we are
asking for some language to
extend that.
Madam superintendent so is is
that going to be enough money to
do that.
yeah we believe that the with
the quotes that we've gotten
it's enough money to do that
what it's not enough money to do
and we've made this decision
internally is to move ABC over
to sales support we are we've
been.
The quotes that we've got in our
CIO has indicated to me that by
using this money now.
It will put us in a position
where we could get will
definitely get another three
years in hello we could make it
work for up to four maybe five
pushing it
in which time the economy we're
hoping will be in better shape
and will be moving along with
the be you know be finished with
boards and commissions and we
can come back to the legislature
for money to move AB over the
sales force and potentially not
have to ask for so much because
we've already got the
infrastructure built into the
department.
Okay and then my last question
are your boards and commissions
fully appointed by the governor.
And are they operational as as
they can be during the COVID.
Mister chairman Senator yes.
there are still a couple boards
that we need to do some re
appointments but they still have
members serving them and they
have been meeting we set up a
new system around the December
after we participated in the
sense that hearing and it became
really clear to me that there
was a problem we skip past all
of our boards to go to an annual
setting of annual meeting so
that when they adopt their open
meetings resolutions each year
that the required to do by law
they're also establishing what
days they're going to me
throughout the rest of the year
to meet their statutory
obligations and any additional
obligations that they feel that
they need to meet but at least
their statutory obligations so
the public will know well in
advance the board members will
know it well in advance and we
won't have this problem of so
who's available on February
twentieth nobody okay moved give
us three more days it it became
just very difficult and so we
are that was something that they
instituted so that.
Board members can plan for those
days.
Okay thank you Senator Campos
did you have another question
remains yes just a thank you Mr
chairman district quickly in
this is in regards again to of
the for the permitting but
directly with the happen of
course medical cannabis
facilities
is there again a delay in that
area it is going to be needs
more resources and I bring this
up because as we're dancing with
various issues whether it be
with ABC or we're dealing
directly with us these
specialized facilities
are there are some issues that
we're not looking at that we do
need to address thank you Mr
chairman.
Mister chairman Senator I do
believe that we're going to need
additional inspectors as we move
into the legalization of
recreational cannabis and we're
we haven't we haven't addressed
that but I appreciate you
bringing that up I've been
working on suggested amendments
for the house bill that is
currently moving through the
house you have a similar one I
believe very very close in in in
on the Senate side and so that
is that is an area that I I I
hadn't really thought about so
thank you for for queuing that
up as something that I need to
to think about.
Appreciate that thank you Mr
chairman that's our.
Thank you I don't see anybody
else's hand hand
Raised in and so superintendent
thank you for your time good to
see you again
good luck with the I. D. and and
all that will move on to our
next presenters Kelly in some
here tell you want to start
one second the secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman again
Kelly Klein with the legislative
finance committee I believe
actually deputy secretary of
veterans services is going to be
presenting today in place of the
secretary Sonya Smith so Brian
Mr Hagen will be on the line to
also is our DFA counterpart
Michael Reagan's for and this is
gonna be really quick since
there was very tiny differences
between the LFC and exec there
is only a nine point four
thousand dollar difference in
general fund with the LFC lower
and a two thousand dollar
difference in other revenues and
that from licensing fees for a
total of eleven thousand dollar
difference and all of that money
was in person and the HSC pass
the LFC recommendation lower by
that eleven thousand dollars in
person however I would note that
the agency has over seven
hundred thousand dollars and
funded vacancies savings about
one thousand dollars really not
to make a difference on person
and the DFA and I'll see have
agreed that much the funding
they could almost hire all of
their veterans service office
which is a priority of the
legislature with that I will
turn over to Michael for any
comment.
Thank you Kelly Mr chairman
members of the committee there
was very small differences in
the LFC recommendation has been
adopted by HFC will be in the
first version of house bill two
one thing that I want to
advocate for is there was some
of.
Authority for seventy five
thousand of license plate funds
that was not included and I
believe I believe I W. secretary
Oster Hey you we'll talk more
about that in his presentation
but we will be looking to add
that in the Senate amendment
process on this seventy five
thousand of fund balance that
the agency could potentially use
to address any kind of
initiatives are shortfalls in FY
twenty two is one of the
priorities of the executive so
with that Mr chairman members of
the committee I will turn it
over to W. secretary Brian Oster
Hey you for this presentation.
W. secretary we start thank god
that the the legislature's doing
and junior bills because you may
have some of that money in
excited junior bill for veterans
department you may have more
than what you requested and so
that's a little advice to you
and.
You know Kelly can you tell us
how to say your last.
So that.
Mr chairman it's a poster hobby.
Thank you.
All right you want to go ahead
and W. secretary yes Mr chairman
members of the committee good
afternoon and again I'm Brian
broadcaster how do I and the
deputy secretary for a DVS on on
unfortunately just secretary
Smith had to step out of at the
very last minute and she asked
me to to cover down and she just
sent her apologies for not being
able to be with be here with you
all today
but I I do have with me helping
the pension today are greater
DES team so on the line with me
is a letter combos he's our
field services director at
Mendez he's are at
State it's director Jemia Warner
she's our healthcare division
director Monica my **** she's
R. S. D. director or acting
director and CFO excuse me and
rich coffee who runs our does
veteran business outreach center
and that with that let me just
share my screen with you all.
I know you all able to see this.
Yes we are okay great Mr
chairman and members to me thank
you so every day is veterans day
this is a new model that
secretary Smith has initiated
and really this is just to
remind us that every day we need
to be doing everything we can
for our veterans and their
families for everything that
they have done for us you can
see on the slide our mission and
vision but bottom line our
agency one of our primary
responsibilities is to assist
veterans and their families with
obtaining federal and state
budget and we have six divisions
and bureaus to work every day to
make that mission happen we have
our field services Division.
Which is comprised of our
veterans service officers
they're feeling throughout the
state helping veterans and their
families obtain federal the
state budget we have our state
budget division.
They oversee our state budget
our state veterans cemeteries as
well as a range of our memorial
we have our healthcare division
which right now is focused on
our COVID nineteen information
dissemination but it's also
running as of recently our new
transportation program.
Helping veterans in highly rural
areas of some areas of the state
get access to health care and we
have our veterans business
outreach center it's a federal
program helping.
Veteran entrepreneurs get advice
on starting up businesses or
maybe current entrepreneurs who
may need assistance with
with resources we have a S. T.
doing the budget side of the
house and and under HSD is
another federal program the
state approving agency which
their primary job is to review
an audit all of the educational
institutions to ensure that they
can continue to receive G. I.
funding our state.
So.
Just to look at the size of our
constituency I think this is the
the latest US census data we
have from from this previous
December so we have
approximately a hundred forty
five thousand New Mexico
veterans that's not including a
family members and then blows
kind of an approximation of
certain percentages based on the
most recent VA data we have
which is approximately a few
years old at this point we have
seen any recent census data on
on those particular groups but
according to we have from the VA
this is kind of the breakdown of
of how everything works out.
It's just a little bit about our
COVID response.
Not to go through the the entire
slide but I do want to focus
there on the on the first point
remote teleworking like all
other agencies we have to
transition to remote work
a synced around March of last
year and our message since that
time and continues to be that we
are still able to provide full
spectrum services to veterans
and their family members and
stuff during face to face we're
doing in phone email still mail
zoom of whatever needs to be
done but we are still in this
environment able to help a
veteran from the beginning to
the end file a claim attend a
state budget or whatever else we
are able to a system
fully and currently.
We're doing collaboration with
the VA Medical Center in D. O.
H. vaccine registration you're
in close talks with both
organizations to keep up to date
on on how many veterans have
registered to receive the
vaccine on the state side and on
the baseline how many veterans
are affected being vaccinated.
And on that last side you can
see the COVID survey this is
something we implemented near
the end of the year to start
collecting data from our
veterans that we serve on on how
they're doing during the
pandemic ensuring they can.
Obtain access to our services
and seeing whether issues are so
we can help kind of tailor our
messaging to their needs.
So while we have a lot of great
divisions of workforce we want
to take this opportunity with
you for the day to.
Primarily focused on the
veterans service officers and
what they do and and kind of
what how we see
The future is the rest of this
year and and going forward into
next FY so you see it again the
veteran service officer better
advocates they're suggesting
patterns in the family members
with filing VA claims and
applying for state budget you
can see the the great numbers
there in FY twenty seventeen
thousand veteran in Cory's three
thousand plus federal claims
filed and approximately twenty
five hundred state benefit
applications and.
On the the the claims on the
house for the plane side you can
see that that's bringing in at
least FY twenty about twelve
million dollars in the federal
economic impact into the
statement and that's that's a
that's.
Money from as a result of planes
going to New Mexico veterans and
that number continues to rise as
the months and years go on.
So we're looking to expand yes
coverage.
This year and going into the
into the next you can see in of
our priorities here.
Our
courses to continue to emphasize
our virtual capabilities going
back to to the COVID slide.
That we are able to provide full
spectrum services now although
we do understand the need for
face to face communication given
our current environment we are
still able to help veterans and
a system with all of their needs
currently.
As it is right now.
Party to establishing new
offices in in needed areas and
and a few slides will we'll talk
about some future spots for yes
those and then a priority three
leveraging state and the and
interamerican partnerships and I
think two points here to make is
number one is I think our fuel
services divisions is doing a
great job coordinating with our
native American partners to
train them up to the yes so so
they can go out into the.
And and receive it and help
their members get it's.
And I think we're actually
looking to do some more training
with them next week and then we
started a pilot program with the
department of workforce
solutions to look at areas that
may be where they don't know if
they're program that's a.
Their their employment veteran
employment wraps up partnering
with them to where we can maybe
turn employment revenue to
employment Representative.
Plus yes so to kind of expand
our coverage in areas to ensure
that we have a continuing
physical presence.
This is a twenty one a snapshot
of where we're currently at we
just hired a a.
The woman's.
Program manager.
Hi I heard this month we've got
the two cancer recently selected
for grants and Rio Rancho
jalape that is the a partnership
mention with workforce solutions
that's our first a spot there
but we anticipate in the coming
months and years to perhaps
expand their.
And then the three spots for the
planned future.
Location Silvercity alignment
house and we are currently
working on on getting those up
and running.
As we speak and you can see
there at the bottom twenty four
full time yes those and we
currently have the seven
vacancies.
So just a different picture of
what we just talked about kind
of where our locations for yes
those are in the state a black
identifies where we are
currently blue indicates.
Location new location as of FY
twenty one.
And then the three planned new
locations The Lion silvercity
and Thomas are read.
Kind of just maybe give it a
different data visualization of
where we're at state.
We want to mention some FY
twenty two continuing priorities
Education where next want to
make sure we are doing our very
best to make sure that every
veteran knows about.
What benefits.
They are entitled to.
Health care transportation as a
as I mentioned earlier we have a
new transportation program and
so currently up and running
serving a handful of.
Highly rural counties making
sure that veterans in those
counties can get transportation
to medical appointments and that
is a a a grant that that we're
able to do that program.
The ones that are program
manager we just hired heard
we're excited for for new things
and and perhaps taking a look at
how we can really re evaluate
that position going forward.
The FY twenty two budget
snapshot here.
As a Kelly Michael indicated
that there is the LFC
recommendation that has been
adopted.
I won't dwell on the slide too
much and then also as Michael
indicated there's an offices
veterans license funds funded by
questions of of the fees
that are collected for the
special registration plates for
armed forces veterans agency
utilized high cost to expand
services we roughly receive
around seventy five thousand
annually.
And currently in an H. B. two.
For FY twenty one you can see
the following language that
we're requesting now be amended
to HB to so that we continue to
utilize those funds should we
need to.
And with I stand for questions.
Thank you W. secretary this is
senator Candelaria we just
Cherry for the remainder of this
presentation as our chair and
vice chair stepped away
is there anyone else from the
department to need to speak.
and I believe we've already
addressed and we had the
executive and LFC budget
analysts speak on this yet.
Yes Mr chair we will happen
thank you with that with that
being said will turn out to
questions and comments by
committee members first on my
list that I see is Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chair then and W.
secretary welcome thank you for
coming today I have a question
which is having to do with
veterans suicide and New Mexico
was ranked I think highest in
the country for veterans suicide
you you might have addressed
this and I saw that that was
listed as one of your priorities
when I go to your website I see
that you know you all have a
newly designed website newly
designed since the past
administration anyway I don't
know how new it is but and
there's a need videos on there
there's also a picture of my
district of that Rio Grande with
two new come out on that's a by
the way Southern New Mexico nice
picture but I but I did want to
ask you you know what I'm.
What X. is the department doing
as far as like proactively
communicating with veterans who
may be struggling out there
knowing that you know folks more
may not take the time to search
out a website and call you.
We feel school committee in
speaking other veterans at the
importance of being very
proactive to reach out and
educate veterans and kind of
just give us a snapshot of what
the department's doing to
proactively.
Try to help veterans in crisis.
Thanks
Mr chairman Senator thank you
for that question and I will.
Let me know who's our health
care Division coordinator of
follow up the but first let me
take a stab so obviously the
veteran suicide is incredibly
important to us and and and as
you can see from our website
we've we've revamped thanks in
part of that is
Part of our overall goal is is
to start
With information products to get
information out there and sing
it there on that the home page
so what you would have seen
going to the home page is doing
a we did a live Facebook event
in December kind of focusing on
suicide prevention and response
for the holidays we recently did
another.
Event up who just recently
that's also on the on that home
page there so that anyone can
click Comeaux.
Focusing on the veterans kind of
side of of that issue.
And I believe there's probably
one more video coming up but let
me turn it over to Jimmy had to
kind of discuss maybe more of
the of what she's doing to
address suicide prevention
response.
Mr Chairman representative.
Our suicide prevention efforts
right now are just beginning so
again in the December time frame
we did a holiday video and then
in January.
Video with the A. discussing
data points a suicide prevention
last week we did a suicide
prevention from the better
respective with the C. J.
Fletcher from the VA.
These are just the beginning of
our efforts we want to be
proactive in Ellwood city
practice we have to teach so
we're getting this provision
that's our veterans to their
family members to support
members of the community of
let's suicide prevention looks
fine the and we want to see so
how do we listen to the needs of
our veterans in order to expand
the services and they are going
to answer being so we're going
to teach those different data
points of how can community
members VA and other state
agencies entering and work with
our veterans to improve or this
information and so we're going
to start the listen learn into
building campaign we're gonna
reach us are homeless shelters
which is another one of our.
initiatives so that we can get
this information out to them
that they know that we're here
that we here again everyday is
veterans day so we want to make
sure that we're reaching out to
all of our different state
agencies are not for profits in
the community just to make sure
that they understand that we are
here in the our veterans even in
our rural areas understand the
importance so we are looking for
different programs and different
other materials come to make
sure that we get this
information out thank you.
Okay thank you miss wanted very
much and for your answer and
that sounds good hi I think it's
super important that that the
department is proactive actively
reaching out and forming those
partnerships to let people know
about the services that you're
offering and
That's a super important piece
because there's so many people
school silently suffering right
that may never you really got to
reach out to try to engage them
rather than hope that they'll
end up coming here before it's
too late so so just love the
proactivity and encourage that
and encourage any advertising or
anything that we can help you
with that I hope you let us know
that furthers Act if I can make
one unsolicited.
Our suggestion that maybe on the
website that you all add a
suicide hotline number.
I know they exist but right now
there's some videos but I think
people in crisis they could use
someone to talk to a warm line
and that might be a really great
addition to your section there
if you had a just a hotline that
someone in crisis could call and
up with that would can I ask you
Mr Warner W. secretary of you
and money to send me a quick
email just because I want to
just paying you back or
something kind of specific
offline
And that would be great if I
could ask someone to do that.
Yes thank you so much and thank
you for all of your service
thank you Mr chair that's all I
have.
Mr Chairman center if I could
just a follow up briefly.
With the website is an ever
evolving
situation I would continue
trying to update and I know the
crisis hotline information it
does appear as resources at the
bottom and we already have
spoken to real time Lucien's to
kind of created a call button at
the top that's read about right
away unfortunately I think
that's something that's a little
bit more involved so.
Something that could happen
right away but we we had a.
Been discussing with real time
solutions on how to make that
happen that's great that's great
well good work thank you so much
you.
Thank you senator next on my
list of Senator Diamond and then
Senator Campos.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you W. for joining us here today
two years ago this committee
provided direction and advocated
for the creation of five new yes
so officers specifically to be
placed in rural New Mexico areas
one of those very specifically
was in Grant County and to this
day that position has not been
filled now I do understand your
presentation that that's one of
three places that you're looking
to fail I'd like to know is that
position after all this time
currently open I mean are you
currently taking applications
because we're talking about how
Davies you know matter to
somebody's veterans and we still
don't have those positions
filled could you tell me of
those five which positions had
been filled and when you expect
to fill the remaining.
Mr Chairman Senator Diamond
thank you for that question.
I will say backing up a bit so
we did have a priority list
moving into to this FY that did
to thank you subsidy and
unfortunately due to some
budget.
Concerns at that time we had to
to place Senator a positions on
hold the and that was one of
them it was.
We place actually more positions
on hold more than just the yes
those whose agency wide
but.
As we are looking to appear flat
and and and able to push forward
I believe that we have submitted
the paperwork to start that.
Process and and again I would
probably refer to Monica who's
R. HSD directors to kind of
maybe if if she has any more
information to add to as far as
the background of how we got
here or we're we're specifically
at particularly with the
silvercity the SL.
Mr chair members of the
committee can you guys hear me
okay.
Yes my okay thank you
Senator Diamond just to go back
a little bit we did we were
gratified you yes positions
there wasn't any specific
language that said it was
specifically for rural positions
are in the way it came over we
we got to positions out of cycle
kind of out of the
recommendation and but again and
due to the pandemic and when we
were formulating a request for
FY twenty two we at that time we
were under the direction to take
a five percent reduction so our
plan was to keep not only those
two vacant as W. Oster hockey
mentioned but gal just it with
our recommendation that we
received last week with the
assurance of knowing that we're
going to have a flat budget
going forward yes we have
proceeded to go ahead and hire
for those positions going
forward.
Thank you and and I want to just
make the point that southwest
New Mexico was very disappointed
that that position specifically
and Silvercity wasn't a priority
because if you go back to slide
eight of your presentation to to
see where these videos so
officers are stationed southwest
New Mexico has a very
disproportionate number of
officers in fact we have one
officer out of Los crucis that
is left to service seven
counties in the entire southwest
New Mexico region and if you
look at your map is highly
disproportionate especially
because that particular region
we've been told has the highest
percentage of veterans.
So so I I just want to encourage
you to please fill that position
as quickly as possible and I
also just want to make this
point the week from the moment I
was elected I would say to the
state fifty percent of my
constituents calls are from
veterans who services are not
being met the very first week
that I was elected my phone was
off the hook and I was able to
connect with very she was very
new on the job secretary Smith
and I have to tell you she was
new coming and so was I I have
never been met with greater
leadership someone who listen to
our concerns and have
immediately met those concerns
so I I want to tell you that I
can not thank you enough for the
new leadership that's coming in
and I know that a lot of these
complaints that we're bringing
to towards you were from a
different different leadership I
also just want to say I think
that was mentioned about the
veterans suicide programs and I
understand right now that you
guys are doing as much as you
can as quickly as you can to
meet those needs but I also
still wanted to say that the
number one priority concern was
to emphasize virtual
capabilities is maybe still not
meeting the needs of our
veterans because of their age
and perhaps our inability to
navigate through I. T. is
quickly we do need boots on the
ground in a COVID safe practice
to come actually meet our
veterans where they are to
provide the services to so we
still want to encourage you I
know that now you're yes those
are getting out during the
pandemic but there are some
cases in which we're going to
need some face to face
assistance with these veterans
and again I just hope that we
can fill those yes are yes so
positions as quickly as possible
also because I do know that they
are included in here your budget
recommends and they're still not
completely full so we like to
see those those for our you know
staffed as quickly as possible
and again thank you please
please send my thanks to your
new secretary for meeting every
need that we've brought forward
thank you guys.
Thank you Senator Diamond the
next members will go to Senator
Campos thank chairman and the.
Along the lines of but Senator
Diamond has been talking about.
I would like to start with.
Of the outreach and this is
taking a look at the BSO
positions as we're taking a look
at.
Early in the all rural areas of
the services and transportation
seem to consider or continue to
go ahead and be a major
consideration all that we need
to our.
Not only research but also to
continue to apply.
Work there because of so many of
our veterans who are not able to
leave their homes and they're
seeking if you will
transportation and I usually
find that some family members to
go to the veterans hospital in
Albuquerque so within the budget
itself as we deal directly with
transportation
again is there is there the need
for additional resources are to
transporter Veterans to their
your nose on appointments or is
is that something that right now
just seems to be working okay
and the reason I bring that up
because of that to a long
Senator diamonds talking about
issues to be one of the major
issues that we're dealing with
the north eastern New Mexico so
maybe Oster in W. secretary
answers and maybe begin the
response in regard to that.
Mister chairman Senator Campos
thank you for that question and
I think I'd I'd first to start
by saying we kind of have to
different to.
Avenues of of meeting the
transportation needs we have a
we have a pre existing practice.
Through Mexico horizons what
with the D. A. V. that does
transportation.
In in certain areas and I I can
allow junior my to leverage
further and then more recently
we received day a federal grant
for health care transportation
and the rural areas I would say
that that just recently started
we we have already done a few
rides and I think that the
database is a little bit early
at this moment but I think we're
certainly open to not only once
this program is a few months and
seeing how we can expand it to
the other highly rural counties
for the next grants cycle but
then also how do we capture
lessons learned from from manta
may be applied to other areas
that are not necessarily highly
rule that we may still there may
still be need for health care
transportation I'm starting to
get a little bit broader in
terms of of the responses and
again it's all related to not
only the budget but the fiscal
issues as we move forward and
that is as you build
relationships with the veterans
on hospital with action services
and as an example but it'd be
for bear orders behavioral
health institute in Las Vegas
yes there is a veteran that
requires all health services and
they're not able to.
Well let's say for example to
the Veterans Senator in
Albuquerque.
Are those contracts.
In relationships to be
expanded so that the veterans in
rural areas you're able to
receive similar services within.
Some of the smaller communities
as an example
Rep Joan Las Vegas.
No worries Silvercity in some
areas yes our our our veterans
are seeking services.
Mister chairman Senator Campos
I'll turn it over to it our
healthcare division director to
me to see if she can maybe
further elaborate on the
information you're looking for.
Mister chairman Senator Campos
currently we have those two
programs as identity has already
spoken about the first one goes
to the DAB the rise and they are
statewide transportation program
but they're usually operating
with in conjunction with R. V.
aids in their veins we have a
smaller fleet drivers with that
program is something that we're
looking to expand in the future
our second program is our newly
highly rural transportation
grant that grant is operating
under the guidance of the so for
the highly rule has to be.
Less than seven people curve now
so we weren't able to pick the
sixteen pounds for this first
phase of our project we state
nine counties that were working
with right now the eighty is
serving so follow Colfax
Guadalupe into court they're
going to be able to provide
transportation to VA clinics so
our community outpatient
community sorry I'm buttering at
sea box and then they'll also be
able to take them to our
veterans hospitals and the new
year's better hospitals and also
approved non VA hospitals so
they had a clinic in the area
and they have appointment has
been verified through the VA
they will be able to attend
those appointments with the
guidance of this program so
they'll quality AV schedule
arrived three days in advance
and then they'll be able to
receive those services and they
will be expanding to the other
line or the other I county so
for five counties just left in
the next few weeks.
So I hope that answers your
question Sir so so that's part
of in terms of transportation
but with the actual services as
an example of behavioral health
institute in Las Vegas yes there
is a veteran Firestone Services
is the veterans hospital board
meeting with these individuals
some of those services and we
provided not necessarily in in
Albuquerque but in some of the
rural areas where there is or
there could be a relationship
with
the understanding that those
services will be paid for by our
veterans so from my
understanding Sir these programs
will be where the access to that
health care is through the
mission act where are veterans
are able to go to health care
facilities that aren't currently
related to the VA again those
appointments should be pre
approved to ensure that they'll
be able to be paid for or
reimbursed and we ask that our
veterans go to their primary
care facilities at the VA to get
that referral but from my
understanding with the mission
act they should be able to
attend those appointments but we
can find out any more
information in a letter dates
are so terrible ideas and also.
And part of the rationale
service this line of questioning
the deals directly with as
senator Dianne was pointed out
how are we going to best forty
our services are across the
state particularly in our
smaller communities where many
of our veterans are your home
bound or bill Daley to go four
for the treatment that they are
they required for their overall
health.
Some moving a little bit further
into this and also we talk a
little bit about how we can
their triangulated civil
services and coordinators in
sample with the National Guard
because as we do serve our
veterans
but he definitely is going to be
of those that are either in
active military or serving as
you National Guard so as we hear
about some of the detachment
some of the centers that are are
closing consolidating and moving
on services into some of the
larger areas how then are we
going to best serve our veterans
in these smaller communities and
I I'm not trying to create a
divide what I'm talking about is
as I see really within the
northeastern region individuals
are having a hard time
receiving the services and I
know that you're doing
everything possible resources
that you have to do that but.
As we see the well this state
the National Guard and once it
will last not related but that's
the whole point how are we going
to build those relationships to
make them stronger as we serve
our veterans and and that is
there is a need for additional
resources the need for more
coordination that's that's the
and that this is the question
and those of this for you.
Thank you Mr chair.
And Mister chairman Senator
Campos I I don't I'm not sure if
this will.
It's on on the the questions
you're looking but I know we are
also right now I go back to that
the COVID nineteen slide there
that's a you know what we're
doing in the rural areas we are
working with the VA right now on
on what resources can be
provided in rural areas of
tablets
for example that that may help
rural communities access health
care without needing
transportation.
I appreciate that and the
secretary what we may do is this
offline I have quite a few more
questions and and of course I I
do want to offer both parties
supporters forward so I I just
there still some our mission
discrepancies that we worked in
once I don't question is in
regards to the
the veterans cemetery in angel
fire issue the system that would
be just the needs that are have
those been so and that is you
can just give are in Bremerton
on status in terms of the
ongoing work that all has been
sharing their May that schools
eight of the twelve that
should centers for veterans
across the country not something
that people are still haven't
grasped because we're gonna be
having more chances on smaller
the insured there so maybe just
as also race report in terms of
of of the product which is
there.
Mister chairman Senator Campos I
I I if I if I may turn it over
to a director Mendez and then
state to budget director and I
think you'd be able to answer
questions on a range of.
Memorial.
Thank you
Mr chairman Senator Campos a
good afternoon with regards to
the state veterans cemetery in
angel fire a yes Sir
we had a soft opening back in
July.
I have been awarded three FTE of
for that facility I currently
have two FTE Act and have
interviewed and sent the third
FTE up we're just waiting on a
offer letter so that should of
show me operate there I will
tell you this Sir we already
have
twenty eight veteran burials.
At that facility
I will remind everyone that that
facility is in phase one of its
operation of the soft opening
allowed us to start doing
veteran internment so yes Sir we
are operational at that facility
again soon is COVID permits we
will do a full for edge grand
opening and we make sure that we
do and put you on our invitation
for that as well but I will tell
you that it is operational I
will remind you Sir that that is
not just a of Vietnam veterans
cemetery but it is a state
veterans cemetery for all
veterans who are eligible and
their dependents I hope that
answers your question Sir it
does and I I really appreciate
that and then going back to the
W. secretary in terms of how we
can bring and better coordinate
all the Veterans Services do you
have any plans for the immediate
future in terms of how we can do
that particularly as we're
hearing about
detachment Centers for the
National Guard policy having if
you will wells that are inactive
National Guard.
Then having to relocate and so
as we go forward it's going to
be how are we going to better
align services to our veterans
and I just I would like in
Houston little assurance in that
regard that the entire picture
for veterans is being reviewed
and and yes there is additional
resources how we can help and
and just very quickly if you can
respond to that and then again
Mr Deputy Secretary we can have
a conversation in regards to
what some of these issues
offline.
Possibly after you can reach me
on on on the cell number source.
Mr Mr secretary secretary are
muted my my apologies of Mister
chairman Senator Campos I think
we're we're extremely open to
the idea of how we can partner
with other organizations to to
make things more efficient for
for veterans and again I would
go back to maybe the workforce
solution
Department this is one way we're
looking at.
The veteran going in and and
receiving employment assistance
and also at the same time being
able to.
To receive assistance funding
plans for VA benefits and
applying for state budget so.
In in that respect we're looking
to how we can leverage our our
state partnerships to kind of
expand the area and make it more
the one stop shop for our
veterans with respect to the the
National Guard question.
I would love to continue to talk
with you maybe a little bit more
about that offline if that's
alright but lacked appreciate
that thank you very much thank
you Sir Australian just get in
touch with me buy sell or I can
call years you knew what.
Chair number one also more but I
would like that conversation as
soon as possible so that we can
continue in the preparation of
our own budgets for consistent
Year again and thank you very
much gentleman on the line just
for the opportunity to pose
these questions to our our
veterans organization wells that
are serving a solution I thank
you very much for all to
continue to do this for our
veterans particularly so many
that are aging or really out
there all right now seeking
means to use resources that help
in the future thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator next on our
list is Senator correct Hemphill
followed by Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you deputy secretary for the
presentation and the information
I'm my question as
I live in Silver City and of
course access to health care is
a challenge for everyone
especially our veterans and I've
heard a lot of people
complaining about how
inefficient the transportation
Services are when they're trying
to get to Albuquerque and I was
just wondering if that was a
possibility to organize outreach
clinics so physicians are
traveling to those rural areas
making it easier for our
veterans to access that medical
care you know I am a mother of a
child with a lot of disabilities
and we've had multiple
specialists over the years and
when we had those traveling
clinics where multiple
specialist came to our area it
made life so much easier it's
very difficult to travel with
disabilities and I think that
that might really improves the
quality of life for a lot of our
veterans if we have those kinds
of outreach clinics thank you Mr
chairman.
Mr chairman Mr chairman excuse
then Senator thank you for that
question.
And I would I would say as far
as the outreach services to that
area as it pertains to to apply
for VA benefits and as state
budget are turned over to to
learn Campos is to talk about
how the esos the once you know
what we're doing now with
without reach defense
predominantly actually a hundred
percent virtual.
And what we may be doing here in
the future once activities
region to normal.
Mr Campos and speak to that part
of I was as far as bringing
health care into that area that
may be more of a VA issue but I
would I would defer again to to
me that what Larry if they had
any more insight as far as as
your question as it pertains to
bring health care into your
area.
Senator Hemphill
right now so I know that the
Silver City area has a community
based outpatient clinic.
That's where we up do our most
of our outreach when we're able
to go out to Silvercity but most
veterans are aware of that
community based or to block
that is a yes.
What did they do have the the
virtual ability to link a
veteran up with the drive over
to the hospital.
And W. after he did mention that
the VA is a has a new program
they they're doing a lot of the
tablets and iPads that through
loaning out veterans in rural
communities.
The the challenge right now is
the link up the internet process
of being able to to link up into
the VA system but with the C.
box that are that have grown a
little all over the state even
up and tell us
remote sites said that the main
focus for the C. box is to reach
out to the for for these rural
sites and in the state of New
Mexico and I believe there's
fourteen C. box today and they
continue to to build these a
I think one of the biggest
challenges for for the VA has
been staffing of actual doctors
that that work at these C. boxy
they do rotate around the state
the specialist in
at the C. west but normally it's
not done by appointment because
of the limited resources but
they do have physicians
assistants and registered nurses
that are able to to link up the
veteran with the doctor directly
so
I think the vehicle is doing a
phenomenal job of trying to get
these resources out there but.
It's still a growing.
We're we're still going through
growing pains with with the
ability to get the word out get
the the resources out to the
Veterans.
Thank you I appreciate that
answer so would you say that one
of the biggest challenges is
just finding that health care
providers and keeping them
retaining
Those specialists so that they
can continue to provide those
supports to the to our back
veterans.
Mister chairman Senator Hemphill
at I don't want to respond to
the VA but.
Sitting in in not meetings with
the VA on a regular basis that
is one of the biggest challenges
is the the ability to get the
the doctors providers up to the
locations
that that's so common nationwide
as far as a doctors in the
attrition rate for the VA
hospital have a tendency to to
meet the requirements and and
gain experience and then they're
going to private practice your
moves to to bigger hospitals.
Thank thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator Senator
Gonzales.
Thank you all thank you Mr
chairman and
To acting director of.
Could you kill the bill a brief
full I would just a brief status
of the.
Of the cemetery tells the
veterans cemetery tells.
The chairman and senator again I
would to defer to and Mendez who
is our state budget director he
should be able to to provide the
latest with a testament Terry.
Thank you.
For Mister chairman Senator
Gonzalez good afternoon Sir of.
With regards to the house
veterans cemetery I I and I
think you know that is a a grass
roots
not a state veterans cemetery
but it is a Taos county veterans
cemetery of the state of New
Mexico our office is acting as a
a consultant on that project.
When I last spoke with the
project manager there Sir they
were at a hundred percent
construction documents completed
they plan on having
construction equipment and
infrastructure of for that
project.
Probably early excuse me late
March
with a very aggressive bill plan
they are using the
general contractor one of the
ones that we've used for our
three facilities so they know
what they're doing their plan is
aggressive in the fact that they
want to be completed by veterans
day twenty twenty one Sir.
Mr chairman thank you thank you
for that update because so I
guess the last part I would just
so funding wise so it's fine or
is there going to be more of a
need for additional funding.
Mister chairman Senator Gonzales
I know last year if I'm not
mistaken they got to point they
got excuse me three point two
million dollars from the state
for that project when they were
doing their construction
documents.
They were at a little over three
and a half million dollars so
there is still some area for
them to work there but I know
the construction company the A.
any firm and the county are
working together to see what the
county can find with regards to
bringing that number down if
they can find some of the
construction within the county
they're doing that so I know
they're working on a very
aggressive plan again at this
point I can't talk for the
county and I wouldn't want to
talk for the county but I think
you know obviously with every
project there's always a need
for funding but I think they're
right where they need to be when
I get when I last spoke and I
sat in on the meeting with the
county the construction company
and the A. any firm they were
right where they needed to be
they were ready to start turning
shovels like we said at the end
of March and again be at
substantial completion by mid
summer and be ready operational
not fully operational but
operational by veterans day
twenty twenty one Sir okay very
well all thank you all Mr
chairman thank you Mr Mrs thank
you.
Sir.
Thank you all.
Saying no one else on the list
there one question I want to
pose Mr Deputy Secretary.
Where is the respect to the
COVID nineteen.
Vaccine do we know if the VA
hospital here in.
New Mexico is number one is
administering that vaccine and
if so are they administering it
solely to veterans that are
hospitalized or they also
administering it on an
outpatient basis I guess the
third question is do we know if
the vaccinations being done by
the veterans administration are
actually being counted in the G.
O. H. numbers or are they not
being included in that number
such that New Mexico's
vaccination rate actually higher
than we've publicized.
Mr Chairman your first point
that the VA is.
Administering the vaccine at the
the Albuquerque ASAP my
understanding and and a lot here
to to step step involving
correct me where if I'm wrong
but it's on the basis of whether
not you've been enrolled in the
VA health care system not
necessarily whether not you've
been hospitalized I do know that
the VA recently tested a pilot
for going beyond administering
the vaccine in Albuquerque they
tested that in Santa Fe my
understanding is that.
Based on how that went there
looking to potentially
administer the vaccine in the C.
box around the state.
To your second question I would
to defer to need to more to see
if she has any better
information whether how the
veterans receiving vaccinations
to the air being counted by D.
O. H..
Mr Chairman.
So as the W. as already
mentioned are vaccinations are
being given out by the VA
strictly at the VA clinic they
are being told to call the main
number and then there's for
registration lines that then we
can use to send their
appointment
as far as data collection from
my knowledge they're being
separated from the O. H. if I
can get back to you with a
confirmation of the information
I can.
Thank you thank you both so I'm
so just make sure I'm confirming
so basically the VA is
administering the vaccine to any
veteran who request a vaccine
are their parameters.
So.
Then there are parameters and
then we who's going to the V. A.
M. administration has to be
enrolled in the VA health care
system and their medical health
care system in order to receive
their vaccination through the VA
we're also encouraging all of
our that aims to sign a deal H.
A. in the VA if there rules if
they're not in a row we
encouraging them to start the
enrollment process and still try
to register for the vaccinations
to the VA if applicable.
Thank you so much and do we know
what that universe looks like
the total number of rules
veterans who may be eligible to
get the vaccine the VA.
Sir I do not have the number us
that's okay so if I would before
I turn it back over to our to
our permanent chairman I know
our staff is interested in
understanding more of this data
so if the department would
please follow up with Mr solely
and Mr Abbas office following
this presentation particularly
with data that we can get from
the VA of the number of that
serve already been administered
the vaccine because it sounds to
me that this state is not
included in the deal H. reports
and we're trying to piece
together as accurate as a
pictures possible of the
vaccination rates I want to
thank you both for being willing
to follow up with the committee
staff on that issue.
and saying no other members with
questions we'll move on to our
next presentation and I will
yield the floor back to chairman
yes.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Kelly are you with us they are
going to go ahead and begin.
Thank you Mr chair on HSD code
six twenty for aging long term
service department given their
major bus scheduled to go over
this really quickly overall
there was really a one point two
eight million daughter between
LFC and exec and you can see a
majority of the difference if
the committee can turn to page
ten of their packet age ten
which is your general fund level
rack up in on that high level
you'll see that the main
differences are on two lines
line twenty six in the aging
network executive recommendation
included one point two million
dollars above the LFC for the
aging that work I will say that
the LESC did not include this in
our recommendation because it
was not requested ability and so
we were unable to be provided
any additional information or
analyze it during the LFC
recommendations so it's a it was
not included because it was not
requested of us and the second
differences the same nature it's
online thirty three for program
support the executive
recommendation included four
hundred and thirty six point two
thousand four from the general
fund to reduce the vacancy rate
and again that was it requests
LFC so we were able to include
that in our recommendations I
HSC due to the LFC
recommendation however they did
at five hundred and seventy
seven thousand so half of the
difference of that aging network
difference the executive
recommendation added they put
that on top of the LFC
recommendation and with that I
will turn it over to MaryBeth
for any additional comments.
Thank you Kelly good afternoon
Mister chair and members of the
committee I don't have very much
to add Kelly covered I think
what the big differences were in
the two recommendations I know
on HSD has some needs involving
language that they are they are
still hoping two to be
considered so I will leave that
to the secretary to discuss in
her presentation
and so with that I'll turn it
over thank you very much.
Thank you I'm Mr chair and
members of the committee and
like to be able to just share my
screen and give a quick
presentation here can everyone
see the screen.
Yes okay so with me today I have
sent samo inaga he's my deputy
secretary for aging and long
term services get Seri Jacobs
are general counsel to Laurie
Delores Gonzales is our director
of policy and planning do knees
king who is our director I've
are aging Network division
Valerie Garcia who was our
budget director and Rebecca Baca
these are director of office of
the Indian Affairs as we start
going through this this
presentation today so you know I
think it's really important for
everyone to know how involved we
have been in the COVID response
and COVID activities as many of
you know for most of you know
that COVID is really affected
and impacted our senior
population and so we serve
individuals who are sixty and
older and definitely are
populations have been impacted
one of the things that we do is
a community based services for
people who are living in the
community and we also work can
in hand with those individuals
who are in long term care
facilities like just to talk
briefly about what we've been
doing in terms of registration
and vaccines many of our seniors
have called our office and
probably your office is well at
asking why they haven't been
vaccinated yet ten what's going
on and so in response to that we
have
temporarily converted our one
eight hundred number which is
the eighty Garcia the at the
aging and disability resource
center to really work on
registrations in addition to
that we have solicited the help
from our aging network which
basically our senior centers
from around the state in order
to to it to register our seniors
and adults with disabilities and
anybody that's calling so what
we want to be able to do is
be more responsive to them and
and have clinics available to
them so that we're not calling
multiple times because
technology can be a challenge
for not only individuals who.
Or sixty in plus but also those
people that are living in rural
areas so right to date we've
made for over four thousand
calls we have registered a
sixteen hundred over sixty
hundred individuals we've held
twenty one clinics and what that
means is that we partnered with
local pharmacies our biggest
pharmacy partner right now in
the community is Albertsons and
we hold clinics suggested for a
specialty populations such as
seniors
at age sixty and above focusing
right now on seventy five plus
and adults with disabilities and
we today we've administered
three thousand eight hundred and
thirty one this is just with our
senior clinics alone now we
partner with the department of
health to do this but we believe
that with this this focus
population and asked really
focusing our emphasis on getting
them vaccinated that we will be
will be able to get them
vaccinated faster.
In our long term care facilities
as we mentioned all ninety five
percent of our seventy one
nursing homes have received
their second dose clinics ninety
seven percent of the state's two
hundred forty one assisted
living having just received
their second dose an estimated
completion date of three thirty
one twenty one so we're part of
the federal pharmacy program
that offers three clinics and we
were able to convince our
pharmacy partners to also does
first time vaccines at that
they're at the third clinic so
that those people who have been
apprehensive that clinic wanted
to you can also receive that
vaccine and we're working on
strategies and a plan to get
them both vaccinated as well
even though those clinics will
stop
projections show right now that
approximately eighty five
percent of our residents and
eighty percent of staff will get
backs needed which is different
from what we've been hearing
from the national average and we
attribute that to a lot of
promotion a lot of training and
education about the vaccine so
we'll see what those numbers
turn out in terms of the federal
pharmacy program but as of now
we seem to be in the lead and
the apprehension seems to be
diminished
so in FY twenty two at I think
it's really important for us to
talk about what we need and and
some of why we need it we need
to transfer authority trip to
increase I'm sorry we need
program transferred in order to
increase to one point three
million dollars in FY twenty one
and twenty two we need not
regarding language and eight and
APS and aging network and the
reason why that so important is
that we've embarked on an
initiative to maximize Medicaid
resources so what we know of a
population sixty and older is
those that are that we have
about forty percent to are
eligible either for Medicaid and
Medicare.
Share or eligible just for
Medicaid in in our senior
population with adult protective
services actually we deal with
individuals who are eighteen and
older and many of those
individuals are on Medicaid so
what we want to be able to do
just want to make sure that
we're maximizing the services
that people are receiving in the
community and make sure that
people who are eligible for
Medicaid are registered and
enrolled and we're taking we're
we're billing Medicaid first and
then on the administrative end
is that we have an opportunity
to do a maximum of fifty fifty
percent billing on Medicaid just
based on the percentage of the
clients that we serve so yes Sir
at high percentage that qualify
for Medicaid then we're able to
build up to that fifty percent
match the issue is is that since
this is new we don't always know
what our percentage yes and so
we need some flexibility now and
tell we can figure out what the
algorithm as or the cadence is
on on what Medicaid is going to
reimburse versus State General
funding.
and then and in FY twenty two we
need our language at three point
three million from the queue so
they are kind so we drew down
all of that money now we need
language to spend it and this
next year
I think it's important to show
that that comment has
highlighted a lot of issues with
our senior population if you
look at the match from
Bernalillo county just because
of COVID we've seen an eighteen
point seven five percent
increase just in our consumers
alone who are eligible to
receive services and most of the
services right now are grab and
go meals and home delivered
meals many of the senior sites
that we have though provide a
lot more than that they provide
adult daycare services they
provide in home services they
provide for services they
provide an array of services
that we have closed down because
of COVID and we don't believe
that this number's going to
change this number is going to
increase and I said it before to
this committee and I'll say it
again by twenty thirty New
Mexico will have the fourth
highest population of seniors
sixty five and older in the
country per capita and so and we
know that we got a lot of
seniors in need we've got over
twenty percent of them that are
living at poverty level or below
and so we see that these needs
are going to increase if you
look at the meal delivery
service sometimes you know where
a consumer would need one or two
meals a week we see that ninety
eight percent increase in just
the meals being delivered and
this is just in the metro area
alone we move on to the more
rural areas and non metro areas
you see for PSA to an eight
percent increase in consumers
twenty two percent increase at
those people needing meals and
then when we talked about those
adult day services those in home
services in this chore services
that have been closed they're
gonna open up again and we're we
are projected to see about an
eight percent increase once it
does open up and COVID
restrictions are lifted and
those won't go away and so our
budget will continue to grow and
climb.
and we're meeting the needs we
believe of of that of New Mexico
seniors and adults with
disabilities you look at our PSA
three which again is is more
rural areas we have a nine
percent increase in consumers
and it's forty three percent
increase in meals alone so
people need more meals and then
again we believe that they'll be
a nine percent increase in the
demand for other services that
happened at the senior sites
such as you know in in home
services chore services and
those sorts of things he is a
former seeing eleven percent
increase in consumers allow and
a ten percent increase in meals
and we project and eleven
percent increase in those
services that have not yet been
re opened because of COVID.
We look at our Indian area
agency on aging and
you know when when published in
tribes they closed down we
didn't that this didn't have the
option of doing grab and go
meals are home delivered meals
everything shut down so you're
looking at
You know being basically the
state home orders that that did
allow us to capture the right
data all the time and and some
of the more detailed data that
I'd given you on the other side
but we see a twenty three
percent increase in the meals
that are being delivered I just
tried to tribes and pueblos and
again that's even including the
time that they have been shut
down the need is great and we
need to be able to meet that
demand this is a break out here
slide ten and eleven I believe
twelve are just by county and in
terms of the increases that
we're seeing per county we
wanted to be able to break that
out to you so you can see what
the needs were in each of the
communities now you'll see an
increase on this page you go to
the next page and you'll see
some and read here like San Juan
County we had an actual decrease
in San Juan County but the
over all projections show an
increase in the amount of demand
of services that we need to
provide to our seniors and
adults with disabilities.
Again this is a breakdown
On other services provided by by
county and things that we think
that we will will need this is
just another way for us to show
you what that need and the
demand will be in these
communities for in home services
adult daycare chore services and
even transportation services so
we are going to need more money
in order to be able to get to
meet this demand these are some
tribes and pueblos that were
completely closed during the
time that the that we were
gathering data but you can see
the data and the increases and
the decreases that we've seen on
our tribes and pueblos again I
want to be cautious about this
because
you get a lot of tribes and
pueblos were closed down for a
period of time and so we
actually think that we don't
have great statistics right now
for the tribes and pueblos and
for what they need and demand is
going to be if you look at our
budget and you look at
everything that we are trying to
deal with and and what we've
established doing we're actually
looking at an increase and
things that we're going to need
overall incident PSA one we
broke it down that we're going
to need an increases next year
of one point six million PSA to
looks like one point four
million PSA three one point five
million PSA for four hundred
thirty eight thousand and the
Indian area.
Way would be a hundred and
eighty seven thousand and that's
because we need to add staff
and if you see that there's a
number down here a hundred
thousand sorry my co workers are
responding hundred fifty
thousand we only have three
staff that are that are trying
to interface and and assist in
the management of nineteen
pueblos and tribes and that's
simply not enough in order to
meet their demands and their
needs we also need some
infrastructure support that we
can no longer ignore and we're
asking for I. T. support at six
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars which brings us to a
total of six million dollars
that we're going to need for our
budget and also like to say
before I closed and we stand for
questions is that we aging and
long term services has taken a
lead role and also nursing home
response and that means that we
have been in charge of making
sure that all of the facilities
do surveillance testing and then
rapid response testing and that
is over ten thousand tests per
week that we are are making sure
that the facilities conducted
order to keep our residents safe
in these long term care facility
so we've had to have it very
quickly in order to meet the
demands of the aging population
we're proud of what we've done
but I just want to make sure
that everyone understands here
that we believe that these
numbers are going to yes
sustained and not going to go
down just because COVID goes
away that there's a demand and a
need in the state of New Mexico
for our seniors and our adult
population to have services they
like the services that that
receding and we need to to rise
to this challenge and demand and
with that I will stand for
questions.
Thank you madam secretary I
don't see anybody's hand raised
yet.
Scroll through here.
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you.
I just had a quick question is
they do an easy way for under
your agency is that part of your
agency
Mr chair Senator Hemphill no it
is not okay thank you that's
just what I was wondering.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman and thank you secretary
Lopez you're always so energetic
and give you give us how.
We're doing your good work I
know you have some extreme
challenges nattering COVID
especially for most very very
special and vulnerable
populations the elderly and many
with special needs I mean
parents thank you for your work
I just have a question on your
requests for your language
amendments that you need it
seems like you have some
language amendment needs to be
able to help you get through at
least and on the bar language
that you need to be able to use
the dollars that you already
have
it's from the key piece of a
dressing here a fund that we
talk about is that you already
have the funding you just need
the bar language to be able to
move it is that which is that I
didn't quite understand that the
cut off your of the county.
So Mister chairman Senator
Rodriguez that is exactly right
and of course that case of Bajor
Fund is not going to supplement
anything that we're doing here
that is designated for new and
innovative programs we haven't
been able to spend a lot of that
money because we've been there
haven't been a lot of new and
innovative in the time of of of
COVID but yes that's exactly why
we need it.
Thank you and then the other one
would be to the non reverting
language that you need for the
Medicaid to be able to leverage
and maximize.
Medicaid funds so I'm Miss
Mister chairman Senator
Rodriguez really the the non
reverting language helps us to
balance our budget out so if we
got a little more in an adult
protective services because
we've maximized Medicaid and we
were able to draw down on those
dollars and we're able to
supplement and to fill a void
that could be and most likely in
our aging network and so that's
exactly why we need that.
Thank you have a good idea to be
able to spread it out balances
thank you and one last question
on the transfer authority that
you need at that more languages
you're asking for right the
secretary you mentioned the need
to transfer.
Yes that that's exactly what we
need thank you senator thank you
thank you very much and are all
those language amendments
already in house bill two as
they continue to work on it.
Now we're backing Act place.
so so
Mr chair Representative Senator
Rodriguez it is not in there
we've been we were asking we
know that some of these ideas
are not very popular but I don't
know how to to get into an
algorithm or I understand what
our cadence will be on Medicaid
billing without being able to to
move our money around I think in
a couple of years you probably
won't need it because I think
we'll now approximately a
percentage that we can build off
of Medicaid every year we just
don't know that yet and so we're
we're asking the legislature to
kindly take a rest on us and and
put language in that allows us
flexibility to maximize
Medicaid and try to balance the
budget without always coming
back and asking for help.
That makes sense so let me ask
Miss and LFC and suppose Kelly
you working with Kelly to
deceive we can prepare these
amendments and then of course
we'll consider them as we move
along with the budget but at
least they'll be there ready for
us to look at.
Mr chair Senator yes.
Thank you very much and thank
you Kelly for doing that all I
have Mister chairman thank you.
Thank you center Rodriguez
Senator Campos thank you Mr
chairman of course madam
secretary I really applaud you
for thank you into the future
when it really comes to dealing
with our population that
continues to age so over the
next decade if we don't maximize
our Medicaid resources if we
don't strengthen if you will our
community support we know that
it's going to be much more
difficult for us much more
expensive so I I just really
applaud you for the work that
that you're going in just a one
question when it comes to
dealing directly with the
vaccines and I know that as we
deal with it particularly in our
smaller communities one of the
things that we continue to
provide is that are.
Everyone in the community wants
to help they want to sue the
vaccines are are distributed
they wanna make sure that when
it comes to our seniors that
we're taking care of everything
from their meals all the way to
the services that are important
are there any inconsistencies or
is there anything that we could
do better sites from language
and.
Resources
what can we do with the
resources that we currently have
available to continue to improve
the world distribution of
vaccines the distribution of
meals and services to our
seniors and you are talked about
the need for the resources but
I'm I'm trying to emphasize that
point to my colleagues that
right now if we don't prepare
for this the next day it's going
to go so quickly and the need
for for health care and global
services is definitely there
thank you.
So thank you for that question
and Mr Mr chair and and Senator
Campos we've got a lot of what
we think are great ideas that
might be out of the box thinking
you know is is there are some
things that we should maybe
think about in terms of a
permanent fund maybe off of the
social security tax tax that a
portion of that would go to
aging and long term services
department for future funding
but you know to answer the
question about what we could do
better right now and today will
when I started this job just
over a year ago the aging at and
that the aging that work have
continued to provide the same
type of services in the same way
and we want to be able to
incentivize innovation and we
can do that with some technology
specially now I would love to be
able to see us doing more things
virtually so that we diminished
social isolation at the very
beginning of the pandemic we
sent tablets to every nursing
home and assisted living
facility in the state of New
Mexico so that they can at least
have virtual meetings and from
there it took off to be you know
telehealth and and many of those
responses in those long term
care facilities I would like to
see the same thing for the aging
that work it might be cheaper
don't know yet to have meals
that are dropped off that are
delivered once a week or even by
mail to someone's home rather
than doing that the actual
delivery of meals and then check
in with these individuals
virtually or make sure that
there's connections in their
local area so that social
isolation becomes less drastic
so I think that there's some
creative and innovative things
that we can do soon and actually
today I would love to be able to
actually have aging well
communities which are out there
and you can.
Actually get them certified and
and age friendly communities
that we are started to
department to to work on with
the department of health and
those things just talk just
think about just a change a
slight change in thinking and
not necessarily increase in
funding to be able to help
maintain supports and
independence and in the
community with respect to
vaccine I've got to tell you
Senator your community had an
outpouring of support we had our
vaccination there I want to say
that we might have had more
volunteers and we had seen
first and so it's been amazing
and as we work with the
department of health in order to
secure three thousand vaccines a
week we have been able to
through the help of divorce
Gonzales to see on the screen
amazing Dolores has been able to
really
rally the community in order to
get additional help that doesn't
tax the department of health and
doesn't take away from their
resources but enhances what we
need to do with our population
and I think we're doing pretty
well this next week we will I
think we started this project
dealers I know it's going to
correct me if I'm wrong about
three weeks ago I think we're on
our fourth week now and we're
already starting to do now our
second round of vaccinations and
we will now maximize those three
thousand vaccines that we have a
week starting this week.
I just really applaud you and
thank you all for the work
that's going on and sexual
ordinary and I please count me
in as you move forward with with
initiatives it's it's great for
our elders course for
communities across the state
thank you very much Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
secretary Lopez so.
When you were all mentioning
about the amendment says so part
of that amendment one of the
ones from more central economic
development.
so
Mr chair Senator Gonzales if
you're asking if that five
million would be rolled in the
budget that we projected shows
the amount of dollars that they
would need in in each of their
PSAs in order to to fill their
budget.
Okay very well and know that
would be to Senate Bill to
fifteen.
So I'm Mr chair Senator Gonzales
it's not like this is our
presentation of the budget but
this includes the dollars that
they would need in order to top
right now I can tell you that
aging and long term services was
not the best communicator to at
two to DFA and LESC in terms of
of our budget needs which is
part of the reason why it wasn't
in there at significant reason
why it wasn't in there but and
that's why people believe that
supporting both is necessary to
see which one can
can be felt.
Okay very well I understand the
need very well I to serve on the
board for north central economic
development and you know we have
the not discussing this and the
now with the COVID you know the
the cares fund of the four
million that really went a long
ways well you know of the need
is there and as we see that you
know to to be able to work with
them with all the counties and
with over a hundred and fifty
senior centers so what we're
really well also we wanted to
just see how it goes okay thank
you.
Thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Gonzales I
don't see anybody else's hand
raised a scene center was
earlier but he must changes
money.
Madam secretary let me ask you
something about your the
language in I guess first now in
my area of the world you guys
are very responsive to senior
needs and I really appreciate
that but now we got way too much
there's tons of food out there
and there's a warehouse is
packed to the hilt and so you
may not see those numbers come
up is you as you think you are
just because the amount of food
I mean I know where there's one
ten thousand square foot.
Warehouse that has.
You can't get a mouse in that
thing so packed full so it's a
good thing I appreciate all your
help I wanted to talk to me
about your language right.
You're not avoiding language so
how much money do you think
you're not going to spend this
year.
Mr chair I'm gonna defer that
question to Valerie Garcia.
By Mister chairman I'm we are
predicting an APS since we
aren't able to get them their
races we have one point three
million left over so we're
asking that to be program
transfer the amount to be and
program to answer.
Not a reading and I guess it
comes.
It would be the one point three
and right now an aging network
we have about two hundred
thousand.
The network so the small
mountains yes yeah we're we're
hoping to move from APS to aging
network and use that money.
And then tell me why you're you
want the program to transfer
authority because you are yes is
are probably not completed
correct.
Correct.
Do we know how many of those are
not completed.
Mr Chairman as of right now we
we don't know the right now.
Thank you
Mr chairman look at that for
you.
Okay I mean it always troubled
me when we see non reverting
language as the appropriating
body in the legislature
that you guys want to hold that
money in and we had a
presentation earlier from
regulation licensing about a
fund that just kind of sits
there with fund balances so I
just want to I want to see what
programs you haven't got
completed that could have been
completed and one point three is
not a big number and in either
one of those
And you have a let me ask Miss
madam secretary on the Mar
language.
the key to more language do you
have a plan for that money.
So Mr Chairman yes so that money
is supposed to go to new and
innovative programming that
would be sustaining eventually
and so we have we're in the
process of funding a couple of
adult day cares which will
maximize Medicaid dollars right
my co workers are out of hand
today if you can hear them.
but we we so we're we're
spending it on that we have a
care giver coop concept that we
would like to promote about a
million dollars will go to that
and so we're looking for those
new and innovative programming
pieces that would be self
sustaining we've also talked to
the veterans department about
their transportation initiative
and their requests to see if we
can also try to tag along with
them in order to maximize and
see if our seniors can also you
know get those rights into that
the urban areas for medical
appointments as well so we're
looking at those types of
strategies and we haven't quite
figured that one out yet but
does it sort of the concepts
that we we think that we that we
could give us a real big bang
for back.
But you don't have a direct plan
yet you're just saying.
That's right Mr we are looking
at and what's the dollar amount
that's tied to that language
Valerie.
I'm Mr chairman it state point
three million that we need to
have the language for.
Thank you madam secretary how
much money did you get in
federal funds.
Mr chair you asking about.
Yes federal cares I'm sorry okay
I'm Valerie do you do you have
that specific amount.
Mr Chairman I don't have that in
front of me but I can get that
to you.
In the in I would like to know
where we spend how much was
spent where you're gonna get new
new cares around and so looks
like it's going to be at a
higher number so.
I just want to see how much
cares you have a and where you
plan on spending your new cares
what that looks like.
Yes Mister Mister chair I think
that will spend most of it on on
food I just because that's the
increase that you know in the
end the demand and the only
things that are open really
right now the last round we did
spend on food also if the boxes
and and talking also the home
delivered and the grab and go
meals also on tablets.
so for it for a long term care
facilities and so we'll get the
break out for you regardless so
once that money runs out we're
still going to see a major
shortage and so I just want to
be the town crier and sound
these alarms early.
That's fine in I believe that if
the governor help us back up we
would have to do for you
delivering and people be more
available to move around I mean
it's still going to be a
necessary need it just can't be
a complete need every single day
and so
that's going to be a big
question it when that happens
can you tell me east said you
bought the state not laptops
that you said you bought.
so Mister chairman we we've got
tablets so so and so that our
residents could communicate with
their loved ones and do virtual
visits we did that for every a
nursing home and assisted living
in the state of New Mexico and
we also partnered with that
New Mexico health care
association they did the same
that they provided tablets as
well and then we also received I
think Senator tablets from
community down I think in the
Alamogordo area so we did
distribute those and a lot of
times now those are are serving
as as S. home health or
telephonic doctor visits.
Not a good idea.
That that that's a very good
idea problems that.
I just I just wanted to know in
I couldn't figure out my head
why would we had bought those
but I I completely understand
that ma'am maybe they're
catching up on some Netflix to
well they have.
So.
We are we are the twenty first
century some again thank you for
your presentation I don't see
anybody else's hand raised.
Thank you.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
You haven't got it yet we'll see
what happens there's always cuts
that can be done to you never
know.
Right my heart thank you the
only option is make sure you do
get early enough to LFC and make
sure planning than hearing that
from a couple agencies that they
did send the right stuff they
didn't send it on.
And then we get to this point
even in LFC and an answer why
wasn't there and and what
happened.
Jacqueline you're next with the
spaceport America.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my
name's Jacqueline Martinez the
LFC analyst for spaceport with
the acting director Scott
McLaughlin as well as the
executive analyst German Padilla
just a few highlights on both of
the budget recommendations.
Recommendation increase general
fund revenue by ninety six
thousand this was a five percent
reduction compared to the FY
twenty one operating budget.
The LFC recommendation also
maintain the other revenue at
ten million in this is flat with
the FY twenty one operating
budget.
This is the primary difference
in both of the budgets you'll
see in the executive
recommendation that they
increase general fund revenue by
two million this is to replace
G. R. T. funds that had
previously been used by the
spaceport to support operations
and the director of going to a
lot more detail on that point.
Also reduced personal services
employee benefits by about five
hundred thousand decreasing
total FTE by two.
I'll now turn over to Germany
for any additional comments Mr
chairman members of the
committee for me today the
executive order happening
additional comments at this
moment I will use my time to
interim director.
Scott McLaughlin.
Hi Mr chairman thank you if I
make right share my screen and
show present thank go right
ahead.
All right.
Second.
Right is everybody see that.
Yes we okay.
All right so this is a pretty
short this bill presentation
just to maintain our budget a
little bit on our activity the I
just briefly about myself I've
been the interim director not
for about eight months New
Mexico native third generation
moved out of town like a lot of
people do.
several months I mean after I
graduate college and came back
after about twenty five years
and I got the job at spaceport.
So
background a quick so the
customer operations of increase
significantly spaceport the last
couple years many people might
not realize how much has been
going on but we've got some new
tenants and lots of activity if
it weren't for COVID we would
have a lot more to be in the
last year in previous years
there was about a two million
dollar reliance per year on the
excess pledge revenue this is
been by opinion of the Attorney
General leased by a letter from
the Attorney General to be
improper it's also been a
a political issue with many and
the counties and others in the
state because access pledge
revenue was being used to help
with operations the executive
budget does increase does
include a one point seven
supplemental for FY twenty one
and a two million general fund
increase for FY twenty two to
make up for not using access
pledge revenue.
I should be noted that the
request are not an increase in
the budget where the budget is
being held even that's balanced
with previous year is just
making up for the excess pledge
revenue without the without the
request we will be in deficit
this year and of course we will
be able to carry out operations
next year we will have to cut
staff we will have to reduce
onsite services and we'll this
will negatively affected tenants
in the future the spaceport so
it's kind of an accident
existential crisis this point.
I'm just real briefly here some
of things going on its base part
right now our movie most people
are familiar with outlay it's
about eighteen thousand acres
about ten feet long this is the
wrong way this is the gateway to
space for virgin galactic DS.
so what we have had in the last
few years is of course virgin
galactic moved into the gateway
to space they moved in Los
crucis this is now their home
their headquarters there are
something around a hundred
eighty employees and that in the
local area now and they've been
testing the white knights and
SpaceShipTwo on a on a regular
basis they flew in December I
think most people know they had
a motor that ignited on
spaceship to and then and then
stopped operating so they landed
safely there now busy
rescheduling that flight to that
would be their first flight from
space to space from New Mexico
so hopefully that happens in the
next several weeks the other
thing that happened in the last
year was haps mobile or
AeroVironment moved and they
created their own site they
spend about eight million
dollars on site and this is a
two hundred sixty two foot
wingspan solar powered aircraft
that now is station out there
and will be part of a yes
campaign over the next three to
five years there are there
offsite right now but they will
quickly come back this year with
some design elements changes on
this aircraft is designed to fly
close to eighty thousand feet in
the daytime to get solar power
at night time it goes down to
about sixty thousand and their
business model is to get this
approved by the FAA and be able
to do things like fly over to
Puerto Rico and there was a
hurricane and supply cell phone
service.
And or to just find I I need
service around the world so
their production capacity on
this could be in the hundreds
and New Mexico is in the running
for that production once they
get the design finalized and
then we also heads with Google
that came it's with us this year
and they're coming back again
that's all in the course on a
lunch area the HLA and the but
I'm sure if we did not have a
lot of Tivity in the last year
because a COVID a lot of those
operators have to come and set
up which means they have to
travel and they had to deal with
a lot of the COVID restrictions
from wherever their location was
to coming here plus they have a
supplier problems we had several
launch is scheduled for the
spring and the summer network
cancel.
And then in may twenty nineteen
spend lots of set up shop and in
the southern part of spaceport
and they're building the world's
first Connecticut one system
this is a thirty metre evacuated
centrifuge and this will be
testing sub orbital launch will
be about forty to fifty people
on site doing this on a regular
basis.
Once I get operational.
So I want to go over the
economic impact where we are to
economic impact anyway so we've
got something around two hundred
forty direct jobs and then on
how you want to calculate we
have not done a study but on in
terms of acceptance numbers
there's at least two hundred
indirect jobs as a consequence
of that using a salary of about
sixty thousand that winds up
about twenty six million of new
money salaries in the local
economy the Senate construction
in the last eighteen months was
at least sixty million and we
expect us some of that to
continue into the next year we
don't have any new tenants least
leasing space right now but we
are working on a couple that
would hopefully lease and in
twenty twenty one or twenty
twenty two we know that once
virgin galactic is operational
will be hiring new people and
they'll be a big increase in
space related tourism area.
And of course anytime there's
activity outside that increase
that as a contributes to the
hotel restaurant pretty and
spending New Mexico and as as
we've always done spaceport
America's working on attracting
new long term tenants and short
term customers.
So I want to show very quickly
what are what are make up is an
art and a person
this is a this is our OB or
chart and I don't want introduce
a concept in terms of real time
back up so I'm like a lot of
agencies when we're running
missions and we do operate
sometimes in the twenty four
seven type operation we have to
be able to support whatever
customers operating on site so
big part of that is on the very
bottom here the safety in which
is firefighters the security and
the MS so there there twenty
four seven whenever we run a big
event that they often staff up
but the rest of the spaceport
America team also has to staff
up and have redundancy otherwise
a customer may not be able to
operate so to fill the safe
operations this is twenty nine
FTEs are required and the
previous
last year there was a growth
plan to getting fifty people or
more forty five at that is not
of the plans right now we're
trying to state even I'll be
cost effective and just keep the
site running operationally with
the current customers so this is
a bit of an eye chart but is
just to show a normal business
operations.
Up here this is the space for
director we do have to people on
our legal department we handle a
lot of environmental on a lot of
leases and contracts
we have finance and accounting
then we have aerospace
operations this is concerned
strictly with leaving the ground
anything that leaves the ground
we have engineers who work with
the customer we work with the
FAA we work with white sands
missile range on date of launch
we have a pointed range safety
officer this is somebody who's
familiar enough with the program
who can say that that vehicle
cannot launch you would not be
safe to launch so this is a very
critical function if we don't
have the right people here we we
would have to cancel launch we
do have a business development
this also has some engineers the
site is also that this
department is also focused on PR
and stand.
And is also provides a backup
for aerospace and then we aside
appropriations I think most
people realize for like a very
small town we have water with
electrical we have on internet
we have roads we have buildings
so those all also have to be
functional during the launch so
this is kind of the minimum set
up for organization chart like I
said the previous director had
wanted to grow considerably this
is this is meant just to be able
to support virgin galactic and
other customers as they move in
the true appropriations.
Now just talk about the budget
so I'm showing the FY twenty
actuals there on audited FY
twenty one projected and the the
FY twenty two which is reduced
from the original request which
was based on the previous CFO
it's important to realize that
we're about sixty percent funded
so sixty percent of the funding
does come from leases and and
operations of the customers and
the forty percent right now is
coming from the state if you
include the general fund and the
G. R. T..
Again we're only focused on
support the you know the growth
that we have right now not on
anything related to the future
will be able to that when it
happens next year hopefully.
And
One thing that I want to talk
about is not shown on the next
slide is we are we are we are
not a reverted agency so we do a
fund balance.
Because that fund balance we're
able to support part of what's
happening this year but it is my
intent that we have at least a
five to ten percent carry over
as we move into the future and
the primary reason is just for
emergencies we we do we are
revenue derived agency so if we
have a drop in revenue we're
gonna have budget problems but
we also have to worry about
operations on site so but it's
not shown in the next slide so
here is FY twenty one FY twenty
FY twenty nine at twenty one FY
twenty two
Imagine maybe they'll be some
questions about this year's
lease revenue this is what we
get currently from our customers
for the site.
On this that space on site we
separate those a little bit from
user fees so user fees are more
aligned with events for example
one virgin galactic has fees
that are related to the release
and then they have fees that are
related to when they when they
conduct an operation and many of
our customers are set up the
same way we do sell fuel there's
other services but these are
mostly revenue neutral not show
up and expenses the contract
services that the person
services are forced the state of
New Mexico employees the
contract services are a big part
of that is the safety and
security fire department and
emerging markets the medical
services which are there twenty
four seven.
We have other costs like eighty
so that's all of our budget for
FY twenty nine is slightly under
ten million and FY twenty two
just slightly over this is where
we would finish and and
Phoenician deficit our with our
fund balance for able to cover
some of that and we have a one
point seven need this year and
then next year we have a two
million dollar need.
Extra budget that will leave us
about ninety nine thousand in FY
and FY twenty two in terms of
the fund balance.
As I mentioned we're really
focused right now in this
current tenant success we want
to see spend much get their
succeeding any thirty to forty
to fifty people out there
operating we're one virgin
galactic goes operational right
now they're at a hundred eighty
employees we expect that to go
up considerably of course we
have AeroVironment's you will be
testing their plane went once
their info operations that could
be on the order of thirty or
forty people out there to time
the commercial space sector is
growing up fast I don't think
people realize how much how
quickly things change you know a
couple things to consider for
example are are
SpaceX yeah I don't know if
anybody saw the test of the
starship no I don't think
anybody expected the starship to
go quite that fast with the
shows you where the space is
headed
SpaceX also landed a booster for
the seventh time I believe the
six time for re use and we're
seeing all kinds of other the
small rocket market is still
growing axiom space is working
on a on a.
Their own space station so New
Mexico as part of that and we
have some inherent advantages
inherent advantages we have year
round good weather we have
sparse Ronnie population we have
restricted airspace we have the
was more assets and we have an
aerospace ready workforce.
I think most importantly the
spaceport is an engine for our
own diversifying the tax base of
the New Mexico attracting new
high paying jobs and preserving
investment we've already made
I'm I'm a good example someone
who moved away from the space
who moved away from New Mexico
but I came back and I don't
think I would have come back to
work for the spaceport there's
so many people who move away
from New Mexico to get I the
high paying jobs and and I think
people realize it five years ago
I know there was talk about
selling the spaceport and and at
that point there was not so much
going on if you look at what's
going on right now that it's
actually at the point where it's
for filling its vision I don't
this is this would be a report
it's time to keep that
investment going over the next
several years.
I have the statutory mission
just for so people can see it
and that's all I have and I'd be
happy to take questions Mr chair
thank you.
Thank you let me see the.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you interim executive director
that's your title.
Question on the excess revenue
are we are you referring to the
bond revenue from Dona Ana
County so what the two million
dollars is.
That the two million dollars
that is been approximately use
per year the last few years yes
that's from the collected G. R.
T. so.
Of the collected here to some of
that money is used to pay off of
on the majority of it if there
is any excess that's what
collected and that has been used
by the spaceport in recent
years.
Correct and so Mr Chairman and
Mr McLaughlin so so is this the
first year that the space that
you are asking the legislature
to make up and no longer going
to use those funds for
operations.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn yes
this is the first year that
we're trying to
Maybe just a little better yes
well Mister McLaughlin thank you
and let me let me just kind of
put out a plug for that as the
the sole exclusive Dona Ana
County member on the committee
just educate people that Dona
ana county when the spaceport
was built degree the tax itself
for the construction of the
spaceport it was kind of the
agreement the legislature came
up with was they would expand a
hundred million dollars to build
it but then each of the counties
around the spaceport would vote
on a tax it really couldn't go
without Dona Ana County because
our tax dollars was the largest
like a Carroll County got a vote
Sierra County your County voted
to without Dona Ana County we
really made it possible and it
was a close vote because it was
funding a space port and but
first spaceport in the country
then but
But we did that the deal was
certainly that it was for the
construction of the spaceport
and as that has fulfilled itself
it is always been the hope of
the county that that that that
you know commitment within and
when that happened and so.
The fact that the state is now.
You know moving forward with
that and pass the legislature
the general fund to pick up that
piece I just want to tell
everyone is wholly appropriate
is the right thing to do is the
right time to do it and we just
got a bite the bullet and just
say Hey Anneke knowledge that
that's the state's bill at this
point it's the state spaceport
and so I just want everyone to
understand that history that is
fully appropriate for Dona ana
county not be paying anymore and
is fully appropriate for the
state to be doing it finally and
so so let's let's do that so
finally I just want to
compliment you Mr McLaughlin I
mean you know during a really
rough year it looks like the
revenues Khanna held held stable
and I know there's been other
challenges but I mean as we look
at the revenue just showed us on
the spaceport has held in in
your factor expecting an
increase with user fees and yeah
we all see what's going on with
SpaceX and it is a really
exciting world out there work
clearly the pies getting larger
and we're just getting you know
trying to get our piece of it
but could congratulations to
Chris Lopez and miss right near
staff and you and and somewhere
out there want to compliment
secretary bill mccamley which
you know he was the original
cheerleader along with others to
it really believed in this
vision and others but
It's good to see that that is
success it looks like it is
growing every time I hear this
presentation we're hearing about
new clients and so feels to me
like we're on the right path and
So that's that's good to hear
and certainly I support the
request you're you're making of
us today.
Thank you Mr chairman so I have.
Thank you senator Candelaria did
you have a question I think you
text me.
Thank you Mr chairman I guess
not to get too into the weeds
but to get into the weeds so in
terms of the of the G. R. T..
To the special taxed on and on
and on Mr chairman and executive
director McLaughlin so if if the
access let me ask you this so a
portion of those gross receipts
tax will still be dedicated to
serving the assume the bonds on
the construction correct those
are not been retired.
Right Mr chairman when will the
bonds be retired for the
construction.
Mister chairman Senator
Candelaria think it's nine to
ten years we're we're currently
Working a refinance as the
interest rate is about five
percent we get an interest rate
I think closer to one and a half
so since the fall we've been
working on refinancing are
working with NMFA working with
the tax district and working
with a spaceport of forty four
we hope to have those refinanced
upon approval by those two point
NMFA sometime in April may or
June it's it's an interesting
process for sure but it will
save the taxpayer I think we're
looking at like a hundred eighty
thousand a month or something
and the total savings over the
life of the bond is going to be
like a half million.
And so Mister chairman so it's
been a portion of the of the tax
proceeds that we're being
dedicated to general operations
are no longer going to be
dedicated to general operating.
What will Dona Ana County do
with that revenue is it all
going that will all be going to
pay off the bonds early.
First Johnny and a county just
going to keep one point seven or
two million dollars from its G.
R. T. on the space force and use
it for their own and operational
needs.
So Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria that that's a good
question and the tax distribute
and in the board are the next
spaceport authority board are
considering those options so one
option is to simply pay off the
bond early and you could pay it
off we have not done any
calculations figure how much you
pay it off early or you could
look at the G. R. T. access
budget revenue as you know the
way I think a lot of people
think it should be looked at as
a bricks and mortar type tax you
know in usage so there are other
things potentially that can be
done with that for example there
there is a visitor center that
would have been planned for two
years two years back many years
back.
We that could be something that
I think would be a legitimate
use there could be other
legitimate use on the spaceport
itself I think there's some
other ideas and Dona Ana County
the spaceport Authority I think
at this point we would you know
from up from my perspective or
or the agency perspective we
deal in support that eight
anything that that helps promote
the activities of the spaceport
and help to grow so that would
be to focus you know our our big
focus has been jobs and so if we
can find a way to increase
tourism increase specially
increase aerospace jobs that
would be I think a good use for
Mister chair Mister chairman I
appreciate that because I I sort
of echo those concerns of.
You know.
If the authorization is given to
the county to impose the G. R.
T. the US funds do need to
continue going to brick and
mortar for the spaceport I I
don't think it be appropriate
for the counties to keep that
revenue and then dedicated to
either other capital purposes
order boards their own general
operating.
thank you for that and and
during the in terms of Mr
chairman through the NMFA
oversight committee which acts
as the oversight committee for
the spaceport Authority
legislatively no we can
certainly but they will
certainly have a presentation
kind of keeping track of where
this G. R. T. issue go so I
appreciate the the the feedback
lastly Mr chairman
You know this isn't meant to be
busy but I've been in the
legislature now eight nine years
and every year we're waiting for
virgin galactic to take office
at work
realistically when do we expect
as a state for substantial space
tourism activity to begin right
now there's great success on
flights and and all these other
things not as being critical of
that that's all needed but
rubber hits the road
realistically what are we going
to see the kind of significant
return on investment that I
think New Mexico expects for the
amount of money we've invested
in this asset.
Yet Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria nuts and then a big
question for many years on
before I got here of course
there is you know there's a
couple kinds of return
investment of course the one one
is the jobs and I think we're
we're making good headway on the
jobs like I said we have about
you know two hundred forty
direct jobs related to the
special space for private
employer jobs and that ought to
mean that there's another two
hundred or so indirect jobs so
that's one form of return on
investment.
The other return on investment
of course is the regular
operations of virgin galactic
and corresponding space tourism
I I really you know can't
comment on that because I'm not
in full knowledge of exactly
where they are in their plan you
know there they they keep things
pretty quiet but there what
they've announced in the last
few months was you know two or
three more test flights and then
they go on operations and twenty
twenty one and I think probably
some of the notice that that's
part of that they hired Michael
Kobe's here as this he was a
former Disney exec which I think
was a surprise to many people
but it showed that they were
focused on on the on the
experience by the space tourism
participate the space flight
participants the other part of
that is they announced today you
can look forward on on YouTube
on the news but they just hired
a person by name is Joe Rohde he
put out a video today and he is
the former after forty year
career Imagineers at Disney and
I think that shows the
the dedication of virgin
galactic to the business model
into New Mexico he he if you
look for this video it shut in
front of the gateway to space
and he's talking about the
unique aspects of of going to
space what that means for the
participants and I think you
know we we all wish that
SpaceShipTwo the VSS unity had
flown the space in December and
and we know that they're working
hard on a new flight in the next
several weeks and I think the
plans are still sometime in
twenty twenty we we twenty
twenty one we would see space
operations tourism operations
began in earnest and an increase
the other thing that they
announced in our earnings call
you know there part.
They're now publicly traded
company but on the earnings call
last year was the the other
still working on the second
spaceship and a third station
and they're beginning to work on
a second white knight to all of
which are designed you know to
fit into the gateway to space so
the future is still bright I
think everybody's frustrated
with the like the time it takes
but we've seen that with you
know any new technology in the
new
you know any especially space I
don't I hate to say the same old
cliche that space is hard but we
pretty much seeing that with all
of the young developers large
and even certain aspects of
SpaceX took a long time to
develop so so when do we get
kind of quote unquote profitable
in terms of this this whole
endeavor I think we're starting
to see that in jobs and I think
we're going to see B. R. other
participants spend much
AeroVironment's and virgin
galactic work together to for us
to see that spaceport was worth
the investment that the
taxpayers made.
Thank you Mr chairman just just
sharing the hope and looking out
towards the future isn't land.
Our large commercials clients
begin space tourism in our next
from this asset.
well that what will that
increase the amount of fees and
revenue collected by the state I
know that you know so you have a
you have chances you broke it
down they have these these
economic event fees how is the
contractor agreements structured
with these companies do they pay
a certain amount per flight or
is it a flat fee just to use the
space regardless of how many
launchers they're able to
accomplish.
Mr Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria very good question so
over the years there have been
multiple business development
people and of course we've seen
multiple executive director so
they answer that question
depends on a little bit on the
era that the lease was
negotiated and it was negotiated
with so with some of the most
current customers the focus is
been to make sure we pay for
they pay for the use of the
space point so there is the
there is the fee for the lease
which is up as best as we can
determine appropriate cost.
Expense for them for for the
land and and for them using the
spaceport and like I like I said
like you said there's a usage
fees so prevent they have to pay
other customers it's a little
bit tiered so the a certain
amount of activity that cost a
certain amount of money and then
once they go above that activity
then the user fee will increase
and they'll be of the hard look
at that especially as we go
forward because the so much of
what the what everybody envision
you know now more than ten years
ago has kind of changed the
level of effort to conduct the
launches of some some of our.
The end of our our our customers
and what it takes for us to do
what it takes for them to do it
these are things that people
have learned on to go you know
as as we know spaceport America
is one of the first of the first
are purpose built commercial
spaceport so there wasn't
exactly a guide book to go by
and how to do this so these are
things that will be worked on
focused on I I one of things I.
When I said that I was from New
Mexico I should also pointed out
I spent about fifteen years the
federal government so I
understand federal government I
worked a license but I also
spent about fifteen years and
and private industry but a good
part of that over ten years
being owning my own company so
I'm focused on how we make
spaceport America as problem
profitable as we can revenue
generating as we can keep in
mind that we have some non
revenue generating missions that
we accomplished one of those
courses just trying to focus on
jobs the other thing is
expanding pipeline making sure
we we keep a good pipeline to
our clients to our customers and
then helping the overall
aerospace economy in New Mexico
so like I said sixty percent is
I think not too bad for a state
agency but we'll see if we can
move that up and sure we go from
there so Mister chairman Senator
Candelaria thank you Mr I'll
leave it at that I think these
are important topics and this
sort of admitted earlier I think
one issue I think we certainly
want to look deeper into over
the interim is is the structure
of those agreements I mean I am
as hopeful as anyone that virgin
or whoever it is starts setting
up as many planes or whatnot as
possible and we make as much
money as possible as a state I
just want to make sure that our
agreements are such that we are
maximizing the return it just
meant to the taxpayer so thank
you so much Mr chairman thank
you Mr McLaughlin I look forward
to working with you over the
next year thank you very much.
He.
Thank you Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman
thank you Mr McLaughlin for
joining us today as you know I
reside in Sierra County home to
spaceport America and my County
is still after all this time
very supportive of spaceport I
think the same thing I would
agree with with Senator
Steinborn can be said of Dona
Ana yeah we understand the
frustration and you know kind of
we see both sides of this coin I
just took a couple notes during
your presentation you continue
to mention that there's two
hundred forty private sector
employees employed out there is
space for state employees are
there.
The the breakdown of the state
employees right now and I think
twenty or twenty one like I said
we're trying to get to twenty
nine due to the investigation
and and also the.
Slow down and what happened in
the last year a lot of our
positions building it felt so
we're working to get to twenty
nine to be able to fully support
virgin galactic says twenty nine
state employees and then there's
approximately eighteen to twenty
five at work for our contractor
who provides the security of
fire and emergency medical
services and those are a twenty
four seven operation as I don't
know if people realize but we
have those paramedics and
firefighters and security that
are on site twenty four hours a
day so
and if you wanted to look at
that in terms of state funded of
course again where sixty percent
funded but I would calm state
employees but what would that
put us at something around forty
to fifty that are that are non
private sector in terms of.
the aerospace companies.
And thank you I'm you you know
you mentioned that spaceport
America's almost like a small
city and it really is and there
is a lot of activity for as
little as that it seems like
maybe what's going on the media
there's a lot of activity and in
fact I need to tell to remind
everyone that almost the
entirety of the G. R. T. that
was taken in here Sierra County
during the pandemic was because
the construction work that was
actually being done out there
its base port America so what
was essential for us during the
pandemic.
Also we realize you know we had
a great fire here on our total
that golf community and and many
of our our homes were threatened
and we actually completely
relied on the response of
spaceport America's fire team to
respond to that fire they were
kind of the saving grace out
here first year accounting so we
thank you for doing that we we
see a value in this I feel like
spaceport is under appreciated
and has been for quite awhile
from from the New Mexico
legislator and and I wonder if
we should then talk about I
appreciate Senator Candelaria
saying that we need to first of
all dive into the structure of
those agreements we have to
figure out how we start
generating more revenues and see
a return on this massive
investment that the states made
here that's so important to our
small community so not only do
we need to kind of look at the
structure these agreements but I
also think that we need to start
discussing and this is crazy I
know that coming from such a
large supporter spaceport is is
we need to have a honest
discussion about maybe selling
spaceport and what that looks
like and I can tell you that
perhaps private enterprise is
the only thing that's going to
finally make space port
successful and I'd like to get
your thoughts you don't have to
dive and much but but what would
your thoughts on not be actually
state selling spaceport getting
out of hand to government and
giving it to private industry.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Diamond thanks for the question
which annoys.
So so you know one.
One one aspect of selling the
spaceport in if I may paraphrase
question is that if the if we're
private enterprise it would
somehow be more profitable I
think that that is not
necessarily true I mean what
that what that says is that
somehow the government employees
and many of before my time we're
doing something wrong at the
spaceport and I don't I haven't
really found that that's
necessarily true that the
business model of spaceport of
course like any enterprise even
if it were a private enterprise
depends on in our case is a
transportation hub as a toll
road if you well depends on the
people who use our service
reforming in a way that they say
they're going to perform in the
case of something like virgin
galactic that got pushed way
behind because of some problems
in their their tests plan that
of course causes a failure in
our business model as well so
that's one aspect of it in terms
of actually going private you
know if if if any if anybody has
an asset they're going to
celebrate they want to sell that
asset at its maximum value I
don't think we're anywhere close
to our maximum value right now
if virgin galactic and spend
much and others begin operating
at a more regular level we're
going to see that the space port
is in the you know worth the
investment we put it in maybe
that question will be about
selling it at that point but
will we'll see increase you know
increased usage of the space
part which is the main way we're
gonna get increased revenue so
it's not so much that spaceport
America as the forty necessarily
failed in its ability to
generate revenue we we need
customers to be here to operate
at their high level and if I may
there's a couple other issues of
course we do have a site license
with FACS site launch license
it's questionable about how that
could be transferred to a
private entity we also have
agreements with up with white
sands missile range which are
fairly easy to to.
Keep going as a state entity
it's unclear how that would work
as a private industry that the
entity the space the airspace
above spaceport America is
technically owned by DOD
operated by DOT so as a as a
state we kind of have an ability
to work with that much it I
don't quite know how that would
work as a private entity the
other thing is if if we sell the
spaceport for less than we've
invested in it and we've not
made the taxpayer all and I
think that's a consideration do
we want to sell it at a
discounted we want to sell at a
loss another big part of it is
is part of the space point
mission is to do things that
don't generate revenue when
we're out looking for jobs we're
trying to create jobs through
our.
Customers and when we're trying
to work on stand and and help
aerospace economy of New Mexico
those are not things that
generally generate revenue but
those are things that are in our
statute mission so one way to
drop our expenses would be to
not ask us to do quite as much
but I don't think that's a good
answer either because the you
know like I said when I was when
I would when I graduated from
New Mexico state I'd left town I
had the very few choices in the
state or I wanted to work and I
came back because the spaceport
existed and I think we want our
investment in our use to pay off
as well we want people and and
southern New Mexico New Mexico
all round the state to be able
to come and work at spaceport
for private employers so I think
there's I think it's a good
question to ask about wind and
if the space point should be
solved but it's it's definitely
a complicated issue.
The question it is it is
complicated and and Mr Chairman
and Mr lock lock when I
appreciate your thoughts on that
I also just want to echo that I
think that there's a lot of
frustration around to the delays
and the flight scheduling of
virgin and we hold spaceport
America responsible for that and
it's important that we were we
remember that you were just the
that that you were just housing
there your tenants there and so
you have no influence over what
they do other than they just pay
rent to to really rent ranger
runway in which your hair isn't
right your facility and so you
have no real influence over what
what virgin does and I know that
we've got a lot of
responsibility on you every time
there's a set back with one of
that that particular tenant
you continue to mention that
sixty percent of the operating
budget is now derived from
customer fees and leases I wish
you were able to present I
assume that that has steadily
gone up and and what are the
last comment you're done or has
there been a steady increase in
and when do we expect to let's
see do you expect that that's
going to continue to increase.
Mister chairman Senator Diamond
I I think we can get it to go up
we had quite a few
the COVID did shut down quite a
bit but if I if you the vertical
launch operations we had some
other customers who delayed
postponed because a COVID so I
expect that to grow up go up I
don't know what the final ratio
will be you know in terms of
what what how we're we're paid
for like I said because we're
doing other things that are non
revenue generating yeah one of
the things we're doing that's
non revenue generating for
example is continuing to improve
and grow the spaceport but the
stem is another aspect of it
promoting aerospace in New
Mexico is another aspect of it
so sixty percent doesn't seem
like a terrible number but I
would like to see that number go
up I I agree with you but we
need more tenants we need more I
vents on site and we're going to
continue to focus on that.
You're not gonna find someone
who would like to see spaceport
America sixteen more than me
that perhaps with the exception
of our Representative Dow who is
is constantly out there waiting
for her rocket ship but when you
guys come to us with the two
hundred million dollar need for
next year I wonder how much you
need the year after and the year
after and it's great as an
advocate as I can for that for
it for this and I want to see
really just launched its into
success my role on this
committee is to also stand as a
guardian and a steward of good
financial decisions for the
state and so when we talk about
the two hundred million you need
next year are those recurring
revenues tell us what the year
after looks like and the year
after.
Mr chairman and Center diamond I
think you mean two million
I'm sorry I'm getting my
broadband in my space court
except.
Yeah so it is a couple of ways
that look at that one I think is
first we have to I think
everybody fiber to go back to
that one side trying to show on
one side activities things
really have changed in the last
two years
three years ago but act because
of their spend launch was in
their AeroVironment wasn't there
we only had we had no not no
activities now we have a daily
activities virgin galactic has a
trainer they finally find a
white knight spent Montez forty
to fifty people out there
constructing literally the
world's largest evacuated
chamber that they're going to
have forty or fifty engineers
run sometime later this year and
once virgin galactic goes to
space like I said they hired
again we'll go find the video
you'll find it interesting but I
hired a person by the name of
your Joe Rohde the forty years
an Imagineer and Imagineer and
Disney who is now going to be at
spaceport America so I don't
think people realize how quickly
things have changed when it when
I was out there this summer and
stop
saw the sunlight or the two
hundred sixty foot wing span
solar powered airplane flying
around
spaceport America after they had
built in just four months and a
million dollar facility and had
and on that day they had a
hundred and twenty people on
site they had investors from
Japan they had from apps Google
they had all their employees and
their they've invested money in
that side and they're intending
to stay at that site this is now
their home to test the sun fire
so we went from in just a few
years not very much activity to
more activity than our employees
can handle right now so the two
million dollars that we need to
supplant the G. R. T. again it's
not an expansion of our budget
it's a focused look at where we
are right now what we need to do
to get through the next year yes
that two million dollars is
going to be a continuing need
but we hope to grow revenue and
not come back to to ask for
You know increases in the future
but we'll see how it goes this
is space you know.
This is you know if you want to
think about and on the way this
is New Mexico's on little
Manhattan Project right we we as
a state we we we got lucky we
got the Sandia labs we got we
got also most we have currently
we have these things that the
federal government helps us grow
and we have thousands and
thousands and thousands of
employees and billions of
dollars that come into the state
well the next state of New
Mexico did its own Manhattan
Project in the state of New
Mexico did its own economic
development project with the
spaceport ten years for such a
large endeavor is not horribly
long time in the grand scheme of
things to wait and see if it's
gonna pay off so I do think we
have a bright future a lot of
that's based on just a few
things that have happened the
last day a few days like
starship and and falcon and and
the landing on Mars I mean
things are happening fast in
space right now the commercial
space and we're in a really good
place.
I I would agree with that things
are happy I feel like a
spaceport is right on the brink
of something big right now I've
never seen it Thomas its own
little boomtown and probably the
last three years I would say
just the amount of construction
in the activity going out there
it's unbelievable how quiet that
place was and it's just on fire
right now I I do want to tell
you that I've had the
opportunity to go out there and
look at the spend launch
facility and for anyone who has
an opportunity to to do that
it's it's amazing so they have
and I don't know how many
employees I'd say maybe around
thirty employees many of them
are retired veterans their young
veterans who have come back from
war and they were scuba
certified if I understand
because they have to be able to
weld underwater they're
certified underwater welders
because it's the same kind of a
science it's needed in space and
they have their own little city
out there and what they're doing
out there is just it's nothing
short of just amazing what
they're gonna launch up there so
I'm excited for you I know that
there's a lot of frustration I
feel like we're right here on
the edge of really finally
getting it to go I'm I'm
disappointed in the AG's opinion
I know that that's not law on I
also just want to reiterate from
my leadership parents Sierra
County while the opinion said
that those funds were unable to
be used for operational purposes
my community still walk open to
to I given G. R. T. to help with
any brick and mortar or or
infrastructure anything needs
out there were still willing to
commit and send best and
spaceport American we we just
thank you and all of the
investors in your continued
interest and investment in
southern New Mexico so thank you
very much I look forward to you
know having some conversations
out offline to see how we can
help you and I appreciate your
time Mr chairman.
Thank you center diamond Scott
in in these comments are not
directed at you it at any point
or time but we didn't do such a
thing called the super computer
New Mexico I think we finally
took that thing to the scrapyard
and then got ten cents.
we also did do the rail runner
which is really not operational
and cost us a lot of money every
single year.
we did spaceport America based
on one.
And there's one person in one
industry where each really
hampered us.
If you guys take the time to
read the lease of spaceport
America it is totally one sided
lease which I've told the
spaceport they need and
renegotiate
and and the star game revenue
off that.
Really you should have been an
enterprise agency and become
self sufficient and and moved on
and since its inception it's had
a government employees from the
federal government with a long
and just say give us more money
give us more money and we're
gonna become operational and
that's never happened now do I
believe it's changing and I do
believe is changing but but here
some are some examples of you
know everybody else in in the
space industry is located next
to the ocean in case something
happens they don't lie about a
community or town that they kill
a few fish
that's that's historical Palmer
gonna deal with forever well the
business side and the technology
side is is well driven currently
right now the virgin galactic
and I don't think he even owns
virgin galactic anymore I think
that they share owners a hold it
and he doesn't even own it
anymore only assigned a two
hundred fifty million dollar
building off somebody's eyebrow.
And that's the design of the
building the architects designed
it off his eyebrows.
We didn't do justice to to the
taxpayers of the state of New
Mexico.
And you have a one sided lease
that doesn't give you control of
spaceport America when you need
it and I can see you shaking
your head.
Because one in Spain a launch
however Boeing whoever's testing
their needs control they need
control and and that's the way
it should work
You know it's good to talk about
them hiring Disney employees and
in Disney that but space means
engineers doesn't need.
In order for things to work
correctly engineers are going to
solve the problem and so I don't
know that's another high
Because they want Disney
engineers and Disney developers
well they have a background in
engineering architecture or some
space background then maybe I
can agree with that but when
you're asking for us to replace.
Income or money because for ten
years we've told you guys you've
done it wrong and you guys
continue to do it.
I don't know how we're gonna
resolve your issue.
Do you have any plans on what
your lease rates for the current
and
Tenants that are there now
because I see that your release
revenue is only three point two
I think virgins least the last
time I read it may have brought
it up to the three million
dollars so so what are your
lease rates or what do you
charge someone to go down there
new spaceport America.
So Mr chairman the lease rates
are we trying to arts fair
market although for each side
each side is very different so
that lease rate for the virgin
is very high because they're
leasing a building from us
though we straight for apps
Google is more about leasing
land and and having access to
utilities and spend lots is a
different right all all those
were negotiated in the near or
far past and I think that those
leases could be worked on and
and we're certainly working on
improving the range that we
collect revenue there there is
there's not a guarantee at the
moment that you could pay for
the spaceport with you know what
what is the break even point out
the spaceport in terms of those
usage either land or user fees
and work that's what we're
working on we're working on
bringing in more tenants and
having more operations but I
think we're in a reasonably good
place you know there's a lot of
history there's a lot of water
under the bridge there's not you
know like you said some of the
leases are locked up in a way
that we can immediately changed
and they be part of a
negotiation or renegotiation
that's been I have read the
virgin galactic lease and stuff
it's very complicated that has a
lot of things in it that don't
make sense anymore frankly the
and there's a lot that's
happened in the last ten years
and and their operations in our
operations that simply don't
make sense so there is a desire
on both sides of the house by
the way to renegotiate that
lease and make it make more
sense and then going forward as
we as we bring in new tenants
we're focused on making sure the
least pays for the services they
use for example the twenty four
seven fire and security in the
mass and and other other things
you know just the price of a
plant so
a lot of those are public so I
can't answer you directly and I
can answer you off the top of my
head anyway because I don't know
exactly how you sell stopped my
hand but I I understand what
you're saying and I agree with.
Much what you said it is true
though that virgin will call you
know virgin and spend launch and
AeroVironment we we have a one
of our functions out there is to
work to schedule letter space to
maximize the use of their space
in the facility for all of our
customers in conjunction with
whites and so that is a big deal
and and we're focused on that
because every time they do
something we have the potential
to get some revenue.
Mr chair.
Thank you Scott I still need to
know the lease rates in the loop
the leases will be public
information because they're all
in trouble and last we defined
it can be approval but what are
the least right what do you
charge spin on what what is
their lease right I mean you're
asking us for two million
dollars in revenue.
and you guys violated according
to Attorney General the law for
so many years and we kept
warning here that and so you're
only showing the least rated
three million dollars so what is
current virgin galactic Hey and
then I came back out the least
numbers that you're charging the
other the other eight other ones
pretty easily.
At the virgin galactic leases.
I I hate to quote you some
without having it in front of me
Mr chairman.
Yeah I I'll have to get you I
have to get you what information
is.
What is what is a I know you
know there are space there the
protection act
does protect some of the
information from our our tenants
that's on another more water
underneath the bridge but sorry
my like goes off in my office we
need more electricity
so but I I I think I can find
out what we can share with you
get that to the later date but
the the thing is is not you know
it's not just a job it's not
just revenue it's jobs
You know what we.
This you but but I mean you keep
playing one off the other I mean
if you're an enterprise agency
your income has to come for from
income to survive in in and
that's the problem is they never
set it up for you guys to be
self sufficient they've always
set it up for you guys to come
in bait for more money and more
money and more capital for more
projects and if they're gonna
build a sixty million dollar
building spin launches I can't
remember how much money we put
into the capital and the
spaceport maybe in the hundreds
of millions over time and so the
two fifty is now may be covering
around three fifty four hundred
just a rough guess
I think when you're we put in
thirty million alone
when they put in the roads I
mean there's ranchers that are
still getting paid lease rates
very good lease rates for those
roads that's a cost to spaceport
eight it wasn't well done on
this is not your issue this is
an issue to where it wasn't
designed right and it wasn't
built right in and they put all
their eggs in one basket and
spaces what it is it's
technology that takes time to
develop and things go good and
things go bad.
But
now sitting here saying we need
more money we need more money I
think the time was earlier on
the change some things before it
becomes.
A bigger issue for us and well
tier C. believe that that's fine
that's a state project that that
they have the right to in Los
crucis and and everybody has a
right to but there's things the
way Matt make things run more
efficiently we may circle back
around and look at
how about creating an enterprise
enterprise hub where you have to
get to certainly straits and you
have to be certain certain
metrics and certain standards
and Mr standing on your own two
legs the people I believe the
people a Los crucis in tier C.
and this is my belief we're sold
one thing and told their taxes
are going to pay for this and
the good people in charge of
spaceport America did something
else and and that was wrong.
and this is not on you Scott
this is this is over time what
should happen that didn't happen
But I think that it's time to
change.
We're gonna have budget
constraints at the federal law
stays in place are the executive
order for over time and so we're
not gonna be able to fund
everything so I mean when you
want us to take children
spaceport.
Can be a tough choice for a lot
of legislators teacher Karia
spaceport going to be a lot of
tough choices if we don't get
you headed in that direction.
And really quickly the other
thing you really watch now that
state region galactic it is is
public is every time the
legislature convenes and we give
money their stock goes up then
and governments later goes back
down well what do things
happening there maybe a little
Robin Hood maybe a little bit
game stop they're they're
playing on the on the funds so
I.
I think we need to be very
cautious as we proceed.
I hope you are new director I
always try to trust them but you
know two prior she wanted to
have weddings lady Gaga and
that's not what the spaceport is
designed for I'm I'm I'm bored
with you a hundred percent if
it's private investment and
private space stuff.
but I am not on board anymore
with with ancillary events that
are just games.
You we do have to answer the tax
payers each one of us is elected
in our district ideas big issue
it it's a big issue across the
state when we tell me can't they
say why given Munoz spaceport
someone should be well aware
that will take a hard look at
your numbers I still want to see
at least revenue if those leases
have options of those leases
have renegotiation Rights
we should see that but if not we
should change it to enterprise.
HSD in you guys should begin to
stand on your own two feet
operationalize you have a virgin
galactic.
I don't mean to that PO number
of billion dollars you have a
private capital company that has
over a billion dollars invested.
And they're only paying this
three million dollars a year.
You want to plan the space came
it's an expensive game to play
in and you have to be successful
over time it's a long term
strategy.
Let's get a little bit real
about what we're doing in New
Mexico and and not have our
blinders on.
I think that's it I thank god I
just don't want to be the
supercomputer of the rail
runner.
The more in in leave us in a
direction Scott make us proud
leave us in the direction where.
You have that private industry
because that's where spaces
going the feds are doing tons of
money to private industry to for
space exploration and
everything.
And so just leave us in that
direction and will be able to
help but only in this center in
a circle anymore I I think I
don't know the Disney guys but
that's you know call in new
Netflix series of one so thank
you for your time today I
appreciate it sars will be hard
but it's not on you it's it's on
prior administrations and in
prior directors that that never
took the leadership and figured
out how to make spaceport
operate on its own so thank you
for your time today.
Thank you senator.
Thank you for.
Sh Conner Jorgensen you with
this for the highway department.
Go right ahead.
All right thank you Mr chairman
my name is Connor Jorgensen the
LFC analyst for the department
of transportation I know we've
got secretary Mike Santa on the
line as well as
the D. O. T. executive team we
also have a.
Diego Jimenez of the department
of finance and administration
I'm just gonna go do a very
quick overview and then get to
D. O. T. so the DOT is
responsible for construction and
maintenance on the state's
thirty thousand miles of
interstate U. S. and state
highway systems.
For decades the department has
faced funding shortfalls we
estimate these for FY twenty one
at about three hundred fifteen
million dollars for maintenance
and another two hundred fifty
three million dollars for
construction.
A lot of the reason for the
shortfalls that revenues to the
Department are derived primarily
from fuel taxes those revenue
sources have not increased over
the last couple of decades which
has resulted in the purchasing
power of our state road fund
following pretty dramatically
over the last twenty years.
And.
That's all I'm gonna touch on
for background as far as the
base budget I'm I just like to
give the committee a little
brief overview of the house
process and then we'll talk
about the the recommendation as
it appears now in the HSCs
version of the general
appropriations act so typically
speaking that the DOT will
submit a budget requests to the
LFC and the executive
At which point the house of.
Transportation and public works
committee H. T. P. W. C. B.
gains a consensus process to
develop the actual budget it
generally starts from the LFC
recommendation and makes
adjustments the adjustments are
necessary
for two main reasons the first
reason is that fund balance
available to the department is
not generally known at the time
of budget initiatives budgets
are submitted and I'm not
September first and are based
off of July revenue forecast
There's another revenue forecast
in January and it's van that we
know a little bit more about the
actual fund balance available to
the Department.
So the consensus process takes.
Any monies available through
fund balance into account and
the second is recurring revenue
that we would see
From those from those fuel taxes
vehicle registration fees
etcetera so.
So for FY twenty two the D. O.
T. requested a budget of nine
hundred fifty eight point five
million dollars that was a
decrease of thirty one point
seven million dollars or about
three point two percent from the
FY twenty one operating budget
the reason for the decrease was
mostly again that fund balance
revenue was not there that
accounted for over twenty
million dollars of that
difference but to there was
There was speculation that the
COVID nineteen pandemic and
ensuing lockdown would drive
down fuel consumption leading to
reduced recurring revenue when
the January forecast came out it
turns out the that I.
The the pessimism in that
In that forecast was a little
bit too much and so the
department wound up with
revenues that were about twenty
two point six million dollars
higher than they anticipated an
additional thirty two point
three million dollars
in fund balance was also
available to the to the
Department so in addition to the
nine hundred fifty eight point
five million dollars
the H. T. PWC staff.
Budgeted another fifty four
million dollars.
Into the department's budget
The secretary will talk about
the actual programs but in your
in your packet on page or you'll
see the breakdown of.
How those how those monies were
appropriated by program the H.
T. P. W. C. recommendation for
the operating budget was
accepted by the house
appropriations and finance
committee and you're gonna see
it reflected in the general
appropriations act there's one
other piece of this budget it's
nonrecurring revenue the
original LFC recommendation
included a hundred fifty million
dollars for unfunded state
projects as well as another
hundred million dollars for
local projects
That amount was increased during
the a budget development process
of age T. P. W. C. and H. A. F.
C. so right now
There is a hundred seventy
million dollars available for
state projects of which about
eighty five million dollars of
that is dedicated to specific
projects that were discussed
between HSC and DOT staff
and then there is an additional
one hundred twenty one million
dollars for local projects and
finally nine million dollars
Or essential your service err
service.
And that is contingent on
enactment of Senate bill one
thirty one or similar
legislation how with that I'd
like to turn it over to Diego
Jimenez of the DFA for any
additional comments.
Thank you governor Mr chair.
As you know coming described
this the DOT budget typically
goes through what's called the
tech group consensus process
It is this kind of stuff that's
primarily what happened others.
Yeah the executive things the
overall it's a good budget but
there's about thirteen million
dollars that that house
transportation committee
reallocated without consulting
DFA or D. O. T..
So our ideal budget on the
executive side which moved
thirteen million of the
additional funds that Connor
described and kind of re
reality among the other
programs.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr secretary are a
Santa Fe you're there with us
correct want to go ahead and
begin thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Mike
Santa cabinet secretary for the
Mexico department transportation
this in a pool of my very brief
presentation I hope everybody
can see that.
Thank you can so I'll just start
just a I'm gonna go into too
much detail into our budget see
like me too but budget issues in
a B. R. operating budgets to be
over a billion dollars I've been
with Department over twenty
years I think this is the
highest we've ever been when you
include all of our revenue and
fund balance is a lot of you
know we get all were basically
an enterprise agencies so we get
all our funding from gas and
special fuel tax are we distance
tax vehicle registration in a
motor vehicle excise tax I think
we're the third largest
apartment we have about twenty
six hundred full time employees
within D. O. T. the current
vacancy rate is about fifteen
percent my first took over in
January of twenty nineteen were
up over twenty one percent right
before the pandemic we got down
to about fifteen this right here
the pandemic started and hiring
slowed we went back up to twenty
percent and now we're back down
to fifteen we really want to be
at that ten to eleven percent
that's when we really feel like
our department is operating as
efficiently as possible we're
always in have some vacancy to
promotions and retirements but
we're really trying to get down
that to about ten or eleven
percent we're very thankful that
the governor and this body are
legislators over the last couple
years starting in twenty
nineteen of appropriated about
five hundred and thirty five
million dollars General Fund in
addition to our operating budget
and so as Connor mentioned we've
been getting kind of that
surplus general fund to good
investment to invest in
infrastructure as all of you
know we're very appreciative of
that this year we have a hundred
and seventy million scheduled
coming over and house bill two
four DOT specific projects and
then another hundred and twenty
one that'll go to the local
entities that will manage so if
that holds true than this number
this you will go up to over a
hundred million dollars in the
last two in the last three years
were very appreciate.
Of that.
Just to kind of give you an idea
of what we've done with that
five hundred thirty five million
two hundred thirty five was
Derek dedicated to smaller
projects and maintenance
projects just so you know about
ninety four percent of that is
spent or in the current projects
a project that's out in the
field maybe not finished yet but
something that is happening
where money is being spent
people are working in the jobs
are getting done so we spent a
large majority of that already
over the last sixteen months we
got about fifty seven million
for local communities ninety
percent of that is under
contract with the into the I
think we spent somewhere close
to twenty five million already
so are making good progress on
that all of those projects are
identified and all those who
want to be there county city our
tribal partners
we got two hundred fifty million
for major investment projects in
the special session seventy five
million was taken back to help
shore up the general fund and we
were given seventy five million
in bonding authority so right
now we have a hundred seventy
five of general fund money for
major investment projects in
these are projects there we knew
are likely to take anywhere from
one to three to four years we've
already expand or in the current
projects sixty six percent of
that so in sixteen short months
we actually have a some good
progress on that we're actually
ahead of schedule where we were
when we started this a couple
years ago and then of course at
seventy five million in bonding
authority we have projects ready
but we don't have the bonding
authority and until July twenty
twenty two you'll see a bill
coming to your committee zoom
that is moving that bonding
authority up a year or as soon
as possible to take advantage of
some of the really good bonding
rates that are out right now and
we'll talk about that in just a
second.
Speaking of I think of one of
the common questions we get is
what is our debt and I just want
to focus you on this column
right here where it says total
starting with a hundred fifty
two million are debt payment for
FY twenty one will be a hundred
fifty two million dollars as you
can see it goes all the way up
to a hundred eighty two million
in FY twenty four and then we
get a significant break in our
that starting in twenty twenty
five and then eventually most of
our debt is gone and and twenty
thirty there's a couple payments
and in twenty thirty one and
twenty thirty two that we need
to to make and all of this that
is from bonding in the past
going back several governors
just about every governor
did some type of bonding program
I get a lot of questions about
the real runner all focus you on
where it says S. R. F. which is
state road fund this kind of
great column here this is the
amount we pay every year for the
rail runner on the track so our
bar bonding payment this year is
twenty seven million it levels
out to thirty min nine million
up up until twenty twenty nine
and then our last payment will
be in twenty thirty and that's
the twenty five million.
When we are able to bond that
seventy five million here's this
kind of second to the last
column on the right we're gonna
from low those first four years
with interest only payments and
then trying to catch up with
that payment in future years but
we don't want to go past twenty
thirty I don't want to put the
department in in longer yes in
the in the ten years that we are
right now but we do have these
next these high payments coming
up in these first four years and
for this new do interest only
and then take care more of the
principal and things at the end
one of the other bills you'll
see coming through is for us to
be able to utilize the rest of
the grant funding which is a
total of two hundred thirty four
million
this is how we would structure
those payments once again
interest only in the first four
years and then making that
difference up and especially as
will our situation gets better
starting in twenty twenty five
we think this is a good Avenue
to take I will say that bonding
prices are all time low right
now we just changed out some
fixed rate bonds that were
seventy million refinance them
into bonds that will pay that we
will only sixty two million so
we we save the department about
seven point seven million
dollars this last year we got a
bonding ray of point six percent
less than one percent and so as
we still have this authority we
want to be able to use that and
Bondeson as possible because the
rate is so cheap and I think
it's only going to go up as we
come out of this pandemic so
that'll be another bill will be
heading to Senate finance really
soon this just goes over what I
said but kind of a little bit
easier to see our bonding
payments go up the next four
years is a big drop off here
we're going to be in pretty good
shape in twenty twenty five
little spike there but by twenty
thirty to twenty thirty two were
pretty much out of that one of
the advantages to funding the
rest of the correct bonds will
be that we can level this
payment out over the course of
time we don't have kind of these
up and down it's a lot easier
for us to.
Lad we have a level payment
which we were able to do for the
rail runner but weren't able to
do for the rest of the bonds and
so we're hoping that bill passes
it'll free up some money to get
us through these next four years
since our construction program
will only get smaller as our
debt goes up and then we'll be
able to level that payment input
the department in good shape
without extending the amount of
time that we have to pay your
debt out.
I know there's some new members
but just to give an idea were
broken up into six districts
it's really a good idea to get
to know your district engineer
each of these rural districts
has a district engineer
we do have a vacancy in district
two done interviews looking to
fill that position within the
next couple weeks and I want to
say we have a very very strong
field of district engineers they
do a great job and if you have
any quote questions about any
projects in your area they're
the first person you probably
want to call them because
they're going to have those
details to you they're very
responsive and there somebody
that you should have on speed
dial as you as you work your way
into to being a senator for
those of you that are new
they're good at a good asset to
have them in person to call I
also want to just give a shout
out to all of our patrols we do
have eighty two patrols all of
these are buildings and small
groups of men and women who work
very hard they're the ones who
really are the wheels of our
department they make us go
they're the ones who over the
last seven days straight have
been pushing snow with these
last no storms way work for tens
Monday through Thursday and then
if we have snow they work the
rest of the weekend so they work
really hard and they are
probably the the lease rate
people in our department and
they do the most work and so I
just want to recognize them
especially for their work that
they did these last seven days
straight dealing with those
several storms that we got over
the last few days.
We also then is the point of
entry the reason I bring this up
will be another bill coming to
your Committee we are have taken
over this process from DPS over
the last four years we have a
couple pieces to the puzzle left
we can in the form of
legislation on that you will see
where we will fully be
functional for these ports of
entry is it's a big revenue
generator for us as you know
we're at an enterprise As You
agency since we've taken over
this from DPS back in twenty
sixteen and the transition we've
already collected more than an
additional twenty two million
dollars in revenue I'm just
because their staff and we're
managing them and we we really
care about every dollar that
comes in because it goes into
our budget so you'll be seeing
that soon as well I'm I think
Conor hit on this all this
mention is our purchasing power
is just not the same I think
probably eight to ten years ago
and you asked how much does it
cost to construct a mile there
was an easy way to remember that
every miles about one million
dollars as you can see right now
on the twenty twenty one if we
were to do a mile of interstate
it's about two point eight I go
down the U. S. routes in New
Mexico route to gets a little
bit less expensive but every
time we put construction dollars
out there it's just not going as
far because materials labor all
of those things are continuing
to get more expensive even
though we're bringing in just
about close to the same revenue
as we have been for the last
fifteen to twenty years.
I won't go into these but we do
have nine DOT agency bills I
think we have to reschedule to
come the Senate finance looking
for your support on these if you
want to ever talk about these
I'm sure be happy to discuss
these but these are very high
priorities force these are
things that we think will help
modernize our department as we
move into these new years and
and both procurement.
Whitman and some other functions
of our departments anything you
can do us your support these
pieces of legislation so
we'll be talking more in detail
about these I'm sure once they
get to your committee for those
of you who don't have my
information here it is you can
call email me text me twenty
four seven any time that you
like I will certainly get back
with you and I can answer a
question I'll put you in touch
with one of my staff that can we
really try and be responsive and
I know a lot of the constituents
that increases that you get our
the majority of our of the
related to some transportation
or traffic issue and so we make
it a priority to get back with
you and give you the information
that you need so with that Mr
chairman I will stop sharing my
screen I have a lot of staff
members here with me today we
won't go through all of them but
hopefully between all of us we
can answer any questions that
come up so thank you Mr Chairman
for having us today we
appreciate it.
Thank you and Senate Rodriguez
gonna chair I just have a few
questions for that jump on to go
to another committee.
Mr secretary first of all thank
you for taking on my test when
the text when I'm behind a semi
and I. forty locked in
frustrated for thirty miles at
forty five miles an hour while
going up a hill in it's just
turning worse and worse on I.
forty in so we can get those
tracks like other states do in
the right hand lane is
additional lane somewhere along
the way we're gonna continue but
that's a high rate of rex and
and have a combined forty
between Gallup in Albuquerque
and it's.
Very frustrating for people
especially when you know and is
November I think I was leaving
town anna from Laguna took me
about three hours to go about
ten miles of that was going to
stretch around that curve in
that seems to be a problem that
I'm how we're gonna deal with
that but that's a that's a big
issue because it just locks it
down and there's just about
everywhere it seems that I have
the lan I. forty I can tell you
I'm not a traffic engineer I can
tell you what fixes on I I just
know that trucks going down the
road and they can control.
I did see some stuff from house
bill two today that kind of
concern me
I see legislators earmarking
rose are are placing in the
budget roads in their districts
I don't really agree with that I
think the department if we have
faith and I have faith in you
that you know where the needs
are New Mexico where the
priority should be and and for
that problem exists.
Just a kind of a word of caution
not the way HSD should operate
we don't do it to other agencies
saying you need to do this you
got to pick this over that yet
to do this over that and I don't
think it's fair to the
secretaries on to put them in
that position
I know that
I need you to reach out to the
airport guy in your department I
would like to have a chat with
him on.
About some airports and and some
work done to airports that
really bad but I think overall
it the real runners always been
initially we knew this was
coming over time we kept kicking
the can down the road and
kicking the can down the road
and in the bonding issue and the
ridership is down how much does
Albuquerque or Bernalillo kick
into that line thank you can do
anything Santa Fe Albuquerque.
Thank you Mr chairman as far as
the payments that were making
for ownership of the tract
nobody kicks in anything we're
paying that out of state road
for which is that twenty nine of
thirty five million dollars
figure that that I mentioned in
my presentation.
And we're up almost a million
dollars to to pay that
completely bond package in a
real under off correct.
Mr chairman and I think it's
upwards around seven hundred
million
I think the purchase price was
about three hundred fifty
million or so and so over time
as we are in bonds and paying
interest obviously what we
actually pay I think it's up to
about seven hundred million
the.
We just can't do that anymore.
The small status with a groan
that would have been a different
story but it's just not that way
it's a great thing to say you
have a commuter train it's
another thing to pay for it.
Especially with ridership.
Thank you for your time.
Chairman Rodriguez is gonna take
over I'm gonna jump on the
committee but I I'm a circle
back around with you and some
questions I just don't like
you're marking roads.
When that tells me that we don't
have faith in our secretaries to
do the right thing into their
job correctly and and it's
really bothersome to me is that
that people want to do that so
thank you madam chairman.
intake you hear what.
S. and OP here responses to
we've got next Senator Gonzalez.
Well thank you madam chair and
members and also to sectarian
your staff.
I really don't have a question
the money is more of well a very
strong applause from the
department of the work that you
do with the considering all that
this is one department that has
not seen an increasing about
twenty eight years in all
specialties and comes to the.
To the gas tax in the special
fuel
it's just amazing what to do you
know of with the with the
resources that we have.
The one part that maybe ill this
will be the only question that I
have.
Is so when we see that flat
helpful the death Services.
Just the state so I think we
have learned all.
A painful experience with having
so much depth.
And because then the the high
payment that goes in to paying
for debt services.
Tell the state would keep it at
a at a minimal versus to at the
level that we have been in the
past and I don't know how the
safeguard or how we could do
that and I know also with the.
chairman Smith you know how
concerned he was because of
well.
Supporting additional the no new
revenue but not for bonding.
The it's so catch twenty two
because you need both but within
that I think if you have all
well the right balance you know
so much better for the state
that being at a high level
bonding so with that are you
still with us is to secretary
Seneal.
Thank you Mr chairman yes I
think one of the things that
happened in the past with
bonding is eight have twenty
five or thirty year bonds on the
trying to keep the the yearly
payment down
and thank you for sponsoring
this bill are are bonding bill
we do want to utilize the rest
of the two hundred thirty four
million that's was already
approved in the grant funding we
have seventy five approved
through the special session the
reason we want to do that now is
we can get this in a ten year
bond we can get an interest rate
pry lower than one percent if we
can do it now with this low
interest rate is probably not
going to be any good time in the
future to get this done we know
we have four years of coming up
of high payments in which case
estimate need into our
construction budget and so if we
can free up this money
especially during this time with
the pandemic and that the
economic the economy recovery
and we think it's a really good
investment because the money is
so cheap to borrow it's not
anything like what's been done
in the past I think it's a
responsible way to go and we
appreciate you sponsoring that
bill for us Mister chairman
Senator I'm sorry madam chair
and senator.
very well all madam chair of the
secretary Santa well I just
really want to applaud because
so.
you know just today's
presentation how wrong that it
was you know you covered
everything.
And the you know and very and
also with the assistance of well
Connor.
You know but just the state you
know
I also feel very ill.
You know when we get something
like the the trip report that
mentions you know the conditions
on the status of our bridges
road road miles the thing about
it is so.
I think we just need a paradigm
shift you know or more
responsibilities on everyone
that the roads belong to
everyone and they're not free.
You know from all of the entire
part of you know how we work
with this the definitely I will
applaud your staff and I will
apply the work that's being done
and also the commitment that you
bring to us you know especially
on the inclement weather you
know another part that all of
the you did mention that you
know every so often in our state
well that has come also is when
you have this so desert sand
storms and the other part is I
know that the department of
Linda and you know what no there
were some wildfires also going
with the DOT's equipment.
You know to a system and you
know that it's all you know
within our state.
You know again the madam chair
members site really hold it all
the legislation that was so
placed on the screen that we
really supported strongly and we
make this so pieces of
legislation happen this year
thank you.
Thank you Senator Gonzales very
well for that Preciado your
information I know you're a very
big group when it comes to
transportation issues.
Eight are you done to we're
gonna move on to Senator Pat
Woods Senator are you there.
Yes thank you madam chair.
Of in a presentation there was
something said about thirteen
million dollars that the
executive one what do proud of
how it was was marked good I
hear more about that.
Yeah madam chair and senator I
think for as long as I've been
here we've had a process our
budget always that starts is
house bill three and house
transportation we meet with the
analysts and with members of
their committee to try and
decide where to put any fund
balance that's coming in in this
case we also had additional
revenue just because we under
estimated the gas tax revenue
you're being conservative so
that we don't overspend to ended
up having about fifty million
dollars of money yes to put into
certain locations we had an
agreement of our tech group
where that money would be spent
and then during a process during
a hearing it was amended and
moved and we were not allowed to
have any input on that so I was
very disappointed in that I
think I made that very clear I
still don't think that it was
put in the right place I'd like
it to go to our original
agreement
and I guess I'll just leave it
at that madam chair and senator.
Well you got me in really
intrigued now.
Mr send of all where is that
road at.
Madam chair and senator it's not
a road basically
we do invest a lot in our
districts but I also as a
secretary of transportation we
have a whole department and I
have to represent our entire
department and there was some
money put in other parts of the
department that is in dire need
of that money and then that
money was taken out of that and
pushed into maintenance and use
all the money that went to our
districts for maintenance
projects and so I think that
money would be better served in
other areas of our department
that actually help support the
district and I'll just give you
an example of of one I won't go
into too much detail but we have
a program where we have a
contract that they go out and
they take pictures of all of our
pavement they take light our of
our of our guard rails and signs
and bridges and it brings
information back to the
department and we do it should
do it about once every five
years hasn't been done since
twenty thirteen it tells us were
damaged guardrail as were
missing signs are all of those
things we had put money to do
that again and that money was
moved and then to make sense and
so that's the type of thing that
happened and I am certainly not
questioning the Authority of you
it to appropriate where you need
to I was just a little
disappointed that we were
allowed to at least come in and
get feedback so that people can
make an informed decision so
that's that's the kind of thing
that happened.
And madam madam chair of.
This is our car from hello see
if I if I might and
So there was the secretary said
of all is is correct there isn't
typically a tech group
process which this year was was
followed and ultimately again
some some changes were made by
the Canadian after the process
we do have a list of those I
think the
the upshot is.
You know we we saw several
changes for example money for
there was two million dollars in
traffic safety for ad campaigns
the the department had requested
and that the committee then
moved up into districts
maintenance and fuel supplies
there was a million for
communications which similarly
was moved into that District
maintenance and fuel supplies
there was a million to fifty
that was related to the light
are issue and I think the but H.
T. PWC action.
was taken when the the members
of that committee voiced their
preference to have any
additional monies being moved to
support directs maintenance
activities and I think it's also
important to keep in mind what
we're really talking about
again there was that nine
hundred fifty eight million
dollar request and then I got
increased by the fifty four
million dollars
to take us to one point oh one
four billion dollars and so what
we're talking about here is the
is the fifty four million
dollars exclusively but
But yeah I I just wanted to
provide some of those additional
details.
Thank you madam chairman.
Well course I'm at a complete
loss because I do know from my
colleagues in the house we're
one thirteen million dollar
expenditure was talked about.
And it happened to be according
to them the number to.
Avid road in the state that need
some repair done on it.
And so I don't know what I don't
have any idea if we're talking
apples to apples oranges to
apples or or what we're doing
here but I was told to watch
after this little bit so I guess
if you would Connor let me know.
Exactly where that thirteen
million dollar road is in at our
that expenditure offline will be
fine.
And the I would take a lot of
interest in that.
So thank you very much Madam
chairman.
Thank you Senator appreciate
your your questions well I don't
see anyone else
let me check double check this
right here make sure I don't
leave anyone out there I don't
see any more hands up here for
any questions and I personally
just want to thank you have a
secretary and your staff for all
the work that you do in many
times we take this for granted
we get in our car and there we
go and you know we complaint
once in a while we see a pothole
here there but most of the time
ninety nine point nine percent I
want to say at least for me I
get in my car I keep going and
everything is great and fine and
no problems you tend to forget
that all that takes funding you
take coordination pay scale the
takes the divisional staff to be
able to do here the work that we
have require you to do and so I
want you to know that I
appreciate everything that you
do and that in talking to
senator goes on this I have
heard many times how short you
are in your budget ever since
he's been working on
transportation issues he's
always mentioned how much
funding you need and how
resourceful you are that you do
so much with so little and you
know I think that we need to
take that very seriously I was
shocked actually maybe I I just
hadn't seen this part one and I
think Conor you mentioned it and
and thanks for your work to
Connor you mentioned that there
was a three hundred fifteen
million dollar shortage for
maintenance and then there's
also a two hundred fifty three
million dollar shortage for
construction.
Do hear that correctly.
Madam chair you did and those
are those are numbers we work
with D. O. T. in their asset
management folks do a fantastic
job putting together those those
needs assessments I believe I
included that and
In in your packet on page five.
Thank you I just wrote the
numbers down as you were talking
because I thought that was quite
significant
and not only that but I think
that as time goes by the last we
do on the roads the more costly
in so you know in addition to
that I was just thinking all
these ripple effects are coming
to my mind in addition to that
you find that you leave things
behind like this that what
happens is that instead of
paying attention where you're
supposed to be working on
different parts of the state for
example you know it just tends
to to pile up on you and have
this this ripple effect and
presale we just don't know where
we are but I remember a few
years ago there with one the
discussions took place about the
great program and all of this
different ways to be able to put
funding for roads and and on and
on
you know it's very evident to me
that we still lack today we
still lack a very good system
framework by which we can
continue to fund the department
of transportation for roads
throughout where we know that
they're going to get done we
know that we can have a plan
that can be fulfilled we know
that we give the staff a mandate
to do and work on some of the
roads and bridges and everything
else you do that out of the
funding is there and that you
don't have to be delayed have to
wait but thank you very much for
your work
cabinet secretaries the staff
and also to our staff Connor and
of course it was them who was
that Diego thank you nice to see
you Diego
everyone else that has helped in
this whole process we appreciate
you and I think we are done for
the day because I don't see any
other hands up so thank you
thank you thank you madam chair
we appreciate you.
Right this committee thank you
very much.
Thank you and I'm sorry I didn't
even ask if you want to comment
on anything I said because my
Regis COVID the appreciation
thank you but okay great what
thanks to everyone you stay safe
this evening have a good night.
The many of you again soon.
By the chief.
