litigation just some of the very
high highlights it would require
us to produce in a tax
expenditure budget annually
which we currently that are
required by statute to do it
would streamline the way we do
compliance checks when licenses
are renewed making sure that
businesses are in tax compliance
just make it smoother
it would exempt payments from
arpa that New Mexico health care
providers are receiving from the
G. R. T. so there's a minor
non recurring impact to that
would allow tribal governments
to set their own tribal tax rate
and have full sovereignty over
that regardless of the
neighboring county right it
would repeal about a dozen
obsolete and expired sections of
the tax code and with that will
stand for questions those are
the highlights.
The audience but in support.
Opposition.
The.
Or.
Representative Harper and the
tax expenditure budget it's
never really been done so I see
that is here this also changes
there's a double taxation on
gross receipts on marijuana that
that gets eliminated.
For those that the same thing
happens rates I do have an
amendment to its back.
So we know that is the biggest
hit to the reoccurring costs
into the local cost on
cigarettes marijuana.
questions from committee
members.
Mr chair.
Are you proposing an amendment
now we have one
The move propose and.
Sure well I move things.
Finance committee amendment
number one to.
That big long bill before it
becomes Senate bill forty seven
one forty seven.
So page twenty one.
Online sports seven times a
practical.
And then on page forty one line
five strikes and certain there
for
Okay thanks.
This.
Representative substitute so
people.
That marijuana was taxed on
gross receipts and.
G. R. T. yes Representative.
Mr chair and members the
committee to where to explain it
is that if you're a cannabis
retailer you collect G. R. T.
send it to the state you also
collect cannabis excise tax and
send it to the state with the
way we the statute is written
right now when they collect the
cannabis excise tax they also
gross receipts tax on the amount
they collected so there's a very
blatant pyramid in there and the
amendment that the chair just
explain would remove the pyramid
and so it has a a minor negative
impact on state and local G. R.
T..
We use the same situation in the
cigarette tax correct so that is
a two million dollar cost in the
FIR to the state and one
million.
Something.
The cigarette Mr chair
In the taxed rather fire we
broke out cannabis versus
cigarette for it what was
section nine will not be section
ten the general fund impact of
taking that that you're meeting
off of cannabis is one point six
million local one point one
million.
On cigarette which your
amendment would restore
the cost would have been the
general fund impact of two point
seven million and a local impact
of one point eight million the
amendment will make sure you
keep that revenue in place.
Portion of the.
Any questions on.
So.
Mr chair by leaving the tax on
cigarettes with taking the tax
off of joints are we promoting
more joints and cigarettes.
And smoke.
This seems like a fairness
issue.
Doing both the don't do either
one.
There.
Mr was it really only because of
the revenue of.
How about for you.
smokeless.
That of a to Mr chair they've
got something in there that'll
fit your budget.
Where's the cannabis guy I'm
sure he's got some for you to.
The.
All right I don't care I don't
care either way but I but it is
curious to me why one and not
the other.
I
so Senator next question any.
Pat.
So when we call the roll on.
And.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond is excused
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill is excused
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz yes eight thousand eight
in a minute substitute bill
questions on this section.
Yes we are this is not I think a
lot of questions and then the.
And I get it every time we look
at one of these are very lengthy
but just in a nutshell much what
is it do and what what exactly
are you doing here because
there's an awful lot of stuff
here I mean just to scanning the
first forty pages to get to the
admin page there was sex crossed
crisscrossed the woods and the
forest several times.
Mr chair and and senator pedia
and the interest of time at the
onset I I discovered some of the
more significant highlights.
but everything in this in one
way or another simplifies tax
distribution reduces the
potential for litigation or
protest or makes the tax system
less confusing for taxpayers in
one way or another and I'm happy
to go into as much detail as you
like but I know that the
committee.
Appreciate that Mr chair and
madam secretary so this this
eliminate any credits deductions
any anything that's not working
for us is what I'm always
interested in we look at these
bills Mister chairman Senator
Padilla the bill does repeal
several sections of the tax code
that are either expired or
obsolete these are things that
we recommended for repeal in the
tax expenditure budget because
they're not being used they've
never been used or they can no
longer be used so it will make
us that section of the code
shorter but they don't have any
fiscal impact they're not
raising taxes on any taxpayer.
And Mr chairman and madam
secretary and Sanchez so if
you're reconfiguring searing
account and somewhere in New
Mexico when you're doing work
for any number of people this is
going to cause any grief from
that standpoint these are just
inserts and removals and.
Mr chair Senator pretty I don't
expect that any tax
practitioners will have grief
over this and and and chairman
and senator I could add to that
we've had the New Mexico CPA
society and other folks look at
this legislation
since it was I presented during
rest up and we've incorporated
their changes this this really
makes it easier for those folks
to administer okay thank you
that's not.
In the questions.
And secretary have a few in the
center should know wants to and
from right.
Every time a striking a business
in and I'm on page eight right.
It says restricts businesses
purchaser purchaser at strict
business at the location of the
seller locations indicated by
structured for delivery.
Or the friction when done.
Market if the chairman members
of the committee good afternoon
my name is mark shaken the tax
policy director the taxation and
revenue department this is just
a clean up Mr chair to clean up
the language to make a little
less confusing because we use
the same terminal function
different places with different
meanings and this is just meant
to clean that out of.
The archiving Tax down the
right.
So you know our our I webcasting
is down no it's it's going
except for the video audio
taking her off.
So.
Make sure to get trouble in the
digital world again like it did
last week and so are webcasting
is down except for audio but I
assume is working so recording
on zoom.
And that will back up the system
so I'm gonna keep going and so
more go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman.
again this is a just a clean up
of language we use the term
business location currently in
several different places with
different meanings so this was a
something that we're changing
from business location to
reporting location simply to
clarify and make it easier for
people to understand the code.
So and I a.
Sell something to someone in
Albuquerque my business location
is in Gallup I've I identify
that that product went to
Albuquerque Albuquerque G. R. T.
right not gallops correct Mr
chairman that is correct that
would be reported.
Thank Mr chair just to just to
kind of add to that nothing in
this bill changes the location
that things must be reported to
we you know we move from origin
to destination based sourcing
and nothing in this bill on does
or re does or changes any of how
taxpayers must comply.
K..
No well the representative can
makes mistakes and tax bills on
to make sure I'm not getting
caught up in any mistakes as we
move forward I think you went
through it with Adrian today
correct do not go through this
bill with Adrian today that
chairman that's correct.
And then on the Lincoln C. so I
fail to report when dealing with
I need my taxes payroll G. R. T.
X. that is waiting distance then
you can hold my license until I
come current Mr Chairman almost
ending on what you're renewing
let's say you're renewing a
liquor license the taxed
Representative check will be
that you are complying with the
liquor excise tax on the gross
receipts tax and if you have no
on file returns so and that's
the same for the liquor tax
cigarette tax weight distance
and a couple others that are
addressed in this bill the
problem we're trying to address
is that they're all throughout
statute there later these tax
compliance checks that we do for
business licenses we do that
mostly with our LD but the
language is a little different
all throughout and so if we make
the land it went language
standard than we can do a better
job streamlining and automating
those checks.
Okay then on page twenty.
The director of the struck all
home game into alcoves beverage
control.
Show all not allow transfers
Simon assume any of the crisis
reversion to the director
receives written notification
from the sec your team secretary
or their delegate that authority
in the.
You so the liquor license not to
to the.
So let me go through some more
there somebody has a liquor
license and the distributor
sends a letter out in the.
I think we collect at the
distributor on liquor.
In the customer doesn't pay the
taxes then you can suspend their
license or not renew it only.
Mr chair and I think that's
that's correct we would not
renew unless Marcus any
different than that and and
that's the same in current law
really we're just making all the
language match throughout
various sections.
And then so.
Save state that they use that
system I think you can tap for
that right.
I'm just.
It probably isn't done through
tap I think our audit and
compliance the compliance side
of our audit and compliance
division goes into the tax
payer's account to check
compliance.
And how would the protests that
send my transformation through
you're not reporting it if a
license falls on a quarter where
they're not required to report
if Mr chairman occasionally
there will be something
reflected incorrectly engine tax
or for example if a taxpayer has
sent a return and but it wasn't
received in or something of that
nature we just have a dialogue
with the business to until we
come to a conclusion that they
are compliant and then move it
forward.
And then on the pursuant to the
tribal section right.
It says they can do anything
they want that we have an
agreement on cigarettes
Interxion and may now this on
cigarettes that thank you have
to be within a certain
percentage so don't shift that
market share.
I'm not well I don't think
during recess relates to the
cigarettes this is specifically
to the G. R. T..
Correct but.
I'm in business in I want a tax
advantage over somebody else and
I'm located in Albuquerque.
Where Sandia is let us.
I think what's the other one
there's another tribe that right
in a fight on the tax advantage
Then I would move to those
markets and then have a tax
advantage telling my guys if if
I sell you a million dollars
worth of lumber from my eyes
letter location I can see the
two percent on your taxes and I
create an on fair to vantage
because two percent G. R. T. in
a million two hundred thousand I
think right twenty thousand.
The thousand and so you can
create a disadvantage.
To the market.
And I think we have maybe maybe
not cigarettes but I may be a
gas tax in some agreement where
they couldn't.
Representative Harper where they
could go Senator shown Mr chair
is there is a criminal gasoline
tax at seventy cents they can
they can use collected user for
governor purposes but they
can't.
Yeah and so so the gentleman
you're exactly right there is an
agreement the gasoline tax what
to what this is trying to do is
right now in law it says that is
what and Santana or Sandia they
can not increase their G. R. T.
higher than their surrounding
areas right that's current law
that's currently can be
accepted yeah that.
Yeah keeps them out of the the
agreement talk a little bit
louder because yes or not so if
the if the do increase above it
keeps them out of the agreement
were the tax department does the
collecting and remitting and all
of that.
So there's that heart stop right
now for the I mean they can go
as low as they want but they
can't go higher and we're saying
here is we're gonna.
Treat the tribes the same we
treat any county or municipality
let them go higher if they want
and so actually it would be kind
of the opposite of what
the sooner that you suggested if
we passed this sandy is one of
whatever could make it higher
then in Albuquerque.
Thank in the lower right now
they can go over the can do
whatever they want they just
can't go higher under current
law making alone and it's
raining Mr Chairman sort of a a
timely issue around this too is
that as the state has cut its G.
R. T. rate by a quarter percent
the total right that tribes are
allowed to collect is now coming
down as well so I think it is
more important with the state
reducing its right last year and
potentially again this year.
That and that brings an
interesting question when we
reduced G. R. T. last year when
we have any tribal entities come
back and say Hey you know what
you're doing is kind of fact
innocent R. G. R. T..
And.
We want to send caution to that.
Mr chairman not that I'm aware
of really listen I'll think not
now not from Mr chair not to my
knowledge but I think it has
come up during this legislative
session we've we've been
contacted about that in this
proposal in the bill would
alleviate that concern.
Because they can go higher not
lower correct and and like all
local governments Mr chairman
that tried in setting it's right
if it chooses to fire it has to
weigh the pros and cons about it
it might just like any local
government would they make it
might bring in more revenue or
it might deter activity from
happening there and they have to
strike the right balance like.
Okay I think that in and then
you're codified the tax extender
budget which we never codified
so Representative Harper this is
this is new it's not Chairman
it's not a cleanup of the old
agency sure kind of find the tax
expenditure budget let's be
clear about that so chairman we
have as a body passed that
legislation a half dozen times
and it's been vetoed by Democrat
and Republican governors who
basically don't like the
Legislature telling their tax
department they have to do
something I was very pleasantly
surprised when when the tax
department came forward and said
that up
Commission approval from this
executive to actually finally
codify it they've been just
doing it because of the
executive order all these many
years the tax expenditure report
we get.
They just do it because the
governor said to so I I think
this is wonderful that that part
the government agreed finally to
make this law.
And how does it amended the
corporate and the franchise tax
on the gross receipts.
This is about the pass through
entity definition.
Thanks.
Mr Chairman what it does is
there's
it adds back in the amount of
credit that they receive what
sort let me go back a little bit
if passed to NC elects to pay
the tax directly then the
certain owners and if it's not a
partnership will get a credit
but in order to make up for
against their taxes that they
would on individual level but in
order to make the math work you
actually have to add that amount
of credit that was paid by the
pass through NC back into their
base income otherwise the the
the math doesn't work and
actually I could present an
example but
I I'm not sure how that on the
actually but basically it was we
went through this as we were
drafting a bill and it turns out
that if you just give them a
credit for the tax that was paid
but you don't have that into
their base income that we're not
collecting enough tax on them
because we're under reporting
their income.
But on a pass through entity in
gross receipts that that should
just be a a pass through from
the gross receipts to them if
you're craving one side and then
you're adding impact income then
you're raising their income
level even those rate in gross
receipts.
Because they would normally get
it is Mr chairman because they
would normally get a tax
deduction for the amount of
credit rate say they have a
hundred thousand dollars the
past entry as a hundred thousand
dollars of income the pass
through entity pays the tax
directly say they paid six
thousand dollars on that then
only ninety four thousand
dollars will actually be
reported as income and the state
tax will be calculated on ninety
four thousand dollars of income
so the amount of credit they
receive will be too large versus
the amount of taxes due on that
income so you have to add it
back in to calculate the amount
of state tax that would be do
against which they're taking the
credit for the tax that was paid
by the pass through instant.
Little complicated for me.
Mr chairman will agree to and I
had to have it is going to be by
the staff from the multi state
tax commission.
but she she did send me a little
chart an email that that showed
me how the math works and so
about so I'm able to talk about
it too but I can get that for
you at some point and for that
little simple she wrote up for
me if you would like I can
certainly do that.
Yeah I mean it if it's just for
round numbers if the total
amount is a hundred thousand net
income in the gross receipts
were six thousand you're taking
that six thousand off of right
in the gross receipts and that
brings you ninety four percent
all right then you're adding it
back to their income which would
bring it back to hundred
thousand Mr Chairman probable
points of personal this only
relates to income taxes not to
gross receipts and I know that
so say they have a hundred
thousand dollars of income and
the pastor entity elects to pay
the tax directly say they have a
six percent taxes I going on but
Matthews is here at six so they
would pay six thousand dollars
in tax that would mean that
they're actually passing on only
ninety four thousand dollars to
their owners that's what will be
reflect also partner share and
talk about a partnership Mr I
was in a single member pastor in
the yeah so if you have a single
member that's how we work if you
have to members of the forty
seven thousand you so you have
to add the credit back and.
Okay.
If they didn't have a you don't
add the credit back in the if
they did pay.
Mister chair if the pass through
entity pays the tax than we had
back in the pass through entity
does not pay the tax we don't
have to because they'll be of
passing on the full amount of
income without any deduction for
taxes paid.
So what would be the purpose of
the of of them paying the tax
the state just holding in in the
partnership and dividing fifty
by two and so you're paying for
six percent on fifty.
Mr chair this is a workaround to
the tax cuts and jobs act cap on
the deduction that individuals
not businesses can take on their
taxes so the the advantages that
the the individual will have I'm
not have to have their cap their
sole source state and local
taxes captive when the itemize
their deductions so that's the
benefit they're getting is it
doesn't affect through their
state taxes at all all the
benefit occurs on the federal
side.
And what about the franchise
tax.
Mr chair I don't believe this
affects the franchise tax I
believe this is just the
corporate income tax for income
and franchise tax act there are
a Mr chair there the corporate
and franchise tax act is just
the name of the act but the
supplies to the corporate income
tax.
What.
Senator Burt just a quick
question Mr chairman the medical
insurance pool a testament.
Can you explain that I don't
even know what that is this
first time I've heard of this so
can you explain that to me and
and why are we no one is it no
longer refundable with the way
the bill's been re work.
The Senators session.
Sure.
Okay Mr chair.
Representative Sir Senator for
Within what used to be twenty
one I might now be section
twenty two of the substitute
bill there was a recent decision
in order that the tax base
potentially a decision in order
on a tax protest from through
the administrative hearings
office and we are what we're
attempting to do it through this
statutory changes reserves the
tax base that was in place
before which is what tax and
Representative thought was
intended by the legislature
before and it it basically
certain insurers can take a
medical insurance pool credit
for some types of insurance
issued it's very limited from
their their credit should their
credit they take for that type
of insurance should not be able
to exceed their tax liability
and they should be able to write
off to zero but not receive a
refund or carried forward to
future years we did not the tax
department's position was that
the current statute doesn't
allow that but there was a
decision in order that reversed
it and so this change is
necessary to preserve Tax base.
So it it and it's no longer
refundable is that right the.
Cracked which was the position
of that the tax department all
along and but now the law of the
land with this decision in order
is that it can be refunded or
carried forward to future here
just clarifying that.
Kind of confuse like chairman
but thank you for that Mr chair
Senator Burt we would we would
also enjoy if our workers less
complete.
To the issues that come to us
and we we we would all like it
to be real simple and I think
Senator chair actually has an
idea of how to.
That maybe that discussion so
thank you very much Mr chairman
and thanks for the information
I'm gonna go Senator Steinborn
and please the only issue that
we brought up is the vote on
this we need to be.
Live everywhere in.
We know what happened last time
we went live everywhere on the
floor so what we will we're
going to figure out you may not
need to be in the room but Mr
stick provided somebody up there
for the vote in case you that
but we do want to be live so we
don't run into an issue on the
floor Senator Steinborn thank
you Mr chair and representative
senator secretary
can you tell me the lineage of
the such as.
Mr chair and Senator Steinborn.
that two years ago the twenty
twenty one legislative session
when when we proposed and passed
house bill ninety eight that
kind of clear the deck of all
the statutory cleanup we knew of
at the time we've been
collecting ideas so for two
years we've been collecting and
making note of changes that
needed to occur for one reason
or another something's not
functioning well something's
leading to a bunch of protest
something is prone for
litigation and so we've just
been collecting those ideas we
proposed all is an agency bill
and now they are all combined
together as one okay so thank
you Mr chair madam secretary so
this this is a really a
department bill of cleanup
issues have there been
interest groups through this
that were involved in the
crafting of this bill at all.
Mr chair not really most of
these ideas I have generated
through staff if I'm
If I I can think of one though
there is a section that has to
do with excluding our propane
equipment from G. R. T. that was
a bill that came to us through
health practitioners we heard
that they were proposing it and
set that makes perfect sense we
would like to included in here
too so that one way or another
gets passed thank you Mr
chairman of secretary and co
existence with this is
information who's involved in
the crafting bills that many
states have deemed appropriate
for our knowledge in the
discussion of bills before we
vote on them this is something
that our legislature is not yet
in their wisdom given us this
empowered us or the sinister
with this information so rather
than be from not knowing I'm
gonna start asking this question
more more so that we can.
Really kind of solve the mystery
behind some of these bills that
we're just left wondering but
thank you for answering that for
Leafbuyer answers let's put it
that way and and senator state I
I and I I I like we're going
with that line of questioning
and so so also note that the CPA
society came forward to us and
asked could you please include
what was sections twenty five
might now be twenty six and the
new substitute but they're
finding that
they needed some changes to the
testing time line for CPA's and
we thought okay those are tax
practitioners that fits in this
bill and and we agreed to put
that and at their request thank
you madam secretary thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
The body of more questions.
Try that systems.
Misleading is that it's comical
plan savings of we'll put it
back up we'll try to get all
twenty two phonogram but.
Around the corner.
For but it is being recorded
this.
But we do want that live so we
may have them reboot the system
as we're having agencies we can
do that okay all right.
Thank thank you for your
presentation yeah yeah thank you
present we have so as to when
you come back centers and over
you don't bring that pie and ice
cream.
doing first.
On into the early childhood
first Kelly.
Let me just say something we
have a disagreement with the LFC
on their their their comments of
the racks I don't this is not
reflective on you madam
secretary but I do know on
anybody.
Going after them we can work
that out so I just want to
clarify as we move forward on
these racks that.
The conversations are not.
Thank you for L. in the bottle
committee.
Tell you gonna start soft make
sure we know the house this yes
thank you Mr chair Kelly client
with the legislative finance
committee for on early childhood
education and care Department
HSD code six eleven.
with me today is secretary
secretary Elizabeth Groginsky
and my difficult part more
medicines Morris to the far
right so I've been asked to re
go over what HSC did for the
budget and then take a deeper
dive into some of the childcare
pre kindergarten discussions
that we've been having.
So with that you should hand out
in front of you with the general
fund high level that also has
some other revenues in that high
level so just so you know that
fort Collins has HFC but love it
is what is currently contained
in house bill two right now from
the house appropriations and
finance committee
just to know every time you see
one of those side boxes with a
little aero poking out that
land grant permanent fund
revenue.
And so Land Grant Committee fund
revenue is general fund revenue
and so we have to count in the
general fund summary high level
and there is a land grant
permanent fund table rack up on
page two of your hand out so
lines seventy three through
eighty every time we see one of
those lines that matches up to
the general level of where the
land grant permanent fund
revenue has been appropriated a
majority of that revenue is for
pre kindergarten eight million
is for home visiting and twenty
two million is for some tennis
replacements that allows HSD to
keep tenants so that it can be
used in other of children and
family programs in HSD involved
in CYFD so as you can see here
with that land grant permanent
fund revenue for general fund
it's almost a seventy percent
increase for early childhood
and then the secondary Tabor is
your early childhood education
trust fund revenue so that
separate from land grant
permanent fund this is on top of
land grant permanent fund.
And that can be seen on lines
fifty three through seventy two
now will note since the last
time we heard from this
committee the bill was to
increase distributions from the
trust funds from a hundred
million dollars the bill has
been amended it has reached the
Senate side it'll be heard in
Senate education first and then
I believe it comes to you guys
and it's been amended to a
hundred twenty five million
dollars for the distribution so
you'll notice that between the
LFC in the HFC wrecked that's
gone up twenty five extra
million dollars a majority of
that revenue is going to child
care assistance and so you'll
note
There's several put places where
truckers is insisting on this
high levels you can't just use
one sixty nine because it's
pocket in different forms it's
about seventy seven million
additional child care assistance
from that revenue source on top
of that
there is five million of the
opioid settlement money going to
child care assistance and then
an increase in federal revenues
that came from like eight
federal budget of almost sixteen
million so all of those are new
revenues for child care
assistance on top of the current
operating budget so those are
kind of the high level what the
numbers look like when it comes
to early childhood education and
care department I will know that
the I was asked to go to a
deeper dive into childcare
someone a full sentence and
charts in your packet maxed.
So on page three of your packet.
This is the childcare assistance
sources and uses chart and so it
gives you all of the revenues
and the spending and so you can
see in the agency called on the
eve increase the medicine three
hundred and six million dollars
and there's some proposals that
came from executive after
further conversation about how
to spend those revenues you'll
notice online seven for eighteen
through lines twenty two are
propose executive rate increases
for childcare assistance and
what those would cost
there is a line for expanded
enrollment so more of the
children rules and that's online
twenty three that is a
possibility estimate from LFC if
to add an additional thousand
children.
there online twenty four is a
line it's more of a place holder
of for a copayment restructuring
right now families are not
paying copayments for child care
assistance that's been covered
by federal revenues the agency
has spoken with us if they would
like to do some restructuring of
have copayments system looks
like to look to more aligned
with federal recommendations LCS
at this point doesn't actually
have a cost estimate on that so
we pocketed some money to
hopefully be able to cover with
that looks like it's less you
know it might be able to go back
into more slots if it's more
there's still some flexibility
in the budget to look at that so
and then the last two lines are
just quality administrative
costs of the agency gets and so
you notice that and even with
all those findings that there's
about almost five and a half
million dollars left over online
twenty nine for additional work
that the agency would like to do
and that's if that line twenty
four is forty million dollars
that could change.
So that's for the agency
childcare assistance budget lays
today is an estimate.
And then I'll turn your.
packet to the next two pages and
so I was asked to go over what
range of like a little bit.
So on page certain words if you
were cut off the page numbers.
Page four of your packet.
In twenty twenty one there was a
large child care assistance rate
increase and so the blue bars on
the right R. the Ole are on the
left of the old rates the tables
on the right or the current
rates for child care assistance
and you'll see below are the
percentage increases on the
right on tables what on average
those rate increases were for
those child care providers.
on the one before it yeah.
So that that's the old reflect
compared to the range that we
are currently providing at this
point.
Now as we noted in the child
care sources and uses table the
agency is proposing rate
increases again and so this next
page which is the one that's
chairman public minute ago with
that orange and blue.
Is what LFC estimates the new
rates would look like annualized
so the blue chart is the current
rates for children by star level
and the orange is the proposed
estimate of the new rates given
what the agency again in broad
spectrum of what those rate
increases would look like for
those children still see for
instance right now it's eighteen
thousand two hundred dollars for
infants in a five star center
with the twenty two percent rate
increase it would move up to
twenty two point two thousand
and so those are some of the
cost drivers in this budget is
looking at that average cost per
child according to these
requests rate increases.
On your next page page six I
know we look at this again we
look at the last time but we
were asked to bring it again.
This shows you how child care
assistance it's a snapshot looks
like by age range of enrollment
so for instance in January of
twenty twenty two forty one
percent of the children enrolled
in child care assistance for
school age or older and fourteen
percent were the youngest
children fourteen percent so you
can see how that's pocketed it
ranges the highest point in
which infants were enrolled is
was all the way back in two
thousand sixteen that was at
twenty seven percent but on
average from the **** Center
we've seen the last two years it
ranges between thirteen to
fourteen percent any given month
for the youngest children in
child care assistance just
remember that trucking system
starts the first few weeks of
life and ends when you're
thirteen so it is a broad ranges
Adrian service.
Your next tables which is table
seven is just a projection of
the early childhood Trust Fund
with that new distribution of a
hundred and twenty five million
in FY twenty fourth so you'll
notice that in FY twenty former
spending hundred twenty five
million and then the new
distribution comes through and
it's still going to grow two
hundred and fifty three and
twenty five two hundred seventy
eight and twenty six and three
hundred seventy four in twenty
seven and if I were to move that
table out just a few more years
you're going to see that it
increases initially almost a
five hundred so that's going to
continue to grow despite the
increased distribution this
year.
And then finally in your packet
you're going to see the early
childhood education department's
queue for so end of fiscal year
last year report card so you
have some performance it on here
there's some key charts on this
table so you'll see the early
childhood education of funds
that have been increased since
FY twelve significant increases
every year since then even in
years of solvency and financial
troubles.
And then the two blue charts
show the increase average cost
we've been paying every year
between fifteen and twenty two
for child care assistance you'll
notice that every single year
the average cost for children
and child care assistance has
continued to grow and then the
table right below that shows the
average monthly enrollment for
all of those same fiscal year
so.
The pandemic we range from about
twenty twenty one thousand kids
enrolled in childcare assistance
at any given time during the
year that did this COVID pretty
natural and then you'll see that
we've shot back up now the
newest members of that I have is
were around twenty four thousand
kids enrolled
on the last month that I have
data for and so that's really
been risen above the pre
pandemic levels of children
receiving services mostly as a
result of the expanded
eligibility you will remember
during the summer the department
executive announced of federal
poverty level four hundred
percent is the eligibility level
for families to receive child
care assistance as long as
they're participating
economically meaning they're
going to school or they're
working.
So with that I will turn it over
to MaryBeth for any additional
comment thanks Kelly Mr chair
committee members I and I really
don't have anything to add to
that I think it's.
Federal.
Secretary and
Take it away thank you.
Members of the committee we
shared yesterday with the
committee secretary in that with
you a one pager that outlines
the request up how to and not
increase any money coming into
the ECECD budget but to
allocated in a way that allows
us to continue the momentum that
we've made expanding pre K.
creasing the hours increasing
the supports for families in pre
K. and maintaining enhancing the
gains we've made in childcare so
with that I'll stand for
questions.
Make sure.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and good afternoon secretary and
her staff and other nice lady
here with us today
I thank you for this one pager
so much easier to understand and
I know that last time you were
here there were some questions
in the at least comments that we
were we were mentioning about
more about childcare pre K. and
that's where help me understand
okay if I understand your
presentations correctly in your
paperwork it seems like you
