HAFC made.
It basically started with the
LFC and then adjusted from
there. Yeah, let's start with
those. OK, the first is on line
6, Mr. Chairman, for 500,000 for
the court-appointed special
advocates statewide for the next
special appropriations which
sheet so they make sure
everybody's OK.
And
6
It
that.
please.
No, page one, line 6.
OK, now we're all on the same
page.
Uh, Mr. Chairman.
There was
Let's see
I think we can skip through.
Page 2, line 14.
Let's go back to page one.
There's a $6 million
appropriation to the courts,
right?
That was the same as the LFC
wreck. That's correct. OK, and
you're only gonna show us
differences. That's what we can
focus on today, Mr. Chairman, if
you.
OK, so there was an ad of 5
million for additional.
Uh, hardware software and
equipment they tell us what page
you're on page 2 line 14, Mr.
Turner.
They also have um
Ria reauthorization uh request
uh that we can go over
separately at the appropriate
time of a previous appropriation
for the same purpose, that they
still have a balance.
We can skip over page 3, Mr.
Chairman. Those are all the
same.
Page 4 is all the same.
As the LFC.
Page 5.
On line 49.
Uh, this 3 million for tax and
Rev to work with the corrections
department was removed.
Both departments said they're
already working on this and
wouldn't need the money.
Line 53 was funding the DFA
request for uh starting.
Uh, with housing personnel and
programs.
As well as line 55 for housing
projects for senior citizens
living in manufactured housing.
I think there's a program up in
northern New Mexico that works
with MFA on that.
Mr. Chairman, on page 6.
Line 57.
There was a new item of 7.6
million for local public safety
infrastructure, and you can see
the earmarking of some of that.
Down along the
Order
Well, let me ask you this, this
is for
Public safety campus for
chaparral, it's 400,000.
Uh, in local, why is that not in
capital? I mean, that's a, that
is a Christmas tree earmark.
Mr. Chairman, that's what HAFC
chose to put in the budget.
We're gonna flame 57. That's our
first flag.
Good, Mr. Chairman.
Center.
Any of this has to do with
No, we're, we're not on that.
This is the DFA we're not undo
it.
Charles the public safety that's
different than that.
So.
Let's see, there was a change on
page 7, line 68.
The LFC had recommended moving
the administration of these
criminal justice coordinating
counsel, prime rejection grants
to DFA away from the sentencing
commission, HAFC moved it back
to the sentencing commission age
8.
110 million.
To support transitional housing.
That's to help people, um, move
from
unhoused situations or part of
substance abuse recovery and
behavioral health needs.
80 million of it is earmarked
for programs in
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
County, 10 million for programs
in Las Cruces and Doniana
County, the balance would be
available for statewide usage.
There was a corresponding
reduction of 50 million in fund
transfers, um, for transitional
housing that was in the LFC
recommendation that we'll get to
later, Mr. Chair. So let, let's
flag that one too, because
you're gonna have a kind of
carve out.
And I don't see Santa Fe in
there. They're gonna have to buy
for the 30 minutes that there's
I mean, there's 110 there and
you're just carving a majority
of that for two cities in in
that probably is not gonna work,
so playing that is number.
69. OK. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman.
OK, uh, 70 was a new ad to the
law enforcement re recruitment
and retention fund of 4 million.
72 to the mortgage finance
Authority for administering a
credit worthiness program at
250,000.
Well, do they currently do that,
a creditworthiness program in
DFA?
Uh, it would be to the mortgage
finance Authority, who's got a
range of different uh housing
assistance and down payment
programs. So it has to flow
through DFA to get to MFA.
And there would do we currently
do that in there?
I believe they have some
programs that are related to
that, but we can follow up with
what was their testimony on
that, that if they needed the
extra 250,000, they're going to
say yes, but they really needed
to do what they're currently
doing.
They have an earmarked to do a
variety of different housing
programs from STBs. I'll dig
into that. Yes, sir, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, line 74 is moving that 2
million from DFA to the
sentencing commission for those
grants, 2.5 million.
It's page 9. These are to
criminal justice coordinating
councils to
Uh, test out innovative crime
fighting techniques and LFC had
found that wasn't working very
well at the sentencing
commission with what they were
funding and and recommended
moving it to DFA.
HAFC moves it back to the
sentencing commission.
Mm
That's line 74, Mr. Chairman.
Well, just tell him.
Anybody just jump in right here
if something gets you because
I'm kind of looking down. I'm
not looking up so just kind of
jump in but don't run her over
each other.
Could we get a little more
information and details on what
that is and how that's gonna be
used. Yes sir, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Uh, page 9, Mr. Chairman, um.
Cybersecurity initiatives at do
it.
Uh, LFC was at 15, the exec was
at 10.
Uh, HAFC increased that to 20.
And then Mr. Chairman, there was
uh an ad on page.
982 as part of the ethics
commission testimony of the need
for
Um, infrastructure upgrades at
their office for security and
that would be through 2027, Mr.
Chairman, um.
Charles, I would like to.
Highlight line 80.
The Secretary of State has said
that she doesn't have any plans
for moving, she doesn't know
where she's gonna move $100,000
isn't anywhere near that.
I understand that the AOC moved
just a few years back. Is that
correct? Can we get some
information on what it costs
them to do that. Thank you.
Let's jump up to 76. There's a
bill soon this committee for
Trump radio systems where else
in the budget that we have that
in capital for do it.
We need to, we're gonna need to
flag some areas that they need
to.
Those radio systems in.
I'll check to see where the P,
I'll check to see where the
where the uh
Public Safety Radio.
That usually is in capital.
OK
OK.
Keep going.
Age 10
Mr. Chairman
Uh, line 88, the executive had
money for marketing excellence
Bureau.
Where agencies should try to
work with tourism who are the
experts in marketing to help
them, so that would be like.
Cultural affairs for museums and
monuments, um, the LFC had put
money in those agencies' budgets
to then go and work with uh
tourism in this case, HAFC chose
to get them 2 million to align
with the exec rec.
Line 90, 4 million and in new
appropriations for creative
industries grants that the
economic development department
administers.
Wait, let's jump back up to line
85 of the tourism department 26
16 million.
For national and international
advertising campaign.
Well, that's your sanium
standard, right? Yes, that's
correct. All right, then 2.5,
OK, good. Uh, line 93, an
increase for the New Mexico
partnership.
Uh, from 750,000 to 2 million.
Let's flag that.
Mr. Chairman, uh, again on line
94.
For operational support for
entrepreneurship, uh,
incubators, accelerators.
Uh, including $10 million for uh
Quantum Venture studio. It's for
a total of 15 million up from 50
million in LFC.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman
Charles, I'm looking at that
line 94 and it looks like the
economic development department
didn't request anything and
we're giving them $15 million.
I, I'd like to have more
information about that. OK, uh,
well, uh, so this is hand in
hand with um Senator Trujillo.
You want us to go through, how
do you want us to do this this
morning? Well, if we just tell
them to flag him, that's
signaling to him that we want to
know more information, right? To
me.
But we just tell them flag that
I want more in that the flagging
is telling them, give us more
information, we want more
detail, we want to know what's
going on there.
So I see what this is for. I
mean, this is actually uh could
be part of the um
The quantum bills that I have
actually.
Uh, but, but these aren't.
Credits or deductions or any of
this is what would this be used
for, I guess because it's well
he'll give us the information
we're just gonna go through them
and let them flag them. I just
wanted to, Senator Shindo you
Charles,
we can flag number 92 as well,
um.
On the uh unrepresented
filmmakers. I know that.
Do you jump into a film,
something I don't know if that's
connected with that. I'm not
sure, but if we can get more of
that. He wants to Benny Shindo
film studio.
Right, Charles 1195, another.
Uh, HAFC out of 15 million for
economic development.
Uh, space for innovation hubs
and including 10 million for
quantum innovation hub space and
Mr. Chair,
that number 95 looks like almost
an exact repeat of 94, so if you
can flag that with 94.
Well, I don't, well, I don't
think they're the same, but
let's get more info on it.
Yeah they're, they're not, but.
I mean 50 million. Let's just
flag from 93.
102.
To
all the way to, to 106.
I mean, those, that's a lot of
money in economic development,
that's 90, 50, maybe roughly
pushing the $250 million mark.
For economic development, let's
flag all those.
On 90 million for trade ports.
We don't even know what those
are. I don't even know what
those are.
there's a bill related to that
one, Mr. Chairman, but
Yeah, and and the language
there's more similar legislation
or similar legislation. I mean,
tell me what similar legislation
would, would be right now off
the top of your head with a
trade part. What is so that it
would have to be a bill that was
similar to um
House Bill 19 that got stalled
in maybe a Senate bill passed
instead.
That's standard template
language.
That you don't have to
if you don't want to.
But it gives the flexibility if
there's something another bill
that does the same thing it's
not the same exact number.
Is there another bill here, Mr.
Chairman? I'm not aware of one.
I thought that was just stalled.
OK. It looks like those. I'm
gonna see what all those are.
That's roughly 200 million.
OK, Mr. Chairman.
110 on page 12. I'm sorry, can
we just, uh, why are we flagging
all of the economic development
because they're large numbers
for me 50 million for this, 90
million for that, 7 million for
this, 10 million for that.
I mean, there's roughly 200
million in economic development
money in
I just, I want to know
contingent on enactment of
Senate Bill 169 or similar
legislation.
$24 million.
Uh, talent recruitment retention
public, private sectors.
$10 million.
Yeah
I mean some of those things like
earmarks.
what is it and can they get it
out in a year?
Yeah, I mean, we're gonna give
him $200 million. It's a small
agency. How are they gonna
handle a $200 million influx.
In some of it so.
Right. So what's
OK.
Mr. Chairman, on page 13.
Uh, it's related to.
Line 110
Before jumping in with $50
million for the fair access to
insurance requirements, Pilot in
Lincoln County that was in the
LFC wreck.
Uh, they were funding a study to
get a better handle on the
Insurance market overall and
what to do, especially
considering the fires in
California are going to upend
the national.
Market and, and will this
actually
This yep, uh, Mr. Chair, they
did keep 10 million, um,
To go into the fair uh program
online 14 uh uh like that
because when they were here,
they said that they're gonna do
hardening their homes. Then we
had a bill by Senator Stefaniks
that had money for harding the
homes.
Just one agency needs to do
hardening your homes. We don't
need to chase it and 5 different
agencies under 5 different
scenarios, and people will say,
well, go over here, go over
there, we'll.
You know
And another strategy could be
preventing fires in the first
place as, as opposed to
hardening homes as uh, are there
other cost-effective strategies.
Make sure like,
Power lines are
Uh, free and clear from trees
and things like that. So I think
that was the intent behind the
study. Yeah, but, but that's the
responsibility of the utility
companies, not of, of the state
if they don't clear their
easements and keep them clean
and
That's, that's not a state
responsibility there or a
private company, they can do
that themselves.
CRC
I mean PRC?
And so like that. I just don't
want.
You know, everybody's doing
weatherization. Eners doing
weatherization, MFA is doing
weatherization. There's
weatherization all over and, and
we got money scattered and
instead of just focusing on one
and giving them them enough
money for the 10 million here
we're out of money, go over
there. Oh, we got 10 million
here, we're out of money. So
pile it all up in one place.
Yup.
So, you know, I know, I know the
light heat program, I mean, I
know the weatherization that we
do with NMFA or whoever does it
and it's hugely important and
Saves
We get far more out of it,
right? It really helps people
say. I just want it to the
chairman's point though, I don't
know the other programs, but I
also wouldn't want to prejudge
them that they're bad just
because they're in another
program, I think we should hear
about it and see if
consolidation makes sense or
not.
Just from my perspective. That's
why we're flagging it right on.
Thank you.
Uh, line 116, uh.
Go to the exact rec on
veterinary facility and shelter
inspections.
Age 14.
Line 118, this would be for
helping cultural affairs get
ahead of their capital needs,
uh, giving them money for
feasibility studies, doing
planning and design, how to fix
up there.
Facility statewide, you usually
give them a annual capital
outlay grant.
Um, 119 for actual grants to
rural libraries up to $50,000
per library.
Uh, 3.5 million.
As opposed to putting money in a
savings account and only
spinning off of small fraction
of that.
Mr. Chairman, is this the kind
of language that the governor
typically vetoes when we say in
the item
which which which number did you
want to flag?
119
OK.
I mean, we funded rural
libraries to the tune of 20
million and now they want an
additional.
50,000 per library and that'll
bring it up to roughly 80,000
per library, so.
I mean, we created that trust
fund, there was never any money
in it, so I mean.
You can't just
Keep dumping money into things
and we got other issues we got
to resolve, so.
And then, uh, 111 flight 131
flight for me cause.
An archaeological field school.
The Department of cultural
affairs, $20 million.
The force and we not doing the
special session, did we not?
Set aside 10 million for for
spending and restoration in the
special session. This is for
more, Mr. Chairman, kind of in
relationship to not doing the
Um
The 49 million for the fair
program and the house hardening,
it was to
Do more forest.
Um, get all the for spending
money and then we sent some to
Mascalero. I want to see what
they've spent in the last 6
months in Masculero on there.
Beforeation or if they've even
done anything yet.
OK.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I think we can
skip to age 16. Mr. Chairman
Charles, can you flag 133. I
noticed that we, um, the
Energy minerals and natural
resources asked for 1.5 million
for vehicles.
Could I just understand why no
none of that money was provided.
Maybe it's somewhere else. Thank
you.
Page 16, Mr. Chairman.
Um
144.
was adding 10 million for
geothermal projects.
Um
141, I'm sorry.
Adding 10 million to get halfway
to the executive for geothermal
projects.
OK. 750,000 for oil
conservation, um, their admin
program.
On page 17.
0, 144, sorry.
Uh, 5 million.
For the state engineer to
continue its work with the
litigation and settlement there
I think there's some Ria
requests related to those at
both the AG.
As well
You're gonna have to turn on
your mic and so we can hear you
if you want it flagged. I got
it.
Mr. Chairman.
Yeah, I'd like that flagged
also. I mean, what do we put
into this? Uh, do we have any
idea how much you've already put
into this whole.
Litigation shenanigans circus.
You put in a fair amount of
money for the engineer to do
studies to help with the
litigation as well as for
attorneys' fees at the AG as
well as setting aside.
Uh, tens of millions of dollars
for water projects to try to
show that we're moving on, um,
In an area to
In southern New Mexico, uh, to
show Texas the that we were
meeting business on fixing
whatever issues we're being
litigated.
The
Everything is kind of gotten
flipped because
The
Um
Litigation was actually settled.
With Texas.
And then
The federal government under the
Biden administration.
Took the position that
They didn't want it to be
settled, and they wanted to
Keep it open and let the federal
government dictate how to the
settlement would go. So that's
still pending out there.
So is this all that's out that's
currently planned for that
litigation.
Mr. Chairman, we'll get, uh, how
much has been appropriated that
the that is unspent that they're
asking to continue to give them
authorization to spend as well.
I'm just saying in, in terms of
new money is this 5 million,
it's, is that all that's going
into this effort or is there, is
it another locations of the
budget. Uh, there's other money
in the AG's office related to
it.
And the engineer, uh, this was
part of the exact rep. Thank
you. I mean, we flagged it so
they're gonna come back. There's
Rio's money, I think in in
another section that we're gonna
have to look at. I mean, just so
members know, this is the
section where there's gonna be
the most movement in the most
money available. This is how
much 1.7 billion.
Joey, like 3.1 billion in 3.1
billion that.
That
We don't know what it does yet,
but we're gonna find out.
Mr. Chairman, on page 17, these
are for um
The non pueblo settlement
beneficiaries identified in
Indian water rights settlement
agreements that are, uh,
Congress did not uh passed last
session and they will still
Um
Be up for discussion this
session.
The state engineer has said they
can move forward on these even
though the settlements at the
federal government level haven't
been finalized, uh, with these
water projects and it would
count towards our state matching
requirements, uh, if we got
those done. And so HAFC added 5
million to the LFC's 20 million.
And we can also look at the
status of prior year uh spending
um for these as well for you,
Mr. Chair.
This
Mr. Chairman, um, Charles, I'd
like to know whether or not that
money that we invest in this is
going to count towards our share
in the long run.
That's what the engineer has
told us, uh, Mr. Chairman
Senator.
Uh, and
million, so we'll just call the
state engineer and go over this,
and we'll have a hearing with
the state engineer, hopefully he
goes is tracking that.erin
Charles 146, there's a million
for the state engineer for
regional water planning.
5 million to get to the exact
wreck on line 148 for the water
security Planning Act.
3 million to Indian affairs for
equipment and capacity building
for a sawmill and Mescalero.
that
Yeah, they have 10 million 4
stations, so we may just
In this special session
reappropriate that money in
capacity building. Is there
currently a sawmill mascular?
I think there was one that's
been closed down, and I think
there was discussion about how
to help them reopen it, and then
when you're
worse than process that would uh
locally.
Turn what is worth nothing. Go
ahead.
Sorry, um, Charles, would you
flag 149? I'd just like to know.
I know it's $200,000 for the
commission on the status of
women. Maybe it's included in
the regular budget. If you could
just give me information about
that.
Yes.
Page 18.
Line 154.
For community comprehensive
planning uh with Indian Asian
tribes and Pueblos 500,000.
4 million on page 161.
Or a pilot program for
grandparents raising grandkids,
that money would come out of the
Kiki Sager Fund.
Page 19.
Line 164, 1 million for a
A driver study.
169.
Is that related to 12, and 3.
164, no.
169.
169 is OK.
That's uh 28 million.
In the HAFC scenario.
10 million
Uh, stayed in for, uh, the next
two that are also related.
A 20
Same thing, this one was also
related.
In 173 was as well.
174 and 175 or other state funds
from the Healthcare
Affordability Fund. I think
these might be actually
recurring costs.
Which numbers? I'm sorry 175.
looks like those are, those are
actual recurring costs, so we
can see if we can get them.
placed appropriately.
Yeah.
Page 21, Mr. Chairman.
Line 186 for a healthcare
strategic recruitment program.
Uh, we
This can made contingent on
legislation.
And that should be House Bill
315, which was just filed.
E
22, Mr. Chairman, line 191.
This was an executive
recommendation for the local
news fellowship program at the
Workforce Solutions department,
a half a million dollars.
That's
I believe it isn't.
I think it may have been um.
A junior or junior grow money.
In the past
Junior.
We, we shouldn't be adding, but.
1862, I mean, is the workforce
solution. How many healthcare
like
Higher end institutions would
give health care money can be
gather those all up and see how
much we're putting into the same
thing and we're putting in
workforce solutions, I mean.
Correct, do you have, uh,
contractors in the health
department that work on
healthcare worker recruitment,
uh, primarily through a federal
program, you have loan repayment
and financial aid assistance
through the higher ed department
for.
Uh, healthcare recruitment as
well.
Good, good, real, real quick on
the uh local news fund, we are
adding to it.
And that's a really hugely
successful program.
Kind of training journalists and
deploying people in news deserts
and.
Um, so just FYI, I mean, we can
talk about it, but that's why
we're adding to it or proposing
to add to it.
In line 194, Mr. Chairman, on
page 22, 1 million to Workforce
Solutions.
promulgate rules for a
Program to support new parents.
Why is not early childhood doing
that? It's supposed to be in
consultation, I think this is
supposed to be some sort of
workforce development support
program focused on new parents.
Some question may need to look
into how that works let's look
at that home visiting and other.
Sure.
We're doing the same thing on,
on page 190 or 190.
Um
Why is that not under PED.
Did the workforce solution. The
workforce solutions program does
have
Uh, programs targeted towards uh
job training and employment
support services for youth, and
that's why this would build on
those efforts targeted to kids
who are out of school they've
got program for this already.
This is
in this.
So whoever's in the back
listening, make sure we flag
workforce solutions to bring him
in so they can talk.
all their specials.
We'll just hear about them all.
OK.
Uh, Mr. Chairman.
The next one on page 23 for a
small program at DD um.
TC 229,000. I believe that's
related to a bill we're getting
the number.
That will need to be updated.
Line 201, 6 million for an
opioid prevention program.
Mr. Chairman, Charles, could you
flag 198? I see that's for the
office of the Special Education
Ombuds, the contract, I know we
just passed legislation, um, and
I think it got off the Senate
floor and it didn't get carried
over to.
That's 198 thank you.
Uh, that line 201 would be
through fiscal year 2028.
Charles, is that the shots that
we heard in Albuquerque where
they said they can end your
craving and, you know, I think
they used the drug addicted
mother where this would not be
the this is a prevent preventing
people from becoming addicted.
Uh, what we heard about in
Albuquerque was uh something
called medication assisted
treatment where
It basically blocks the brain
from
Uh, the enjoyment from the
opioids and, and allows people
to not be addicted to it
anymore.
OK.
Keep going.
24, Mr. Chairman.
This is uh 2 million for
enactment of Senate Bill 219.
And even
Say that word, Mr. Chairman, I'm
not sure exactly what that is.
Line 205.
Over obesity and nutrition and
physical activity program,
300,000 sit there on your phone
and Google what that is.
Mr. Chairman, um, Charles the
205.
The Department of Health would
like to add language to that
line on 205 to save for the
obesity, nutrition and physical
activity program through
statewide flamenco youth
educational program will get to
language.
In another section. OK, thank
you. And if you need to flag it
for flag that one for.
I get that to you. Thank you.
And
Mr. Chairman La.
212, 1 million to develop PFOS
rules.
At the Environment department.
40 million for the strategic
water supply program was added
on line 213.
And 2:15 on page 25, 7 million
was added for the river Stewards
program.
On 214 flagged that.
Because we had a bill to take it
to sites.
contamination storage. I mean
you can park 50 million there,
but where are they going to take
the the rain and clean up.
There's no site that takes it.
They'd have to develop a site.
And, and get a federal permit to
transport it, so the 50 million
may just get stuck there because
If you have no place to take it,
or are they gonna clean it?
Mr. Chairman, let's flag 213
also because that depended on
House Bill 137 or similar
legislation. I'm not sure that
legislation's moving forward.
That's $40 million right?
OK Mr. Chairman.
elaborate on
29214.
So anyway, that's $50 million to
help clean up a couple abandoned
uranium mine sites, including um
some non-uranium mine site,
sorry, some non some abandoned
contaminated non-uranium mines,
uh, not mine sites, sites
include all dry cleaners and
stuff like that, so the
environment department has a
plan for spending that the they
have another ass somewhere,
maybe it was in Senate Bill 21
and they had money in there to
charge a fee for contaminated
sites, highly
am in ated sites. The secretary
pulled the money from the fund
and used it for contract and FTE
money, and now we're backfilling
that fund at 40 million.
And so he pulled all the money
out was that this was that the
special that he requested.
Well I think you're talking
about the correct, he pulled the
side. They pulled this site to
pull the money from highly
contaminated sites and
transferred it out.
Of the fund.
Or FTEs and other contract
employees, and now he wants, we
want to fill up back fill that
fun, but.
This is for uranium, it can only
be used for uranium.
He has another fun for highly
contaminated sites.
That he can use, so.
Let's keep going, Charles. OK,
Mr. Chairman, uh, let's see we
did River Stewards and then
again another environment on
line 216 million for
Um, drinking water sample
analysis.
Reflex 215.
Uh, that to be available through
fiscal year 27, which usually is
a flag they can't spend it all
on the next fiscal year.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, 220, they
added another 5 million for the
Office of Natural Resource
Trustee.
Uh, that's un transferred from
consumer settlement.
I mean, I think she wants to
create her own team of lawyers
over there, so let's call her in
and let's hear her because I
think when I met with them, they
wanted only wanted 3 million now
our fundament15 million, and I
don't even think they need that.
There's only what, 5 people in
that.
I think this is for the
remediation costs or supporting
that. Let's find out
polluters, 217, Charles, before
you go past, I'd like you to
flag that. OK, wait, that I
think that has to be at a higher
number.
If I remember right, it was like
10 million when I met with
somebody, so that's something
you need to look at. This is for
the testing of PFOS in Curry
County, if there's a desire to
find the capital project of
replacing or extending water
lines to those properties that
are on wells that they're
concerned about, that would be a
different place.
That would be a different
appropriation.
They want to see how far that
plume went with this, correct?
OK.
So if we
I don't think there's any
differences on line 26.
Of 222 for veteran services
outreach.
They added 250,000.
And 2:30 and an ad for the
governor's Summer Challenge
programs, half a million.
Age 27.
Uh, 2:32.
This is for the hepatitis C
treatment program at the
corrections department.
Uh, LFC had 22 million in
general fund plus the other
state funds. This is a
multi-year program and they
prioritized um making available
money that can be spent in the
near term rather than over a
long period of time.
Line 22
I think that's
Oh, this is other state funds 2
million to expand re-entry
services using the community
corrections fund balances is
that tied to 3.
12 or 3 that was not.
But we, I think we did put money
in there for in in.
When I'm gonna say 12 or 3,
somewhere in there that that
there's some language that's
similar to that. So look at
that.
A line 235 for domestic violence
services at Crime Victims
reparation. You may consider
moving that to CYFD where they
administer those programs.
Uh, 236 for
Services for victims of sexual
assault, 1 million added.
that page, Mr. Chairman.
240 needs to be flagged too,
cause you.
Have a helicopter but no
maintenance money. That's uh
funded online 242, Mr. Chairman,
LFC funded it for the next 3
years.
OK
And sit for that page, page 29.
Line 253 was removed for K-12
plus because of that court
ruling. We didn't, uh.
and
A demand for additional learning
days since the school districts
were suing to not do that in
one.
So that was reduced from
The assumption that we would
need to fund it because
districts would have to do more
of those days now that they
don't have to do more learning
days. That's why HAFC took it
out.
Line 30.
OK, Line 30, uh, lines 256
through 258 were ads for
Uh, various studies.
Related to education acts.
264 was not a uh was a change.
Uh, there was 10 million that
reverted.
Uh, this is being
re-appropriated for a total of
40 million for CTE.
Age 31.
3, for the STEM network on
online 269.
We go back to 264 on the career
technical E. Yes, that is solely
operational money, so that's not
to build or in other high
schools or
What would this be for?
these are operational,
and then there's a separate uh
$50 million appropriation from
the public school capital outlay
fund for equipment for CTE as
well as maintenance costs, um,
and things of that matter.
So do we know if that's just for
the existing or is it for um
schools to, they don't have it
to, to build it out.
With that 50 mL the 50 million
would go to all school
districts, OK.
So if they chose to use it to
build out like a new program
they could.
Or the department could say we
know this school can actually do
it, you get more of it. The 50
million will flow out through
the
Um
A local, um,
Funding formula to all the
school districts. All right,
thanks.
Uh, let's see, also.
Mm
Mm
To page 32, Mr. Chairman.
Charles, I'm sorry, Mr.
Chairman, can we just go back to
266. That one seems to be
dependent upon legislation, but
it doesn't say what legislation.
If you could just take that.
We will find the bill. Thank
you.
Page 32, Mr. Chairman, line 273,
30 million for
Um
Activities related to the Indian
Education Act.
Uh, this was a grow
appropriation in the LFC. They
moved it uh and increased the
amount by 5 million per year.
Uh, into uh a multi-year special
on line 273.
274, that is not contingent on
any legislation.
This is basically to help build
up capacity within the
Tribal departments of education.
And you've done these multi-year
appropriations um for those
departments in in the past.
Um
As opposed to the
EED keeps giving Indian
education money to other
entities including school
districts.
Line 2706 279 is a lot of money.
40 million
That part of the NMSU, the
governor only recommended 25 and
We're way above that. Is that
for any institution that's for
all the institutions they're
building renewal and replacement
uh cost. What we're seeing in
capital outlay are a lot of
requests for heavy maintenance
cost.
And this is an attempt to
supplement their regular budgets
to get ahead of restuckling and
things like that. It doesn't say
maintenance in the language.
That's what the BR and our
building renewal and replacement
and facility demolition.
Mr. Chairman Charles, if we
could just flag 275. I'm
concerned that there's $9
million that wasn't added into
the budget.
And I think that would be
applicable to things like
communities and schools, cooking
with kids and those kinds of
programs. This was a a a pilot
project that was used to steer
money directly to the highest
poverty schools that both LFC
and LESC recommended getting rid
of because it wasn't working
effectively. OK, thank you.
You can do
OK.
Before I gotta leave here in a
minute, sir, but you and I need
to leave. So the members know
we're, we're gonna probably
start with PED in the next day
or two, and here with them,
cause we, they're probably the
largest hole in the budget, then
we'll probably go to early
childhood and higher ed, and
then whatever you flag on here.
If they're
Mm
Yeah, whatever we flag, we're
going to start coming back and
and seeing.
What they have, when you start
looking at these sheets and
you're going to get to UNM and
in schools.
Um
That a lot of this maybe should
have been in capital, it's like
a congressional Christmas tree
throughout some of this.
Um, so we'll have to start
looking at
Places cause I think we still
have to make capacity.
Um
Uh, I mean, here's one, the
state racing commission, we just
allowed them with your, your
bill to get 3.5 million more
than what they needed, uh, to,
to manage his and all those
other programs and then they're
asking for $85 million for a
vet.
85,000 in the spaceports another
one.
OK.
Shindo, you're in charge.
You don't miss anything.
Moving to page 34, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, let's see, line 283.
was for a pathways into careers,
uh, program, including an
earmark of 221,000 for the
supercomputing challenge.
$3 million for
Scholarships, financial aid, uh,
to support practicums for
behavioral health and addiction
counseling students, 2, for the
expansion of New Mexico
workforce training, uh, pilot
program for non-credit based
workforce programs.
Yeah
284, I'd like for you to fly.
You have funded endowments for
the same purpose in the past,
Mr. Chairman.
35, page 35.
An additional 5 million for
health professional loan
repayment focused on
professionals and behavioral
health settings that were
related to
Uh, those Senate bills the
chairman talked about, they
added 5 million specifically for
loan repayment for doctors.
200,000 online, 291 for tribal
dual credit.
I mean to page 236.
Uh, pilot with the athletics
program and at UNM for 3 years.
Get their finances in order 1
million for bioscience
Authority, 400,000 for Gallup to
implement.
A
Certification program for a
police officers. Yes, sir.
On 296.
The 2 million for the veterinary
repayment loan repayment.
Yes, they added that from LFC.
Yeah.
Um
Mhm
Yeah, I'd like to.
For the talk that chair.
Mr. Chair, I'd like to highlight
that.
Right
303
It looks like we didn't provide
any um for supporting
accessibility needs of deaf,
deaf and hard of hearing,
medical students.
That's a
Huge program that gets funding
from a match that Health
Sciences Center puts up for its
uh training, its medical doctors
that brings down Medicaid money,
500,000s uh.
Small amounts in the larger
program that could be used to
take care of this particular
issue. OK, so it's getting
funded elsewhere is what I hear
you saying. OK, thank you.
Uh, let's see.
Just like to lag um.
97.
Right. This the.
the state as well.
Right.
I guess to look at those um.
It's interesting on that is
we're going to give 9 million
for
students that are
Or uh playing sports, but only 2
million for students that are
learning to be doctors.
It's a multi-year
project.
you know
Page 37.
Or New Mexico State Institute of
Artificial Intelligence at 2
million.
4 million
For strategic water supply grant
program.
Through FY 28.
There's the companion 6 million.
We're getting out of having to
fundraise for basic student
costs and athletics.
1.
2 million for the Osea community
ditch funded in Mexico State.
An increase in the LFC.
A recommendation for line 313 to
support equipment in their
research lab for uh water
treatment.
Mr. Chairman Charles, I just
want to point out 307, we've got
$4 million dedicated there for
associated with potential
projects for strategic water
supply program grant or
contract?
And then we've got 40 million
over the environment department.
I'm sure they're working
together, but it seems like a
Do
OK.
Hm
Page 38, Mr. Chairman.
3.3 million for Mexico
Department of Agriculture for
the.
Um, grants to assist state meat
processors.
9 for soil and water
conservation districts through
FY 28.
430,000 to
NMDA for the approved supplier
program.
2 million for
Uh, New Mexico Tech for enhanced
marketing, 1.5 million for
seismology equipment in the
Bureau of Geology, 1 million for
student and community we.
Wellness center planning 2
million for the Water Data Act.
A 39, Mr. Chairman Chairman
Charles, just 317, um, I
noticed, if we could just get
more information, the uh
agriculture department wanted
$10 million for waternologies
and agriculture, is there a
reason that we didn't it?
I don't believe that came
through in a, a request for LFC
to consider, I think it was an
executive and and you had made
appropriations for pilot
projects in the past to the
state engineer for.
A similar thing down in Donana
County, so we'll have to follow
up on the status.
It's not in the HAFC version of
House Bill 2, correct?
Yeah
Just point.
That everybody should remember
what's in the far righthand
column is what's in the
Uh, if it, the House Bill 2 that
came across.
And what, what's not in their
cross is has it been put in
there.
So
If you want to
Add something you should flag
it.
Mhm
If you want to take something
out or you wanna reduce it we'll
flag it.
Or if you want to know something
about it, flag it, Mr. Chair.
It's a good reminder, um, Mr.
Chairman.
So this is one of those sheets
where you're seeing the full
appropriation amount, not the
incremental one, so.
I should have flagged that from
the beginning, but.
Uh, let's see.
Page 39, we're getting closer.
325, uh.
For 450,000 for the Mesalands
nursing program.
5 million.
Uh, this is, uh, the whole
harmless that would be necessary
to implement the.
Funding formula changes in.
Um
The SCG for public schools, I'm
sure you'll spend more time on
this, the
School folks will ask for 2
years' worth of hold harmless
for those formula changes that
are being proposed.
Now we're getting into
supplementals and deficiencies.
323. I know they found it at the
same level as as the
recommendation, but I'd like to
know a little bit more about if
that's an increase over what
they've been getting or that's a
huge investment in, can we look
at that. I'm, I'm not sure they
have the capacity to spend that
in one year.
OK. I had a meeting with the um.
head of that department.
Early in the session.
So now starting on lines 329,
we're getting into what are
called supplemental
appropriations, and those are
appropriations basically that
agencies say they need in order
to finish the current fiscal
year.
There's another kind of
appropriation.
Or an illegal act called a
deficiency where they overspent
last year's budget.
So no changes here except for in
addition for.
No, that was in LFC too, so
that's.
Age 40
340 and 341.
They added money to DFA's budget
where there.
Salaries that they had uh are
paying are higher than what
their budget will support, so
they're uh getting additional
funding to finish the fiscal
year.
Page 41.
On a deal like that where
they're
Whether increasing here, did
they increase the budget for
next year,
DFA's operating budget.
That is something that you
always want to flag if
somebody's.
Well, I mean, if they're
There's another way to run
short, it's that revenue is not
coming in. In this case, this is
all general fund.
Uh, so in some cases you could
be backfilling revenue that's
not coming in. We'll see that
when we get the CYFDE and why we
recommended not doing that.
Uh, in other cases they're
spending amounts are just
running higher than what their
budgets can support. So you want
to make sure that if you do find
it, that next year's budget, we
don't have to do it all over
again.
Mr. Chairman, I will just point
out the irony of line 341 that
the
Financial, the Department of
Finance and Administration,
Financial Control Division
overspent by $500,000.
Right.
Just ironic.
That's where I think they were.
According to testimony was that
they were needing to make
significantly higher pay
adjustments in order to recruit
and retain the kind of people
that they needed to work in that
very technical.
Uh, department, but that is.
I understand your flag.
Uh, let's see.
Line 354.
On page 41.
That one
is a little bit higher than the
executive and the rationale for
that is the LFC was they serve
for starting rate increases that
the department had wanted to
start at the beginning of fiscal
year but didn't have budget for.
Um
The executive recommended that
those rate increases wait to go
out in the 4th quarter.
The LFC had recommended making
them retroactive for the entire
6 month period for that priority
fit program that you probably
have heard.
A lot of folks talk about.
The line 357, this was a big
change.
Um
In the fall, we heard that the
healthcare authorities state
health benefits was running a
shortfall of 124 million.
Uh
They revised that at the
beginning of the session, and
you're able to do an $85 million
supplemental to hopefully finish
the year with a 0.
They made several promises on
that that they were re-premium
that uh.
But they also got a contingent
bill, don't think that that's
not a contingency there, but
there's a bill to change the
employee, employee.
Uh, um, hey Ben or pay.
But there's nothing to do with
this, I realized, but that's
correct. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Let's go to line.
43
Now we're, I mean, page.
42
Age 42, 367.
This is where the corrections
department was saying that their
personnel costs are running
higher than their budget, and
they need a 3.5 million
supplemental, and they can use
some money from one of their
Uh, other state funds for 4
million. You may hear from them
uh wanting to go higher. We'll
wait and see our budget
projections don't support that,
but it's HAFC chose to go ahead
and.
Try to address that, Mr.
Chairman Charles, line 361,
Department of Health indicates
that they have a 2.2 million
shortfall in facilities
management?
What I, I see we didn't give
them any money, but what's, what
facilities are they?
Uh, the behavioral Health
Institute is the biggest one in
Las Vegas.
They are usually half full of
that at their inpatient
substance abuse treatment
facilities.
Um, they're running very low
census and not bringing revenue
into some of their nursing homes
that they run around the state,
uh, as well as um juvenile
adolescent treatment facility in
Albuquerque, Sequoia.
Mr. Chairman, I think we should
have them come in and talk about
that.
Thank you.
Moving on, Mr. Chairman to
Page 43
These are starting section 9.
These are all the multi-year
pilot projects. So when you see
a number in these, there was no
changes here.
When you see a number in here,
divide it by 3.
And that will be the, the pilot
projects because you'll see it
broken out in House Bill 2.
There'll be duplicate sections
for each year that you're making
a separate appropriation.
Um, the only changes are when
we, let's see.
Really
When we get into schools, I
think.
Age 45, you'll see some
differences, and this is where
CYFD's funding.
Is for the things that they
asked in their base budget, the
LFC recommended, don't build it
into your base budget, but if
you need to hire a case workers,
which was justified, here's
A pilot program.
Go show us how you can do it.
Along with training for um those
case workers uh to work with the
schools of higher education. So
instead of it being in their
base budget, it's here in this
part of the budget.
389, there was a new pilot
program that was added in HAFC
for basically universal, um.
Basic income for uh students
experiencing homelessness.
H 389.
Mm
When we say other state money,
this
This would be fed, no, it's not
federal money. What, what is
that you're putting into the gro
trust fund.
But this one, this one is coming
from the public ed reform Fund
for schools. I'm sorry. And
there's a bill making its way
through to make it mirror what
we're doing in the grow with
these multi-year pilots, uh,
with evaluations that would
support whether there should be
ongoing funding for it or not.
OK, so the schools comes from
the public ed reform Fund.
And then
The other other state funds are
going to be from the grow.
Just, just a quick question. I'm
sorry to hold you up, Mr. Chair.
The public ed reform Fund. How
is that funded?
That one used to be funded with
reversions from unused uh
extended learning, um.
Units in the funding formula.
It is no longer funded that way.
And so basically there's a
transfer that you'll see in the
back of the bill from the
general fund into that.
Public ed reform fund.
And then it has to follow the
parameters of the statute that
you passed for how it can be
used. OK.
Mm
Lane
390
The attendance initiatives.
Uh, pilot was reduced 391.
This was the pilot for the
tribal departments of education
that you saw that moved to the
special section so it wouldn't
be subjected to the row
requirements and the amount
increased by 15 million, page
47, 392, the strategic school
staffing.
Uh, pilot was reduced.
393, the school Improvement
initiative's pilot was also
reduced.
And you'll see when we get into
the schools, uh, why they did
some of that to get closer to
Uh, initiatives that were
priority for LESC and for the
department.
Same thing with line 394.
And then 395 was not the same,
it looks like.
Line
396 on page 49.
That's the same
And now we're moving into
section 10.
Which are fund transfers. So
this is where we're taking money
from the general fund and
putting it into earmarked funds
for specific purposes.
There was uh additional ad here
on 399 for uh legislation, House
Bill 113, creating the animal
welfare Trust Fund, $7 million.
That's contingent, yes, sir.
So if that bill doesn't pass,
that money would not. There was
a reduction line 402.
Or the community benefit fund
transfer, uh, I think a bunch of
those showed up in the economic
development.
Uh, department specials request
as opposed to running through
this fund.
So that's why the economic
development.
Um
Appropriations look so large
relative to LFC.
I think a bunch of those were
coming out of this particular.
Uh, fund transfer.
403, the transfer to the grow
local solar access fund on 405
that was related to community as
well so I was on 403404405.
Why aren't they contingent on a
bill too, aren't they weren't we
talking about bills to do that,
uh, 403 and 404, you've already
uh have statute. This is just
moving money into reserves and
then moving money into a
different part of reserves.
On 403 and then 404 is
supporting the spending for some
of those pilot projects that uh
are in excess of what the
formula could support, uh,
spinning off for those pilot
projects in 405 contingent on
legislation.
This is 406 is where you saw the
housing money in from the LFC
moved into that 110 special.
Uh, slight reduction to the
amounts going to the water
project fund.
to 200 million.
An increase uh in building up
fund balance at PSIA for the
benefits program.
So it goes up
So 65 million.
On page 51.
Also a slight increase to the
risk fund.
Most of these costs were related
to extraordinary, uh, hill and
other weather related damage.
Uh, the risk fund is.
Has pressure on it due to um
sexual misconduct cases amongst
educators as well.
That was not part of the LFC
recommendation.
Page 14.
Uh
Different strategy than the
executive.
No change here from the LFC but
doing a fund transfer.
Or the public liability fund and
then you'll see in the recurring
budget that we talked about
yesterday.
Not only building up
Um
The rates to pay into that fund
and the operating budget, but an
additional 17 million to try to
bring that into the black next
year and build in the fact that
it's these are recurring costs
that we're seeing on these
settlements in lawsuits or 12.
Uh, added money back into the
Kiki Savera fund for uh future
appropriations.
Or 16 since the uh pilots were
reduced in uh public schools,
the transfer to the Perth needed
to come down, so.
That amount changed online for
16.
And then last page, Mr.
Chairman, some increases that
you'll see, I think tomorrow on
IT.
Uh, that resulted in the
Transfer that needs to go into
the computer systems enhancement
fund where all the IT
appropriations are made that
went up.
The 188 million for statewide uh
roads, state roads on 419 was
eliminated. There is a bill that
they're working on in the house
for uh bonding program for
transportation.
Line 421, there is a balance and
you'll see in Riyadh's requests
for rural Air Service grants,
uh, the House chose to add
another 5, I think the San Juan
County is probably intending to
come online with the a new uh
program this summer, so this
would help fund.
That program and others, yes.
So rule Air Service, um.
Not, not knowing what is the
balance of that, you know, I
think there was last we looked
about 5 million.
In one of the reauth
so if we reauthorize that and we
add 5, that puts them at 10. Is
that an amount that they're
happy with?
I think it should last for a
couple more years just like what
we've done in the past.
and on that point, uh, Charles,
I did ask the DOT to get me a
A figure to do an air service
between.
Mm
Las Cruces to Phoenix.
And I don't know whether they.
Send anything in on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, about
between Las Las Cruces and Los
Angeles.
You're open for that. I'm just
kidding, Mr. Chairman.
The film industry stuff.
Um
or or maybe Clovis in LA just
spitba and online, uh, on page
52, no other changes besides
that air service for section 11
of the
Um, bill, which is the
transportation.
Uh, appropriations that are
non-recurring. The recurring
appropriations for or DOT are in
section 4 with all the other
agency recurring budgets.
In this quick question, Mister
Chair.
Why isn't uh heavy equipment.
In
Capital requests somewhere else,
or is this the normal place to
put that.
This is a place where we put
money sometimes for buying.
State vehicles and other types
of things. So the heavy
equipment's appropriate to be in
in this bill, uh, the cap, they
didn't put a request into the
Capitol bill or they, they did,
but it's, I don't know that it
will, will be funded in there if
it's funded here. And then
there's money in their operating
budget as well for heavy
equipment, so there's several
places that they ask for the
same. That's correct.
So we just need to watch.
I think there's 22 million in
total, total tweet.
Thank you.
So, Mr. Chairman,
That leads us to the very
bottom.
We specials, some of them moved
from fund transfers into
specials, so the overall
spending amount didn't change
that much from $3.1 billion on
the grand total compared to the
LFC recommendation of a little
over $3 billion but where that
money uh is booked uh did change
in some cases from one project
to another, um.
Um
Or from a fund transfer into uh
the specials, so you'll see
almost 1.4 billion in specials.
108 million and supplementals.
1.4 billion in fund transfers.
Then 167 million in
transportation.
With that Mr. Chairman would be
happy to answer any other
questions.
OK, do we have any other
questions, Senator Steinbor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Charles.
We kind of um
We, we, we flew by it, so I just
wanted to come back to it. There
is um
Uh, an interest in kind of
Rebalancing or whatever the
money that went into LWCF.
Which was highly fully funded,
but the outdoor equity grant
program, which is hugely popular
and in demand and maybe taking 3
million from the LWCF, which is
8.
And they think it could be fully
funded at 5 and moving.
That 3 over the outdoor equity
fund, so it's at 6.
And um that's what
The advocates in unison are kind
of asking for, and I fully
support it. So I just want to
flag that for you. Uh, we don't
need to talk about it. Um.
But
You know, so it's on your list,
and if that's something you
that'd be great or that's
something we can work on with
the committee as you see fit,
Mr. Chairman, did you want me to
go through the Rios today as
well.
Let's go ahead and do that.
Can I ask one question?
OK.
Uh, the
Texas license, uh, not texting.
The TRD, the
protection.
Revenue they.
Had a request for the C2 program
for the e-titling.
Stuff and it was, it didn't come
through the House Appropriations
at all, that was it in here that
I missed somewhere, Mr.
Chairman, we'll get into the IT
projects, I believe tomorrow.
OK, thank you very much.
Thank you.
Uh, OK, so there's these are
language only, but they're
really authorizing extended
spending.
Um, specials that will show up
in those, in that section of the
bill as well.
But in this case, we went and
pulled.
Um, the status of the spending
out of shares so you could see
how much money was left.
Um, so that's a good flag on
line 3. There's still some
funding left, uh, for the AOC's
hardware and software and
equipment. That's why the LFC
hadn't recommended funding it,
but now we see that there's some
money that HAFC put in for it.
Line 7.
These are some of the litigation
expenses related to uh those
water, uh, the Rio Grande
Compact.
And you can see
Only half a million dollars out
of the $4 million has been spent
and these you've the
legislatures reauthorized these.
This is originally authorized in
2022.
Same thing for line 8.
Still balances from other
interstate water litigation
costs, uh, extension of uh.
Consumer settlement uh funding
that the AG got for the Gold
King mine.
clean up
Flag on uh line 11, there are
some.
Appropriations made last session
for um
Major upgrades at clinics and
hospitals.
Um, none of that money has gone
out.
And this recommendation in HAFC
moves it from the healthcare
authority to the Department of
Finance and Administration, but
that's $15 million sitting there
for uh primary care building in
Taos County.
Mr. Chairman Charles, why hasn't
any of it gone out? We have they
need to follow up with the
department. I know they had some
anti-donation
was, questions, uh.
Last fall, I, I don't know if
those have been.
Resolved, I believe this is a
publicly owned hos hospitals.
I'm not sure why that would hold
it up, and it's definitely not
the type of appropriation that
HCA typically handles versus
like local government division
that handles like capital.
Thank you.
Lane 12 extending the.
Local fire department, uh,
recruitment and retention
grants, the department has set
these up to be multi-year.
Uh, supports, uh, to kind of
phase in funding. So this uh
would
Be in line with that approach of
where we front some of the money
year one and then the locals
start picking up the tab in your
2 and 3, same thing for law
enforcement on line 13.
There's a wastewater treatment
system in Donana County, uh, DFA
is asking for an extension.
No money has been expended on
that yet.
Uh, same thing, asking for an
extension.
Or
Pump station in Milan.
Domestic violence centers in
northwest New Mexico.
17. Here's the other large, uh,
A stranded appropriation for a
hospital in Tucinary, 10
million.
Cybersecurity initiatives you
saw HAFC added to the LFC, so 20
million and non-recurring, uh,
this is with reauthorize money.
It's sitting there at about 4.3
million.
Here's another 3 million out of
a $5.5 million appropriation for
cyber.
One of the biggest ones is for
broadband line 20.
OK
On that particular 17.
On, on 20, let's, let's like
that if you will.
OK.
Public regulation, they ask for
a special for more IT equipment,
but they have encumbered but not
spent, uh, any other 1.5
million.
Number of other PRC.
Appropriations that have not
moved.
24, another cybersecurity
response at OSI.
Energy and minerals, 2.5 million
for the oil conservation.
Uh, division to improve their
inspection and compliance
backlogs, none of that has been
spent asking for an extension.
State engineer
$5 million of that.
Uh, encumbered or expended.
State engineer, none of the.
This
Like 27, none of the 10 million
for dam rehab, including uh
rehab for flood control near
hatch has been booked or
suspended.
Yeah
The
8, this one's environment
department.
74% done spent, you can question
why we need to extend it.
Here's a couple more for the
environment department,
including 7 million only 12% has
been encumbered or spent.
Of line 30.
That's for the state to create a
state surface water and
groundwater permitting program.
This one
Is a contract money to help them
draw down federal funds for
Uh, Title 4E, the family's first
program. They have submitted.
Uh, plan to the federal
government.
And all of the services that
they propose to do, uh, none of
them.
On its face would even qualify
for federal funding. So I'm not
quite sure why they why they did
that.
There's a clear set of programs
that the federal government will
fund at the Medicaid match rate.
And their plan didn't include
any of them.
9:31.
Mr. Chairman, the money was
encumbered and the plan's been,
cause I remember them coming and
talking about it, but none of
it's been expended, right? OK.
As of February 24th. OK, I think
that's a flag.
Transportation.
That has basically been
encumbered and expended, you
could question why we need to
Uh, extend that.
Why not just spend it, the same
thing with 33.
On on that Charles, we also have
on the other sheet.
Another 50 million that we're
wanting to put into there.
Into the wildlife corridors.
This is the design money for a
project, I believe, north of
Cuba.
Uh, so that 15 this they've
designed the the project.
And now they would get money to
construct it uh out of the 50
million.
Thank you.
DOT's got a couple of other
An old air service one where it
looks like they've encumbered
the money but not spent it yet
on line 35, and then lines 36.
37 and 38 are other prior year
transportation.
Appropriations that they're
asking for an extension.
Lane 39 is sweeping balances
that are small and stranded in a
number of education accounts
into the reform fund.
Mm
And then
Reforestation, uh, centers
asking for an extension at New
Mexico State.
And 41 Northern is asking for an
extension for some funding you
gave them for security
improvements. It looks like
they've only spent 1 out of 3
million.
So overall, Mister Chairman, as
of February 24th, there's 264
million.
And reauthorization.
Uh, requests that are in House
Bill 2 that have balances that
are unexpended or unencumbered.
There's another 187 that.
Uh, we believe are under a valid
contract to be encumbered, and
they've spent 326 million.
Total appropriate original
appropriations totaled 777.
That Mr. Chairman, that
concludes the Rios.
40.
Um, we'll just flag the whole
document.
Senators, and I think that's
all red away.
All right, we're gonna have just
a couple of questions and.
Mr. Charles, real quick question
just for my education. So I see
a lot of these rios are 2
through fiscal year 2026, 1 at
the very end is through uh
number 40 is through 2028.
Is there a reason why they're
all like mostly the 2026, like
there's a real I'm dealing with
with an agency.
Could it be a 2027 or 2028.
OK
Specials are for.
It's usually not recommended
from staff, Specials are things
that should be completed within
a year and a half, uh, there are
other, let's see.
Cases where you've said we're
gonna purposely set aside money
for multi-year like through the
grow as an example to give them
enough like lead time.
Uh, there could be other big
Not capital outlay, but related
type projects that are gonna be
multi-year that we know about
that you can extend those um.
And that's what they're asking
for here. They're saying we're,
there's no way we're going to
spend it in FY 26, so save us
the trouble of having to reauth
it, but it's also a flag,
particularly if you're seeing
that in a request from the
outset.
For a multi-year, how much can
you really spend in year one and
that because there's an
opportunity cost even with this
huge budget, you still have
Opportunity costs and
trade-offs. And that's uh one of
the things that you have to
grapple with. How about money
for one year and then come back
and we can do this again, uh,
versus setting aside a huge
amount for multiple years.
So let me ask you this, um, Mr.
Charles. So this is for special
appropriations supplementals, is
that in a different place or is
this supplementals for a
supplemental. You would not need
a reauth for a supplemental
because the supplementals just
finished the current fiscal
year.
So, uh, June 30th.
That's how what I'm saying like
if it's about to expire.
And they want to continue to
have access to the funds.
For a supplemental Mr. Chairman,
it would have already expired,
uh, last year.
And then they're asking to
finish the current fiscal year.
On June 30th with some extra
money in their budget.
All right, um, I'll work with
you guys on that one. Yeah, and
thanks, Mr.
Thank you, thank you, Charles.
Thank you for the presentation
so we'll move on.
We have uh
solvency. Anybody here?
All right, go ahead and start.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, members,
uh, I'm Greg Trujillo, executive
director of PERA along with uh
AJ Forte, um, municipal director
of the Mexico Municipal League.
So we're gonna go briefly over
uh
Another pair of solvency, um,
what's occurred in the past and
where we stand today.
Briefly, Mr. Chairman, uh, the
end of fiscal year 2024, uh, the
para fund stood at $17.8 billion
last year we had an investment
return of 8.66%. Uh, we
currently have 49,816 um active
members contributing to the
fund, uh, from 335 different
employers, uh, we're currently
paying 46,026 uh retirees and
beneficiaries, um, in last
fiscal year we paid out $1.45
billion in a retiree benefits.
Um
Our funded ratio stands at
67.2%, um, amortization period
52 years in our actual liability
is $26.5 billion. That's the
amount of benefits that we had
promised our members of what we
have on hand is $17.8 billion
the shortfall or what we call
our unfunded liabilities is
currently at $8.7 billion.
Uh looking, uh, the next slide,
Mr. Chairman.
Uh, this is kind of para over
the last 30 years and kind of
the significant um.
Milestones that has hit in 1992,
uh, our cola model was changed.
We had a, we had a cooler model
tied to uh CPI that was changed
to just providing a guaranteed
3% uh cost of living adjustment
for members at that retirees at
that time, uh, when that was
passed, no accompanying
contributions, um, were made to,
to pay for that change.
Uh, 1996, 1997, we also um
Increased benefits, so we had a
plan that most people earn 2.5%
pension factor for each year
they worked. We increased that
to 3%.
And there was a contribution
increase uh with that 0.5% to
the member, 3.5% to the
employer.
Uh, but what
Also happen with that is for
years prior to those
contributions taking effect. We
grandfathered in all that
service. So even if you worked
24 years at 2.5% when you hit
your 25 years, we calculated
that benefit at the 3% factor.
The 1998, um, Mr. Chairman,
there was a constitutional
amendment passed uh by the
legislature and approved by the
voters to constant
constitutionally protect the
para fund, uh, and it, it
enshrines that no benefit
enhancements can be uh.
Provided without additional
funding or without the required
funding.
Uh, after that, and, as you can
see the, the bars on the top
peril is pretty well funded at
that point in time.
Um
Economic factors occurred the
dot-com bubble, 2002, we started
going on a little bit of a
downside, uh, but the great
recession is really one of the
big events that uh that hurt
user at the time was worth.
$14 billion almost overnight, we
lost 50% of that. We were down
to about $7 billion.
And that, that's kind of really
when
Um, we started getting into the.
You know, issues with our
funding. You can see we were at
93% at that point in time over
the five-year period, we dropped
about 30% down to 65%.
Uh, are funded, are unfunded
liability at that point in time
was less than a billion dollars,
uh, by the time pension reform
happened in 2013, uh, we were
over $6 billion unfunded.
I will say there was an attempt
to do reform in 2010, uh, that,
uh, did not occur. Um, so the
actual pension reform that
happened that really kind of
started to strainen us out,
occurred in uh
2013, um, it did a good job and
I'll explain that more um and
more specifics, uh, but then we
had to do another pension reform
because the initial one, it, it,
it's a gradual implementation.
So we did that in 202.
And where we are today, 2024,
end of 20 fiscal year 2024, we
sent at 67%.
As I mentioned, Mr. Chairman,
uh, constitutional amendment was
passed in 1998. I'll just uh
point you to the 3rd bullet, um,
the permanent part states, the
legislature shall not enact any
law that increases the benefits
paid for the the system in any
manner or change the funding
formula for a retirement plan
unless adequate funding is
provided.
Uh, slide 5, Mr. Chairman, um,
the way that Pera is funded is
we withhold contributions on, on
behalf of a member, um, they pay
a certain percentage and their
employer pays a certain
percentage.
Uh, currently, uh, the first
column, the deficiency and
contribution rate uh to fully
fund uh the plan would take an
additional 5.37% in
contributions. Um, we have
multiple divisions within the
Perfund we have other plans that
concern judges, magistrates,
they're much smaller. This is
our biggest fund and that's a
general members, state police,
uh, municipal general members,
municipal police, municipal
fire.
And so if we did, and you could
see each division has different
funding, um.
Requirements, the only division
currently funded adequately is
the uh state public safety
division, that's state police,
adult correctional officers,
probation parole officers, and
state firefighters.
Um, in the amount to fully fund
us just on average, and this
would be recurring, would be
$166 million.
And, and there has been
increases that have happened in
the past that I'll talk to you
after.
I also did want to point out the
prior years uh before pension
reform was um enacted in 202012,
the overall shortfall was
12.14%, uh, before the reform in
2020 was 6.27%. Um, so we are
making improvement, but we're
still over 5% away from, from
fully funding the plan as far as
contributions go.
Uh, side 6, Mr. Chairman, uh,
with the pension plan, there's
only a couple.
A real levers that we can pull
to to make changes, uh, that's
increased the amount of money
coming in, which we've done by
increasing contributions, um,
decrease the amount of the money
going out that was done by
making changes to the cost of
living adjustment.
Or reduced benefits, which in
2013 we did as well.
We created a new tier of
benefits for members hired after
uh July 1 of 2013. Uh, it's
called our tier two members.
They paid the same contribution
rates that tier one members pay,
uh, but they have to work a
longer period of time in the
benefits that they receive are
less than what the, uh, than
what a tier one employee, um.
Receives uh contribution
increase when a 1.5% for the
employee in 2013.
And 0.4% from the employer.
It was a contribution
because someone close the door.
There was a contribution swap
that happened while, um, so the
actual, uh, percentage for the
employer was 1.9%.
Um, and it increased the pension
maximum for people working
longer for a pension fund is
good. Uh, they're paying in
longer and withdrawing their uh
benefits for a shorter amount of
time.
So we, we increased the maximum
from 80 to 90% in that reform.
Uh, Senate Bill 72, um, the cola
model was changed again. We went
from a 2% uh bola factor to a
risk sharing model, um, the last
two years of compounding cola
that we've provided has been
0.5%. Uh, we understand that's
not enough for our retirees, but
given our.
Kind of funding constraints that
is kind of what we can afford at
this point in time. Uh, there
was a carveout for certain
retirees, uh, disability
retirees, um, and, uh, retirees
that were age 75 or older as of
uh 6:30 or 2020, they get a 2.5%
compounding cola.
Um,
employee contributions went up
by 2%. Employer contributions
went up by 2%. Uh, that's been a
phased-in approach. We're in the
5th year of that phase in, uh,
the state employees have made
their contributions of.
Finally, uh, your phase in
completely, uh, the municipality
is already here 3, so they still
have a contribution increase
this year and a contribution
increase coming next year before
that's fully phased in.
Um, and again, we increased the,
the amount a.
A member can earn in from the 90
to 100%. And this was done via
task force that was put together
by the governor, uh AJ served on
that task force and I'll let him
talk a little bit about.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee.
So my perspective will be
From a task force member.
When we, when we had to spend a
year on the task force.
Talking about how do we fix
this? What are the
recommendations from the task
force to the governor, to the
legislature on how to fix this.
One of the recurring questions
that came up was,
Why did we increase benefits
when we couldn't pay for it.
Every meeting we had when the
actuaries came and said, these
are the enhancements that were
done when you didn't pay for it,
when you didn't fully fund it.
And we as task force members say
why did we do this?
Well, here we are today.
In in my comments aren't
specific to any one bill. It's
every PERA bill that's a benefit
enhancement that is not fully
funded, right? We have an $8.7
billion dollar deficit.
From the league's perspective,
from the task force perspective.
This fund is too important for
retirees or active employees or
future employees.
To dig the hole deeper than we
already are.
And so our our presentation.
is the one.
With the league letterhead on
it.
Right, we talked about
Just one of the bills, one of
the PERA benefit enhancement
bills we see.
Our concern is it's not fully
funded, nor is it equitable
between state employees and
local government employees. We
have employees that cross back
and forth on a regular basis.
The way this bill is
constructed, if you work
Your entire career as a state
employee.
And then switch over to the
local government employee and
retire. You don't get a cola.
for local government doesn't opt
in.
If you retire as a state
employee.
The state puts in $10 million.
Even though the requirement
would be 33 million, so it's not
fully funding it, it's digging
the hole deeper.
Then you look at who are we
helping? Who should we be
helping?
This is the question through the
task force.
Right, that we had to put
forward to the legislature and
the executive, who should be
helped? Where should the
triggers be put in, what levels
should always get a benefit.
When you look at the compounding
cola.
Right, we just gave an example
of should we be helping the
people of 50,000.
Right, the director level
positions, they retired at 140,
160, 190.
That compounding cola gets very
expensive.
We believe the retiree should be
taken care of absolutely. We
also understand that everyone in
pension reform.
There was a cost, and everyone
was at the table.
The unions
State employees.
Local governments.
Retirees, everyone agreed that
we are all going to pay to pay
more or have a lower benefit,
right? Our active employees are
receiving less of a benefit than
our tier one employees, right?
They are asking for a cola,
compounding cola increase.
Everyone took a hit at this.
are asked to the committee is,
let's not dig the hole deeper.
And if you look at
The next page, right, this one's
important for us, right? Cause
when we sit around the table as
a task force member and we say
from an actuary actuarial
perspective.
Why are we, why do we have such
a big deficit? There, there are
many factors, right? For the
contribution rates as high as
they should have been given the
benefits.
Your one was expensive, that's
the Cadillac. We, we didn't pay
for it.
But you also look at what other
other states give.
Right? This done, this chart was
put together.
In 2019.
That blue line for New Mexico.
It's actually over here. It's
100% now.
So retirees in other states get
40%.
50%.
We now get 100%.
The idea is, sure, people will
work longer.
Therefore, they're not
collecting that period of time.
So actuarly it makes sense.
But with that said, you look at
our deficit, you look at how
richer benefit is.
In the compounding cola just
digs it deeper. And when you
look at the small chart.
We are one pool, and that's
where we say,
When you have a bill that treats
local government differently
than state government, we have
to remember we're one pool.
Yes, we can track solvency
differently.
Local government employees have
a lower factor. There's more of
them working and less in
retirement. Therefore, our
solvency is actually trending in
the right direction.
State government, that wasn't
the case. They had a higher
factor, more in retirement, less
working.
And now with the salary
increases, right? It, it's not
trending in the right direction.
So we will, right? At some
point, be back in front of you
in another task force. The
chairman will be
Munoz will be his 3rd pension
reform, right? Asking us why did
we enrich benefits when we
didn't pay for it.
We're asking you all today,
let's not do the enrichments
unless we can fully fund it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Is that conclude both I've got a
couple other ones I move through
quickly, uh, so slide 7, was
kind of the real reason that uh
Senate bill 72 happened in 2020.
Uh, if you just look at the, the
graph to the right, the, the pie
chart, um.
We were paying
So we're, we're what's called a
mature fund. We pay out more
than what we take in. Uh, so,
In order to recover retire to
cover retiree benefits. We have
to take out of our trust fund,
uh, every month to make up the
shortfall. So before uh and
reform was passed, we paid out
$1.2 billion in benefits.
657 million of that was uh
coming from contributions of
employees and their employers,
almost 600 million of that was
coming straight out of the trust
fund.
So our projection showed that we
were going to be in the future
digging into the trust fund at a
rate that was unsustainable. So
the trust fund wouldn't grow,
we, it would just be kind of
like Social Security there to
pay benefits.
Uh, so Senate Bill 72, uh,
reduced that amount. We reduced
the cola, amount of money going
out, increased contributions,
amount of money coming in, and
now contributions make up 66% of
the retiree benefits, but we're
only drawing down the, the uh
press one out a 34% rate. So
it's, it's, it's a huge
improvement, um, and like I say,
the contribution increase, uh,
still hasn't been fully
implemented, so we still got 2
years to factor the uh briefly,
Mr. Chairman, next slide, uh,
just looks at our cost of living
adjustment, what we've provided
since the reform.
happened, uh, that 2.5% carve
out, um, as I
stated age 75 and older,
disability retirees, you can see
that population is reducing, so
it's almost uh down half
compared to 2020. However, the
compounding cola population is
also increasing, so, uh, 34,
almost 35,000 retirees got a
cola, 0.5%, as I said last year,
um, not enough, understand that,
um, but when you're paying out
90% of our population, that
cola, it's add up and it is, it
adds up and it is costly.
Uh, briefly, Mr. Chairman, just
looking at the contribution
increases that have come in uh
as of last year, uh, recurring
to the bottom right, $180
million in recurring revenue
coming into the fund, uh, that's
going to continue to grow over
the next 2 years.
Uh, and that is helpful.
And this, Mr. Chairman is kind
of just what I wanna share with
the committee on our population.
Um, not unique to us, uh,
mortality, demographics, um,
similar to what's happening in
Social Security, other areas uh
are.
retiree population keeps growing
are active population does not.
Uh, so right now we're about
3000.
actives more than retirees in
about 2 years, I expect those
line lines to cross. We will be
paying out more retirees then we
have uh active members paying
into the fund, and that's gonna
have that's gonna keep uh
continuing until the early
2030s.
A couple just uh statistics on
our population, uh, our current
active member is 43 years old,
um, their average service is 8
years, um, that's good we've
got, you know, tier 2 members,
uh entering the population.
Um, currently our tier 2
population is 64%, or tier one
population is 36%.
Uh, so until tier one really
kind of fully exits that plan,
our plan, and those liabilities
stop incurring in tier 2 fully
takes over. That's when our fund
really starts seeing
improvement.
Um, and just looking at our
retirees, uh, the.
Currently today, the average age
is 69 years old.
Um
They retired at 56 or average
retiree has been retired about
13 years.
Uh, and mortality is something
we look at closely. We expect a
male in our population to live
till they're 85 and a female to
live till they're 87, so that's
still a long period of time to
plan for benefit payments.
Uh, but one thing I will point
out is, is that.
Trendy that age is trending
upward last year, the average of
tire that retired was 59 years
old. So people are retiring
older, they're staying longer,
and that is good for a pension
fund.
That's like, Mr. Chairman just
uh talks about uh
Some of the bills that AJ had
mentioned, uh, you know,
implementing the 2%, uh, cost of
living back without funding it,
uh, adds to our liability, uh,
takes us to almost $10 billion
in uh.
You know unfunded liability
decreases our funded ratio to
63%.
and it's like 13 is just for
information. I do have our chief
investment officer here with us,
Michael Shackelford, if anybody
has any specific investment
questions. We're happy to answer
those.
And the final slide, Mr.
Chairman, we throw these in uh
to all our presentations, it
just shows a breakdown of where
our benefit payments go by, uh,
county, and one thing I do like
to point out is uh.
Approximately 90% of benefits
that we pay out stays in New
Mexico, so for the most part, if
somebody retires from Perra,
they stay in New Mexico.
And with that happy answer.
Thank you, uh, Senator Woods
would take just a few questions,
uh, and then move on because
we're trying to get through a
couple of bills, OK, the
question I've got is on the last
page here on slide 13, you talk
about your fun performance.
Tell me
Is that meeting your expectation
is that we, we see a lot about
you, you talked a whole lot
about money.
collected from your employees.
Are we missing a fun performance
quite a bit here, Mr. Chairman,
so, uh.
Or assumed rate of return is
7.25%.
Um, last year, we exceeded that
8.66%. Uh if you look on this
slide, uh, over 3 year, 5 years,
7 year, 10-year period we have
underperformed.
Since inception, um, we have
exceeded the, the 7.25% and
that's, that's an assumption we
look at every 3 to 5 years to
make sure that 7.25% is
appropriate.
So we have, we have
underperformed, um, a bit, uh.
Reason for that is we were very
conservative because of our cash
flow issues, we had those
liquidity concerns with the
reform that happened in 2020 and
those liquidity concerns were
lessened a bit. We were able to
kind of increase our risk in the
investment portfolio, uh, that
takes time, but we are starting
to see results of that.
And if you have anything
specific and they said
my chairman is hollering at me
to shut you up, but
The 3-year performance here was
3.65%.
And so
You're saying now we've moved
past that and we're gonna
Take a little more risk and, and
We'll get more returns, um.
But you're also telling me don't
pass any more bills that will
cause you more.
Ker you
Your funding.
Yeah, uh, Mr. Chairman, that's,
that's the gi, the grist of the
thing that I hear today is I
think uh
you've been listening pretty
good't pass a damn thing because
we're not very solvent, we're
solvent, but we don't want it,
we want to increase your
solvency, not decreasing.
Miss.
Thank you,
Senator Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Morning, gentlemen. I just have
11.
Question clarification.
So if, if I'm a retired school
teacher now.
And I go back in the classroom.
I pay back into Para.
Correct?
You,
you're Mr. Chairman, yes, it
will go into the educational
retirement Board. So then when,
so even, even with parents, so
when, when you have retire, you
come back and and work.
Did they pay full?
And the employer pay full.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and uh and are
near correctly, they have to
make the full contribution and
they are not do any additional
benefit.
So Mr. Chair, with that, then
does
Where, where does that fall on
this chart, I guess is my
question.
With, do we just not have enough
of them paying back in. I lost
the chart.
We not have enough of them
paying back in, uh, Mr. Chairman
and uh Senator Lanier, so the
return to work program under PEA
is uh much less.
Popular than what's under ERB.
There's a lot of restrictions,
uh, our return to work program
actually ended in 2010. So those
that were grandfathered in stay
in I think it's less than 150
members.
Uh, last year returned to work,
um, was opened up a bit, but
it's very narrow in uh.
Who can participate. It was
limited to entry level public
safety, uh, positions and there
was uh constraints as far as you
had to have been retired as a
certain date. So that, that
program that started last year
as of.
last month we only had 25 people
that have taken advantage of it.
So, so it's much, it's not as
prevalent as it is in in the ERB
system.
So Mr. Chair, would that be a, a
place for growth?
I mean, just in your opinion, is
that something that that we
could advertise and grow, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Lanier, uh,
the way it's structured, it
does, um, help. I mean, it's,
it's such a small population. It
doesn't move the needle, um, so
we.
The amount that would have to
knew that would be significant,
um, and there's a lot of other.
Um, advocates that just don't
like the policy of it. So it, it
would be, it's been difficult in
the past.
OK, thank you.
OK, all right, uh, couple more
questions from Senator Gonzalez
and Compost and then we're done.
Mr. Chairman, members, um, I
don't have a question, but.
Oh
One suggestion that I would make
if possible if uh yeah.
To all the members, if you can
serve at one time or another on
the.
Interim committee for the
pension Oversight Committee.
Because there's a lot of moving
parts. So well, we're looking at
the actuarials.
The other side is also what's
happening with the investments.
You know, and they go hand in
hand because one brings to the
other one.
And uh so it's quite a.
You know, and then also seeing
with um the participation from
the members growing or
decreasing so there's a lot of
factors into it, but if you do,
um,
Get into that committee that
gives you a very good oversight
of um.
Seeing how the whole operation
works.
And also to really understand
the liability to it.
So we thought, oh, thank you,
Mr. Cha.
Senator Coos thank you very much
Mr. Chair. Just, just quickly
and I'm, I'm just looking for a
quick response as well, uh, Mr.
Chairman, so as we take a look
at our, our police and our our
firefighters and what they're
dealing with and if you will,
uh, the, uh, continuing decline,
if you will, with the benefits
or if you will, the resources
going in there. The second thing
with the cola as we deal with
that across the board, uh, and
we see that uh we're not keeping
up, if you will, with the uh.
uh, rates, and then thirdly, in
talking with uh many of the
retirees uh that are in the
system, they continue to
indicate, uh, we're getting to a
point where there's more and
more, if you will, of the
poverty and less resources, if
you will, for them, but Mister
Chair, very quickly, if you
could, uh, help me by responding
to the type of things that we're
looking at at that angle. We've
already dealt with some of these
things for solvency for a period
of time, but I'm, I'm more
concerned now as we continue to
see some of these special
groups, uh, and how the
resources are declining, but yet
how we see our overall uh per
retirees, uh, how they're not
possibly receiving the uh actual
cola that uh that they could be
receiving. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Campos.
Absolutely sympathetic.
That issue, and I think there is
a solution.
Right, every, the bills that
we've seen are not exclusive.
To making the problem worse,
right? digging that hole deeper.
Right, I, I think it's House
Bill 96, right? $66 million
general fund impact, that's a
13th check. That does not hurt
solvency.
Right? That's something that
that helps the retiree group as
a whole, right? Doesn't segment
any group. It helps all of them.
It gives them the 13th check.
It's funded with general fund
and it doesn't compound our
problem.
Like do you think there are
solutions out there, Senator?
Thank you Mr. Chair and just in
closing, I just go, go ahead,
please clarify that bill, uh,
Mr. Chairman and Senator Campos,
uh, it would be for 2 years, uh,
2% flat bonus payment on their
annual benefits, and that would
be in addition to any
compounding to your period. So,
it, it's not ideal, but it does
provide temporary relief without
impacting the solvency of the
fund. And so Mr. Chairman, just,
uh, as we go forward, I hope
that during this next interim
that we're going to take a
closer look at it because as we
continue to offer.
fixes to it. The bottom line is
we continue to go and see with
inflation with the resources.
Now the federal government is
involved and as we're dealing
with it right now within state
government is we're dealing with
that we compiled about $14.4
billion just coming into to to
our government, but that doesn't
take into consideration, uh,
resources for Native Americans,
resources, if you will for our
bases. We're, we're, we're
getting to the point now to
where they're gonna have to take
a very serious look at all of
these things, and this is.
gonna be one of those things
that is incumbent upon us to to
further address. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair. Senator, we're
done.
Mr. Chairman, are you going to
have me present on Senate Bill
30 or we just kinda
Generally discussing it because
Senate Bill 30, I'm a co-sponsor
on that one. And Senator
Stefaniks is not available to
come and actually present the
bill.
Uh, no, we're, we're just doing
discussion purposes only for
this one. OK, so can I discuss
it from here?
Um
Or is it, is it gonna be that
you're gonna have somebody
sitting down there.
Mhm
OK, we're gonna be here in the
building a little time, that's
what I'm being told. OK, thank
you then I, I, I just wanna say
that.
We have got to do something for
our retirees.
We just have to, and I hear that
coming from both of you. And,
and I also understand that we
don't want to do something
that's gonna jeopardize the, the
fund.
Um, but we have got to do
something.
For those individuals who were
on the edge when they retired,
they're on the edge even further
now. This, the, the data that I
have um from the group who's
been helping with information
here. So since there's been
about a 22% inflationary. And if
you look at Social Security,
which does have cola, um, every
year. It's been pretty
significant increases, even just
this year, it's 2.5%. You can
look at other years where
It's as much as 14% because
there is inflation and even if
you own your home and you don't
have to, you know, the cost of
that may not be going up. The
taxes are definitely going up.
And the taxes are going up
because the cost of your, your
the appraisal of your home has
gone up. And so your, your tax
increases and the cost of food,
the cost of transportation. This
is the insurance, the cost of
insurance has gone up.
And so I, I, I truly feel as a
co-sponsor of Senate Bill 30
that we have got to do
something. Now I will
acknowledge that when I, when I
signed on to the bill, I didn't
realize that it didn't have the
impact for the local
governments. And so have since
been working with the
individuals like can we balance
out, can we go back from 5 years
to 1 year, and we do 2 years,
can we do everybody? We're
trying to find solutions, but
those solutions have to be
all of us. Yeah, I'm gonna wrap
it up, um, Senator, I will. I
just in closing, I, I just wanna
say like we need to do
something.
All right. Thank you. Thank you,
Norman.
All right, we're gonna move to
um
The Senate Bill 189, Senator
Harumillo.
He, he might switch to his one
controversial bill.
Second, Mr. Chairman on Senate
Bill 199.
Senator Hill, at least.
Present your bill
I appreciate that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Here's what this
does. It's, it's related to the
local DWA grant program and
every single one of our counties
has this in place. Now the
program's mission is to reduce
the increase of DWI alcoholism,
alcohol abuse, and
alcohol-related domestic
violence across the state using
the current tax revenues. Now
DWIs are currently funded with
45% of the liquor excise.
tax revenues, and as I said,
that's in all three of our
counties and here's the three
ways and how it works. There's a
distribution fund which are
provided quarterly, the second
is competitive grants awarded
through application process and
work as reimbursables. And the
third is alcohol detoxification
grants. Now what this bill does,
Mr. Chair, allows the
reallocation of these tax
dollars to serve as indirect
support to counties by the LDWI
programs that DFA resulting on
roughly 637%.
Possible return on investment by
providing technical assistance
and grant support directly in
lieu of placing administrative
burden on our counties. And so
with that, Mr. Chair, I'll take
questions.
OK, um, before we go to
questions, uh, anybody in the
audience in support of this?
Any anybody on Zoom?
anybody in opposition of this
bill.
All right, go to committee
questions.
We motion for Du Paz for Senator
Bran by Senator Trujil.
Please call rope
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes, yes,
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Tobiasinbotia, Senator
Trujillo, Senator Trujillo votes
yes, Senator Woods. Senator
Woods votes yes. Senator Shao.
Yes. Senator Schendo votes yes.
Senator Munoz.
We have a Duke pass.
Eating in the in the positive 0
and the negative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Thank
you.
Senator Souls.
I appreciate being able to
present this is uh is to move us
back to a state school board
instead of a state secretary of
Education. I presented and
carried this with uh Senator
Neville the last couple of
years, uh, it's dying for lack
of time, various other things
and so uh we're back again, uh,
the bill started off going back
to what we had a 15 member 5
appointed by the governor, 10
elected from around the state.
There was significant concern.
particularly from the charter
schools and so in education
committee, the bill had a fairly
major amendment made to it that
essentially moved the PEC
completely out of this bill,
kept them as an independent.
Charter authorizer, uh, within
the state and also reduce the
bill from 15 members down to 11
members with the governor
appointing only one, the 10
would still be elected from
around the state within the
districts that are currently the
PEC and so each district would
have a PEC election and then the
next election two years later
would be for the
Um
School board, the state school
board members, the school board
would then hire a qualified
educator as the state
superintendent of schools, um.
That's what this bill does.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
First go up to the audience.
Anybody here to support the
Senate Joint Resolution.
3
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Lily May Ortiz
and our representing New Mexico
School Board Association and
then Mexico School Board
Association has a membership of
450,000 school board members
from throughout the state and
this last December, the school
board Association voted on a
resolution to move from the the
this uh governance that we have
in the state now to a state
board of education, uh, the
resolution that was submitted
and approved by the association
was asking voters to approve a
constitutional amendment to
reestablish.
State Board of Education as an
independent body with the
authority to appoint a state
superintendent of education.
With funding and oversight for a
robust and accountable education
system for our students are
educators in our communities.
The membership did not outline
any details on the configuration
of the state board, but simply
for uh voted to move in that
direction, uh, we asked Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee for your support on
this piece of legislation and we
asked the sponsor for submitting
it. Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody in support
for
Mm, OK, all right.
Anybody in opposition, um.
Go ahead, we'll take all three
of you.
How many do you have?
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Amida
Aragon. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Kit scan,
and I first want to say how much
we appreciate the amendment that
happened in uh Senate education
and appreciate the sponsors work
on that. We'll also say there's
49 states that rank above us in
education, and they all have
varying structures of
governance. There's no research
that shows that one is better
than another or leads to to
better outcomes than the others.
We've tried this before and we
didn't have.
Outrageously better outcomes and
so we really think our focus
would be better spent focusing
on some of the legislation in
front of you, including Senator
Soul's math bill, Senator
Stewart's literacy bill, those
are the things that make
meaningful differences for kids,
and we ask that you focus your
attention there. Thank you.
Yeah.
Give you guys a minute bit.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to speak
against Senate Joint resolution
3 today. My name is Greg
Frosted. I'm assistant secretary
of Education at the Public
Education department. This
governance structure that we're
talking about moving back to a
state board is the governance
structure from the last century.
It did not work then and it will
not work now. Um,
In 2003, when this was changed,
we did not have a higher
education department, we did not
have uh an ECECD.
Now that we do, we work
collaboratively, closely with
them every day and to separate
them out, to have the public
education department reporting
to a state board while the other
education agencies are reporting
to the governor would create
misalignment and would cause
problems with the important
activities that we do together,
such as the longitudinal data
system, the Office of Special
Education and other grant
programs that we run together.
Uh
Additionally, there's no body of
research to support that uh
state board is a better
governance structure that will,
it will result in better student
outcomes and to put uh the
significant amount of time and
effort over the years it would
take to move uh to move us
backwards, uh, rather than
focusing on important
Initiatives that would move us
forward with student outcomes,
um, is, is not a good use of
time and resources, and for that
reason, the public education
department opposes SJR3 and
hopes you will as well. Thank
you.
Uh, good morning, Scott Scanlon,
registered lobbyist with uh
excellent schools in New Mexico,
charter schools, uh, without
repeating anything, we will just
say that um this is a huge
change, we don't think it's been
properly vetted by the LFC by
the LESC, uh, and one of the
things that hasn't been, uh, at
least in our opinion, properly
vetted is the the impact on
charter schools who would lose
the focus of their authorizer,
um, if this change were made
this bill. Thank you.
Good morning, chair members of
the committee, Alison Riley with
the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, respectfully standing
in opposition of this
legislation, we understand the
intent of these proposals are to
improve our education system.
However, we feel the resolution
at this time lacks thorough
vetting and raises concerns,
reverting to a model that proved
unsuccessful over two decades
ago is not a viable solution for
the challenges our education
system faces today.
Additionally, injecting politics
into our education governance
system isn't a good solution at
this sensitive.
time. These races tend to become
more about culture wars and less
about how to best support our
students. SGR 3 has not
undergone a comprehensive review
or open discussion during the
interim and given the magnitude
of this resolution, we feel it
should have extensive debate and
analysis before any decisions
are made. Thank you.
Thank you.
How many do we have on Zoom?
Um
OK, we'll go ahead.
Oh
Or
Oh, OK.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Hope Morales, and I'm
speaking to you today as a
former local school board member
for the Roswell Independent
School District. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
there's lots of concern about
the potential politicalization,
delay of decision making, and
overall effectiveness of an
elected state board. I've seen
firsthand the challenges that
politically charged groups can
place on school board members
that can disrupt the true
intention of a school board.
Many of our local school board
members across the state have
not participated in.
mandatory training, causing
concern about their knowledge
and commitment related to their
duties as an elected official.
In addition, without a full
board committed to students, not
organizations that funded their
campaign, there is likely to be
a disconnect between what is
happening and what needs to
happen. Although we have all
participated in educational
systems at some point. It
doesn't mean everyone is an
education expert. It is hard to
be a school board member, and I
worry that we're focusing on the
wrong issue rather than a state
board of education, we should.
provide more support to where
decisions are happening, and
that is at the local level.
Local school board members
should be surveyed to ensure
they have all the tools they
need to be effective in serving
their local communities. I do
want to thank the sponsor for
his continued service to New
Mexico and his commitment to
students. Thank you.
Thank you, Eli, you got a
minute.
Good morning, Mr. Good morning,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Eli
Cassels and I'm the manager of
policy and programs for Teach
Plus New Mexico. We work with
hundreds of teachers across the
state, and there is deep concern
about the potential consequences
of SJR3 and how it may
negatively impact students,
educators, and public education
as a whole.
In the Senate Education
Committee, we heard opposition
from a variety of individuals
that share different
perspectives that called out
some of the challenges that
include strategic collaboration
and longitudinal data sharing
between state departments and
the gridlock and dysfunction
that we've seen from similar
board systems that would slow
down efforts in a time when we
need urgency.
Many teachers shared these same
concerns. Now is not the time to
focus on educational governance,
but rather solutions for
students. I urge you to oppose
SJR3 and instead support
initiatives that focus on
students, empower educators and
uphold our commitment to a high
quality education for all. Thank
you.
Thank you. We'll take one more.
This is
Go ahead, Gwen.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Can you
hear me OK?
Yes, we can.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I want
to start by saying I think very
highly of the sponsor, um, and
of this committee. I'm asking
you to consider or reconsider,
uh, is your last name?
Piece of legislation, Gwen Perea
ornament, and I'm the president
and CEO of the Lannel
Foundation.
Um,
oh, what I most want to say is
that I really hope for some well
developed policy that can lead
the state in this area. I do
believe some solid research is
needed on governance for our
state. I believe that it needs
to be not grounded in our
current, nor our past
structures, but what can help
lead us forward. Um, I like the
idea of state commissions. I
think there are some issues with
this piece of legislation as it
Currently stands with a separate
PEC and a state board that are
not connected. I don't think
that's in the best interest of
the state, um, I would like to
see a better comprehensive
approach, whereas it's been
stated, some research is done by
legislative finance committee
staff and legislative education
Study Committee staff as well as
the public education department
itself. Um, I'd like to thank
the sponsor.
Sure, but I, I urge that this
not pass at this point. Thank
you. Thank you.
All right, we'll go to
committee. I've got Senator
Brent and Senator Trio.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
Senator Souls, uh, we've, we've
had quite a few conversations
about this and, and um I just
have a couple of questions, um.
First, I have a statement. I
think we can walk and chew gum
at the same time.
So we can focus on more than one
bill at a time, right? Wouldn't
you agree with that?
Mr. Ja, yes, I mean, certainly.
Because this bill is here
doesn't mean we're not working
on lots of other areas in
education.
Uh thank you.
Then you also asked answer for
me how many superintendents have
we had in the last 6 years.
Mr. Chair and
and senator, I think we've had 6
or 7 if you count into the last
administration.
Uh, and certainly over since uh
we had changed from a state
board, uh, we're somewhere
around 8 or 9 over in where
prior over 40 years, I think we
had 3.
So, yeah, and under this
governor, I think we've had 5 or
6, I've lost count. It's been so
many, um, and then we had 2
under the last governor.
One right at the end.
Um
Is there any consistency
In the public education
department when you're changing
superintendents.
That often.
Mr. Chair and Senator, uh, when
there's change in leadership,
even if it's within the same
party, there are major changes
in policy and focus in
personality, and we know in
education that consistency of
leadership is one of the key
drivers towards being able to
move forward with policies that
help children.
I remember, you know, 2 years
ago, um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
working on a bill with the
Superintendent Stackhouse.
And we're halfway through the
session when he resigned.
We had done this bill together.
We had the bill filed.
The next day I got notified by
Greg, uh, over at PED that they
no longer supported the bill.
You talk about a switch
overnight.
Right? And this is a bill I had
worked.
At several meetings with the
superintendent on.
So that's where you, you have
this, you know, difference and
you change leadership and all of
a sudden we're going a different
direction even though we're
under the same party, under the
same um governor.
You you're going a completely
different direction. I, I think
that's
One of the reasons that you're
bringing this bill.
Now one thing I, I, you know,
with um
Uh, this ornament, when she was
talking about, you know, the
same board on both.
talk to you about that. I
actually agree. I think that the
board should hire and fire the
superintendent and take care of
all the charter schools.
I think they can handle one
thing.
I don't think what we're asking
for is that the board runs PE.
We're asking for them to hire.
The superintendent, isn't that
right?
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes,
typically the board is not doing
anything on the day to day
running of the department.
They're supervising, overseeing,
hiring, firing, evaluating the
superintendent and maybe some
very broad policy types of
concerns, but not running the
day to day, uh, in the past, I
think the board met maybe 4
times a year. Uh, it was not
like being on a local school
board of which you've been on,
I've been on where you're
meeting at least twice a month,
if not 4 times a month.
With work sessions and other
things.
The English German singer, I
appreciate that because I, I
think that the consistency is
the superintendent, right? So
the board brings the
superintendent in and that
superintendent, like you said in
40 years we had 4, is that what
you said, or 3? I mean, there's
some consistency there.
Um
I think the biggest issues we
just have, have had so much
inconsistency in that
department.
Uh, since we changed it from
being
Uh, aboard.
And, and I think that's
You know, and talk about
politics, right?
Um
Do you think there's more
politics now or when there was a
board?
Mr. Chair and senator.
And it feels like there's more
politics in the trajectory with
changes in administration can be
huge switches every 4 to 8
years, uh, where in the past the
superintendent and the board
were a little bit insulated from
the day to day politics that
went on and then there was one
statement made um biped, which
obviously doesn't support this,
um, but
Just
By biped who um was talking
about the three different
departments.
Um, so I have one suggestion.
I think maybe we should put all
three of those departments under
Yeah.
And they can hire all three,
then you have 1.
cohesive group, uh, I, I think
that would work great and then
you'd have consistency in all
three departments.
Um, so we might want to think
about that one.
Or maybe bring it in another
time, but.
And that, that would be one way
of handling that, so that they
wouldn't, but even if, even if
they're appointed those other
two are appointed and this
one's, you know, running the,
the education, they can still
work together.
Again, we can do more than one
thing at a time.
interesting.
Mr. Chair and senators,
certainly, and I think there are
other examples of it that though
the Attorney General is elected
separately from others is
certainly working with
Corrections department within
the administration is working
with various other state
agencies that are all working
together and the superintendent
almost certainly would be
working very closely with early
childhood and with higher
education, it doesn't mean that
suddenly there is a wall put up
and they shall never talk to
each other, I would imagine
there would be close
collaboration on a regular
basis.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator, I
think you're right unless, of
course.
The governor who appoints the
other two tells them they can't.
Which could happen I guess.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I, I
fully support this. I think what
we're doing now is not working.
I think it's pretty obvious it's
not working, um.
There's a lot of other things we
need to do for education, but
having some consistency.
At the head of our state
education.
I think it's key.
Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, if I might just
introduce Dan Rounds who is the
executive director of the school
board or the the superintendents
Association, who also is fully
in support of this legislation
but is here to help answer any
technical questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, may I
make one short statement some of
the things you've heard are not
factual. There was a higher
education department under the
that old system I worked under
both.
I was the public school finance
chief from 1987, 1991 under the
state Board of Education.
It, it was with 15 members and a
state superintendent of public
instruction. I was reported to
the 2nd of 3 and 43 years.
Alan Morgan, thank you.
You.
Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
sponsor, thank you for bringing
this forward. Um, I, I, I will
echo that I have great respect
for the work that you do. I've
admired um your opinions and and
the things and had the
opportunity to serve on the LESC
for the 4 years that I was over
in the house.
Um, 6 years ago, I probably
would be sitting right next to
you.
And the reason being is that it
was the lack of uh we didn't
like there's many of us here in
this roundhouse. They didn't
like the policies that we're
going forward.
But we took legislative action
and we were able to continue to
move in the direction that the
majority felt like we needed to
move.
Uh, there was some stability
under the prior administration.
I will give them that.
Um, I worked very closely with
uh the secretary and ultimately
wrote a letter of recommendation
before her, um, being, uh, you
know, confirmed by the Senate
Rules Committee, and that was
because she was willing to work
with me.
And so I've been on both sides
of this aisle.
And um do you remember why we
changed in 2003, you said, I
know, um, Mr. Rounds has worked
under both and I'm assuming that
you have to.
Mr. Chair and and Senator, I
did. I was a.
Let's see, I was a middle school
principal or an elementary
principal. I think I was in my,
as an elementary principal at
the time, uh, and was trying to
tell people it was Richardson
who was trying to pull more
power into the governor's office
and I very clearly remember
voting against it and
encouraging other people to vote
against going to a secretary of
Education, uh, it can be good
when it's your person in there
and you politics aligned and it
can be awful when it's not in
the
concerns then as they are now is
the flip flopping of policy that
can occur when it is a political
appointment like that instead of
a an appointment to do the best
for children. Uh, it narrowly
passed at that time.
Um, but I recall it well and
remember very well.
Being a principal, being able to
call up to the State Department
of Education and always felt
like they were there trying to
be helpful, uh, being a
principal under the newer
system.
Uh, even before some of the
political things we've talked
about over the last decade or
so.
It changed fairly quickly in
that it felt like more of a
government bureaucracy and we
were always worried what is,
what are they going to do to us
rather than that they were there
to help with the education
problems I was having within my
school or district.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Chairman. Um, so,
I will just also say I was on
the school board too. There's a
number of us that, um, are
serving in this capacity that
we're on school boards and um I
had the opportunity to do a one
hour workshop.
At the last, um, not this most
recent one cause I was barely
able to walk in there, but at
the last, um, school boards
association and what I did do
the, the whole hour on and it
was very well attended, and
there have been lots of
conversations after that was the
history of education in New
Mexico.
And I went all the way back to
our Native American, uh,
pueblos, uh, how we taught our
families, right? We taught our
families how to, uh, what they
needed to know and we've, you
know, transpired, trans
transpired to uh the religious
sector, and, you know, that's
kind of a dark uh spot in our
history for many, and then we
moved into a school board from
the time that we had our state
constitution, we've had a
Department of Public
education.
That's not something new. We've
had a Department of Publication.
So we walked through all of
those those steps, right? And
then we had about 2025 minutes
to talk about what is the issue,
what is the issue that's
underlying this, and you and I
have had a conversation,
Senator. I, I really think that
issue is the transition.
And I get that, but I don't
believe that this is the
solution to that problem.
I think that there's other
solutions to that problem and
that we need to have a more
comprehensive conversation.
There's other um states that
have a school board, and they
do. I don't know how many. I
would love to know that answer.
I also know that there's other
states that elect a state
superintendent.
So there's not that other level
of bureaucracy because we're
really talking about another
level of bureaucracy between us,
who were the, the lawmakers,
right? We're passing legislation
that I believe is going to be
groundbreaking in regards to
math and to reading.
We get that legislation, it
passes and it goes directly to
the secretary who has a
responsibility to implement it.
We passed legislation under this
other, it goes to the board. The
board goes to the superintendent
and there's another level of
bureaucracy in my opinion.
I do think that there's other
ways to make this happen and,
and one of the suggestions that
I had in the conversation with
school board members, why don't
we change this position into a
six-year term due it similar to
what we were looking at doing
for the PRC, which is you have a
committee that's appointed, uh,
based upon, you know, specifics
in the law.
Um, the unions, the uh
nonprofits that are helping, um,
uh, so you have a committee that
committee makes recommendations
to the governor.
And our governor has to choose
from those recommendations.
There's some control at the
local level because we would
have input from those who who
know um uh who could filter
through some choices, and then
that position becomes maybe a
six-year term, and the position
cannot be removed unless there's
reason for malfeasance, for, you
know, and then you have the
court. So I'm just, I'm just
saying this one idea.
Because I think there are other
ways for us to address the lack
of stability and the transition
that continues to happen. I
really feel like we're riding
the ship.
And I look back on uh the
analysis and the test scores
from years ago when we were
under this other system, they're
not any better.
They're not any better, and I
know that the analysis on those,
uh, you know, who, who was
reading, who was doing math was
a little bit different, but it's
not like the test scores were
way up here and now they're way
down here.
That has not changed and so the
structure of how we do public
education has changed.
Twice now and multiple times
under these administrations, and
there has not been the
improvement that we want to see.
So for that reason, I
respectfully will not be able to
support this piece of
legislation, but happy, happy,
happy to work with you to find
some solutions that work for the
entire state. I see the senator
chairman's trying to wrap me up
again. This is important
information.
Senator Luna.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Welcome.
All right, I have a few
questions for you. Um, I, I have
a statement because I'm also a
retired school teacher and, and
lived through both systems, and
there was some misstatements. I
felt like with the um public.
Comments, um.
What we have now is we have 2
people.
That are deciding.
The curriculum for the entire
state of New Mexico.
The governor
And the Secretary of Education.
And we know how this goes.
I mean, you just go through the
number of secretaries we've had
in the last 6 years.
And, and that creates a
knee-jerk reaction. Every time
we get a new one.
Oh, this is what we need to do.
Oh no, we gotta do this one.
Right?
And so, so I think that's a
major issue. And I think we can
solve some of that. Is this
gonna be the perfect bill? No,
it's not. Are we gonna have to
fix some things?
I haven't seen a perfect bill
yet other than maybe Senator
Padilla.
that came through the other day.
That was a good bill
but
So, so with that kind of being
the the background of it.
If we go back pre-16.
Where we did have a state board.
Is it their fault?
That the scores were completely
low then that they were the same
as we are now. Is, is it the
state boards?
fault that's the student scores
for that.
Mr. Chair and Senator, uh, no,
uh, New Mexico, much of the
scores in the state are due to
poverty, social issues, a number
of other things, certainly
schools have some effect with
it, but this is not going to
solve all of those problems, you
know, and those weren't all of
the problems in the past. This
is one of the pieces of
stability that will allow some
of the other measures to to
start taking effect and, and not
have to worry.
about getting partway down and
then suddenly jumping off a
different direction when we're
starting to make some progress.
Yes, sir. Thank you. And Mr.
Chair, um,
So kind of with that staying in
line with that.
We've, we've got to have some
guardrail. I hate that word
guardrails, we always use it.
We have to have a checks and
balance system.
And really, it should start with
The parents, the parents should
be engaged.
I mean, that's what we want to
create. Then you have the school
board.
So the parents go to the school
board, the school board goes to
The superintendent.
Except for under
The system we're under now.
How much say does the school
board have with the
superintendent. I mean, and
others are, in other words,
what's the role of a school
board right now.
Mr. Chair and Senator, the local
school boards, local school
board, sorry the, you know,
having been through all of that,
you know, local school boards
actually do have lots of control
over things that happen within
their districts based on budget
and policies and other things of
that sort, but local school
boards are not by law supposed
to be doing the day to day
running of the district, they
hire a superintendent to run the
district and then oversee.
supervised that superintendent
or the day to day running of the
district. The superintendent is
then working mostly with the,
the public education department
as far as the state policies and
how those affect the local
district.
So
I'm sorry go ahead. I didn't
mean to interrupt you, sir.
The chairman Senator there man I
just had an additional piece to
that answer. School boards do
have the right and
responsibility to do things like
adopt their calendar.
We've gone through that over
this last year.
We had to go to a district court
to make a decision when we
didn't agree with the decision
of those two people you talked
about.
Because there's no relief valve
in the current construct.
Under what's being proposed, the
board of that that board of
education at the state level
would be that relief valve
before that rule would go into
effect. You would have a pellet
opportunity outside of the
courts.
Which you may still end up at.
Could be the interim there that
would occur. that was true under
the prior system. It is not true
under this system. I just want
to go to the point you raised in
the decision making part of it.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, um,
Senator would
With this new system change all
of that?
Mr. Chair and and Senator, you
mean the roles of the local
school board and just the rules
in my opinion, no, I was a
school board member and was
president of the New Mexico
School Boards Association under
the old system, um, and
regularly the state
superintendent would come and
present, would talk about uh
policies would be in front of
the legislature advocating for
more monies for schools, etc.
etc. um, and the system worked
fine with the exception that our
as was indicated.
The outcomes for all of our
children were not great at that
time. Most of that was probably
not due to the structure of the
system, but due to systemic
structures within the state as a
whole with poverty and other
issues. OK, thank you. And Mr.
Chair, so, so that's kind of my
point.
This is gonna be a big move.
It's gonna be a big change.
But
Under from the school board, the
local school boards down, it's
not really that big a change, is
it?
OK, so Mr. Chair,
That, that leads to my point.
This change is really
To take politics, minimize the
politics as much as we can.
By reducing some of the
governor's power.
And when I say governor, I mean
any governor.
And it's damn sure gonna change
the power in Pitt.
So I don't understand.
To me that is common sense.
We need change.
Because what we're doing is not
working, and I'm not saying what
we have done in the past isn't,
but if we just continue down the
same path.
We're gonna get the same
results.
By creating this board, we're
not going to jump to number 30,
I promise.
But if we can
Take away a little of the
politics, smooth it out a little
bit, start working towards
What's actually going on in the
classroom without just two
people.
telling us what to do. I think
it was a big move. I do have 11
more question, Mr. Chair. It's a
very short one.
How would the, the districts be
set up.
For this board.
Mr. Chair and Senator, the way
it's set up within this
legislation is the districts
would follow the 10 districts
that we currently have for the
PEC.
OK. And so, Mr. Chair,
Do you feel like that's
politically charged? Does it
lean left? Does it lean right?
How does that board?
Look like it's gonna line up.
Mr. Chair, I don't know whether
it would lean left or right, uh,
certainly ensures that there is
is representation from all areas
of New Mexico. So the east side,
which has many small, more rural
types of districts, it has.
Representation out of
Albuquerque from the northwest
from down south, uh, it's fairly
diverse across the state and so
my guess is relatively, I mean,
we never get it perfect,
obviously, but is relatively
representative of the state.
Mr. Chairman, I'll just add this
is a nonpartisan election.
I, I, I understand that, but.
Unfortunately, it doesn't work
out that way. Uh, Mr. Chair, if,
if I could, if I could get a map
of that before we go to the
floor.
Before this bill goes to floor,
it doesn't go. I, I would like
to see the, the district maps.
I, I haven't actually got to see
that yet, so.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I, I
think that's easily enough to,
to get those and they're
relatively available on the
Secretary of State's website and
other places. Perfect. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
To Senator Lanier's question
when I'm reading the summary as
well as it shows that there are
no more than 3 members from each
from the two major political
parties, um, that would be on
this board and then one would be
a tribal representative.
Mr. Chair and senator, that was,
those would have been the
governor's appointees, uh, in
the amendment that was made in
Senate education, the governor
appointee was moved to only one
and so that no longer would be
as to where this bill currently
is.
I see. OK. And I saw a little
exchange earlier, um, one of the
people that stood in um
Not in support of this bill,
said that it could potentially
um affect charter schools
throughout the state and I saw
you nodding no, that's not
correct. So could you address
that, please, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Chair and Senator, again, that
was corrected with the amendment
that was made in Senate
education that totally moved the
charter schools and the PEC
completely separate. They will
stay as they are, continue to be
the chartering authority for the
statewide charter schools.
OK. Thank, thank you.
All right. Thank you. Uh.
Chairman, I just have one quick
question. So if a union and
unions will play their game in
these elections.
Could they, could they influence
all the elections across the
board and then
Have a takeover of PED which
would be not good.
Mr. Chair.
I mean, certainly one group
could put huge amounts of money
in and influence the election.
That's the election laws that we
have now across the state, there
are some unions that are more
powerful, their districts that
don't have unions at all and so,
you know, and just as we've seen
politics play out in other
things in education that the
unions don't always win.
You know, what, what they're
advocating for, I mean, but
certainly that's what elections
are when there's money involved
is, you know, whoever convinces
the most people gets the most
votes.
OK, thank you.
the pleasure of the committee
do passed by Senator Brent,
seconded by Senator Lanier.
Will the police call rope.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes, yes,
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes no. Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes
yes, Senor Padilla.
asked.
Senator Steinborn.
Sent her Tobiasin.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes no.
Senator Woods.
Yes.
Senator Woods.
Sinner Woods boats, yes, Senator
Shendo. Uh yes. Senator Shindo
votes yes.
Senator Padilla.
Sorry
Yes.
Senator Padilla votes yes.
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Tobias in votes, yes,
Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz votes no.
We have a due pass with the vote
7 in the affirmative, 3 in the
negative.
Do best. Thank you committee and
for the very good questions. I
appreciate it. They were very
thoughtful.
Uh, see, everybody's leaving the
room, so we're gonna need to set
up some subcommittees to guide
to go through specials and
supplementals and language, uh,
and then capital.
As we start moving forward, so
I'll come talk to you on the
floor a little bit, uh putting
up those committees together and
see how we're gonna handle that
because we're gonna have to.
Especially going through capital
is gonna be tough and, and
What was this the specials and
the supplementals, $13 billion
right here.
Uh,
yeah, 33 million.
3.6 billion, so there's a lot of
room in there, so uh I don't
think so at this point because I
don't know what they're doing on
the floor. We don't really have
a whole lot of bills and aren't
really tied to House Bill 2.
And then so I think I said this,
I want to start hearing public
education.
Uh, early childhood, get the
education out of our way, um.
And we'll kind of move in to
CYFD.
Uh, those all kind of tied
together, especially with early
childhood, and then we'll come
back and we'll start hearing
like worse more solutions. We
know we have a bill that that
funds gonna go insolvent if we
don't do something less, we're
gonna have to start figuring out
some of the other agencies that
we're gonna hear.
And see where the critical needs
are. So just so you know, the,
the exec has made the decision
with the secretaries that they
want to get everything gathered
together at the, from the exact.
And then start coming to us. So
prior for you that didn't know,
they would all get stuff out of
the house and then they'd come
over here and ask for extra
stuff that they never asked for
before.
And so then we'd be confused
where it came from. We'd ask
them, they said, we don't know
where it came from. So we're
trying to control that. So they,
we know exactly where they're
at, they know exactly where
they're at.
We did put on the agenda for
either Saturday or Monday, uh,
the governor mentioned about the
federal cuts.
Uh, we're gonna have to really
start thinking about if that
does happen to Medicaid and
Medicare, how we're gonna plan
for that.
And accomplices have been
working with LLC on some stuff.
Uh, we met with them this
morning at 7 and started talking
about what that looks like in,
in what we're gonna need to, to
plan if something does happen,
hopefully it doesn't, uh, but
just to start that process in
our head.
Uh, to start thinking about
what, what it may look like if
something does happen, so we did
ask the governor to come down
maybe on Monday.
And just give us her thoughts on
what what she thinks happened
because she was in a meeting and
not to question but just, we
just want to get it in our
brains and the thought process
centers Mr. Chair, just a quick.
Come in.
Should we start thinking about
increasing our reserves somewhat
to take care of the possibility
of that, so we don't have to cut
programming, you know, uh.
I'll tell you this, they, they
DFA has run some scenarios and
high low, mediocre, uh, if
something high happened.
Reserves would last about 3
months.
And so that tells you where
we're at, and so that's a high.
That's what everything getting
cut. Uh, we're, we're gonna look
at those scenarios, so we're
just gonna
Look towards the future and hope
for the least amount of damage,
if there's any. I'm saying
there's gonna be any, but we'll
ride this boat, however it
works. How about you row and I
ride? Uh-huh.
