Uh, senators Figueroa and worse,
and ask you please to vote yes
for this resolution. Thank you.
Thank you, Barbara. We're gonna
go to the audience, uh, those in
support will take 3 and those in
opposition, I'll take 3.
One minute piece.
Chair.
Members of the committee, my
name is Jessa Cowdry, vice
president of operations at
Common Spirit Saint Joseph's
Children as a statewide provider
of home visiting in New Mexico.
We journey weekly with hundreds
of families as starting
prenatally and journeying with
them until their child's 3rd
birthday from my decade plus of
advocating at the legislature. I
know SGR1 will benefit children
in the state of New Mexico.
Y'all are making important high
stakes decisions and the issues
are complicated these.
days, whether it's how to build
out a world-class early
childhood system or how to
resolve our dysfunctional system
of child protective services,
and truly you could name any
issue today is more complex than
say 50 100 years ago.
Establishing legislative
salaries is a common sense
proposal in a time that makes
little sense. Everything is more
complicated. E1 will enable US
legislators and future
legislators to have the time and
resources necessary.
For creating solutions to drive
our state forward. And if you
feel uncomfortable about
cleaning a salary because
volunteer work is near and dear
to your heart, um, and volunteer
work is sacred work. I see that.
But maybe perhaps it could be
donated to a, a publicly to a
cause in your community that you
care about. Thank you so much
for voting us on SG one.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
committee members. I am Arta
Chavez, ED for New Mexico Native
Vote. I'm Dana from Cuba Pueblo.
Our state legislators play an
important role in shaping the
policies that will impact every
New Mexican, including myself
and everyone in this room.
That's a lot of power, but
without fair compensation for
our legislators, we are
eliminating this role to those
that can afford to serve during
the 30 or 60 day or even the
interim sessions. We need those
that are most qualified and have
the dedication to uplifting the
interests of the people and
commitment to public service. We
speak to.
So many advocates who want to
work on behalf of the people,
but simply cannot do so because
they cannot afford to do so
without pay.
This bill will allow for space
at the table, allowing
accessibility for working class,
our young leaders, and reducing
reducing conflicts of interest
so that our lawmakers can focus
on leading our state. We urge
your support for SJR1 and
believe in the future of a
diverse, effective legislature
that truly reflects the New
Mexican community. Nitra, thank
you.
Got
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Mason
Graham. I'm with Common Cause
New Mexico, and I'm also
speaking on behalf of about 18
organizations that are in
coalition in support of this
legislation.
In 2022, we've done extensive
polling and sampling of likely
voters on this subject. 64%
support establishing salaries
for legislators and 62 support
an independent salary commission
and that supports spans across
demographics, political parties
and regions. So voters recognize
that change is long overdue. Uh,
the organization work that we do
goes across the state and covers
many of the challenging issues
that will be discussed and
debated during this session.
So first we see how important
and consequential the work you
do here is, and also during the
interim. We respect that
sacrifice that our legislatures
make in order to serve the
people because it is hard work
that demands integrity and
resilience and all of our
legislators should have the
resources they need to commit to
this work. Their communities and
their constituents. Voters
should have a choice in how they
want to invest in their in their
representation, especially if
that investment nets New
Mexicans a stronger, more co
Legislature or not just the
wealthy, the retired, or the
extremely resourceful can serve,
but where all of our legislators
can show up and fully execute
the year-round responsibilities
of their job.
Uh, Mr. Chair, if it's, if it's
OK with you, I would like to
just name some of the
organizations that are part of
our coalition. It's quite an
exhaustive list, it's a long
list, let's not do that if you
only get 1 or 2 or 3, we'll be
all right.
Sure, so that includes uh common
cause New Mexico, New Mexico
made a vote, uh, the Senter for
Civic Policy, New Mexico Asian
Family Center in New Mexico
Black Leadership Council.
New Mexico open elections, OA,
uh, and the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter. So there's more
of that. Thank you. We're gonna
teach you how to count here in a
minute.
You gotta count votes.
Thank you. Uh, we're gonna go to
questions from committee
members. Senator Pain, oh, and
there's no opposition, I don't
think is there any opposition? I
didn't see anybody raise their
hand when I did that, so.
I'm way ahead of you.
Center Padilla here first. Uh,
thank you, chair, and thank you
to the sponsors. I don't have.
Questions, but I do want to just
make a comment on the, the
strategic move that this does or
or makes for the state of New
Mexico is that it opens the door
to really anybody to serve in
the legislature. Uh, today I
just firmly believe that 85, 90,
95% of the people that we all
interact with could probably
never serve in these roles and
so as a result, um.
You know, uh, the, the
legislature isn't always as
representative of, of New Mexico
and represented what's going on
at the kitchen table.
Uh, I've been very, I mean, I, I
grew up in 7 different counties
and 7 different foster homes,
built a business and that's what
allows me to come and do this.
I'm very lucky that way.
But I can tell you that uh my
sisters and my cousins and
people that I'm related to could
probably never serve here
because of that, it's extremely
difficult on my business to be
able to to come and do this. I
will tell you that uh at the
exact opening moment of our
session this year, my office was
literally flooding at that very
moment.
So I mentioned these things
because we've got to create a
way that makes us not.
That makes it accessible, but
then also makes it doable. And I
think that that's exactly what
this does, and I like the
provisions and the legislation
also that uh
That allow us sort of a runway
to set the whole thing up ahead
of time, uh, you know, in, in.
It, it's contingent, uh, we, we
To whatever legislation,
whatever we passed before the
voters.
uh
Uh, we're not go into place if,
if the voters don't approve it.
So everybody has a role in this.
Everyone has a hand in in
designing this and
Setting it up for people and um.
I just also feel like, you know,
when you're serving here and you
have all these other
that are going on
Your life and everything and
Um,
The time the session is ending.
It's almost like it's so we
can't even stand each other up
here in some cases and, and
we're in the
this tiny little building, it's
a big building, you know, for
one person, but it's tiny based
on the 300,000 people that walk
through it every day.
Um
I just, I feel like we could
probably do that.
A lot better, and I think this
is a move in the right
direction. So I just want to
make that comment. I want
the doors to be open to
everybody, uh.
or has a desire to serve the
people.
Thank you.
Stein.
German
I
Mr. Chairman,
For a while.
It's dawned on me
truly
Exclusionary.
Right.
pay.
For public servants who do this
job really is.
still have a working age, I run
a small nonprofit.
And I remember
last year at a moment
I was
Basically have to work for a
living, um.
I
couldn't afford.
committee because I was having
to complete an assignment.
Yeah
I watched, who was able to
participate. Retirees.
respect, but
Retirees who
How many
We're not making a
outside the legislature.
For people who are paid well to
attend those meetings, and I
felt like
It's really
I guess enfranchise my
constituents were me as an
elected official to basically
not be able to.
for
Yeah.
But to not be able to go and sit
at that committee and learn and
participate and expand my
knowledge so that I could be a
warrior on those causes like I
am a warrior for the causes
that.
I do, I, I am able to fight for.
It's really about time, and it's
really about do we believe in
public service, we believe in
investing in people.
Do we believe that the citizens
of the state and the state
itself is worthy of that
investment.
Because to say that people
should work for free anymore
than anyone sitting out here.
Would work for free or could
afford to, that's naive. It's an
offense, actually, to expect
anyone to do that, even though
we do it and we, we, we love it
and so we don't do it for the
check clearly. um, but we also
should understand the trade-offs
of what we're not getting as far
as the investing in New Mexico.
We cannot afford Mr. Chair as a
state to not make that
investment. And so for that
reason, it is the right thing to
do.
Um
And I think um we will get
By doing this, we will get the
best pool of people we can
possibly get to do this job and
invest in New Mexico and have
thoughtful policy.
Uh, deliberations on these very
complex challenges that we face.
And so we need to make that
investment is the right thing to
do and so I
I'm proud to support the
proposal and I also will say,
Mr. Chairman, I don't think it
should take effect when we're in
office. I don't think, I think
it should, if, if the voters
decide to do this, it should
happen.
Um, and whoever succeeds our
terms, so.
Um, and that
Maybe it will not be me or many
of the people up here. So thank
you, Miss Char. That's all I
have.
Senator Trujil.
Oh wait, we do have an amendment
that came.
And so we're gonna make copies,
get the sponsor a copy of the
amendment so they can look at it
we'll go through trio and then
uh
Senator Woods hasn't been.
They're good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, senators for bringing
this forward. Um, most of you
know my, my, my lived
experiences that I had to leave
5 months early for my second
term of serving in the house and
the reason was financial in
nature. It was the beginning of
COVID and um my husband's job
was in jeopardy and I was uh on
reduced hours trying to be able
to serve, so I, while I'm
retired now and I do have the
opportunity to be here and I
don't need to.
of a, a salary from this
position. Uh, I know that
there's a lot of people out
there that are in the same
position that I was in at that
time, and in order to get new
people here will be in that same
position also and so for that
reason, I'm very supportive of
this, and I, I too, you know,
uh, the idea is that it's not
going to impact those of us that
are serving right now. It would
be the next, um, uh, you know,
uh, the next.
Thank you.
Thank you. Did you have time to
look at the amendment?
Senator, what you want, can I
have a motion to
Discussed for an amendment for
discussion purposes.
You know, Mr. Chair, wait, we
gotta get the motion first
amendment,
uh, he's passing it out right
now.
One
Senator Woods, we need a motion
for. I propose, uh, a motion to
the Senate Finance Committee the
following amendment to Senate
Rules Committee substitute for
Senate Joint Resolution 1.
For discussion purposes. We have
a motion, we have a second on
the amendment.
The second life center uh
Lanier.
Any objection to that.
No, would you want to explain
your amendment?
Well, let me explain, let me
read the amendment first.
On page 3, line 13.
After article.
To
Inser
Semicolon provided that the
total amount of the legislative
salaries for a financial year
shall not exceed.
4 10% of the oil and gas
severance tax received by the
state for the financial year.
Of the for the financial year, 2
years preceding.
And let me go further to
explain.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
You know, let's first
acknowledge the only reason
we're even able to consider a
proposal to pay legislatures is
because of the record
contributions of oil and gas to
the state budget.
Without these record high
revenues, we wouldn't dare
prioritize salaries for
lawmakers over the needs of our
constituents, including schools,
roads, and healthcare.
Therefore, I'm proposing an
amendment.
To this joint resolution that
ties the maximum aggregate
amount of legislators' salaries
to these oil and gas revenues.
The exact formula in my men is
4/10 of 1% of the prior two-year
average oil and gas separate tax
revenues, for example.
The last 2 years of revenues for
these industries are as follows.
FY 2023. It was 2 billion.
400
98,325,000. That was 23 for 24,
it was 2 billion.
143 million $577,000 for 2024.
The average revenue for those
two years is 2 million, 2
billion 320 million, 951,000.
4 10% of that is $9238,00084.
You divide that by 112
legislators.
That would produce a maximum
salary of $82,000891 per member.
Mr. President, Mister, Mister
Chairman.
That's my proposal, um.
I'd be happy to, uh, I'll be
happy to.
I'd be happy to uh hear Senator
Worth and Do Higgs.
Response.
Cents you see that as a friendly
amendment or
Unfriendly amendment. So Mr.
Chair, Senator,
So that would be an unfriendly
amendment. I actually think
that's way too high.
Or for salaries for for a
part-time legislator, um, but,
but more, even more so, one of
the the key tenets of SJR1 is
that we are removing
self-dealing.
From the equation.
We are establishing this
independent citizen commission,
and they are the ones who would
decide if salaries were
established and who would limit
them.
Uh, but we don't, we should not
be part of that process. Um, and
I, I would see this amendment as
as ensuring ourselves into that
determination in a way that I
think runs counter to the
intention here, which is to take
all self-dealing out of it, and
just have this independent
citizen commission, being the
one making those determinations.
And Mister Chair
The only thing I would argue
with that.
This is the maximum salary.
When you say this is too high,
this would be the maximum it'd
be a floating point according to
oil and gas revenues.
So
This would establish maximum
salaries.
Every year.
Mr. Chair, that's, that's the
amendment. Thank you. Questions
on the amendment, Senator
Trehill.
Yeah, thank you. Um, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Woods, the way
I'm reading this and, you know,
I went to law school, so I
didn't have to do math in
college, but the way that I'm
reading this, it says 4/10%, not
4/10 of 1%, which I read to be
40%, not, not 4/10 of 1%.
It's a big salary. That's a big,
that's a much bigger salary,
Senator.
Senator Sinndall moves the pass.
extremely
So I make that maximum a little
higher.
Well, evidently I didn't get it
written right, sir. No, it's not
right.
OK.
And I can't, I, yeah, she's not
right about that.
The draft and knew what she was
doing. Oh, wait a minute, wait a
minute, wait a minute. Turn off
your mic first wait a minute.
Accord to Tom.
my expert,
the drafter says this is right.
Well, I don't know if law school
math works or not, but
what's math what's math problem
do you want to solve a if, if
you see that it is correct.
That the numbers you gave us cap
it at 80,000 a year.
Then
Senator Trujil, you still have
the floor.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chairman.
again, not the math expert here,
but um I just think that capping
it if anything is not a good
idea, and it does seem like the
way that it reads that it's
Or
Over 10.
The drafter probably has better
math skills than I do.
Yeah.
So out of the floor.
Thank you, Chair. So I, I can
sort of back and forth on the
map also, but I, I don't know
that that's correct, but outside
of that, I, I don't, I'm never a
fan of putting an actual number
in legislation because then
suddenly it's, it's, you know,
it's, that's why the commission
idea I think is a better one
because they can penalize the
legislature if they don't feel
like we're working hard enough,
they can set the salary where it
needs to be, but if you put a
number there, uh, when I was
creating the early childhood
education and care department, a
lot of the advocates wanted
salaries actually listed. I said
absolutely not because uh what.
What do you do when the market
changes or when costs escalate
the way that they have from an
inflationary standpoint, uh, you
have to go through all of these
steps to get all that changed.
I'd rather a commission said it
rather than a cap be in place.
So I'm just Mr. Chair, on that
point, we're also talking about
the Constitution here. It's not
putting it in statute, we're
putting this in the Constitution
and I just am concerned that the
independence issue would also be
that would be very confusing for
voters to try and figure out
what 4/10%. I mean if we're
having trouble doing it.
It's gonna really confuse voters
and so.
Couple
on the amendment center, but you
still have the floor.
And
Any other questions on the menu.
Senator, what you going to
defend them.
Let me just say one thing about
the amendment.
You don't realize you're not
thinking about.
The effect of oil and gas on
earth.
Particular budget here.
If one gas goes off 5 to 10%.
You're gonna have to make some
real hard decisions.
On what you're going to fund.
All I'm trying to do with this
amendment is to bring that to
light.
That are budget is so dependent
on oil and gas right now.
That if you don't take some
consideration of it.
Trying to think of a word.
But I'm not gonna say anything.
You have to think about what
you're doing, the consequences
you're bringing. Every time
someone comes in this committee
and say, I need another 10
million here and I need another
10 million there.
It's real money, people.
Real money. Now I'm, I'm, I'm
welcome to the vote on the
amendment. I think I've made my
point.
That
This is, this will figure out to
To uh
$9 million guys.
And we hear all kinds of bills
in here, 10 million and above.
This is $9 million.
So thank you, Mr. President or
Mr. Chair, and I'll be happy to.
For the boat whenever you're
ready.
Senator Lanier on the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I agree
with Mr. Woods, Senator Woods.
If
If we don't put boundaries on
this.
I mean, we, us newies, we've
been lucky enough.
There's a lot of money here.
Oil and gas are bringing in a
ton of money.
What happens when that's gone?
Are you going to re-establish
the committee again to
renegotiate what the salaries
might be.
So I, you know, I already have
an issue with the committee
deciding if, if we're all
sitting here and we're not gonna
be um voting on our own salary
if it's not gonna start until
the next.
Um, elected cycle.
Then why not belly up? Let's set
the price right now.
What do you want it to be?
Or we need to have an amendment.
That says, hey.
If the state ever gets in dire
needs again, now we have some
guidelines. We have a guard rail
that says.
We cannot.
Go over this amount.
If oil and gas goes down.
And that gives us the guard
rails where we can lower.
The uh
The salary of of an elected
official.
Thank you, Mr.
And you senator, you want to
respond.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. So there is a provision
in here that says that the, the
salaries would be reevaluated
every 4 years. So if we did have
a a downturn, uh, this
commission would absolutely be
empowered to reduce our
salaries, um.
to make sure that our, our
budget uh stays solvent.
You're good. All right.
So, so back to the amendment in,
in putting this in the
Constitution to the voters would
not be the right place, correct?
by saying yes. OK, that was my
only question.
Um
Will entertain emotion on the
amendment.
Mr. President, I propose
This amendment to the Senate
Conservation.
Commit.
Um
So Senate rules
Senate rules
Senate rules committee
substitute Rosenna joint
resolution 1 and I propose for
Du pass.
They can propose to do pass, but
we still need to vote, Mr.
Chairman.
I moved to table.
So we have a motion to table,
which is non-debatable. Uh, we
call the roll on the table
motion.
Senator Brent
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez.
On the table in motion Center
Gonzalez.
Table in motion for the
amendment.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes.
Senator Lanier.
They
Senator Lanier votes no.
Senator Padilla, Senator Padilla
votes yes. Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin, Senator
Tobiasson votes no. Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes no. Senator
Shando, Senator Shindo Boas,
Senator Munoz, Senator Munoz
votes yes, you have a 6 to 3
day the table
tabled the men's and table
center Treville. Are you done?
Yes. um Thank you, Mr. Senator
Shindo.
Um, excuse me, thank you, Mr.
Chair, uh, uh, thank you for the
presentation. Can you explain a
little bit about the, the
amendment that was made to
change the election date from, I
think we originally set to 2028.
Can you explain a little bit
about that?
Yes, so Mr. Mr. Chair, Senator,
so when our Constitution says is
that when we do.
uh constitutional amendment, it
will go on on the ballot, uh,
And then for the next
legislature or in a special
election.
Now that has often been
interpreted to be in the next
session, but what it says is the
next legislature. Right now we
are in the fifty-seventh
legislature.
That legislature lasts until,
uh, January 2027.
Um, because, uh, it is a
two-year legislature.
And so the next general election
after the adjournment of this
legislature is the general
election that takes place in.
So, so we're in fifty-seventh,
isn't it 2 years?
So we, we are in the first, Mr.
Chair, Senator, we are in, in
the first session of the
fifty-seventh legislature right
now. The fifty-seventh
legislature will continue until
we adjourn in January of 2027,
whereupon we will then go into
the 58.
Legislature.
So, so yes, it is, it is 2
years, but that's.
That that's why that delay, so,
so, so initially I think the
initial bill that was changed
was from 26 to 208. That was the
reason why.
That was good, right, Mr. Chair,
yes, it, it also gives us more
time to work on the enabling
legislation for this before it
gets to the voters, much like we
did with the PRC Constitutional
amendment so that by the time
this is going to the voters, uh,
with the legislature and the
voters have a real clear
understanding of how this will
work.
And Mr. Chair and Senator
Shindo, uh, another issue that
you might remember when we were
doing salaries for the executive
level positions.
Uh, on the floor, uh, Senator
Cervantes, when it came to the
governor's salary pointed out
that there were concerns in the
governmental Conduct Act with
passing an increase to the
salary during her term.
So we actually put a delay on
that, so the governor's salary
won't go up until the next
governor comes in. It's kind of
the same issue for us. We're at
the beginning of a 4-year term
if this passed in 2026, we could
have issues with us voting for
something that increases our
salary in the middle of our term
with 2028, it'll be a new term.
I appreciate that explanation.
Thank you. Uh.
I don't any questions, but I
think the comment, you know, I
think a lot of we've heard from
uh members about why this is
important and so forth and and
and and it is, I think, you
know, you know, I waited to run.
I was kind of
Pretty much for nice and secure
and you know, get to go to
college and, and, and everything
and so I could afford it and I
think, you know, that's
something that, that I had to
take into account, you know, in
terms of uh this and whoever
comes in this seat, you know, I
don't know who that's gonna be,
but I think, you know, at least
having compensation to support,
you know, uh, you know, uh.
Folks that are coming behind us,
I think it's important, and at
the end of the day, it's really
the people that's gonna vote for
it, I think, I don't know, this
constitutional amendment has
been tried how many times in the
past and it's failed and so I, I
think a lot of education needs
to happen because I many times
I've been in the gas station
talking to folks and they think
we're paid and had to, and so
if, if we pass it, it's still up
to the people of New Mexico to
decide whether we are going to
be a paid.
Legislature, so.
So can you tell us how many
times it's been
vote it down in the past.
Since statehood
Mr. Chair and Senator 5 times,
the last time was in 1992, more
than 30 years ago.
OK. Appreciate it. Thank you. No
more questions.
Center Woods.
OK, it says that the commission,
Mister Chair.
The Citizens commission.
Shall be composed of 9 public
members, not more than 4 of them
should belong to the same
political party at the time of
appointment and whose
appointment term qualifications
shall be provided by law was the
question I have, Mister Chair
and senators, senators.
I
In the past
Was there any was there any
determination on how these
People were going to be
appointed, what, you know, how,
how that was done is it just
gonna be a lottery that we just
Go out there and ask for people
to come in by lottery or or.
What, what's, what's your
thoughts on that? I know it says
provided by law, and you're
gonna tell me all this past this
and then we'll decide how we're
gonna do it later, but I just
like to know, Mister Chair,
what's your thoughts on that. So
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, you'll
remember when Senator Payne and
Novelle and I did the
constitutional amendment on the
PRC.
So the enabling language that
was critical to answer those
questions we put that forward
through the legislature before
sending the joint resolution to
the voters so that they could
see those exact questions and
what we did is we made the
enabling legislation contingent
upon passage.
I think you're right, people are
gonna want to know what's, is it
drawn out of a hat, where is it
coming from? What's the balance?
I think it's gonna be very
important and this is a case
where
I do think having that enabling
legislation and having the time
to do it right again back to the
vice chair's question about
2028. That means in the next 60
day session, we can make sure we
get that right. So that again,
we have time to vet it and
answer those questions and most
importantly,
Get those to the voters as well
so they know what they're
getting.
OK, that's, that was my main
question is,
Making sure that when it's sent
to the voters, the voter has a
real picture of what we're doing
here, not just saying pass it
and we'll tell you what
happened.
Thank you, Mister Chair.
In bison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Senators,
I mean, I've got a real freshman
question here because I don't
know that I heard a real clear
answer to Senator Woods's
question. So how do I know as a
freshman senator that we, we
passed this today and so you're
saying in 2 years, the next 60
day session. We're all gonna get
together and talk about whether
we draw out of a hat or whether
there's certain skills or
qualification or life experience
to the people that are put on
this committee, um,
That sounds really nebulous to
me and something that's so
important, so many of you have
talked about why it's so
important to you, why it's so
important to the people.
I, I would want, I would think
that we would have thought this
out or had some real clear
examples. Um, I'm thinking back
to Obamacare.
When Nancy Pelosi so famously
said, we don't know everything
that's in it, but we'll find out
after we pass it. Well, that
makes me uneasy as a citizen,
let alone a freshman senator.
Feeling like I don't really
understand what I would be
voting on.
So man
Mr. President, Mr. President,
you
Mr. President, Mr. President,
let me look at that seal,
uh, I think.
I understand the point that
you're making.
And I do think it's, it's gonna
be critical for us before this
gets to the voters.
To put in place something that
does lay the guardrails and if
we don't do it,
Uh, I think this thing is doomed
to failure, quite frankly.
And so I do think that having
those guardrails in place is
important and doing that with
sufficient time to give us the
opportunity to really debate
those issues. I just go back to
the PRC and those that was a
significant change. We were
going from a 5 person elected to
a 3-person appointed.
So similar if you've been
sitting here 4 years ago or 6
years ago when we did that, you
would have asked exactly the
same thing and
Again, having that.
That guardrails legislation, the
enabling statute is critical to
making that happen and we do
have a little bit more time here
because of the extended time
frame for the reasons that have
been stated.
Mr. Chair, I'm also um curious
and I, here's the bill.
Hang on. There's a line in here,
Senator Woods, you may be able
to tell me real quickly.
We're prior to going, I think
through first committee, it was
a, it needed a vote of 6 to 9,
and now it's been whittled down
to 5 to 9.
My understanding that correctly,
Mr. Chair Senator, No, I didn't,
we didn't make any change like
that in rules.
OK, and Mr. Chair, what, what
it, what does it say about the
vote? I know there, there would
be 9 members on the committee.
So, so you would have to, so you
would need a, a majority vote,
55 to 9. I read somewhere and
maybe it was from the analysts
that it said before it was 6 to
9.
Mr. Chair, Senator, not in any
draft I saw.
No, not what came to the rules
committee.
Mr. Terenceson and I would add
you might be thinking of prior
versions, some version of this
has been introduced multiple
times in multiple years, but
this version, that part was not
changed just the year.
OK, so not in your version, it
wasn't changed, Mr. Chair. OK,
thank you very much.
In there.
Mr. Chair, um, you know, there's
a lot of good things in this
bill and, and I agree with a lot
of our counterparts.
Um
You know, one of the things I
brought up, you know what I'm
gonna say.
I, I wanted a friendly amendment
of adding
term limits.
And
Let me explain.
My greatest fear
Is that we take an 18 year old.
person, the same male.
And
He holds that seat.
For how many years?
I mean, how many years could you
hold that seat?
And if they elect him, then,
then that's fine, that's what I,
I just, I don't want to have a,
uh
Mitch McConnell and a Nancy
Pelosi, Hunter and first.
You know, you know what I'm
saying? So, so that part really
bothered. I really think.
Uh, term limits would have
strengthened this bill.
Um, a lot.
I know that.
Um, some things that it's log
rolling and
And I, you know, it's an
amendment if they vote on it.
Then let the court decide.
You know, if that was the case
or not, I
I'm not a lawyer and, and I, I
think as, as they vote on it, it
would have some.
Some footing.
But I also have a problem with
With the committee.
Um, anytime you.
Anytime you form another
committee, there's going to be
some bias in there.
Whatever it might be.
Democrat, Republican, it doesn't
matter. Old, young, there's
gonna be some bias in there.
And so
I don't understand why we don't
just set the salary.
Said Sari, whatever.
Whatever the body decides, if
you decide it's 50,000.
sample, I think that's when we
talked to talk about senator.
If you set it at 50,000.
And you could just do a cola.
You know, raise it 3% every
year, put it in the bill, done.
Nobody ever has to address it
again.
Just leave it at that.
Because
Correct me if I'm wrong.
We don't have any vacant seats.
Down here right now, do we?
We do in the house, Mr. Chair,
from a
From a passing.
Right
So all of us knew when we signed
up.
What we were gonna get paid.
Um
10 years ago, could I have done
this job? Probably not.
But I didn't come down to Santa
Fe.
To get paid.
I came down for the citizens of
San Juan County.
And so I, I just really
Really struggle with this, um,
I know what the marketing is
going to be, the marketing in
New Mexico is very simple.
Santa Fe, Albuquerque, Las
Cruces.
It's it.
It wins.
And so I, I have a real tough,
tough problem with that.
I think that uh
We are so sorry.
If this is what we want to do,
let's set a salary.
So Mr. Chair and Senator Lanier,
I'll just take you back to your
prior question on the
amendments, if you set a salary
and the oil and gas tanks, we've
got a salary set in the
Constitution.
So I just think that's a factor
for sure as to why you want to
be able to have the commission
come back every 4 years with the
ability to reset it if there's a
budget.
that as I was sitting hearing
you make that argument. I was
thinking about exactly that
piece of if you set a salary.
You know, that's up here and we
don't have the revenues to do
it, then by constitution, it's
going to happen, so, you know,
and I'll yield to Senator Doig
about the.
You know, the reason for the,
for the commission and why we've
done it that way.
And Mr. Chair, Senator, I mean,
it, it really is to to avoid any
self dealing on our part.
And to ensure that.
That it is uh a commission that
is representative of of the
citizenry of of New Mexico.
That is, is making these
decisions and not
Mr. Chairman, the problem I have
with that is the committee is
not set up. We don't have any
boundary. We have no idea yet.
I, I don't know how you can say
that.
And, and, you know, leader
worse, maybe we ought to set the
salary so low.
That we still have the 3%
increase sedative.
20,000 a year.
And do the 3%.
What's that gonna be in 50
years.
So even if oil and gas tanks.
Mm
You know, we, we still have
that, it'll be low enough.
That it's, it's not gonna break
the state.
That that makes sense and I I'm
sorry, I don't have the, the
numbers of what it would
actually cost and that that's
bad on my part.
So, Mr. Chair, I think.
That would put us into a
Super challenging debate we'd
have Senator Woods wanting to
put it at $90,000 which I think
is too high.
I think $20,000 is too low, but
maybe you think that's the right
thing to do. I just think by
having this.
Independent commission and this
is the same argument Senator
Tobiasson was making. I mean, I,
I hear what you're saying. I
mean.
Those guard rails are going to
be really important and the
voters and remember this is the
all we're we're asking here is
let's give the voters the chance
to make this decision and if we
can't get our act together and
put together an enabling statute
that answers the questions. This
thing is not gonna pass.
It's that simple. It will not
pass. And so I, I again.
I just think at the end of the
day what we're asking is to
allow this step to move forward.
And yes, there's gonna need to
be enabling legislation. That's
on us. And if we don't do it.
This will never pass. And I
think we've got to be able to
answer those questions and I
actually think this independent
commission gets us out of
exactly where you're trying to
lead us into, which is to set it
ourselves.
Which just I think creates a
whole string of of challenges
and puts that into the
Constitution.
Which takes away the flexibility
we'd have to go back to the
voters again to change it if
something.
happened or circumstances
changed.
And Mr. Chairman, and, and
that's part of my worry is
We're, we're gonna put this
amendment out.
For them to vote on.
When they start asking us
questions, we need to have the
answers.
And right now in this bill,
We don't have those answers. How
do we, how do you expect us to
go out and advocate for this
bill.
When it's on the ballot, when
We don't even know the
boundaries, the guidelines. So
Mr. Chair, if we get to 2028 and
you don't have the answers to
those questions.
I don't expect you to. We lose.
This does not pass.
This doesn't go on about till
2028.
That's a long time to put in
place those guardrails and I
think
Again, it's incumbent upon us to
come up with.
Guardrails that are saleable to
the voters and it makes sense to
the voters, and if we don't do
that.
We're done.
Mr. and I want to thank all
three of you.
senators.
As Mr. Wood would say, um,
I, I do. I really appreciate you
feeding those, those questions
and things and, and I appreciate
it.
Senator Byson for a 2nd time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thanks
for letting me have another stab
at it. Um, so you know I come
from a corporate background. I'm
a business coach. I live in a
matrix-driven world.
And
If this body, if the legislature
were to be paid.
I'd want to see it being us
being paid based on outcomes,
solutions for the people, and I
think if you looked at our
report card right now, we would
get a big fat F because we are
at the wrong side of almost
every national list of major
subjects that you can think of,
um, crime, child welfare, I
could go on and on, and then
when I think about the oil
industry.
And I'm a freshman. I've been
here. What, what day am I on 28?
27 right in there 28-ish.
More numbers. Every single day
that I've walked into this
building.
At least one of you have told me
that the oil and gas industry is
going away.
The governor herself has said by
the year 2050, we will be a
carbon net zero, right, a carbon
zero state.
So there's not a single industry
or you could bundle up every
single industry that we
currently have in this state,
and it barely even registers on,
on the meter compared to the
income we have from oil and gas.
So I'm also concerned for the
people's money.
I think that the people that are
here that volunteer as
legislators, we are, we are here
for, from our heart. We care
about New Mexico and every way,
and we come here in the spirit
of American volunteerism, which
is the foundation of the United
States of America, so.
I'm concerned that we aren't
matrix driven, that we aren't
looking at the financial
viability of our state and where
it's going, that really concerns
me, especially sitting here on
Senate Finance and looking at
the line items on the budget and
the tens of millions of dollars
that every agency is asking us
for, um, the money that they
don't use and they try to
shuffle around the, the budgets
that they're looking at, um, it
concerns me and I will close in
saying to your answer about a
more.
diverse body. Um, I'm very proud
to be a part of not only the
first um female majority
legislature in the state, but
the largest in the United
States, and I can look at the
last names of Campos, Trujillo,
Padilla, Gonzalez.
Sendo, did I say it right?
Please tell me I said that
right.
Munoz
I guess we'd have to do a little
DNA research and but I think, I
think we're diverse.
I may be the only only Swedish
Finnish born person here, not
born, but you know, majority
DNA.
We're pretty diverse and we have
pretty diverse backgrounds and
we are here in the spirit of
what volunteerism is for every
person in New Mexico, and that's
why I, I don't support this as
it's written. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Let me just uh.
Make some comments.
I mean, the novelty of paying
the legislature and getting a
better legislature is not going
to be the outcome.
I mean, you're gonna have, I ran
for this position.
Because I wanted to serve,
right?
Now we're gonna have people
running for a paycheck.
And that's gonna be a completely
different scenario that, that
you're ever going to see again.
Let me ask you this, if there's
a downturn in the economy.
And this is enacted in salaries
or whatever they are, right?
Um
What do you think the first
place we're gonna look is to cut
numbers in side.
refund education.
Or should we fund health care
and what should we fund
legislative pay?
The public is going to be
looking for us to, to look at
those reductions.
Have you heard of those comments
or or will this allow us to
In that commission.
Make reductions if there's
downturns in the economy. Maybe
it's not oil and gas, maybe.
Something else, COVID hits again
or something, God forbid, but
COVID hits again and we're
looking and scrambling for money
and, and does this commission
gonna allow us to make those
cuts to legislative pay.
Mr. Chair, yes, they, they would
have every 4 years when they
reassess I'm not talking every 4
years. I'm talking the downturn
can happen immediately. I mean,
2016, 2019, I remember you came
in in 2020, um, a lot of our
legislators have not
They've enjoyed the wealth,
right? Call it oil and gas as
well call it GRT wealth, it's
all combined, right? A lot of
new legislators in 2020 have not
seen the cuts we had to make.
And so when we got wealth, let's
build us a staff and we're
paying them an average of 60,000
a year.
When we have to make cuts in the
economy or cuts to the budget,
they're gonna, they're gonna be
looking for places and they'll
be looking for our heads first
is the commission for when we do
that, is that gonna be allowable
in in that to make those cuts,
because
We're gonna cut everybody, if we
have to cut everybody across the
board equally and, and so.
That's one of the things I want
to clarify, center work look
like you give me an answer. So,
Mr. Chair, I think that we as
the appropriating body, if we
don't appropriate the money in
the budget for the commission,
then the reality is.
The money's not there to
Pay the salaries. I mean, again,
this is the.
This is the full circle piece of
this and just a couple things.
You, you and I were here through
the worst of this. This
committee has done an amazing
job of the leadership shown in
setting up a very different
portfolio with our
Using our non-recurring money to
create these permanent funds.
And I just remind you, the
legislative branch is 4/10 of 1%
of the budget.
It is about time that we fight
for our own branch.
And this is going to be a less
of a cost than the staff piece
that we just passed and I think
it's $16 million. I think
Senator Wood's number there was,
was 9 million $9 million for
$80,000 salaries and we're not
even that I think that's too
high.
So again, in the grand scheme of
things, this is a very small
number when you look at the
overall budget and we have built
You and I can talk all day about
the early childhood fund, which
is Senator Smith who sat in your
chair was critical to that.
That's a backup reserve that's
got 9 billion going to $12
billion we're talking about $9
million to pay $80,000 salaries,
which means it's probably $6
million to pay a $50,000 salary,
which I think is comparable to a
county commissioner when
Commissioner Lanier was there
or, or my wife was on the is on
the city council.
That to me feels like a more
appropriate place, so.
I think we've actually done a
good job to put ourselves in a
position to be able to deal with
this and potentially even if
that meant a couple of years
that we got to wait, we've got
enough buckets of money.
To be able to deal with that.
I mean, we could take this to
the voters all day long, but,
but they're gonna ask us just
like Senator Lanier said, what
are the guidelines and what are
the guardrails, right? I mean,
For me, the per diem rate is the
biggest issue for us. I mean, we
come to Santa Fe during the,
during the summer in the
interim, you can't get a room
for under $200 on a per diem is
$180 a day, and if you do,
you'll probably have a window
knocked out like I had the other
day, but I wasn't at the hotel,
but I mean, the, the real issue
is per diem because now you're
gonna be taking your salary and
offsetting your per diem costs
without a tax deduction to do
that, because your salaries and
your per diem rates are set and
you're not allowed to deduct
that.
That's something that's very
tricky.
Mean the per diem rate.
Should be the focus for me, it's
a focus.
Um
And people can say whatever they
want, you know, I gotta get a
part and I sing the song of I oh
I oh I oh so it's off to work, I
go because I borrow money and I
got to work and that's, I make
my living, I mean.
Luck has more to do with success
than a lot of people think, um,
but you gotta be lucky and you
gotta work hard to, to achieve
things in life, and, and so that
has to happen. I, I just don't.
I think that we're dealing with
the real issue of the real issue
for me in a lot of legislators
like Senator Steinborn said he
couldn't make it to meetings
because of per diem.
Well, you take your pay 180 a
day, I don't know what he's
making a day and your per diem
and then what's your cost of
travel and and wear and tear on
your vehicles and your mileage.
I've never even added that up
cause I was afraid my wife would
find out and make me quit right
away.
It's like, what is the kind of
fish caught for when you go
fishing, you don't want to know,
right?
Uh,
lures and everything, you, you
do not want to know the answer
to that question. And, and so
that's really what happens. I
mean, I've been questioned about
this before, you know, like I
said this earlier today, the,
the best way to not talk to his
constituent is to get ice cream
on your way into the store and
head to the milk and egg section
and tell him you gotta go cause
your ice cream is melting.
And, and, uh, but I, I, in
smaller communities.
And and maybe not Albuquerque,
but legislators are, are caught.
I mean, we're at the gas station
at the grocery store, uh, you
name it, wherever we go, the
restaurants, one guy's
restaurant, he's mad because
you're eating that restaurant,
you're not eating in that one in
smaller towns. They, they're
laughing because they probably
experienced that, but I mean,
they're gonna tell me, and
they've told me this before, I
pay your salary and I expect you
to be there.
And, and for urban legislators
that don't have
Large districts. I mean, mine
goes from Zuni to.
Shiprock Mountain is, it's in my
district. I mean, those are
large districts and, and you
can't make a meeting.
Chill, it starts at one and
think you're gonna make a
meeting that starts it tenosity
at at 2 o'clock in sever
constituents and they're gonna
have that real chip on the
shoulder, I'm paying you, why
aren't you here?
And that is a real issue among
constituents. You try to get to
everyone.
Try to get everywhere, but, you
know, voters want to see you,
they want to see you at the gas
station, they want to see at the
chapter houses, they want to see
you
in it.
Events in Zuni, they want, they
want to see you.
And now they're gonna say,
You're gonna be here cause I'm
paying your salary.
And that changes the face of the
of the legislature.
Um, because there's absolutely
no way I can make it from.
Zunita Grants to somewhere else
to try to make meetings and
still
And still try to do that, I
mean.
is a living wage under 80,000
we're talking about this during
the session, right? Where do we
really need to place people in
state pay and in some state
employees are making $57,000 a
year right now in agencies, and
we need to bump those up because
that does not make them a living
wage, they're working another
job at some other time, at
50,000. They may have 2 kids,
you know.
It costs a lot to raise kids.
Uh, they may have.
That they may be taking care of
family members and so.
I, I just think that
Let me ask you one more
question. So if this passes and
we do the enabling legislation
in, in
This is gonna happen to
somebody.
I'm gonna say Senator Manos was.
Over there in the ice cream
corner of the grocery store and
he wasn't at our meeting hearing
what could happen.
Can they file an ethics
complaint because you're a paid
person and you're not there
where they requested you to be.
Mr. Chair, no, I don't, I don't
think there would be any basis
for nothing complaint on that.
I'll also say, no, you're right.
Lots of people think we're paid
already.
Where the the study that common
caused it a couple of years ago
found that 65% of people don't
know that we're not paid.
So to the extent that people are
already mad at us thinking that
we are paid and not going to
their meetings. I think that
that is, that's how it is now.
Yeah, but it'll make it even
worse in the future, so.
I, I think that's just, but the
one, the one idea that people
need to get out of their head
in, in Senator Lanier believes
in term limits. Go talk to other
legislatures in the states that
have term limits, there is no
knowledge constitutional
knowledge, legislative knowledge
that hangs around very long in,
in, I will tell you in my
position, you better have budget
knowledge for a lot of years
because you deal everything from
ants to zebras.
And, and it, it flushes you
along the entire day. I mean,
just look at our agenda today
from DFA to, to economic
development, to transportation,
and that legislative knowledge
has to be there in, in term
limits, I think would be one of
the worst things you could enact
on people because it
It doesn't carry the
institutional knowledge forward.
Senator Worth and I have this
debate and I hire a lot of young
people because I want to create
that institutional knowledge of
what's happening.
You look across through cabinet
secretaries and, and how much
institutional knowledge do they
really have and how much respect
they have for the legislative
process. I mean, we're seeing
that right now. There's not a
lot of respect for that, but
The novelty of getting a better
legis legislature by paying them
is novelty idea. I mean, first
of all, you have to have the
willingness to commit.
The willingness to commit the
time to do what needs to be
done.
Uh, and the willingness to take
tough votes and, and I will
guarantee you if this gets
passed and it happens, the
lobbyists will be in the
hallways telling us I.
Yeah, I pay you.
And you had better vote for
that, and that's the worst thing
that can happen is when we have
lobbyists involved in in making
those threats, and that's why I
ask about the ethics question
because
They, they work for a lot of
people and, and they, when they
don't get what they want and
you'll hear a lot of lobbyists
threatened legislators and
you've probably seen it or heard
it or experienced it and, and
that's one thing that does not
need to happen with this, so.
Senator Stein real quick, yeah,
real quick, just because you
brought it up and I just want to
be real clear.
I didn't say that I couldn't go
to a meeting because the per
diem wasn't high. It's not a per
diem issue. It's about time.
It's about investing in time so
that.
That
person can afford to do this job
full time. And um and the value
that that gets to our democracy
and to our government, when you
have to work another job, which
not everyone does, or they have
staff, they have spouses, and
things that enable them to have
a limited time. Not everyone has
that. And it's in that is the
exclusionary.
Reality we have today that
doesn't allow the full
participation in this democracy.
It's about time.
And the ability to serve because
of that. Thank you, Mr.
Well, Senator Steinborn, the
only thing we can't buy, no
matter how many billions you
have is time. You're limited by
time and and you make your
choice and your decision with
your own time and, I mean.
You, there's no way to purchase
more time uh with that, could I
have a motion?
And motioned for due passed by
Senator Steinborn, seconded by
Senator Trujil.
We call the road.
Senator Brant.
Senator Campos, Senator Campos
votes no. Senator Gonzalez.
I coughed, I'm sorry Gonzalez
votes yes.
Senator Lanier
since your Lanier votes no,
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla votes yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes.
Senator Tobiasin. Senator
Tobiasson votes no. Senator
Trujillo.
Center toil votes, yes, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes no,
Senator Scho. Yes. Sendo votes
yes. Senator Munoz, Senator
Munoz votes no.
have a 5 to 5.
It is tied
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you.
There's a note right here send a
business and taxes holding uh
bills.
are waiting for responses,
Senator Compos, you have 2 bills
over there, Senator Padilla has
2 bills over there. Gonzalez has
a bill over there.
So whoever hopefully send her to
Padilla didn't run out of the
room and beat you guys. So if
he's already there, then, uh,
can we send somebody over and
then send her two wants to go
next. It doesn't matter to me. I
just need to.
I'm sorry, in couples, thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman. I have
a witnesses for both bills that
are waiting over in tax as well.
OK, so we can try to keep our
committee members here if
somebody's.
This should be
Right.
So just so you know, somebody's
tracking that incentive tax
because they sent a message over
that they were waiting there,
so.
And work you want to do it.
112 Senate Bill 112.
Mhm.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
with me is David Campbell, who
is the executive director of
Lobo Developments.
This is a bill that exempts
property taxes on student
residence built on university
owned lands through a
public-private partnership.
Uh, basically, it's if if the
University of New Mexico builds
dorms itself, uh, under the
Constitution it's very clear
that they are exempted from
paying property tax. What they
did here is enter into a P3
where they continue to own the
fee, uh, they built the dorm on
top of the university land in an
arrangement, a lease arrangement
where the students pay their
rent to the private company that
built the building.
Problem is the assessor has
changed the interpretation and
is now trying to assess property
tax on that even though it's
students who are in there and so
this bill would exempt uh that
property and I think is
consistent with Article 3,
Article 8, Section 3 of the
Constitution and I yield to Mr.
Campbell for any.
Additional comment.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much.
David Campbell with Lobo
Development Corporation and UNM,
um, Senate Bill 112, I, I have
three points to make very
quickly. Um, first of all,
economical housing is about
student success.
Uh, this bill attempts to exempt
property taxes on student
residences built on university
owned land through public
private partnerships by
promoting lower cost housing
solutions, the bill
Alleviates financial burdens on
students, improving their
academic performance and overall
well-being. Point number 2.
Addressing housing insecurity
through P3 models.
Public-private partnerships are
an essential part of the
solution to effectively tackle
the growing shortage of student
housing in New Mexico by
collaborating with private
entities, universities can
create high quality, efficiently
built housing options that meet
the needs of an increasing
student population. 0.3.
The long term economic benefits
accrue to New Mexico. Lower cost
housing not only attracts a
diverse student body, but also
strengthens the state's
workforce, graduates who benefit
from accessible housing are more
likely to remain in New Mexico,
making their careers here.
Conclusion, we would ask for a
due pass on Senate Bill 112. I'm
available for any questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. We don't have anybody
on Zoom and support or
opposition, anybody in the room
and support. It does not work
for you and then.
Anybody in opposition.
Seem un questions from committee
members.
Senator Woods.
OK, so, uh, Mr. Chair, there'll
be no consequences to the state
budget.
But I noticed nothing from any.
It replies from many.
County Agencies, of course, I
guess we don't have to have
their input.
We just take their money.
So, well, they get it returned
for me.
You know, that's the only thing
I see in this bill that
It's doing is taking money from
the county.
And uh
You know, you can say, well, the
student is not having to pay as
much.
You know, you say that, so
that's a, that's a positive.
Uh
That's all I got.
Thank you. Thank you. Any other
questions for Senator Woods'
reasons can have emotion.
We
And motion for due pass. I have
a 2nd, 2 by Senator Gonzalez, we
call.
Senator Brandt,
Senator Campos Senator Campos
votes yes. Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez Goa, Senator
Lanier.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin, Senator
Tobiasson votes yes. Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo Boser, Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Sendo. Senator Sendo votes yes,
Senator Munoz. Yes.
Explain my own similar the near
you want to vote on this this is
the higher,
well, yes, ok, it did works,
yes.
So we have a DuP pass.
Thank you. Let me ask you one
question. The county assessor
can't come back and now that we
made non-taxable and say, oh,
the student has a desk in there,
and a refrigerator and packs or
pencils, this will exempt all
that, correct? All.
All equipment.
If this becomes law, that's
correct, that's those are not
taxable under those they're like
vultures then touch your pins,
your pencils, your desks, your
computers.
No comment.
Thank you, I label them pretty
good, so thank you, Senator
Worth. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Shindo.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Sherman and
members of the committee, uh.
Senate bill
13
Um
Is the uh.
feel that allows tribes.
To do, uh, create language and
uh.
Culture schools
Based on their tradition and so
forth, um.
This legislation, uh, has been
in work for a number of years,
uh, couple years ago and I'll
have uh.
to the right is an education
director, uh Kevin Shendo, and,
and uh I'm gonna have him kind
of give you a little background
real quickly so that you
understand that it's been in
work for so many years and the
result of this compact is a
result of a lot of the uh advice
from our legislative council
and, and, and, and uh looking at
other models across the state
that are that have been very
successful. So what, what this
uh authorizes uh the public
education department to do is to
enter into uh the uh.
Education a compacts with Indian
nations, tribes and pueblos in
New Mexico to establish language
and culture based schools
designed to meet the unique
needs of students.
Uh, Senate bill represents a
bold and transformative
opportunity for tribes, nations,
and pueblos to shape and control
the education of native
children, the center's
indigenous language, cultures
and values.
Ruin honor their history while
preparing them for the future.
Thank you. So I'll turn over to
uh Mrs. Sendo for um.
T2.
That's a railroading.
It could have been 3, but uh
he's, uh, I don't know, maybe
he's somewhere uh in the right,
let's go ahead and explain this,
let's get through it real quick.
We have people to make comments.
Good afternoon to members of the
committee, um, Kevin Chinle,
education director for the
Pueblo famous, um, as Senator
Schindall shared, um,
This, um, bill actually came to
fruition now or our council.
passed a resolution to convert
our head start to full
immersion, and that was in 2012,
so since 2013 we've been working
in the arena of full language
immersion instruction uh for our
young children, um, in 2022, the
legislative education Study
Committee came and visited the
Pul of famous to learn more
about the immersion um programs
in schools that we had and the
approaches that we're utilizing
as a result of that visit or
leadership at that time as the
uh legislative education study
committee if
They would consider mending the
state charter school law to have
tribes as charter school
authorizers, as we originally
had established two charter
schools, uh, in 201999 and 2001,
um, under the new state law and
so, um.
As we looked into the state
charter school law and looking
at tribes becoming charter
school authorizers, the legal
teams that the LESC found that
um.
To give tribes full authority to
integrate language and
culture-based education
strategies, the way that the
tribes wanted to, that they
would not be possible under the
charter school law, and they
would still be under the public
education, uh, commission, um,
as, uh, tribally.
Authorized charter schools, and
they would still fall under the
auspices of upholding the Common
Core state standards and
English-based standards and
assessments. Um, and they asked
if that's what the tribe was
looking for, um, and it was not,
um, that was one of the
challenges we had had with their
existing charter schools was
integrating full language
immersion programs and the
limitations that was put on us
um by the standards assessments
and evaluations um that were
required of the state and the
public ed commission. So we
looked.
that other states as possible
models and found Alaska and more
um in Washington state, the
Washington state model, um, is
the one that we follow closely
because that more aligned with
what um the tribe had
envisioned. And so after a year
of working through that, this um
language was developed for this
bill and first introduced in
2023, um, and it passed the
Senate, but we didn't have
enough time to get through the
house, um, so we again are
looking to reintroduce it this.
Term, uh, and, um.
Again, it's really uh looking at
Using our own native language as
the medium of instruction within
our schools because at the
moment whether we have charter,
BIE or public schools serving
our young people, the medium of
instruction remains English, and
as long as that is the case, it
works against any language-based
efforts that tribes are
initiating or pursuing.
Um, so that in, in short, is a
summary of the work that has
happened in the last few years
and to get this bill to where it
is now.
And we stand for any questions.
Thank you. We're gonna go to the
audience first, uh, on Zoom we
don't have anybody.
Did you cut the wire?
Did you get the water? OK, I'm
just checking.
Anybody in the audience in
support will take 1 or 2 maybe
3, we'll take 3 in support.
Good afternoon.
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Mark Mitchell, former
governor from the Pueblo of
Susuki. And before I make my
statements, welcome to the
ancestral homelands of Tussuki
Pueblo.
For all that stated by the two
gentlemen, uh, the Pablo Susuki
does support this bill.
And we look forward to a
favorable.
Response. Thank you.
Good evening, uh, Mr. Chairman
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino and I
represent the Pueblos of Akima.
Tower and also the center of law
on poverty and we stand in full
support of this legislation, um.
Only because
I think the state is aware that
there are agreements already in
place between the state and
tribes. I think the gaming
compacts of 2015 are a good
example. There are agreements
between the state and tribes
when it comes to tax agreements,
uh, gas on gas on cigarettes and
also on grocery receipts tax.
This piece of legislation is a
center as explained, is to allow
tribes to enter into.
Negotiations in a compact uh
over the control of schools that
are located on or near tribal
lands.
The tribes that I represent
believe it's time.
The two tribes I represent are
also tired of the.
Um
Of our children failing in
schools and public schools
they're tired of low graduation
rates. They're also tired of the
low proficiency scores when it
comes to math.
And also uh uh reading.
So they believe it's time to
give tribes perhaps a chance to
control the educational future
and the destiny of their
children. So with that, Mr.
Chairman, I ask uh for the
committee's full support. Thank
you.
Thank you, one more.
Uh and I hope, uh, uh, good
afternoon, Honorable Chairman
and honorable committee members.
My name is Jay Garcia. I'm
representing Santia Ano Pueblo.
On behalf of Governor Myron
Armijo, Lieutenant Governor
Montoya. I'm a tribal councilman
and as well as lobbying for the
tribe, but uh I am here to
support this bill, um, we at
Santa Ana are looking to begin a
program such as uh what is
proposed here in this bill and
this will greatly help our
endeavors going into the into
the future, you know, like our
languages um including Santana's
are, are in danger and so we are
trying to, you know,
Not lose it for the future
generations, so.
With that being said, uh, you
know, I urge you all, and I'll
say it in my language just so he
can hear it a little bit so you
know how strong man with
that's how to make it
it's a.
So I'm the
I'm sure. Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody, nobody in
the audience in opposition,
correct?
We have one in support, uh, who
are they?
Sean, is it Yazi or well.
Of John Yazi.
This little John.
I told him, hurry up, Navajo.
You can you hear us, John?
You're next.
I don't see you muted.
At Ben John.
back on the bill.
I just said John's not there
now.
Um, I guess I'm just urging your
passage in support of uh of
Senate Bill 113. Thank you.
Thank you.
Questions from committee
members, Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I love it
when you look to the left first,
um.
Well, in that case, Senate is
your next
I'm usually having to wave him
down, like jump up and down,
like look over here, um.
So there are times that, you
know, I'm in Albuquerque, so
there are a lot of us that would
love to be able to opt out,
quite frankly, of what's
happening there, um, in the
history major in me, I really do
appreciate the fact that without
the code talkers, um, we would
have not had the turn in World
War II that we had.
So I think
Preserving and promoting and
growing your native tongue is
imperative actually to who you
are and who we are as Americans,
um, that being said, I'm
concerned also if you're
teaching in your native
language. If it, I believe you
if you say it's gonna help your
students with proficiency in
core areas. What does that do
for your students off tribal
land and when they try to go to
university when they try to, you
know, look at
had a career potentially off
tribal land, does that put them
at a disadvantage as a
non-native English speaker, how,
how, what's your plan to keep
them on pace.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
And uh Tobiasson, thank you for
that question.
I grew up speaking.
Entirely my language.
Here I am.
ask you some tougher questions.
I hope that answers your
question.
Because since 1819 to the 1970s,
the federal government through
its policies has never allowed
us.
Everybody else has tried to
decide what is best for our
children, and I think this bill
is a turning point in this
state.
Thela tribes
To focus on their language.
For those of us
My brother included and many
others.
They were fluent speakers.
There's many, I don't have a
long to study, but went on to do
some great things.
We created our doctors, our
PhDs, our veterinarians, our
engineers.
And I think having students just
like any other person, proud of
their heritage and where they
come from.
Provides a solid foundation for
them to explore things around
the world.
So I don't, I think so we've
been inhibited for many years.
You're doing what I think is
best for our children.
And I think what this state can
do.
It
This set the stage.
For us as tribes in this country
to control our own destiny.
Because all of our languages in
the state of New Mexico, all 8
of them.
Or threatened.
About 50% of the languages, I
think by 19,150 in the US of
native languages spoken are
gonna be gone.
We spoke, we speak a Towa in
Haus.
world, you're gonna find this
language.
It's about maybe 4000 of us once
this language is gone, it is
gone.
And I think we're very lucky
that many of our children still
speak the language.
But this bill allows us for the
first time.
For our tribes to be in control
of our own kids, our language,
our culture, and, and what we
need to do.
And I, I, I, I just want to say
that because all of us that went
on to do great things.
Never spoke a word of English.
Mr. Chair, and I agree with you.
I think that's precious.
To safeguard your language for
sure.
But my question is,
How, how will your students,
will they take English as a
second language.
Yeah, I, I had to do that in
college too. My own native like
is like we kind of all did
I, I, I think I'm gonna have,
uh, the director talk about the
pedagogy and all the things
that's set in place will allow
for what to answer your question
more succinctly in terms of the
pedagogy.
members of the committee, um.
If you talk to any of the
communities or indigenous
populations around the world
working to revi revitalize their
language. The first thing that
they tell you is.
You focus on the language that
you want to strengthen and
revitalize.
Um
Our world today is inundated
with English, so our kids will
learn English whether we teach
them or not.
But what we've put into place
and modeled after some of the
programs in New Zealand and
Hawaii is we don't introduce
English formally as a class
until the 5th grade.
And then the transitional years
or the middle school years where
we transition them into academic
English and what research has
shown.
Internationally, um, is that if
a student is grounded.
In the in one language and in
this case it'll be our home
languages, indigenous languages,
they have the ability.
To pick up other languages
easier in transition.
And I've shared this in other
committee hearings as we moved.
Dual language efforts through
our charter schools. I always
spoke to our language arts
instructor.
And I asked him, do you know the
kids that are fluent in our
language and those that aren't,
and they say yes, and I said,
can you tell me the difference
in how they're acquiring English
and literacy skills, but they're
written in English.
And they tell us by far and we.
That those kids that are fluent.
In Hamus are the ones that
transition more easily into
academic English and they become
better writers.
And there's research that
support this and so that's what
we're looking at is that we want
to ground the kids in our home
language first and build the
English skills after, because we
know that we live in a world
where they're gonna need both.
And we also recognize that
As we move forward, um.
That transitional peace is
critical at the middle school
level, and we need to focus on
that and do it right and so.
Um
There's one more thing I was
gonna share with uh, so, so
that's the piece to answer that
question is that yes, it's a
part of the strategy, but first,
we focus on our home language so
that they're grounded in
Hamman's first and then they can
transition more easily into
English and pick that up the
academic pieces that they'll
need, um.
For college career professional
advancement.
Thank you for that explanation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, um.
And thank you to our sponsors,
so.
I, I support this, but I, I just
have one question.
Why does he have to be a
compact? Why can't he be a
statute?
I think because it involves more
than one tribe, right and.
And the statute would not affect
the.
The sovereignty of the of the
nation. Yeah, this is a very,
you know, a couple of years ago
to the attorneys and legislative
education Study Committee as
well as our folks upstairs that
having a compact that's
negotiated between the PED and
the state will probably be a
better mechanism.
Uh, as opposed to just changing.
A particular statue.
Mr. Chairman, I would think that
a statute would be.
More solid.
But we have sun here or maybe
you can answer or anything like
that.
Come on, honey, we ain't got all
day.
Thank you Mr. chair, uh, send it
with the LSC.
Um, my understanding is that,
uh,
There is a statutory provision
that allows entities to become
charter schools.
However, and speaking with some
of the potential
Terribly controlled schools that
would want to participate in
this. There's concerns that
becoming a state charter school
would violate federal compacts
as well for them to
Um, operate and manage their
school under previous treaties
as well. And so this provides an
alternative to having a sort of
state governed school.
So that the tribes can still
operate independently from the
you know in an agreement.
Versus a statutory provision
that directs our instruction.
Does that answer your question?
Um, chairman, no.
But it's all right. But you know
what I'm looking here is uh.
First they're asking for, you
know, to be able to do their own
governance.
Right?
You know, to be able to have
your own instruction setting.
As you had mentioned for so many
years, everyone else has done
it.
And this would allow you to do
your own.
And uh so.
Going that direction anyway, to
me it would seem like a statue
would be.
More higher level of
Authority
With that all in that.
The nurse Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Senator, um,
Experts, thank you for this
bill. I love this, Bill. I love
the concept of this bill, I
should say, um.
Our our
We're so rich because of our
history in the state and the
culture and, and.
Indigenous cultures and, and I
mean.
The preservation of it is so
vital and uh other legislation
we've seen in past years to
preserve language by chairman
Lee and yourself, Mr. Senator, I
think it's just so um valuable
and
Such an asset in this this bill
is kind of the next step of
preserving, you know, language
and culture, um.
So really, I'm just thrilled
about it. I do have a serious
question though, Mr. Chair,
about the bill, which is the
exemption of all state statutes
and rules applicable to to
charter schools or school
districts and
Other statutes with the
exception of, I don't know,
there was like one exception
there.
Um
Would you talk about that a
little bit and, and I'm
Curious about are wee oh
curriculum included, we're
exempting that. Why would we do
that as far as like state
academic standards, minimums,
thresholds that welcome your
opinion and welcome maybe
Sonny's opinion, that's a
serious question.
think this chairman, I think
you, Steinberg. I'm gonna have
uh uh.
Director Shindua uh answer that.
OK.
Mm-hmm
Senator,
members of the committee, um.
I think when you're looking at
education from a tribal lens or
an indigenous perspective, um,
you also look at the standards
and the pedagogy within which
you teach and the strategies
that are used.
So sometimes with Common Core
standards and assessments and
evaluations that are developed
outside of our community. We're
trying to fit into a box that
someone else has defined for us.
So taking a step back, we're
looking at
How can we define our own
standards, our own assessments
and evaluations based on the
pedagogy, the strategies, and
the approaches that we're gonna
use and implementing our
language and culture based
schools.
And moving forward in that
fashion, um, the companion bill
to this two years ago passed,
and that's to develop training
and technical assistance centers
in New Mexico, two of them, and
those two centers are tasked
with working with tribes, um,
that wish to pursue developing
their own standards on
assessments and evaluations to
give them that support and the
technical assistance and to be
able to do that.
And so that mechanism is already
in place and there's also
universities, uh, UNM has a
strong, um.
Program within the uh IIE um.
Language literacy and social
cultural studies, um, to have
professors to support that as
well too. So there's other
efforts already in place
supporting language-based
instruction not only in New
Mexico but nationally that can
support tribes in developing
their own. So we're not, not
gonna have.
Standards or assessments or
evaluations, it'll be developing
our own. We all want success for
our kids, and we want those high
graduation rates. We want our
young kids to be college and
career ready, but how we get
there and the path that we take
may be different or will be
different from what's been
defined.
Through the state and other
federal programs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's an
excellent answer. I mean, just
very helpful and.
Um
And argue with that, that, uh,
wisdom and logic either, um.
We have to look at the results
we're getting or not getting in.
In our current curriculum and,
and who's to say that uh
That uh an alternative way of
shaping a kid's experience is
not a better one, particularly
if it's relevant to them, you've
probably increase the chance of
their success. We have welcomed,
you know.
Others thoughts, but um let me
ask this final question, Mr.
Chair. As far as like
accountability or reportability
to the state.
Into our mechanisms, LESC and
Um
Is that accountability and
occasional reporting and all of
this I guess this would be
eligible for the public school
funds, right?
To this like treated financially
like a charter school.
Just financially is that
correct?
Uh
Mr. Chairman of Senator Steinbo,
yes it will be eligible part of
the SEC.
Sonny, did you want to add
something you jumped on.
Well, it's a part of that, I
guess, Sonny, I would like your
answer on this. It's a part of
that, the accountability and
your, your feelings about it,
the um
accountability for lack of
another word, mean to the state
and
Reporting and transparency and
stuff like that.
How would that work?
Mr. Chair, Senator, my
understanding is that would be
determined through those
government to government
negotiations within the compact.
Um, there would have to be an
agreement on what those
parameters would be and whether
they're all alternative.
Measures of success that would
be negotiated between PD.
And the compact schools.
OK, so it would be all subject
to the compact, Mr. Chair,
Senator, basically.
Extremist and stable, yes. Very
good.
How to support your bill. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
I
Tru Hill you're next.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing this
forward. Um, I too agree that
local communities know what's
best for their children.
And um when we have the
opportunity to set those
standards. There are some that
would, um, argue that part of
the
challenges that face black
children.
Was integration and losing
multiple, many, many thousands
of black teachers who were able
to teach the children. So
there's some challenges that
happened with that, but I think
you've expressed have happened
also with Native American
students. So I'm very supportive
of, of this. I do have a
question. Um, what happens with
Impact aid?
Does that then follow the
student or what would happen?
The impact did, yes, does follow
the student.
To
Senator members of the
committee.
Um
Impact Aid does follow the
students, so.
Much like any of the other
schools, um, there are source
checks that the districts and
the charters are required to
have uh approved by the tribes
whose students are, they are
serving that reside on tribal
lands, and those are used for
some of the federal funds um
that they can apply for.
And so that that avenue would
also open up for these schools
as well too.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's
all.
Thank you, Senator Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, very, very
short.
Uh
Senator Shindo, I, I applaud you
for what you're doing, you know,
as a teacher, um,
It's in Aztec, we tried all
kinds of different things,
trying to teach the Navajo
language and, and a lot of
moving parts and everything and.
And I just think it's fantastic.
You guys do know what's best for
your kids and I only have one
ask.
Is that
When it's all said and done,
hopefully those
Doctors and vets and all of the
success stories that you're
gonna get to tell.
We'll come back to New Mexico or
come back.
Your area
That's my only ask. Thank you. I
commend what you're doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Sindo, I
mean.
We all know this depends on how
good your teachers are, right?
In in in the quality in your
classroom because
We have a good teacher, then
they're gonna learn, the kids
are gonna learn, but when you
have a bad teacher,
When you set these up, you're
gonna have to make sure that you
have a quality education. They
don't fall behind, right?
That's, we have to, I mean, I'll
tell you, we have to survive in
a white man's world.
My parents would never talk
Spanish in front of me, and they
named me George Kenneth, so he'd
have an English name, cause they
knew I had to survive in the
white man's world.
Right
And so they didn't teach me
Spanish, they would never teach
me any, they wouldn't teach any
of us Spanish because we were
living in a different world, and
that's what happened.
Natives too, they were living in
in a different world, and they
had to survive in that world,
and that's the way he had had to
learn.
Well,
I probably know more Navajo
better than I do Spanish because
I grew up with little kids,
right? I learned all the bad
words first and then
And then learn the rest, right?
But that's where the way it was
where we grew up in in the times
of change, right? And so you
have to preserve that, but my
cautionary tale is you gotta
have good qualities schools, and
you have got to have good
quality teachers in order to
accomplish this and that is
going to be a key in your
success.
So
Did you want to edit anything,
uh
File number 2.
7 members of the committee. Uh,
yes, and, and we have thought
this through, um, when we
converted our Head Start and
then the tribe established a K6
emergency school, um, we knew
that that was critical, um,
because of how immersion the
strategies that are used there
are very different from what's
taught through our early
childhood education degree
programs and elementary ed
programs that are offered at our
state institutions. So we
actually sought out um a program
that was teaching its teachers
and preparing them.
to teach indigenous languages
within their community schools.
So we ended up at the University
of Hawaii at Hilo.
Who has a college of Hawaiian
language where they were
preparing teachers uh and
licensing them to be able to go
out into what was their
immersion charter schools or the
language-based schools within
the state, um, so for the last 5
years, we've been in this
partnership to pilot a heinous
language immersion teacher
licensure program based off of
their hua Viola teacher training
program.
Uh, we've gotten grants to
support it from the public ed
department and more recently the
early childhood education care
department. So they've invested
in that piece knowing that
language is a critical piece,
um, for a lot of our schools and
so the goal is if we're able to
once we successfully pilot this
program.
to bring it back home to New
Mexico so that it can be
Placed in one of the in-state
schools and then that licensure
program be available for any of
the other tribes that may want
to look at.
The teacher licensure program
based in immersion on to support
their language efforts within
their communities, and we've
also been working with I I um
sippy on Navajo Technical
University and CNN for the 1st 2
year part of that course to
transition into the 4-year
licensure. So, um, we're
currently uh in the uh.
First phase of the pilot where
we have our masters students
from Hamus going through the
program to develop the licensure
program and by the fall, summer
of 2026, we hope to have our
first cohort of teachers that
were putting through the
licensure program. So this is an
area that we've already begin
looking at and beginning to
bring to fruition so that as
things develop here, in Mexico
has an option uh to be able to
license and certified your
teachers within the language
that they're looking to teach.
Thank you. Can I have a motion,
please of Senator Woods, I
forgot about you.
Just, just quickly.
I know 3 things.
The I
Bureau of Indian.
Education.
And I want to know.
Yazi Martinez.
What effect it's gonna have on
that on the state.
And the third thing is why this
is not a voucher system.
So those three things I'd like
to answer for.
Um
I'll have the uh
The BIE, the Bureau of Indian
Education, they run federal
schools across, you know, the
country, and I think I don't
know how many we have here in
the state maybe 20 something, I
believe, somewhere K through 6,
some are high school and so
forth and uh.
I don't think, you know, those
will be converted. I mean, I
think they will stay the same
because it's part of the uh
federal obligation and then
changing, you know, that.
You know, it's gonna be massive.
That's why we're asking, you
know, uh.
Focusing on the tribal
government.
So it, it will be a very sort of
focused effort. It's not
converting any of those schools.
And then the other one was Yay
Martinez.
Um, you know, I think we've, uh,
I think
You know, this is gonna take
some time and education and so
forth, and I think, you know.
Uh, like I said in my statement,
you know, everybody else has
been telling us what's best for
our children.
And I think, you know,
We're the next, you know, 1015,
20 years, I think we're gonna
see some really positive
results.
Uh, because now we are
determining what's best for our
children in a, in a way that we
know it works.
Uh, and I think you are Martinez
is a reflection of what hasn't
worked.
I'm trying to put that, you
know, round peg in the square
hole.
This allows us to go back.
And drill that hole and put a
round peg in it.
And I think we're gonna find
success.
And your 3rd is
The third was vouchers. Oh yeah,
vouchers and I know that's a
difficult, you know, uh, issue
that has come up in the 1990s,
you know, when Governor Johnson
was a governor, that was a big
debate and that debate resulted
in the expansion of charter
schools to allow 5 charter
schools as an experiment that
first year in the Pueblo of
payments, we were the first one
to open a charter school that
first year. The other 4 came on
in year 2. So, so, you know,
what we did.
was we converted a Catholic
school, uh, at that time to a uh
to a charter school we already
had the students, we had the
buildings, we had the teachers.
Uh, because of the issues with
the
You know, Catholic Church, they
decided to close our doors, and
the only thing that we were
Needing less money and that was
a a a a quick conversion of
of of of that and, and first we,
we were somewhat supporting the
vouchers too because we were a
Catholic school, but we knew
that wasn't going anywhere and
so.
Um
Um
The question is, you know, I
understand your culture
differences this chair, I
understand what you're saying.
But I live in eastern New
Mexico, believe it or not,
there's some huge cultural
difference between right here in
eastern New Mexico.
And many of those people over
there.
I would love to do just like
what you're saying.
Saying, I, I wanna.
For a culturally appropriate
school for my kids.
So I hope that, that what you're
doing will carry into my country
too, my tribe over there.
If you understand what I'm
saying. I've been to your tribe,
yeah.
You know, uh
And that's why I said vouchers.
Because that's, that's an easier
way of transferring that money.
Uh, and especially if you know,
we're just saying.
That that money's tied to the
kid.
And he needs to or his parents
need to figure out the education
that that kid needs to get.
So I'm, I'm all for your deal. I
just hope it expands a little
more to include my culture too.
So
You see, Mr. President.
Don't count Senator Wood's vote.
not culturally appropriate.
Can I have a motion, a motion by
Senator Gonzalez. We have a
second by center woods, uh, we
call the room.
Senator Brant
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalezia, Senator Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes yes,
Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborne votes yes.
Senator Tobiasson. Senator
Tobias and Boia, Senator
Trujillo, Senator Trujillo votes
yes, Senator Woods. Senator
Woods votes yes. Senator
Schendo. Senator Schendo votes
yes, Senator Munozen votes yes
we have a Du pass 8 to 0.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
that we're gonna let you chair.
We're gonna roll over Senate
Bill 33, I think we're still
waiting for substitute.
Substitute bill, we're gonna do
Senate Bill 23.
OK, we have Senate Bill 23, I
believe we have a substitute.
Yes, we do have a substitute,
we'll start on the bill and
then.
But
0 23 allows the state land
commission to raise royalty
rates to 25% in a restricted
area, which
circumferences Lee and Eddy
County, which is some of the
best rocks and gravel that you
have, uh, in
With that Mr. Chair will
Get to the substitute.
You want to introduce us to.
I'll have to have a motion day.
motion.
and make a motion of um.
Do not pass on the Senate Bill
23.
And they do pass on Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
discussion purposes.
Thank you. Go ahead and uh have
a second.
Second, with Senator Lanier.
Thank you.
So so
explain it sure.
Couldn't build
23 committee substitute Senate
Finance Committee for
substitute, uh, just to add
language in section one of A
allows the commissioner not uh
cancels except for Pofe or
default at the lease to comply
with any of the provisions.
Um
And then on page 20.
There.
It adds individual language, the
in percentages and total
percentages for each factor
pursuant to Section 9-10-3 have
been missing 1978 shall be
posted in conjunction with the
least notice for each individual
track nomination in a manner
that keeps confidential.
Keeps it confidential, the
identity and the nominating
company.
That those are the changes in
the substitute.
Any questions or any discussion
on the substitute, Senator
Woods, we're gonna have to go to
zoom in and in the audience. Oh,
OK.
You know anybody for or against.
Nobody else in.
Anybody in the audience? OK.
Mm
OK, so go ahead.
Listen
Mr. Miles
News
And
Oh, it's against the bill, OK.
All right.
OK, so we'll go to the audience.
Anybody in the support of this
bill?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, members of
the committee.
Um, good afternoon. Uh, my name
is John Martinez and I am
representing conservation V
voters in New Mexico and all of
our members.
Um, uh, we applaud Senator Munoz
for carrying this bill. It's one
of our top 10 priority bills to
pass this session. Uh, this bill
is all about making money to
support our public schools and
children across New Mexico. Uh,
this is something everyone can
get behind.
Uh, finally, it's important to
remember that smaller oil and
gas companies don't bid on these
leases, so this bill won't
really impact them, uh,
conservation voters in New
Mexico urges you to support this
bill. Thank you so much.
Yeah.
Anybody else to support anybody
in opposition?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
Chairman Munos, members of the
committee. My name is Jim
Winchester. I represent the
small and mid-sized operators,
um, in the Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico, um,
so this committee is all about
dollars and cents, so I'll try
to attempt to speak your
language, um, we certainly do
understand the intent of this
bill, but we feel that it does
miss the mark and, uh, frankly
is a bad deal for New Mexico and
the beneficiaries, and here's
why, as it already stands as
mentioned, most independents
cannot afford.
to bid on tracks at 20% or.
Even 25% if this royalty rate
increase goes through.
That's where the big oil
companies play and can afford
to.
Our concern lies in the
periphery areas around the
geologic border of the New
Mexico Delaware basin as close
as 1 mile from the basin's edge
where our independent members
take risks, spend a lot of
capital on infrastructure with
the hope that reserves there
will pay back the investments.
Now these leases need to be less
than 20%, not more, simply to
induce bidding and development
and the proof for that.
is in the numbers 6 leases in
the past 2 years in these areas
were put up for auction, which
signaled development interest
but they went unbid because 20%
royalty rates were too high, and
because of that, the state
launched out on millions of
future production. Now if this
bill goes through and it looks
like it will, then truly the
best of the best tracks need to
be accurately defined to just
within the geological New
Mexico.
We're basin at 25%. This bill
does not do that. Locking out
the rest of Eddie and Lee
Counties because royalty rates
are too high, will kill my
member's planned multi-million
dollar projects and all the
additional associated money from
reasonable royalty rates.
We thank the sponsor for
listening to our concerns, but
for these reasons we do stand in
respectful opposition. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Alrighty. So uh we will go to uh
the committee, I mean.
We already have the substitute
motions so we're all set. OK, so
we're back in the building.
OK, all right.
Motion.
OK. I need to
Yeah, you need to say the whole
thing here.
Mhm
Mm
No second.
3 meals.
Hm
Yeah.
It's, it's uh, it's the uh
Substitute thee.
On page.
me.
Page 20, line 2.
And that verbiage there that's
underlying.
It's because I don't know, I'm
asking, it's not.
Because I don't, I'm trying to
figure out what I'm voting on, I
guess is what I'm saying. When
you say nominating company in
the last on pages on line 6. The
identity of the nominating
company. Who's the nominating
company?
Mr. Chan Senator, that would be
the person buying it at the
auction.
OK, that is the.
Whoever's
Trying to buy the lease.
Right, they have bought the
lease, and they said that
That the the nominating person
or the person that bought the
lease or auction.
keeps the identity of the
company.
So the, that identity is kept
confidential, right?
And
Why, why is that?
Sure.
Uh, I'll let my expert witness
in.
Mr. Vice Chairin Stewart, Deputy
commissioner over at the State
land office, so the, the way
this usually works is a company
uh puts up for nomination a
parcel that they want to lease
and uh that tells a lot in terms
of the play and their
development strategy and those
types of things. So it's
confidential at that point, um.
Uh, uh, and you know, down the
road after the sale is
concluded, everything like that.
No longer be confidential, but
this is something that, you
know, industry, uh, you know, is
concerned about in terms of um.
when they're putting up a parcel
and showing interest in it.
Uh, identifying where they might
want to do development.
Yeah
193.
And
I was trying to go back to 1910
and 13.
And read through that.
And
But it's somewhere in here it
talks about the nominating
company.
No nominating. I'm gonna take
your word on it that it says.
What you're doing here is to
keep it confidential until the
bid process.
But there, but uh as far as the
track and everything, it's, it's
not confidential. It is
something that we're going to
bid this track.
And it's, and at that point in
time, you're gonna tell what the
The percentage of the royalty is
going to be.
Mr. uh, vice chair, Senator, um,
so earlier on in the section
you'll see on page 18, for
example, which is existing law,
we, we publicly provide notice
of where the parcel is, um, uh,
the royalty rate that we would
be putting it up uh for um and a
variety of other information as
well. This provision here is
geared toward additional
transparency that it puts
up the uh number calculation
that the state land off Career
Petroleum Engineer specialist
came to in terms of what the
royalty rate would be, um, so
that's additional information
that is posted, uh, but
absolutely, this is a very
public process. It is, uh, all
of that information is online,
um, the only thing that is being
held confidential is the
company's name that
said, I want this particular
parcel, but the parcel and all
the information, everything is
very public.
So it's an additional
transparency provision. OK, so
how do you, how would you set
that royalty rate? How would you
set that?
That particular rate you say
you've got a, a gentleman or a
person that, that does that,
what are the factors he looks at
to set that rate, Mr. Vice
Chairman Senator, so under
existing state law, we have a
range of royalty rates uh in, in
this area that we're talking
about between 18 75% to 20%.
The specific royalty rate that
is set for a specific parcel is
dependent on a variety of
factors that are already laid
out in state law. That's that
reference here in 19103, um, and
there's essentially a point
system. So we look at recent
sales in the area, you know,
what is the reservoir there, how
good of a parcel you have both a
geological formation, uh,
assessments, and then you have
uh market assessments and then
our petroleum engineers, they go
through
and they say, OK, we think this
is the 90, this is a really good
track. It's in the Delaware
Basin. It's gonna be a 20%
royalty rate, or, you know, it's
up in the San Juan, it's a gas
play, probably not very uh
profitable. That's gonna be
1875.
Um, and so that royalty rate is
set through that statutory
process that exists already, uh,
and what this bill is doing in
this provision is saying we want
greater transparency and we are
going to post that online when
we are putting the track up.
Uh, uh, where it says how that
parcels gets scored in the
various factors that uh lead to
that calculation.
That's what this bill does, Mr.
Cha, is it just provision.
No.
Senator, that already exists in
current state statute 18.75 to
220% that currently exists.
In this statue in the language
referring, they were just saying
that you can give out the
information, but it has to be
confidential.
Who the awardee was to the
auction.
Good.
So all the, all the substitute
does is say we're going to keep
it confidential.
Correct. And then on page, and
that's on page 20. Yeah.
Yep, and then it just explicitly
defines how the how the land
commissioner can either and
leases upon failure or defaulted
the least comply with any
provision in the covenant.
OK, that's on page one. That's
page one.
OK. Thank you for the
explanation.
So are we have a motion on the
substitute substitute have a
second by
me.
That's right. OK.
You take the
wrote for the substitute.
Senator Brent.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalezosia, Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes,
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla votes as Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Tobias and Botia,
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes, Senator
Schendo, Senator Sendosia,
Senator Munoz.
Senator Munozas, we have, uh,
the motion has been adopted 8 to
0.
That gonna bill on the
substitute substitute.
OK.
for you.
Um, do we have any discussions
on the substitute?
We did,
OK, so we'll go ahead and have
motion.
Mhm
Did you have
Then it
Finance committee substitute
for.
2nd, 2, OK.
22.
In two words discussion.
OK.
So we're, we're talking now,
we've got.
The commissioner shall not
cancel leases except upon
failure or default of the lease
to comply with any of the
provisions covenants.
That the least described in
section B of this section.
So
We're not just going willy-nilly
go out there and counsel
somebody's lease is what is that
says, right?
Mr. Vice Chairman, Senator, um,
absolutely. So that is the
existing language that's already
in the lease uh paragraph 14 and
uh there were concerns we
believe completely unfounded,
but concerns that the
commissioner may uh go out there
and cancel leases, uh, so then
we could increase the royalty
rate down the road, uh, and this
provision here just makes it
completely clear that, you know,
the only basis for termination
is if
Uh, the individual with the
existing lease is either in
default or they're not complying
with the terms of the lease. So
it's reinforcing that and this
was something to help assure
industry um uh that we mean what
we say, which is we have an
agreement and uh we're not going
to cancel it unless uh the party
breaks the agreement.
Well, tell me something, Miss
chair and senator Mister Chair.
Right now when we
Has it been a, a, a fact of life
that third parties have put
these things up for, for bid or
or.
A, a non-oil producer.
Third party
Put something up and and get a
uh win the bid and then resell.
That is, is that been going on,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair.
Mr. Vice Chair Senator, uh,
yeah, sometimes you'll have a
title company, for example, uh,
that is the nominator and the
bidder and often for similar
discussion earlier about
confidentiality, a particular
company may not want to know um
or may not want to signal that
they are bidding on particular
tracks, um, so there are parties
that basically bid on behalf of
other companies.
And there are parties that then
take the lease and sublease the
lease to another company.
And let them do the drilling and
exploration and then come back
and they become the operator
while the leasee on the original
lease is still the owner of the
lease, and some of those have
been
30, 40 years old.
And so that's a common practice,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair.
Mr. President, but Mr.
President.
Mr. Jar, Mr. President, it, it
is a common.
Example.
So all of this here has got
nothing to do with any of that.
That's, that's, we're not trying
to eliminate that.
It's just the fact that we're
trying to eliminate good.
The concern that, that I have
is.
I guess it's.
You know, I was given this map.
And it kind of tells you the
highest place.
That the, the expected to be the
best.
place to drill.
And there's nowhere in this bill
that it actually limits.
The royalty rate to this area, I
mean, any of it is.
I guess I'm a little concerned
about
The setting of that royalty rate
and how it's done. I know that
you've already answered that
question for me.
But uh
It's, it's
It's thought that that there's a
whole lot of real
Big old companies out there, but
there's also some small oil
companies out there.
And, and I hate to drive them
out of business with this bill
is what I'm getting at and.
What can you tell me, Miss chair
and Mister President, make me
vote for this so that you're not
going to run small business out.
Mr. President, you know, uh,
small business, this is an
auction.
In and business is gonna
determine whether they can make
money or whether they could not,
it's like you buying cattle or
you buying, you buying
equipment, right? It is the
value there and we can be able
to have a return on our
investment.
What you're looking at on the
map. And if you look under the
FIR you'll see the underlying
map last, this bill has been run
for the last 8 years.
6 years and has never had any
success. It's died in the
legislature every single time.
The difference between the past
and the future.
Now are currently is, you're
looking to look at a map in the
FIR that says this is the best
oil play in Lee and Eddie
counties. And so when you have
the best, you want a different
rate for the best.
But you're looking at or what
you showed us was the best of
the best.
And so if you further want to
reduce the map size or restrict
that to the best of the best.
Um, because that's where every
oil company is headed.
Uh, in the Permian in the
Delaware Basin.
Um, you can further reduce that
map, but I mean, that is the
best of the best and we're
saying in these counties, this
is the best.
In the rest of the state is a
lot of risk when you're drilling
oil and gas wells and that they
may not come in, they may not
produce at the level, they may
not be that high. And so why
have them in a higher rate when
you know where oil and gas
companies are targeting their
investments.
But with these, with these
leases right here.
They're never gonna come up for
lease again, will they?
I mean
This, why would you ever give
up?
This area here.
Mr. Chair and Senator, these are
leases that are, these are
places that currently don't have
any leases in place that are
coming up from. So there's
actually spots within this.
That
Mr. Vice Chair, uh, senator, I,
I, I think it's important to
note you hit on a very important
uh aspect of this. The, the bill
only applies prospectively,
right? So we're not doing
anything to existing operators
or lessees, it only kicks in if
somebody voluntarily goes and
they want to bid on a lease at
auction and they decide, you
know, that's something I really
want, and they bid on it and
that's the free market, that's
the way it works, um, there are
some, and there aren't a lot,
but they're so
so valuable that the fiscal
impact is huge. So you ask,
well, what, what could convey
maybe why you might support this
legislation, I would say $1.3
billion is the estimate in
additional distributions from
the State Investment council.
Um, uh, because of the revenue
from this.
There aren't that many parcels,
but they're so good and they're
so valuable and there's so much
money to be made that when we
change the calculation from 20%,
which is the company gets 80%
and the public gets 20% for the
sale of a public resource to 75%
for the company, uh, and 25% for
the school kids, that's slight
change on a very few number of
parcels is able to generate over
a billion dollars. I'm not going
to say this is a tax cut bill,
but what
that money is, it is a tax
reduction in terms of the burden
on uh New Mexicans because down
the road, that is money that
taxpayers don't need to come up
with in terms of revenue,
general fund this committee uh
to pay for public schools,
universities and hospitals. So I
think there's a very compelling
fiscal argument, um, and let me
just throw out there price caps.
This is not a very uh free
market structure that we
currently have where.
We subsidize uh companies by
artificially keeping it at a
lower rate than the private
market rate and what Texas
charges.
Which is 25%.
So that's the standard private
market rate right now
Mr. Chair and Mr. President is.
25%.
In Texas, and then you have to
come back and you have to look
at the the the deductions that
New Mexico offers compared to
what New Texas does not offer
and and if he did that, it'd be
even a different rate, so.
And how long have we helped
these parcels off the market,
Mr. President, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Vice Chair Senator, uh, the
commissioner put a pause on this
last year, um, uh, and we have
one opportunity to set that
royalty rate, so she said, I'm
not gonna lease these parcels um
until.
We're able to get the market
value, uh.
Which we believe is 25%, um, so
they've been probably sitting
there for a year, but as the,
the chairman said, you know, a
lot of these leases stay in
effect for decades. So the
amount of money that we gain
through a royalty, um, of, you
know, literally it's a billion
dollars we can earn, that's a,
that's worth a lot more than
whatever we defer in a temporary
short term inflow by waiting a
year to put these up.
Well, that, that probably in the
long run is true in the short
run, it's very wrong.
Because it takes you several
years to make that up, what you
could have the wrought as you
lost.
But not leasing it sooner.
As many of these people like to
talk about the uh opportunity
cost. I've heard many of you
speak of.
Opportunity cost. What could we
have bought with the money
today.
If we had had it.
So, you know, the, the
beneficiaries.
So far have lost money by not
leasing them.
In a timely manner.
Um
Which is
To counterproductive of what the
Land commissioner
It is supposed to do.
Now you can say that the future
earnings is going to be this.
And, you know, you're probably
right, but what I'm saying is.
OK.
I think I'm through asking
questions.
Senator Gonzalez, they may be
ready for you in tax, you may
want to check.
They may be ready for you in
tax. You may want to check
before you leave.
OK
Very well, thank you. OK, all
right, uh, Senator, uh,
Steinborn and then
Motion for to pass.
What's that? OK, we have a
motion and.
We have a
Alright, I'll second my own
bill.
different
But yeah, that's right, OK.
Michael Padilla.
Lots of boils in this building.
All right, so, uh,
We.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Lanier? No. Senator Lanier votes
no. Senator Padilla. Senator
Padilla votes yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin. Senator
Tobiasson votes no Senator
Trujillo. Senator Trujillo votes
yes, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes no. Senator
Schendo? Yes. Senator Sendosia,
Senator Munoz.
Yes. Cinnamons yes, we have a
due pass 6 to 3.
If we do pass Senator,
thank you. Thank you. And I
think we're we're adjourned.
Chairman says we'rejon.
