We have a quorum, jump in that
seat, let's get started, talk
about the bill, they're making
copies of the amendment as soon
as we get the copies of the
amendment.
And the secretary in here then.
Mr. Chairman.
We are doing Senate bill.
481481.
So, um, I am very pleased to
have been part of the
announcement of this historic
initiative that we are trying in
Albuquerque around our states
there.
I joined the governor, the
mayor.
The early county chair, county
commissioners upcurty City
councilors and the state
representative.
For this historic announcement,
so
bill 481 provides an opportunity
for the state to undertake a
Marshall Plan to reinvigorate
and save the neighborhoods
around the state-owned and
operated state fairgrounds. That
area.
It's now the state epicenter for
violent crime, drugs,
prostitution, cartel activity,
human trafficking, pedestrian
facilities, I know cause it's my
district.
In conjunction with this
initiative, the General Services
Department last week.
Released a $500,000 RFP for a
master plan.
Uh, we paid for that last year,
uh, to develop an alternative
plan for the 236 acres of what
is now the New Mexico State
Fair.
Uh, that master plan will
provide for extensive economic
analysis and months of community
engagement to change the
trajectory of this challenging
part of the city.
But the most plan is meaningless
without a financial vehicle to
implement it, that's what this
the tid, the tax increment
development District statutes
are vehicle to capture
grocereceipts from a specific
geographic area and keep them in
that area. We've done this at
the local area all over the
state. We've never done it at
this level. We've never done a
state imposed on state lands. So
it creates a fairgrounds
district over
the existing state fairgrounds
property governed by a body of
elected officials or their
designees as well as a member of
the impacted community.
So 75% of the gross receipts
generated within the district
would stay within the district
to finance infrastructure. This
includes gaming revenues from
the Rossino. They're currently
excluded from the Tid law.
Boundaries of the district could
be expanded solely to include
contiguous land.
Unlike New Mexico State Fair
Commission, this district would
not have the power of eminent
domain.
Ownership of the land will
remain with the state.
But beyond the geographic
boundaries as Tit could have the
ability to assist public schools
with capital moneys, this area's
impacted uh it's important right
now in Mexico students are
stepping over people passed out
with fentanyl addicts,
hypodermic needles. It's just
not a good place.
So I applaud the state police,
Albuquerque PD Burlio County.
They've been working in a very
concerted effort.
But if that's all it took, it
would be OK now and it's not. So
we believe that devoting most of
those 236 acres of the fair to a
mixed use mixed income,
walkable, and green space-filled
neighborhood will be
transformative.
That's certainly what people in
my district want grocery stores
and pharmacies that have left
the area could come back
adjoining property owners will
see their homes and businesses,
real estate increase in value
and justify reinvestment.
There are similar types of
projects, a legislature has
previously authorized for other
special districts, public
improvement districts pay tax
increment development district
kids, the district would have
the variety of powers necessary
to implement projects.
How to contract, spend money,
manage its assets would have the
necessary powers to advance
community benefits and
compliance with state law. The
bonding capacity in the bill is
up to half a billion dollars
will require advanced approval
of New Mexico border of Finance
and New Mexico Finance Authority
with the amendment we put on a
tax, it will have to be approved
by the state legislature.
So the district would utilize
tax revenues from the state fair
site itself would not be a
general obligation of the state,
county or the district.
In compliance with federal law,
and like all kids in New Mexico,
the district would have the
power to impose taxes within its
boundaries.
Protections for the state bonds
must be approved by the state
board of Finance, New Mexico
Finance Authority and of course,
the legislature.
text distribution could commence
immediately. However, the bill
provides that revenue would
terminate in all funds remaining
would revert to the state in the
event that the district does not
issue bonds by June 30th, 2029.
Similar to the TIA.
Any bonds issued by the district
would have a term expiring no
later than 25 years after the
first series of bombs. Language
has been included to assure that
the legislature would continue
to modify any and all taxes.
So big question is they're gonna
move or not?
And no decision has been made on
that.
That will be part of the master
plan.
We're awaiting that the economic
analysis and community input in
addition in the master plan, but
if it does move, uh, the
governor has suggested we should
keep it in central New Mexico.
If it does move,
We have the opportunity to
re-envision what a modern state
fair would look like.
We once had the 3rd largest fair
in the country.
But now it's struggling to stay
alive. It used to be a great
enterprise entity that's not
really happening anymore.
So this is historic legislation,
hopefully to address the.
challenges that we have tent
cities all along central
shocking crime rates, cartel
activity.
All of the elected officials at
every level at this area, uh,
agree that we should do this,
so.
Mr Chairman, those are my
opening remarks online, uh.
Just for uh to answer questions,
I believe I have Kelly
O'Donnell's an economist that
works with New Mexico and
possibly Justin Horowitz, who is
the attorney from Rhode
Just for uh to answer questions,
I believe I have Kelly
O'Donnell's an economist that
works with New Mexico and
possibly Justin Horowitz, who is
the attorney from Rhody
on the line.
OK
Uh, we do have an amendment.
Yes. Can they have a motion to
adopt the mandate for discussion
purposes by Senator Trill second
by center Padilla, any objection
to that?
See none tell us about the
amendment in store.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, we, uh, we
left out an oar in the page
where it delineates who is on
the board, uh, the state senator
and the state rep from the
district, it should read them or
their designee, and that's what
that amendment does. Thank you.
Questions on the amendment?
adopt by Senator Padilla,
seconded by.
Senator Hill, any objection to
adopting the amendment?
Of course, uh, let's go to the
audience. Anybody in favor?
Billy noted all paid lobbyists,
I think, so I don't know about
that gentleman.
Uh
Who do we have online?
knowing anybody in opposition.
Nobody in opposition questions
from committee members.
Padilla and Senator Woods. Uh,
thank you, chair, and thank you
Madam Protem on uh the FIR on
page 5 for the Albuquerque
Downs. I, I just want to clarify
or just make sure I understand
so the dip in there, um,
Gaming text that was just the
pandemic, or do we know what
that was? They shut down for,
was it for a full year?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, they shut down
for, for 2.5, almost 3 years,
and so that all that gaming
revenue dropped precipitously as
you see after the pandemic, it
went back up really high and now
it's back to sort of normal,
it's usually about 12 million up
for lost time, yes,
so, uh, chair and uh Madam
Protem.
On the um the site itself, when
when I hear you say the
neighborhood, so the tid would
be around the actual state
prayers right or it would be the
actual state fairgrounds itself
or what talk maybe a little bit
more about how that might work.
So Mr. Chairman, you actually
have a map, I think on your I
didn't get to that page yet, so
this is only for the state land,
that's the state fair is on.
Now we have
put language in other areas that
are annexed that's what I was
just going to say
or contiguous around it. And
what we're talking about with
that is that corner of the ear.
Southwest corner of it.
It's in yellow.
That is put as part of the stake
there.
Now it's the neighborhood is
really bad all around the state
fair, so um there is other
contiguous property that perhaps
could be.
But no, no imminent domain.
Yeah, and and and and um Madam
Protem, so what happens to the
folks that might have existing
operations on these lands, for
example, the racetrack. I mean
that that's a
Historical part of New Mexico,
no matter how you look at it,
uh, what, what would we do with
those leases that might exist
and and things of that nature.
So, Mr. Chairman, the casino has
a 25 year lease. The, the race
track is not necessarily totally
tied in with that. So there has
been some discussion that we
could move the racetrack, but at
this point, neither one of those
is.
They would remain, Mr. Chair.
The casino at least a 25 year
lease.
OK. Um, and then, so that's,
those are all the sort of
technical questions that I have.
I, I just have to say I
absolutely love the idea. I
think this is gonna you where
this has happened, chair, around
the country has completely
turned into like a
Thriving town center or
something of that nature that's
going to truly turn this area of
town around. Um, whenever I've
had to go to, I think I've gone
to your house a couple of times
to take things over there or
whatever. I worry about you.
I mean, I worry about that
neighborhood. I worry about
people trying to get into the
library and, and I'm with you
with those, those schools that
I've gone to multiple times. I
worry about those kiddos, um.
You know, folks that maybe
aren't able to move somewhere
else in town, they do, they do
live there and they keep their
homes and they, but there's also
a highly transient population
because of what's going on
there. And I just love what this
does. I think it's gonna be a
great, you know, live, work,
play kind of situation. I don't
know uh how many, you know, I've
worked a lot on housing, and I
think it's gonna turn into just
some beautiful housing, a highly
densely populated, but then also
mid-level and high level as
well. So I think this is just a
great deal. Thank you, chair.
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr.
Chair,
Mr. Chair and senator.
I'm looking at the map, the
attach map on the.
If our
And you've got a corner over
here.
That is setting.
I'm assuming outside of the
present fairground.
So that is part of the same.
Area that we're talking about.
Mr. Chairman, yes, that's,
that's the contiguous property
that uh we're hoping to have.
And
that because in my analysis.
It talks about.
The district consists of all
land owned by the state,
commonly known as the state
fairground.
Continued and land continues
that may be separately acquired
by the district. So is that, is
that stately now or is that
private land now?
and I'm not sure about that. I
wonder if one of my experts,
let's reach out for the
helpline. Do you want Justin or?
Well, let, let's just, let's
just go on from there. Which one
do you want on there so we can
let him in maybe Justin, let's
let Justin in it or what, so he
can in and so we can listen in
that way if you have a question,
you can respond.
You might, you might want to let
Kelly in too cause I'm not sure.
I know, I don't know if we can
let two at a time.
And we can let two at a time. So
let Kelly and and they can be
there and then if there's a
question we can.
We can't Senator Woods.
You'll be asked the same
question or another question?
Was that someone that online.
If not, I'll go to another
question. Kelly or Justin, did
you hear that question in the
question I asked was
Uh, is all the land.
That's
State land that is in this.
Uh
Outlined by this.
Highways here. There's a corner
down here that it looks like
it's.
Could be private land and
private people living on it.
This was asking.
Or is that wrong or right?
That that's Mr. Chairman, that's
correct. Um, that land is
privately owned.
Thin woods I'll help you answer
that. That's land is currently
owned by Microsoft. That's the
original owner came from.
There's $7 million in cappa
outlay to purchase that piece of
that corner.
That
OK, so, uh, what you, what we're
figuring on doing.
His acquiring that land also,
Adam chaired.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Madam, that's
OK.
And William asking these
questions is because under
property tax off the authority.
It says uh maximum property tax
levy may be imposed as $5 on
each 100,000. I mean, every 1000
of net taxable value, so.
Are we going to raise money on
the.
The value of the property.
That's on there right now.
I mean, is that how we're going
to do the tax levy.
This is all state land and I'm
trying to figure out, we're
talking about doing a tax levy
here.
I'm trying to figure out what's
the tax levy on?
Only it's just this one corner
of it's a private property.
Chairman.
Senator Woods.
We're already making about 12
million a year here from the
receipts from the casino and the
racetrack.
And then we make about a million
on GRT.
So that's what's there now.
Uh, so the bonds, etc. are for
the future.
Perhaps Kelly or Justin can
answer that more fully.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chairman, um, the,
we would, if the, the, the new
district would be taxing only
against the gross receipts tax,
and the gaming tax increment.
The property tax, um, that, so,
so currently the land is owned
by the state, so it's not
subject to property tax. Um,
property taxes on that little
chunk of private land would
continue to go to the, uh, the
county and the city because it's
that they're currently.
currently have jurisdiction,
then the district could within
the land that's currently owned
by the state, levy up to a 5 mil
property tax, but that would be
subject to 4-year approval at
four-year increments and, and it
would have to be approved by
the, by a majority of voters in
the district. So basically,
really the revenue that would
drive this project, at least in
the in the, in the early stages
would be that gross receipts,
tax revenue, and even more
important.
that gaming tax revenue.
But my problem is chair and
senators this.
The, the gross receipts tax is
generated off of the fairground.
It's, it's, uh, you know,
through sales on the fairground,
different things on the
fairground and
Uh, I guess concessions on the
racetrack.
But if you go in here and tear
all this stuff down.
Except the race track and the
concessions for the racetrack
and the stalls for the
racetrack.
At that point in time, you have
no more gross receipts coming in
off of that, that property.
So I'm having trouble with that
lid that.
jumped from one to the other,
Miss Chan, I'm sure I'm gonna
get it. It's going to be
explained to me.
Mr. Chairman, um, currently, the
gross receipts tax generated at
the fairgrounds is actually
really minimal. It's like, I
think it's, I believe it's about
$800,000 a year maybe tops. I
was really surprised there, so
it's pretty minimal. The gross
receipts tax that we would,
that, that the district would
ultimately be looking to
leverage would really be at
least initially the significant
gross receipts tax that would be
generated by the construction.
You know, once they go in there
and they start reworking
that infrastructure, not to
mention building commercial
buildings or building housing,
you know, those construction
receipts are gross receipts
taxable, and that could sit,
that could mean a really
significant chunk of revenue, at
least for the period during
which development is occurring.
And then ultimately, you know,
all the, and again, a lot of
this is, you know, we have to
see what the development plan
says, but if the development
plan were to say, hey, we're
gonna do a substantial amount of
housing and then some commercial
whatever commercial was
developed would continue to
produce grocery seed snacks.
And Mr. Chairman also, Senator
Woods, the gaming tax will
remain.
Because the casino is remaining,
and that's from 11 to 12 million
a year, we're only going to be
using the 75%, so it's about 8
million.
That will
Yeah, I understand you're
planning on keeping the
The game and taxes there and I
guess it's.
Well, it says GRT and gaming
taxes 9 million.
Is what it's showing.
And
OK, another question.
It says that the uh property
tax.
Uh, tax levy may be authorized
by majority votes cast in the.
In the district by the qualified
electors.
So
At present.
How many pro how many
How many qualified electors are
there in that district?
So Mr. Chairman, that's for the
future. There really aren't any.
electors there, people don't
live on this day. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you Senator Woods, uh.
Senator Steinbar.
In his chair. So, um, Madam
Protem.
I'm gonna be honest, I have a
lot of questions and I don't
think probably there's good
answers to a lot of my questions
I have.
A lot of experience with kids or
at least a fair amount from
legislative terms because when I
first got in, we had the big
forest city too, you might
remember in the legislature when
we first created the TED.
Around that development and
ultimately went down a tie vote
on the House floor, which was
just epic,
yeah, yeah, it was epic.
But then since then we created
some governmental tits,
including in Las Cruces, they
had a proposed hit in Las Cruces
a year, a couple of years ago,
which went down.
So the concept of using it to
develop a green field I support.
But there's a big
You know, forget I'm gonna just,
uh, well.
It's used to create
redevelopment, right? Where it
doesn't exist and you know, you
harness that, but then you have
a big kind of implicit question,
which is
But for if we, if we do this, do
we get something that we
wouldn't have had otherwise. So
I guess my first question is,
all due respect, we had a lot of
hands raised and support. I
don't know who people are
working for. Is there a
development already?
queued up, that's ready to go
for this site yet.
Mr. Chairman, absolutely not.
OK.
Um
So
So the tid words, um, you know,
you're capturing or you can
capture under state law, county
tax.
Local tax, of course, the state
tax. We, we passed this law
because we're agreeing to
capture the state tax and keep
it in the tit and not have it go
to the state, but you also have
a component with local
government has to vote to create
a tid board or can they're
agreeing to forego the local
taxes has the city or the county
done this yet?
So, this is a little bit
of a different mechanism because
this is all state.
Lamb.
So it's not going to be working
with the city on taxes because
it's state owned land. Now
there, there will be some work
with the, with the county
because it will be the county
municipality that helps with
trash, water collection, so it's
not a true tid in the way we've
thought of it all these years.
It's, it's really creating a new
property.
So right now, Madam Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, sorry.
Uh, Mr. Chair, there you go, uh,
you know what I mean just
because I'm a bolo tie doesn't
matter.
Let me stop you right there. Uh,
center guy, uh representative
guy go stay here. The house is
calling for members to go back
to the floor.
We'll call you up as soon as we
get close to your bills, but why
don't you house members go back
to the floor.
They're calling from the
speaker's office, they don't
want too many people gone from
the floor down there.
Just a heads up, Senate Bill 13
needs to get heard in, in.
House education that would be
very helpful.
Representative Romero.
Hope you hear that on your way
out, Senator,
thank you. So at any rate, I
mean, I'm really curious like
with economic development
activity or economic activity at
the state fairgrounds right now,
does this local GRT go to the
city and the county right now?
I mean it's on the state land,
but do they get GRT from it now?
Uh, Kelly, can you answer that?
Yeah, yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, so the land is
technically uh unincorporated
Bernalillo County land. So gross
receipts, tax revenue that's
generated on the land that the
local option piece about 1.3%
yeah,
uh, goes to Burn Leo County and
the rest, uh, you know, the
roughly 5% goes to the state.
Um, but, and, and under this
And, and again, the gross, the
taxable gross receipts at the,
at the fair are really, really
minimal. Like I said, they're in
uh several $100,000 to a million
dollars a year. Um, so, under
this proposal that the local
options piece that 1.3% that's
going to Bernaleo County now
would continue to go to Berna
Leo County. So they would see a
a big bump, you know, if
significant construction
activity or new commercial
activity happened on that
property, they would see a
significant bump in their grocer
ceipts.
Understood the Madam Chair, but
it is with the county is the
county contemplating
We're going their share of the
GRT with this tit.
So Mr. Chair, the county is not
part of the tit. Now I had two
bills to begin with because it's
taken us quite a while to figure
this out. It's new. It's really
a new type kid
I understand, ma'am. I'm just
saying that they could
um, the county is part of the
board.
Uh, so instead of doing their
TI, they're letting this happen.
Understood. It's an important
question, Madam Chair, because
at the end of the day, if we
create a lot of economic
activity. It's gonna be the
county, it's gonna be
responsible for police, fire.
Right? All these services and so
the issue of whether or not
they're foregoing their revenue
from this becomes important.
Chairman Kelly say that they're
in they will still receive their
GRT and if the economic activity
increases their GRT will
increase. Ma'am, the only thing
I want to go through the chair.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator, I just
heard her say they're collecting
GRT now. I didn't hear, I, I
don't know if they're gonna be.
in the tit or not. I don't, it
sounds like you don't think they
will, but I don't.
I'm just, but anyway, I'll move
on. Let me help you out on, on
page 4 of the FIR on the
financial.
Financial analysis.
Does not SB 481 does not include
participation from local
government, city or county.
So it says that in the FIR so I
assume that all right, so I'm
gonna move on anyway. The board
is also, of course, a concern to
me because
Um
Basically, all the da designees.
can be a majority private
citizen board.
And, you know, all these people
were their designees, it's the
way it reads.
Is there anything that precludes
and then two of them are just
interested citizens, I think it
may not use that exact word, but
it's a 9-member board, so.
7 member board. So what would
keep the board from being a
majority of private citizens, it
could even
Have connection to the
development interests.
So, there's only designees for
the governor.
The state senator and the state
representative.
The county commissioner is on
the mayor is on.
The um
A city councilor is on.
This is elected, this is elected
membership board. There's one
community member.
appointed by the governor.
So, uh, it's mostly electeds.
Yes, and those 3 could point
designees. I don't see that
happening in the beginning. So
it's gonna be a lot of work and
it's gonna need dedicated board
and the people on that board are
all the electeds for that area
of the city.
Yeah, I hear you, ma'am. Sure,
but Dennis says Jazzin and then
it's got some private citizens,
so I worry a little bit about
that because
Senator Steinborg, you need to
make sure you go through the
chair, otherwise we're gonna end
the questioning, so OK, Mr.
Chair. Um, so, at any rate, so
it's a concern, Mr. Chair,
because you could have people
who have a financial interest in
approving decisions, taxation,
Um, funding decisions and, and
you, what we did in Las Cruces
is it's a, it's a board set up
of just purely exclusively.
The local government officials
so that you know that there
there's no self dealing.
And so that board composition
becomes pretty important, um.
This is a pretty massive bill
like when you consider the
authority authorized this bill,
it's more extensive than any TI
I've seen the issuance of the
bonds and
Capturing of different types of,
it's pretty expansive and I'm
Um, and I'm sure you know it
well, and the people that are
here. I'm just kind of get
acquainted with it.
So at any rate, so the board
composition is a concern to me.
Um, question right now, the
casino, is this kid gonna
capture Mr. Chair, the, uh, is
it gonna capture the casino
activity in the TI.
Revenues and GRT loss as well.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, this, uh, does
use the gaming revenue, the
taxes that the gaming revenue
produced.
So
that's about $8 million a year.
Right
That's kind of one of those but
for.
Uh, considerations, Mr. Chair,
in um doing this cause you're
capturing existing economic
activity, but
Um
That's part of the upside, I
guess, for so many trying to
maybe thinking of investing. So
yeah, I have a lot of concerns.
I, I like the idea of reading,
but it sounds like it's an area
that really needs a
redevelopment and some sort of
This strategy is a really
interesting one, but the design
of the board, I think is
something really worth thinking
about and tightening up.
And uh I probably want to look
at it more carefully myself,
irrespective of what I do today.
I'll just send it right there.
Thank you, Mr.
Senator Tobison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Protem. Um, I'm looking
specifically at page 8 in the
SIR.
And someone helped me cause I'm
confused now. I'm, I've, I've
just put on my business coaching
lens and I'm looking at the tax
expenditure policy principle. Is
it vetted? Is it targeted? Is it
transparent? Is it accountable?
Is it effective? Is it
efficient? And there's a no on
all of those.
and we're just starting this.
I mean, this is taking what we
use to tax increment district
development district
development, and we're turning
into a state tit.
So it's a different animal than
we've been doing.
Uh, so, um, it, it, it's sort of
not up and running. I mean, it
also says in here that it's very
hard to measure whether or not
it would be successful until we
get the master plan. Do we do
the RFP until we decide if we're
moing the state fair or not, if
we can do bonding, so, you know,
it, they just, you, there's
lots, that's what happens when
you start a project like this.
OK, Mr. Chair, Madam Protem,
that's what makes me like super
nervous because there's not a
plan. It almost appears like
it's a potential land grab
looking at the map.
I hear that we're probably
buying this private land when
We said we weren't doing that in
this plan, so there's a chunk
here in the corner that's
missing.
But there's a plan maybe to
purchase that, it's private
property, but
Is this a state?
Land grab because I'm also
looking
On my
Senate minority analysis, which
you probably don't have.
Um, it's stating that basically
the state fairground district
can purchase.
Contiguous land around the state
fair district. So is this going
to grow and morphine. What, what
I'm concerned about is what,
what is this land going to
become and
Are we giving basically the
state.
A pot of money.
to stay in this area, but I
don't see or hear any
conversation of private industry
and what it might look like. I
mean, not even a clear idea.
It's so nebulous that
I just don't know what I'm
voting on other than, hey, we're
keeping all the tax money here
from the casino and the
racetrack and I want to know
what's the plan for what's gonna
happen here so that when the
racetrack says we're out of
here, we don't like what you've
done around us. I mean, not that
it's great around it right now
anyway. I, I will admit.
But where is it going? And if
this is relying upon this, the
racetrack in the casino and they
leave, then what have we built
around it and how do we support
it? But that's my big fear. So
if anyone can give me clarity
there.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh, Kelly, do
you wanna weigh in on this?
Let me, let me grab something
real quick. So the tech, the,
the policies and principles that
you're seeing in the FIR those
are LFC tax policies and
principles that they scored in
dynamic in in she center is
right. None of these have been
determined yet.
They have to get a tit in order
to redevelop.
And so they won't have these in
the tax policy because they
don't know what they're gonna
develop with and what the
replacement of the text.
kid will do. There's been talk
for years to put in a new arena
there.
And redevelop the whole thing
made me get rid of the racetrack
and move it off somewhere else
too. I mean, you go to any major
city.
In any downtown arena, and
that's how it's redeveloped.
Kelly, you want to add that.
Uh, sure, sure, Mr. Chairman. I
mean, I, I think you, you really
summed it up pretty well there
by stating, I mean, we can't
forecast what the, you know,
what, what the ultimate
development plan is going to
look like right now. It's
obviously being, it's in the in
the procurement process, um,
however, you know, ultimately,
yeah, I'm, I'm sure you're all
quite familiar with the area and
it is an area that is
desperately in need of
redevelopment. It's, it's, I
think it's one of the greatest
single
greatest sort of economic
development liabilities for the
state of New Mexico right now.
So I think we all benefit, we
would all benefit by a real uh
uh uh uh a sea change on East
Central. So as a potential
mechanism for or catalyst for
redevelopment of that area, that
the economic upside is pretty
high and, and frankly, although
that that gaming tax revenue
that's derived from that Rosino
right now is, you know, is, is
a, is a good uh source of
revenue
for this project. Um,
ultimately, you know, the, the
Rossino being there or not being
there, you know, whether that's
a good thing or a bad thing is,
is, is, is really um it's not
something that I could really
speculate on. It might well be
that ultimately the Rossino
moving on would be a good thing,
um, not, not, not recommending
it, but I, I don't think, and I
would not assert that we are
building or structuring this
project with the idea of having
Rassino.
revenue into perpetuity, you
know, frankly, once, once we see
some real change on East
Central, the economic impact and
the stimulus to retail. I mean,
I don't, you know, the, the
changes in that area over the
last couple of decades have been
really shocking and, and, and
demoralizing and the loss of
commerce has been profound. So
the resurgence of that commerce
would more than offset any, any
losses down the road from, from
the casino. So
I, I would, I would really,
although I see the casino or the
Rossino as an asset from a, from
the perspective of early term
revenue. I think the longer term
objective here is to really
revitalize that that
neighborhood, build some of this
desperately needed housing, um,
that Albuquerque needs and, and,
and, and sort of stimulate a
renaissance, uh, that, that
brings back a lot of uh economic
activity and, and, and the
services including healthcare
and groceries and pharmacies
that the the residents
So that community are gonna
need.
So Mr. Chair, I, what I'm
hearing is either we're gonna
build a stadium here, which that
would be just nice for the
general public to know, or we're
going to build housing and is it
state funded housing? Is it HUD
housing? What kind of housing is
it? Is there a grocery store?
And it seems like we're blaming
All the problems in that area by
the fact that the state
fairgrounds exist.
And if we, that's that is
exactly what I'm hearing. So is
the challenge that we have the
state fairground property there
and that's why we have people
zombied out on the sidewalks
and, and a depressed area of our
city, or is there a different
cause and
Why aren't we just calling it
what it is then.
Because I've never in my life
heard of a a master plan to
develop, but we have no idea
what we're gonna do there. And
that's where I'm just, I'm
looking at this going, well, why
don't we have that answer before
we put this together. And I'm
familiar with kids, especially
in Tucson. Their TE is Ted is
wildly successful, but they had
a master plan and they had a
master plan of stage development
and have increased police force.
I think they spent like $600,000
a year just on the police force.
around that area to deal with
exactly what we're dealing with
here. I'm not even hearing that,
and that's why I'm asking
questions. I just, I, I can't
imagine I'm the only person
going, what is, what is this?
It's it.
It seems
Odd.
I, I don't know how else to put
it. It just seems very odd that
we can't distinctively decide a
rebuilding some kind of housing,
are we just shooing people away?
Are we leveling this? Are we
waiting 25 years to then build
some kind of arena that we've
been looking at building and
then if we do that, are we going
to start eminent domain all the
way around this area because
we're gonna need it if there's
an arena. It just, I'm not
hearing a lot of clear answers.
I like the concept.
But I'm not hearing enough
answers for me to really
understand that it's a viable
solution for this area. So Mr.
Chairman, there is no imminent
domain. It's written in the
bill.
Secondly, we have an RSP out now
through the General Services
department. We put $500,000 into
the budget last year.
So we are waiting for the master
plan, the RFP will show us the
master plan.
What my constituents want.
Our grocery stores.
pharmacies, walkable space,
green space, affordable housing,
a community center.
Livable neighborhoods. They
don't have livable neighborhoods
now, you know, you've driven
there. I drive by that's what I
want. That's the vision of all
of the electeds that I've talked
to, Better housing.
Good commerce, a, a place we can
all be proud of.
You know, it's, it's, it's like
a dump now on Central.
By the by the state fair and
along Louisiana to me, this is
an idea that we should at least
try to see if it would work.
Um
I was in the house when we
passed that legislation. I voted
against it.
I was actually in the speaker's
chair cause it was done by the
speaker then. It was 3 o'clock
at night in the middle of the
morning and half the place was
asleep. We've really come a long
way since we did that about 25
years ago. We have a successful
kid in the southeast part of
Albuquerque, where they've just
redeveloped the UNM properties
down there, putting up all kinds
of housing, commercial
properties, walking paths, green
spaces.
That's what everyone is asking
for. We had a good successful
tip for the wind Rock
redevelopment Center. It's a
mechanism that could work. This
is different than the other kids
we've done because it's a state
fair tit. It's just for the
state fair, so.
We're all working on this. We're
trying to make this happen. You
can't just, you know, the
legislature only has a certain
amount of time and then we're
out of here, uh, so we would
have to wait a whole another
year if we don't do this now.
That doesn't mean that it's
gonna be up and running
immediately if we pass this, as
we have to wait for the master
plan.
That should be soon, however,
um, I've heard that by the end
of March, we will.
Mr. Chair, Madam Pretem, will
the master plan have what you
just described to me, which is
really in a livable neighborhood
environment, or will it have an
arena?
Mr. Chairman, we don't know
that. I think they'll have 3 or
4 possibilities. We'll see it
pretty soon. Tobison.
The arena was a concept from 3
years ago where
Everybody went to LA and they
had an arena company that would
come in, if we would put $150
million they put up $350 million
to build the arena there.
The former economic development
secretary, whatever her name
was, killed that.
And so that was our chance for,
uh, I think it was a 15 or
25,000 seat arena to be built
there.
So I just said that because I
knew that was fire.
Uh, Senator Tollman has a runner
in arena bill for every year.
Uh, but if you look at any
downtown area, you go to
Nashville, Bridgestone Arena,
you go to Phoenix and you look
at the, I can't remember the new
one downtown they have.
Like you look out at State Farm
Arena. You look at the growth
around any arena or any
development, that's the way it
spreads. I just said that, so
don't hold the senator or the
tit in arena.
that's my speculation. It may be
a lie, it may not even be true,
it may be a fabrication, but
there was a time.
to that they did look at that.
OK, Mr. Chair. Well, I, I
understand the concept.
You got me a little fired up on
the whole arena thing because I
am reading here and tell me if
I'm wrong. I'm reading that the,
the state fair district may
purchase contiguous property
around the district. To me, that
sounds like eminent domain. I
just, it's not. You're gonna
promise me that you're all gonna
go on record. OK. The word
purchase doesn't, we're not
allowing them animate domain.
We're allowing them in the
domain, I'd probably be against
it.
This is allowing them to
purchase other property.
Mr. Chair, I will hope that this
will bring Walmart back.
Target back, pulls back.
The community grocery store
back.
That would be the desire, and I
hope that it does. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. OK.
Uh, just the arena was a talk
that that they flew out,
everybody went out, looked at
the Serena model.
I was for the arena. I wanted to
put the money in the budget for
the arena.
Because we don't have an arena.
Uh, for 10 years I've said I'd
love to go over there and
dismantle Tingly.
All they had to do is get me a
lift and let me let it collapse
in itself, you have to build
something different. So Senator
Til you're next.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator for bringing
this forward, um, uh, LeoDonnell
is my former boss, and so we've
had a long relationship, um, I,
I just want to point out, um, I
know there's been a lot of talk
about things happening
potentially in secret, but
It's real clear in the act that
they're subject to the
procurement Act, um, but they're
also subject to the governmental
conduct Act. They're subject to
the open Meetings Act, so all of
those things that any other body
is subject to, they're going to
be subject to that to IPRA.
So all of the information, all
of the meetings that they have,
all of that is going to be in
public.
Under the light of the sun, and
I just want to remind everybody
of that.
So, if I could just get
clarification though, Mr.
Chairman Senator, on
Who's going to review the master
plan? Is it the board or
I'm a little confused about
that.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I think
eventually the board, uh, Kelly,
I mean, it'll be general
services division who put that
out and you, um, because the
state fair commission is still
part of this.
OK.
OK, and then go ahead, Kelly.
Oh, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
in addition, the, the board of
Finance is going to have to
verify that any bonding that's
done, this is really important.
There's multiple before any
bonds can actually be issued.
The board of Finance and the New
Mexico Finance Authority are
both are gonna have to sign off
and they're both gonna have to,
you, you'll have to have
reviewed the development plan so
that they can assert in
confidence that the that any
bond issue in
is consistent with the
development plan. So there is
implicit to all of that, that
bond approval that's required
and it's multiple levels and
it's the legislature too.
There's a review of the
development plan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh,
thank you, Kelly. I appreciate
that. And because it's state
land, it's my assumption that um
CID construction industries will
be responsible for building
permits and inspections and that
rather than Bern Leo because
right now there's that's who the
state state land is subject to,
correct?
I don't think that's true. Yeah,
it is true. No, on, on state
land. It doesn't matter, it's
within the city limits of the
city and the county. And they
have jurisdiction over
construction I pretty sure
that's true just because land
ownership doesn't determine who
inspector,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator CID is
responsible for schools, the
state buildings, or are these
going to be private buildings?
Madam Senator Stewart.
Senator, so if this pit or this
kid is developed by private they
just decide, OK, we're going to
sell this section off or lease
this section off to a private
developer then it becomes.
Subject to the city and the
county.
All right, thank you no matter
who the land ownership is.
No, I get it. Thank you, Mr.
Kelly or?
Yes, correct, Mr. Chairman.
OK. And then, um, I, I guess the
last thing I just want to say is
like
I don't like going to the state
fair because of where it's at.
And because there's no parking,
because I have to, I, I can't
get in, I can't get out. I don't
even know when the last time I
went to the state fair was. I
would love to see it out in the
middle of nowhere where there's
plenty of land. There's plenty
of space for, for animals.
plenty of space for.
Cotton candy and games and
rides, and I, I would really
like to see that, and so, um,
for multiple reasons, I'm really
very much in favor of this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator Senator Padilla for
a 2nd time.
Thank you, chair, and I'll be
real fast. Thank you, chair,
and, and, uh, Madam Protem, so
on the questions that Senator
Tobiasson had, I'll just go back
to those real quick. So on page
5, if you look at line 19, it,
it, it uses the word make. So um
I don't know who or what
developer or whatever is going
to be interested in something
until they have some certainty.
So if you don't establish this
district, I think it's going to
be very difficult for you to
find anybody that wants to put a
proposal together. So it seems
to me like you're lining the
steps up the way you probably
should.
Then the other thing that I
think is important is by using
the word may doesn't mean that
you have to accept any of those.
There may be nothing that
happens on this. I don't think
that's going to be the case
because there's such a need
here. But, but chair, I think
that, you know, nothing has to
happen on this, you know, with
this deal. It just simply
establishes the ability to do
it. Is that right?
Mr. Chairman, that's correct.
And there is a provision that if
we don't get our act together
and do something within 4 years,
it's, it's dead.
OK. We have to return all the
money to the state. Yeah, so, so
I just want to help everybody be
comfortable that, you know,
doesn't have to happen, but it
can. And the only way that some,
you know, whatever group or
consortium, whatever's going to
come in to want to do it is you
have to give them a little bit
of certainty for a little bit of
time. And I think that's what
this accomplishes.
So I think this is very
different than what wound up
happening in with Forrest
Covington and all that other
business. I, I still live on
that I, I spent a lot of time in
that property. It's called Mesa
del Sona.
Boy, we should have done a
better job on that deal, but I
think in the long run, we
learned from those kind of
deals, this is very, very
important for our city. I think
it's gonna be huge, uh, from,
uh, reduction in crime, uh,
livability, quality of life, all
the things that are going to
happen on this property. Thank
you.
Senator Steinborton for a 2nd
time, make sure you go through
the Chairman. So,
um, Mate, I have a question for
you. Um, would you be amenable,
not now, but next step on the
floor to do an amendment that
would make that would reorganize
the board a little bit so it
would be maybe just public
officials representative of the
city, county and state.
Mr. Chairman, you're reading
that section wrong. We just made
an amendment.
There are 7 people, 6 of them
are all elected officials.
The governor, the mayor, the
county commissioner, the state
representative, the state
senator.
councilor.
I mean, those are all elected,
there's one community member.
Mr. Chair, Senator, you're
correct, and I apologize because
the amendment thinks, you know,
it's kind of like a uh shotgun
wedding here in the 9th hour, so
the amendment does say that. So
here's an alternative amendment
that would still further clean
up.
The the
How about an amendment that says
no member of a development
authority connected to it shall
serve on the board.
So that way the, the public
members are not also connected
to that because that would be
A conflict.
That be a friendly amendment. I
mean, you're shaking your head
so I'll have to check with all
the people that I'm doing this
with. I didn't write this, you
know, the attorney, uh, that's
working with us, etc. I just
don't think it's necessary. I
think this is a, well, I'll
certainly talk to you more about
it. I'll talk to my people about
it, we'll get a better answer
for you. I just think you're
misreading that section.
Mm
So, Mr. Chair, I mean, as long
as there's members say about the
public members, but there's also
I think several members who are
from the community or whatever.
I say this because we're
authorizing this entity to
purchase land.
There's a lot of money that's
going to be spent.
And I personally would feel more
comfortable if I knew it was
basically.
That we did not have that. We
had a firewall essentially, but,
but.
those conflicts.
I think that's the appropriate
way to do this.
So it seems like pretty
straightforward, simple request,
but
Um, I've heard your answer, so
I'll leave it at that. Thank
you, Ms. Chen and Mr. Chairman,
I will check with the other
folks that I'm sponsoring this
with and get back to you.
Thank you.
syndrome.
Distinguished chairman, and, and
thank you, uh.
Me in for uh.
With this, um
Couple of things, uh.
If you wanted to see a
redevelopment similar, go to uh
East Denver and East Stapleton
International Airport.
It's mixed, it's got open space,
it's got mixed housing, it's got
restaurants, it's very vibrant
community. They have parks,
walkable, light rail and and
light rail and all of that. So
I, I think, you know, there's uh
examples of that that have been
done very well.
I have very uh
Fond memories of being at the
state fair because the school
that I went to in this, uh, San
Diego Mission always had a
booth.
in the village, so my mom was a
volunteer, so.
Pretty much spent almost her
entire time at the boot selling
Indian tacos and making oven
bread and weekends my dad and I
would go help out, and then my
dad would take me over to the
races and I think I started
betting since I was like, uh,
maybe about 6 years old.
So a lot of fun, but I
understand, you know, I, I think
that place needs a lot of
redevelopment and I think what
it's done is stayed between L4,
the former State Airport is a
good example of what can happen.
And I know that we're concerned
about, you know, the purchase of
the area, but I, but I suspect
that if this development does
go.
The property values around that
whole area are gonna go up.
And people will probably want to
sell this, you know, and, and,
and, and take advantage of that
and so forth, so, but the
question that I have uh with
regards to that place is we
currently have there is the
Raino.
And you have the lease for a
certain amount.
Under our gaming compacts.
The racetrack and the Rosino
have to be together.
So if
Somehow the racetrack goes.
And if the casino stays, it's
now not a Reino but a casino.
Does that violate our gaming
compacts.
And Mr. Chairman, we've been
talking about that and looking
into that.
Um, but essentially I, I'm
pretty sure the RSP has asked
for all kinds of different.
Uh
Scenarios. Uh, so, but currently
we're not anticipating that the
casino and the Rossino would be
gone.
We are, we, we are under the
impression that they will both
remain there. We are looking at
the compact because that came,
came up early on and I can't
give you an answer. I don't know
if Kelly can, but the casino
definitely has a 25 year lease.
If that's tied totally to the
racetrack, and they're both
staying there.
I appreciate it. Hi, Kelly.
Kelly used to be my, uh.
And.
With Senate, the corporate tax
corporations and transportation
before we changed the name. So,
uh, hi, Kelly.
Senator Shao.
Yeah, so, so no, I, I think it's
a great idea. I know it's kind
of unusual to do a state landed,
which is very different. I think
one of my first uh bills that I
introduced in 2013 was a tit
bill. I had no idea what a tit
is and that thing went crash and
burn and I learned a lot so uh
hopefully uh you'll have more
success with this one.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
move do pass wait, I got a few
more questions.
Senator Stewart, uh
I'm gonna read you to page 7 in,
in the governor's board.
My, my heartburn is, I don't
like to make a designee making
decision for a governor board,
right?
That's something I want you to
look at for the floor. We had
this, we had this discussion
before, like, if you're
appointed to a board and you're
gonna serve on the board and
you're gonna make a decision.
Please don't send a designee.
When you don't want to go to the
meetings, you send a designee.
These are, this is gonna be a
big project.
Those members I think need to
attend and make the decisions
and not a designation. The
governor may be something.
A little bit different, but to
go to Senator Steinway's point,
well, there's no corruption
here. Every one of these is an
elected official.
They violate the governmental
conduct Act or the ethics code,
they're gonna be charged with an
ethics violation.
In some way, shape or form,
except for the person from the
community.
Which
Maybe completely different and I
don't know how to handle that,
but, but I just would say.
Let's, if we're gonna have a
governing board, let's make the
governing board make the
decisions, not let somebody fill
in, especially these are big
decisions.
And then, uh, make sure they're
aware of what's happening.
The other thing is, when we did
the
I think it was a tit for
windrock.
Yes. And we have them come
review, renew the tid every 2
years.
And that's just what your
progress, how's it going? and
rock's been slow to develop, but
it's getting there.
And this will be the same way,
it'll be slow to develop and
it'll get there. But I'd like to
see some type of reporting to
LFC back is a TED working it,
where you at today? Other than
that, I mean.
You know, I'm in business so I
risk money every single day.
My kids were out shoveling snow
for Amtrak this morning at 6
a.m. and
And just because Amtrak comes
twice a day and and that's what
they do for they make money that
way. But if you're gonna develop
something, it's a risk.
I mean, I'm doing some lots and
crawls, but it's a risk.
80 mile an hour winds yesterday
were trying to work and and so
it's a risk and everybody that's
gonna do this is gonna take a
risk.
I love to see that redevelop,
cause.
I go to Albuquerque quite a bit.
Um
You know, where do I stand? I'll
try to stay at the Marriott.
I'll try to stay where I think
I'm safe, right?
But when there's events,
That will attract people to an
area.
You'll see that redevelopment.
Go like crazy in New Mexico is
due for that.
It is due for that.
Do I think it should be in
downtown Albuquerque, no.
There's no room, there's, it's,
you'd have to use the M in
domain there to acquire that. I
think they tried that with a
soccer field and it didn't work
out so well.
And but here's a place where you
can redevelop and really change
the neighborhood, so.
I agree with that. The designees
I really want.
The people on the board, going
to the meetings and voting.
Not sending the designee, and
then I'd like to see some
reporting like the.
Kit for windrock where they come
back and tell us the progress
and we either extended or not
extend it.
I didn't have Adrian look, this
is a $9 million hit to the
general fund.
We're going to try to score that
in the tax package as it goes
forward, um, but if I was
Uh
Certain
Um
Tribe of Pueblo.
That has a hotel and a golf
course right there.
I would be courting the state
fair, like nobody's business
because you have a hotel, you
have a casino, you have land.
and if if I was in the word of
caution on economic development,
maybe only once a year, but
there's rodeos there year round.
I've been to rodeos, ropings.
Things are around.
Home shows, you name it. And so,
uh, I would be courting that
pretty hard. With that center or
center Gonzalez, you have a
question.
Let's just gonna mention though.
On page 11.
And you can see, I think I
counted 12.
There's like 14.
And uh to my knowledge, um, they
have all been successful.
And um
I was the one that sponsored the
one for Toski Valley.
And that made like day and
night.
You know, it has really changed
that place to what the scenario
that you were talking about.
You know that uh Senator Shindo
was talking about.
So, um, you know, they do work.
And uh you know, if you have a.
That master plan coming forward
and everything, you know, I
think so things will fall in
place. Thank you, Marilyn Dupa
Mosson from Senator Padilla
don't have a second,
my Senator Brand.
We called the wrong.
Senator Brent? Yes, ma'am.
Senator Brandt votes yes.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Lanier. Yes, Senator Lanier
votes yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla, Senator
Steinborn.
Send her tobiasin
Senator Tobias Sibozia, Senator
Trujillo, Senator Trujillo
votesia, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes no. Senator
Sendo, Senator Shindo votes yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinbor votes no,
Senator Munoz.
Yes,
Senator Munoz votes yes, we have
a Du pass 8 in the affirmative.
To
2 in the negative.
Senator Tobiasson explained
their love. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, pardon my French, but
since this area is hell on
earth. I think anything we do
would be better than what we
have there now, and I do hope
that I get to see that master
plan as soon as it comes
through. And I also hope that it
includes a significant increase
in police force in that area and
then local small business and
that it's not just a grab of
homes with big developers and
then, you know.
state or countrywide franchises,
so I, I hope that there's still
a focus on local New Mexico
business with this plan. Thank
you.
San Steinburn.
Mr. Chair. So Senator, um, I'm,
um, openly supporting this on
the floor. I do think we need to
add an amendment just to
conflict kind of a deal to
ensure that private interests
aren't on the board and uh and I
just want to learn more about it
too. But I, I mean,
General and support it, I just
think we need some work. Thank
you, Mr.
Senator Stewart, enjoy the
judiciary.
I, I don't see the table set up
for dinner, so they may kick us
out in a few minutes represent
the guy goes, jump in that chair
real quick.
If you talk a lot about weed or
you're gonna go home early, just
uh.
RLD secretary is Senator Trio,
what is his
title I forget Superintendent
Mr. Chairman, I'm on this bill,
but I'm gonna let these um
lovely people present it.
We could have had you present
it, send her back to the floor,
but I know she's dying to be in
this committee today. I think
she wanted to stay here.
Representative, let's get
rolling and make sure you get to
your points. Do we have, we
don't have any amendments for
your bill, not yet. We may get
me one here in a minute, uh,
let's go through it as quick as
we can. Yes, Mr. Chairman, and
you know, I always want to be in
your committee. uh, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee,
I'm bringing to the Senate uh.
Oh
I have a table in motion, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Chairman, can I
just say seriously, Mr.
Chairman, can I just say that
point of personal privilege, I
want to thank the chairwoman.
She's been very kind to Senate
members this year, well, every
year, but you've been
particularly kind this year, and
we all appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you.
That's not what her husband did
a while ago to me.
I'm bringing uh now now you got
me flustered. I'm bringing uh to
the finance committee today, uh,
the House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for HB.
10 RLD cannabis enforcement.
Um, I am
Uh, I have Senator Truhu is my
co-sponsor along with several
other people. I'm going as fast
as I can here, uh, under our
current law, the cannabis
Control Division of the RLD has
no authority to enforce the
criminal laws of our state, HB
10 addresses that problem
head-on.
This spill isn't just about
revoking licenses. It's about
the ability to embargo seize and
recall cannabis products that
are illegal, tainted, or
misbranded. This bill aims to
strengthen the enforcement of
cannabis regulations, ensuring
public safety and compliance
within the industry. This bill
also protects the hundreds of
New Mexicans who have invested
their life savings in this
business and ensures everyone is
on a plane, is on the same.
playing field.
This bill has been endorsed by
New Mexico Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce, law enforcement
agencies, district attorneys,
and many, many small business,
medium and large cannabis
license holders throughout the
state, and with that, Mr. Chair,
I stand for questions.
Thank you. Who in the audience
in support.
not there's 4 or 5. How many do
we have on Zoom?
We'll take one and one.
Who wants to come up the long
arm of the law that's hustle up
there.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Troy Weer chief
New Mexico State Police. I know
that you always appreciate
brevity, so I will get cut to
the chase. We strongly support
this bill, um, they gave several
of the reasons there. I think
the biggest, uh, is one, it
allows for the embargoing and
destruction of illicit cannabis,
uh, as you're aware, we did a
very large cannabis operation in
San Juan County, um.
We seized the clearly illegal
cannabis, like 170, 164,000
pounds. We then turned around.
We had a court order. We're
getting sued for millions and
millions of dollars, uh, I think
that obviously needs to get
cleared up for law enforcement's
gonna have a big, uh, be very
hesitant to do it again, um, and
so we have been involved
throughout this process, and so
we've given a lot of input and
all of our input has been taken,
so we fully support it. Thank
you.
Thank you. One person on Zoom
you wanna.
In support.
And
Chairman, committee members, my
name is Ben Lowinger with the
New Mexico Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce, and we're in strong
support of House Bill 10, uh,
the, the abilities that are, uh,
presented in this bill,
specifically the ability to
seize, seize in place, embargo,
questionable cannabis product.
There have been several
instances over the last 3 years
where those abilities would have
protected consumers and helped
with the stability of the
industry. We urge that the
committee support this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, anybody in
opposition seeing nobody.
question from committee members.
See no center right, you have a
question.
chairman, I, I just have one
question. Is this like the, the
state DEA.
Mr. Chairman, did you say the
state DEA would just be like our
own DEA in the state.
Drug Enforcement Agency because
you didn't.
Law and order.
Mr. German and senators in
committee, this is gonna be
strictly just with cannabis, and
it's for the illegal activity
that goes on right now, all we
have is administrative authority
as soon as we approach.
Uh.
Deal with and it comes up to the
criminal side, we have to step
completely back. Uh, they, they
know this, they're out there in
amongst us and they just keep
rolling forward.
So it will be just strictly with
cannabis. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Trujil.
a pass,
uh, Senator Shindo's got a, uh,
thank you, uh, thank you,
Representative, uh.
How many agents are we talking
about?
In this industry.
Mr. Chairman and a senator in
committee will have one bureau
chief and 6 agents, so 7 total
for that bureau for the criminal
side.
I think it's true. Thank you.
He was this bill amended in
judiciary?
Mr. Chairman, it was not.
Uh, I wonder why Senator just
didn't do his job.
Um
Mhm
And he didn't do his job.
Um,
Is this gonna resolve our issue,
Clay? Are we really going to be
able to get it the bad actors, I
mean.
I mean that I'll blame this on
the state engineer, the one
instancia, all they, they didn't
have water rights. All they had
to do is go over there and cut
them off the water, and it would
have been done and over with.
But they were too afraid of
them, but in the one in
Farmington, no one would do
anything until they called the
state police in.
Now the state police are getting
sued. I think we had to backfill
your budget for 275,000 or
something like that.
For the cost of
Shopping and hauling off weed.
So Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee is going to cure
everything? Absolutely not. It's
gonna slow a lot of it down? I
do believe so, you know, it's
got a 4th degree felon beside
it. It's not, that's not what
I'm after, it's actual
destroying it if the court gives
us the order we do it enough,
it's gonna run them out or slow
them way up.
Uh, you talked about a lot of my
freedom. It's true, they are.
I'm not. We got a year and a
half of me left here.
You give me the authority and
let us to do it. We're gonna do
our best to reel it in.
Why are you counting the number
of days you were here.
Mr. Chairman, I don't know if
they'll bring me back. I mean,
I, I hope with the newcomer
comes in that routine you
because I think you've done some
of the better work in in I I
hope this fixes the problem. I
hope Larry Barker goes away for
a little while.
Um
Everybody in your
Behind you laughing, but I mean,
these are real situations that
synthetic pot that's on the
streets that you can buy and you
don't really know, you think
it's happening, it's really
weed.
It's all synthetic. I didn't
support marijuana. The law was
written pretty loosely, it was
like throwing everything against
the wall.
In a rush and and didn't matter
as long as they passed, as long
as they got weed.
They were happy, didn't matter
what happened.
And now look where we're at
today. Look at the cost. How
much do we generate off uh
marijuana sales.
Uh, we know that.
LFC
look that up on what we're
generating what our costs are to
operate, uh, Mr. Chairman and
the tax, I know it's usually
like 35 million a year, I think,
37 million.
And what does it cost him? He's
shaking his head, kind of, yes,
maybe, and what does it cost to
operate this agency. So Mr.
Chairman, we this year if we get
what we need. OK.
All right, we have gonna do pass
motion from, I forgot who did
that.
Senator Trujil second by Senator
Padilla.
All the road please.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes Senator Linier.
Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator
Padillas, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes as
Senator Tobiasin. Senator
Tobiasinbosia, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes, yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Sendo,
Senator Senator Munoz.
Yes. Sarahs, yes, we have a due
pass and in the affirmative, 0
and the negative.
Thank you. We're gonna hear
about 3 more bills we're gonna
hear Senator Tobias and I have 2
here.
Then I'm gonna ask the committee
if they want to come in tomorrow
before we go to the floor, so
we're not gonna hear any other
house bills. We'll try to get
those. Thank you. Have a good
night. Good to see you guys.
May Christmas, Happy New Year,
Senator Tobias.
We do have an amendment center
to bison uh 737.1, is that the
amendment you have so we can
match it up. Yes. All right,
explain the bill and we'll move
the amendment.
OK, 305 creates a quality foster
parent recruitment and retention
task force, and it passed
unanimously last week out of a
Senate Health.
And as a mom of teens, you all
have heard me grill or CYFD
cabinet secretary a few times,
um, I'm just very concerned
about what is happening with our
children in foster care. What's
happening with the declining
numbers of parents willing to
become foster parents, and I did
just learn that actually girls
are no longer allowed to be held
in CYFD offices, as you can
imagine, there's probably
some real concerns with their
safety, um, but the question is
where will these young women be
taken?
And will they be kept in state
or will they have to go out of
state because we just don't have
the foster parents willing um
right now with the, the state of
CYFD to do this work. So this
really will help us attract and
retain foster parents in our
state.
Expert witness you wanna add
anything.
Um, Mr. Chairman and committee
members, my name is Marilyn
Beck. I am the founder and
executive director of New Mexico
Child First Network. Um, we have
an organization of over 600
foster kinship and caregivers
across the state.
Um, and I'm also a volunteer
foster parent, so I know this
has been weighing heavy on your
heart, um, in December, I had
the privilege to join a national
consortium of child welfare
innovation leaders talking
specifically about foster parent
recruitment and retention. Um,
and we got, we took a field trip
to Utah. In Utah, um, 25 years
ago, their governor in
collaboration with their
legislative body, um, they were
coming out of a consent decree
similar to our lawsuit. Kevin S
is not a consent decree. Kevins
is a settlement, but they
found themselves in a similar
situation. Um, and we know that
in New Mexico, we won't know
that nationally 1 in 3 foster
parents will quit within their
first year.
New Mexico has unique challenges
that make that even harder.
Um, and so learning from Utah 25
years ago, their governor
created a bold experiment to say
how can we better support foster
parents, recruit and retain
them. Um, Utah today has a very
successful model. They have
never had a child spend the
night in the office. And so
we're, we're excited about this
task force.
Thank you. Anybody in the
audience in support.
And one in support. How many on
Zoom?
Nobody will know, he doesn't
want to talk. He's telling me
no.
Uh
We do have an amendment, can
have a motion to adopt the
amendment for discussion
purposes. Motion by center ran
2nd by center Padilla. Any
objection to that motion?
See no Senator Tobiasson tell us
about the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm
gonna have Marilyn explain it to
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members, and this came
from Senator Charlie in Senate
House, um, because of our high
native population in New Mexico.
Um, she specifically requested,
we do have a native foster
parent, um, statutorily created
to this task force, but she
specifically also requested one
licensed social worker with
federal ICA or IFA experience
from an Indian nation tribe or
Republican appointed by the
Indian Affairs, and so it's a
simple addition.
Um,
questions on the amendment I
have some.
No, no, wait, wait, wait, um,
questions on the amendment.
I, I, I do.
So Indian affairs is gonna
appoint.
A
person from
So licensed social worker.
From a tribe Pueblo or an Indian
nation.
How are they gonna get that
appointment and how they're
gonna pay them?
And how many exist. I mean, I, I
don't disagree with the
amendment, I mean, in context,
in the real world, and then
there is no ding on Senator
Charlie but we have a lot of
members of tribes and poles and
boards of commission on, on the
tip, for instance, and the
Navajo Nation doesn't show up.
And now we have to have a
licensed social and they're
gonna appoint one.
I mean, what, who's gonna work
this for free, they have any
idea? We don't just say you
don't, then we'll I don't think
we, we've, there is a member on
the task force already, um, that
would be an if or if a person
with lived experience, so this
was her request to add a
licensed social worker. OK, that
answered my question.
Move adoption of the amendment.
It
2nd by center Bran. Any
objection to adopting the
amendment?
See none
Any questions on the bill?
See you have questions, Senator
Truhill and Senator Stein.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, and thank
you, Marilyn for bringing this
forward. I noticed that the uh
final report is July 1st of
2026. Are you sure that's enough
time?
I mean, I could see that there
would be a a report in.
July 2026, but it seems to me
like this might be a longer
process.
Thank you, Senator. Um, it's a
great question. So I was on the
Senate 5 Memorial Task Force. We
did it in 11 months. We
specifically did it for July so
that for budgets for the
upcoming 2027 session, being
cognizant of all the rate
increases and potentially doing
something audacious, figuring
out one of the questions that's
come up a lot is should New
Mexico be a county-based system?
And so this would look at, you
know, um, really successful
states, um, in the 2027 session.
The idea of that date was to
give enough time.
For you all to think big.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. I, I just point out
that that that would then be the
end of the task force.
And I know task force don't go
on forever, but
But we can always amend it next
year. Thank you.
Senator Stein more.
Sure. Thank you, Senator Tobias
and I know it's a passion of
years and so good job on this
and your expert and thanks for
all your good advocacy.
I would just say, you know,
normally something like this is
is a memorial. I mean, I, I just
for what it's worth, um,
although we did, I think, create
a bill for the J. Paul Taylor
task force, just interesting
little history. And then, but
then they tried to reauthorize
the bill. It's just a, it's
little, little unique, um, but
I'm gonna support it, of course.
Um, does CYFD support it?
chair, Senator.
Um,
we have shared this with CYFT,
um, their analysis is super
friendly, so they're not here. I
was surprised, but, um, you have
in your budget 1.25 million and
grow for the three years, like
we need foster families. I wanna
say just for you all to know
cause I know this has been
something on top. Utah.
When we were there, their foster
families, they have a foster
family shortage. They don't mix
cases. So one foster family has
the same sibling group, like we
have such a shortage that, and I
think you spoke about it the
other day, you can have 6
different siblings. Utah has
figured out such a successful
way that one foster family has
one case at a time. They were.
So anything we can do, um,
Yes, let's keep doing it.
Thank you and um.
Mr. Chair, Senator, on page 3
here, the task force shall
conduct a bold experiment.
What's a bold experiment?
Wow, what do you envision as a I
can answer that, Mr. Chair,
Senator Steinborn you had
something in mind.
Well, we put that terminology in
because I'll give you an example
of a bold experiment is not
taking children out of the CYFD
offices at Christmas, so that
the CYFD caseworkers can go home
to their own families and
sending our foster children to a
cold empty jail.
So we're asking for the
legislature to please look at
this differently.
We, we have to do better for our
children in Big and bold is also
to get your attention and to
help us all have the permission
actually to think differently
and to look at programs like
Utah's so that we can do better
for these children. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. You may, you may want
to consider something a little
more specific. You have in mind
what that bold experiment could
be and you put it in terms of a
negative, like, don't do this.
When we start with that. But I
think you maybe have something
proactive and positive in mind,
that actually you could direct
the department to consider.
And that might actually get you
something more like what you'd
like to see happen, if you
create it. So I'll just throw
that out there because this is
kind of language that doesn't.
It means something to you, but
it
It doesn't mean much
legislatively, so I'll just
leave it at that. I support the
bill. You, you're welcome, Mr.
Chair and Senator, let me just,
uh, ask you to look at page 3,
section E, that is one of the
descriptors of what we're
talking about for big and bold.
Just so you know, it is there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So just to stand that point big
and bold also has like I'm I
turn the page, look at the bill.
It has things that you.
OK, this one Senator Sindo.
I think was chairman of Senator
Avison, just a quick question,
clarification, looking at your
amendment.
And looking at the
Substitute.
On the first page we struck 16
and added 17.
And then your next uh is to
insert.
12, but it doesn't say anything
about striking what's their
currently.
Um
Or are we deleting the, the 12
that's on here because
It's a little different is this
a tribal member and then your
amendment says social licensed
social worker.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Shindo actually, Senator Charlie
asked that it just be in
addition, not a strike in an
addition. So she wanted both
there. Oh, OK, so, so, so this
will be 12 and then you just.
OK, OK, that's good. I was just
wondering if we needed to
because it's it's
Yeah, it's almost the same
except the insert is somebody
with a licensed social worker.
So you have two tribal members,
one that has the lived
experience and then the other
one would be a social worker
with similar experience.
That's what I'm doing. OK, all
right, thank you. I'm fine with
that. Thank you.
Thank you. I think we're gonna
do pass motion by me, second by
center.
But in cholera.
Senator Brent, Senator Brant
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes, Senator Linier.
Senator Padilla, Senator Padilla
Bosia, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin. Senator
Tobias, Senator Trujillo.
Yes, Senator Woods.
Senator, Senator,
Senator Shino votes yes. Senator
Lanier. Yeah.
Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz votes yes, we have
a Du pass 10 in the affirmative,
0 in the negative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members. Thank you.
OK, we'll move on to, uh, you
wanna do 138 1st?
So it be 138 Senator Munoz.
Mr. Chairman, let's do 2225. OK,
and I know Senator Padilla wants
to get the state police a head
start on his way home so he
doesn't get a ticket.
All the time
All right.
The amendment for this lien.
to build
225 strengths as public safety
environment protection.
Excuse me.
Uh, it deters repeat offenses or
we remove that, uh, first we
repeat offenses of littering
graffiti and traffic violations.
illegal dumping was struck out
of the bill.
Yeah, and, uh, judiciary reduces
financial burdensome on on
municipalities by shifting clean
up responsibilities to the
offender,
ensures greater accountability
for uh.
The current fine for littering
is $50 and proposes to take it
to 250.
That was
Oh graffiti offenses.
Uh, for damages under thousands
of petty misdemeanor in 150
hours with 6 within 6 months of
community services.
Damages over 1000 4th degree
felony.
Um
Excuse me, uh, improper use of
traveling increase the fine from
250 to 500.
Um
And I think that's the cleanup
on it, so.
Mm. OK, all righty, uh, we have
no.
Substitute or anything like
that. So anybody here in support
of this bill?
Zoom.
Anybody in opposition?
the committee
motion for due pass by Senator
Nodale seconded by Senator
Trujillo.
Oh, do you have a question,
Senator? I do, yes.
What was it a second? I do have
a question, um, Senator, it's a
simple question, but why did we
take out the illegal dumping?
We took out the illegal dumping
because the 4th degree felony no
matter what you did if, if you
throw them completely.
Um, Mr. Chairman, um.
Chief Deit now under your
littering then? Is that how you
go after someone that's illegal
dumping or?
So, uh, Mr. Chair, or, uh,
members of the committee,
Senator Brandt.
Um
So yeah, so this wouldn't change
the current illegal dumping,
which I think only applies now.
It goes back to the original
bill, which is only tires, as I
recall. So anything else would
fall under a littering and
there's two different versions
of littering. This one, Bill is.
Reference to the criminal
littering, so like if somebody's
walking around or litters or
where to throw out a mattress,
brings it more in line with the
littering that's under the motor
vehicle code as far as the fine
amount.
But to answer your question,
yes, that's basically what it
would fall back to now is
littering.
Thank you. I think that is
something we need to deal with
because it's a huge problem in
my area.
I agree with you, but I don't
think it should be a felony.
Um,
but we need to deal with it in
some way, uh, it's a little bit
more than just a fine.
Thank you.
OK, we have a two pass motion by
whom? OK. Gonzalez and seconded
by.
Mhm.
called the
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes, yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Linier, Senator Lanier votes
yes, Senator Padilla. Senator
Padilla votes yes. Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes no
Senator Tobiasson
Senator Tobiasson votesia,
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes, Senator Gando.
Senator Sendo votes yes. Senator
Munoz.
Centremonious.
voting? Yes.
No, Senators
have a 9 in the affirmative, 1
in the negative.
All right, thank you. Move on to
the Senate Bill 138 as amended.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senate
Bill 138 rooms the distribution
from the oil and gas proceeds
and pastorality to the
magistrate for pun and the
judicial fund.
Apparently those distributions
are $100,000 a month or 1.2
million.
Annually
When we originally did this in
Senator, uh.
Uh, Senator Engle did this.
Did this, we made the
distribution to shore up their
fund.
We were at 144% solvency.
The legislative fund has now
turned to 94% solvency and
though uh we need to fix this,
uh, the magistrates only serve
1097.
Magistrates and judges in the
retirement fund.
This fund has been, I think it's
currently at 50. Anthony's right
behind me.
Anthony you want to come up?
Come on up.
Is it Anthony
Oh, everybody knows you up here,
Anthony. Good morning, Mr.
Chair.
Um, good afternoon, good
evening.
Um, yes, the magistrate fund is
uh approximately sent.
Uh, funded and the judicial
fund.
Um, is, uh,
slightly, slightly better, but
not much.
So they're currently funded
roughly about 50%.
There's no way to figure this
insolvent. I think we have to
197 retire continue the
downfall.
We've shorted up, uh, as much as
we can.
First we go out to the audience.
Anybody here in support of one?
So be 138.
Right
Uh, Mr. Chair, um.
So this makes it a bit awkward
and and maybe kicked from the
table, but to pass along with
the uh the pair board itself is
come to this bill, uh, due to
us.
Uh, the chairman said that that
the funded ratio very
underfunded. They're also very
small, so well in the terms of
looking at uh.
Pension funds altogether, um,
$100,000 a month.
Yeah,
Bucket for, for example, the
public employees fund or the um
the judicial for the magistrate
funds. It, it, it does make a
difference. OK, thank you,
Anthony. We, we, we were in uh
those uh supported but I got the
opposition, but you, you jumped
the gun, so we'll, we'll make
that note. So anybody here in
support of the bill?
The
We heard the opposition?
Go ahead.
Alright
Mr. Chair Carl right, 2nd
administrative office of the
courts. We certainly have no,
uh,
desire to stand in the way of
legislative retirement solvency
uh as PRA noted in its uh FIR
this change would render both
the JRA and for that reason, we
have to stand in opposition, but
I'm happy to work with Chair
Munoz and any other member on,
you know, any other solutions,
um, certainly want to be
creative.
Thank you.
Anybody who's in?
OK, a committee.
All right.
In Britain and I was in Steinbor
interview.
I think you miss chairman and
senator. I thought when we did
this witheringle, I remember
when we did it, that we had put
a sunset on it.
I didn't think we had just
changed it and left it
permanent.
There
was a sunset, and now it's gonna
increase.
After this, now it's gonna start
drawing 3 million.
the legislative retirement will
drink Anthony.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brandt, um,
It was a sunset in the sense of
looking back in for the
legislative, so it was a
diversion at the time, 2.2, 2.4
million that was going to the
legislative.
It was diverted to these funds
which received 1.2 each.
Um, here this next year, the
legislative is the diversion is
gonna sunset, so that's gonna
kick in on top of that it will
be somewhere, you know, in the,
in the, in the, in the realm of
3.3 or so, so it'll be 3.3 to
that fund.
On top of the 2.2 that will
continue going to the other
funds as well, um.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
So this
I thought that we had like some.
Diverted there for like 4 or 5
years and it was supposed to
come legislative one because
that's
We figured we could afford.
Beef them up because they
Mm
Right.
Um, we did
Hm
And, and so this year, it will
trigger up to 3 million on
retirement even harder.
So we did that for 5 years, I
see.
So if you take the, the
rather quickly in the next.
Uh, right, Mr. Chair, yeah, I'll
add the the um.
That the money is needed to
begin.
Going back to the legislative
fund, um.
There's been some changes since
then and it is now um and so
it's, it is needed for.
that money to kick back in.
Um
The way the law is currently
exists, it'll.
It'll kick in
Uh, a double amount coming. All
right, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and, and yeah, I mean we.
do need to figure out something.
How, how long does it take for
these judges to be vested?
New Year's they have to serve on
the bench.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Brandt,
currently it's 8 years. I know
there's legislation this year to
change to 5 but in current law,
it's 8 years for vesting.
Like maybe we ought to move it
to 12.
Mm
8 years and they're gonna be
vested in this retirement, and
we know this retirements. You
gotta think about that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Senator Steinbla.
So it sounds like we have a
little bit of a solvency with
both, both retirements, it
sounds like.
Um, and now we're kind of like
shifting the pendulum a little
bit.
Maybe so.
So I guess I'm just curious,
like, uh, I guess.
Yeah, it's it's, it's a tough
one.
Precarious
What is, what is currently the
um
So the legislative return. Are
you saying it's at 94%, is that
what you're saying, Mr. Chairman
and Senator, when we did this 5
years ago, we were 100
we're at 94.
interesting. And then the, the
add something real quick.
just, uh, uh Mr. Chair and
Senator.
The reason
Because of the reason for that
drop.
is mainly due to the fact that
this that fund's been receiving
no money.
Since 2020.
Uh, it's been essentially
funded off of what was at the
time it's so much, and so is
that why we're doing this bill
is to start bringing revenue up,
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes,
that's correct.
OK, but, but the uh.
Then we start to decrease the
solvency of the magistrate.
Mr.
Chan Senator already ins so
they're 50% funded. They're
insult.
72 to 78% Senator Gonzalez,
correct me if I'm wrong.
So they're in a Mr. chair,
they're in a more dire
situation, I mean, in terms of
solvency and.
than, than the legislative one,
but both need.
Action, I guess, or.
Whatever, so
All right, thanks for answering
for the new members of the
committee. Anthony used to work
for the Legislative council
service. It was really a
talented drafter.
And now he's moved, as you could
see, smart guy.
Thank you Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
and Senator, we can fix this
solvency of the magistrate and
judicial.
We just ship that number if we
shift that amount, maybe 200.
Mm
200 between the JR and inside
the state general, which they're
gonna have to, we're not going
to increase benefits.
Which the courts are proposing.
We're not gonna shorten the
timeline.
Those are all key things.
The only thing that solvency is
reduction of benefits and
increased.
Uh, input into the system and,
and you're not gonna get there
with I have to move the state
general fund that may be.
uh, Senator Steinbora.
OK, uh, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. So I'm really
confused about this, uh, but it
seems like we're doing just the
opposite of what I hear you
saying we're trying to do.
We're, we're, we're like
We're cutting them out of this
distribution. We know they're
insolvent.
Who's this helping?
Mr. Chair and Senator, it
doesn't help them.
But putting more money in didn't
help them either.
They're so they're 50th
percentile of solvency.
You have to make reductions in
benefits and increased
employer-employee contribute.
There's such a small amount.
200 active members combined.
That you cannot make 200 members
increase enough to pay to solve
60 to 75% solvency would be.
There's no way you can you
reduce benefits.
We took this money in this hand
and said, you're over here and
we're going to try to help you
get up. It never did that. It
just, it on the bubble.
OK, Mr. Chairman, thank you. uh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman, because
what I, I, I hear what, what I
think I hear you saying now is
that this
Language that we're.
Eliminating was
Added to what it, it hadn't been
there before. We tried to solve
the problem and it's not solving
the problem. Is that what I hear
you saying?
Mr. Chair and Senator, that's
correct. OK. All right. Thank
you.
Senator Gonzalez.
Mr. Chairman, they, they
answered it.
So basically,
Uh, Mr. Chairman and uh Senator.
They were never in our plan.
I mean, so from the legislative
one actually stepped up to help
him.
And in the process of 5 years
ago, 6 years, 5 years ago,
Senator Ile, yeah, was send.
Helping them hurt us.
A kid, I don't have anybody
else, uh, and, OK, so what is
the pleasure of the committee
to pass Brent, seconded by
Senator Gonzalez.
The color.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes,
Senator
Senator Padillas, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes, yes,
Senator Tobiasson. Senator
Tobiasson votes as Senator
Trujillo. Senator Trujillo votes
yes, Senator Woods. Senator
Woods votes yes. Senator Shindo.
Senator Senator Munoz.
Senator Williams,
Senators, yes, we have a due
pass 10 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative.
Do you think you Senator
Steinen, thank you, Mr. Chair,
uh, Chairman Munoz, you're in a
powerful position, I think, to
Did try to do an amendment so we
can help out the magistrates and
if if there is a fix there, I
mean, I mean I realize it's a
big thing, maybe it's an
accession thing.
But, um, you know, I would like.
Anyway, obviously we need to
deal with that and uh.
Hopefully, we can do that and if
there's a great solution now,
hopefully on the floor.
So we could kind of fix both,
both situations.
It.
just respond to that we gotta
have buy-in for agreement.
But we can't solve through $20
million at this two years ago.
OK, thank you.
And we have a few house bills.
I'll just sit right here. We
have a few house bills that we
want to come in tomorrow and do
those an hour before we go to
the floor.
Show me a show of hands for a
note.
10 yeah, we could come in at
noon.
We'd come in and show me and
show hands for.
Yes. What time?
No, 12 o'clock.
At noon.
OK, we'll show up tomorrow at
noon.
You know will
Pardon?
Hopefully he's not long at
11:45.
Uh, we may add some more
tonight.
We're gonna discuss?
Yeah
Because I heard the opening
dialogue or monologue earlier
and
So
I know what my opening opening
monologue for today's committee
meeting this committee meeting.
I'm just curious because what I
said because you have about more
than an hour's worth of
Stuff there, so just curious,
yeah. Yeah, um, I don't know if
we'll go in that order. There's
some amendments that need to go
on those bills. We know that
Senator Shindo's bill has been
hung up.
In
Education for 3 weeks.
For 3 weeks, that's a simple
bill, uh, it, they've held it up
for 3 years now.
And so they want to play a game
of chicken. I don't really have
time to play chicken in my life.
There's a way to resolve issues.
There's a right way to resolve
issues. There's a wrong way to
resolve issues.
Uh, we have one week left in the
session. This is our.
And so we just need to figure
that out. I did make a comment
to the representative on his way
out, so let's see what happens.
Uh, we've, we've scheduled about
I can help you with your.
I
So we'll meet tomorrow at noon.
Senator, Senator Lanier.
is in charge of buying lunch.
Let me know what sort of Taco
Bell everybody wants.
I heard I could get a discount
by one of the Republican members
of the committee
adjourn in tomorrow at noon.
We'll, we'll rack up, we may
have some Senate bills that came
up tonight. We'll try to get
those out of the way first.
And then here's some house bill,
so we're adjourned. Thank you
guys. Thank you and chair, thank
you for loaning us the BOLOs
today.
I, I knew we were gonna win.
No fear, no
