So Mr chair committee members
will turning to page I just are
your to this point out here
number thirty seven the New
Jersey attorney general's office
this is for interstate water
litigation costs the attorney
general's portion of the taxes
versus New Mexico litigation
costly you'll see another a
request for their down the sheet
for the state engineer exactly
your recommended the full
requested six point four million
LFC is three million and I
understand I believe there's
been some some legislative
discussions on these
appropriations but we just wanna
make sure that they are your
funded at an appropriate level
but hopefully your helps bring
this case to a close.
Rebelo that you'll see item
number thirty eight or TRD this
is five million dollars to help
other departments as recommended
by the executive health
department implement any
significant tax change yours
something that they're working
at possibly in inner cities
costs this year is if our
recreational cannabis is passed
that would incur a lot of
expenses to charity and so this
this funding would be in support
of things like that happening
last wanted to point out on this
page is the last item there
forty one for DFA three hundred
thousand recommended by the
executor for informational
technology infrastructure
upgrades are this was discussed
with you it's as a potential are
section seven I do request but
they recommended that DFA put in
as a special so that's why you
see this here that's all I have
to the state thanks also chime
in on this the need for
appropriation for interstate
water litigation that another
difference was that the LFC
recommended the appropriation
come out of consumer settlement
funds rather than the general
fund and you know even since we
made this initial budget
recommendation we found we've
we've been working with the AG's
office and found that consumer
settlement fund really does have
a lot of money in it they've
they've gotten a lot of big
settlements lately I think it's
somewhere north of thirty
million at this point and so
it's probably some flexibility
to be using more about money
some of these litigation
expenses rather than state
general fund on this TRD one you
know it's interesting it's it's
really for any potential changes
that might come in this
legislative session some in the
legislation that might you know
significantly change the tax
code make do have T. R. D. check
have to change their software
system informs as a result you
know what the legislature has
done in past years to address
this potential need is
They've they've authorized to
just language not to an
appropriation the state board of
finance approved at
appropriation to the appropriate
that excuse me approve some
money from the appropriation
contingency fund to TRD in the
case that significant needs
arise so that might be something
worth considering here next.
And that's what I've got on this
page so go ahead to the next one
which is page six.
Seventy five million dollars
here the number forty three for
DFA for economic recovery
efforts you know when we are
building this budget we knew
that they were just going to be
significant interest in economic
development activities the
session this was almost more of
a place holder that the LFC put
and wonder you know thinking we
don't know exactly the details
of how legislators are gonna
want to spend money like that so
that's why you don't see any
executive reckon it probably
will change between now and the
next time you see the
spreadsheets
we also want to note here on
item fifty one we've got excuse
me ten million dollars
appropriation for broadband
expansion to do it
broadband's obviously of
interest this year the executive
made a similar recommendation
for special appropriation there.
And then finally this number
fifty five this three million
dollars to the secretary of
state for the costs of
conducting a special election to
fill congressional district one
vacancy I was a request that
came in late necessarily they
didn't know that the election
was coming we're building these
budgets and and now they do so
it's it wasn't in the LFC Recco
although I believe it's
something that C. staff support
spending.
Do you have anything else on
page six yes thank there are
thank you with that special
election requests there are
something that the executive
would support as well again as
Micaela said was that was a late
request so that's why I was not
able to be included by the
executor but since that election
is going to happen we would
support them having the funds to
us to conduct it so a couple of
other items on this one item
number forty five.
This is a our appropriation for
GST to five vehicles I can see
the difference there is one
point five million recommended
by the executive on one million
dollars recommended by that LESC
from the
Both my in medications Madam are
there some concerns that that
might there might be some legal
issues where.
Stating that that are funding
source because the thank you to
much detail basically that we
got your settlement is
controlled by a process in the
funds are held to a trust in its
competitor and so GSD grid ask
certainly for the funds but it
might not be a guarantee that
they would get them so that's
that's one concern that we have
on that appropriation the other
one here I would point us last
item on the list item numbers
are on this page are number
fifty seven tourism department
this is for their revitalization
strategy to restart the tourism
economy once at the pandemic of
courses hopefully no longer with
us
so you can see that twenty five
million dollars recommended by
the executive big priority for
the forty executive so just want
to make sure that I was
appointed that one out and so
that's all I have to say.
Thanks.
Did page seven then.
a couple items on page seven to
note are this number sixty two
and this number sixty for both
to the Economic Development
Department sixty two is for the
media the executive recommending
seven million LFC at ten million
and our sorry excuse me sixty
two is for J. tap sixty four is
for Lida
the LFC recommended seventeen
point five million the executive
thirty do you want to note that
the
LFC capital outlay
recommendations also included
another seven point five million
dollars really does so in total
LFC is recommending twenty five
million dollars for leading
between the GAA in capital
recommendations.
also note this item number sixty
six here also to the Economic
Development Department to fund
outdoor recreation division
investment trails
the executive recommended two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
of general fund LFC recommended
a higher amount five hundred
thousand but instead of from
general fund from the youth
conservation corps fund balances
which they're sitting on I'm
pretty good fund balances and we
thought this was a good use of
that.
That's all I have for page seven
Andrew.
Thanks again I just kind of
related to that it also point
out the item number sixty five
million dollars for the outdoor
equity grant fund to provide
outdoor recreation opportunities
for legislative are at
relatively new fund created by
the legislature so that's just a
million dollars to I'm in that
funding here you do it's
controlled by economic
development department to give
them some more opportunities to
research send out those requests
so that's all I have.
Will move on to page eight now.
And he did all all note this
number seventy four which is for
continued work on the Carlsbad
brine well the LFC recommended
three million general fund for
two million from the corrective
action fund for a total of five
million dollars of expenditure
there
and also I want to know the next
three items this two million
dollars six hundred thousand and
one hundred forty thousand
dollars all to EMNRD these three
appropriations were all
and spied the governor's budget
that agency didn't wreck
recommend them and that's why
the LFC doesn't have a
recommendation that these were
all three items of that.
The executive wanted added and
then finally to note.
Number eighty here is is kind of
a sister appropriation to the
water litigation one at the
attorney general's this one's
just to the state engineer for
Water litigation costs with the
executive recommending a whole
tranche of five point four
million dollars from general
fund the LFC coming eight lower
at one point five million
general fund and another one
point five from the consumer
settlement fund for a total of
three million dollars.
Entering anything else on page
eight here yes thanks for care
are like just briefly discussed
your others starting from the
top we got item seventy three
for the livestock board this was
a million dollars recommended by
the executive if there are is
legislation passed.
I believe it's out there sorry I
don't have House Bill number on
the bill number on in front of
me but that legislation to
create and say let me inspection
programs so that's just putting
in a million dollars
appropriation there to to get
that program going at your such
legislation is in the and after.
I just want to add to the Brian
well appropriation number
seventy four there so the exact
year basically does supports
what the LFC is recommending
here so that three million
general fund two million from
corrective action fund I believe
there's other ongoing
discussions regarding capital
funding to complete the costs
are it is not the cost of the
prime well so that's why we're
the second is working there to
make sure that the expenses that
are needed to complete that
project are are covered covered.
And a couple others for the
state engineer number seventy
nine at that seven hundred and
fifty thousand recommended by
the executive for a fifty year
water plan another a priority
for for the executive to get
that complete and then item
number eighty one.
for implementation of pay go
server settlement agreements.
Including pumping that's at two
million dollars from the
executive one million dollars
from the LFC and there's concern
there that especially due to the
ongoing drought conditions that
the million dollars as
recommended by the LFC may not
be sufficient to to cover the
what the costs that are expected
their so that's all I have to
this page.
Thanks.
Moving on to page nine.
we know two languages here for
the aging and long term services
department the executive
recommended that we have not
reverting language for the aging
network division and they'll
don't projected for services
division for the aging network
LFC didn't recommend the sewer
executive adds thank you know
generally non reverting language
use after member takes a little
bit of power away from the
legislature to be able to re
consider budgets and funding
every year.
this very last one on this page
add to the developmental
disabilities planning council
for guardianship LFC recommended
nine hundred fifty thousand
dollars for that one the
executive.
You got anything else on that
page just briefly on the on the
language items for aging that
the executive recommended these
basically because there isn't
some uncertainties going on with
these programs at the gym
Department both related to
starting receive Medicaid
expenses I believe in that adult
protective services division and
then we're on the way pandemic
conditions were aging network
and whether services can be
provided during such as adult
daycare and things like that so
I think that the the rationale
was that your staff if they're
able to keep some of the funding
and they will have more funding
available down the line and
we'll kind of extra help to
address some of those on going
certain suits and timing issues
so that's eleventh street yeah I
think Sander that makes sense
and it reminds me of a point I I
wish I would have made earlier
on is that
you know this the the states is
most if you're sending you
senator so it's gotten a lot a
lot a lot of federal stimulus
money since the beginning of the
pandemic for COVID support and
it's looking like Congress is
getting ready to move to you
know send even more money
towards the state for a pandemic
support and so you know we.
I just ask you to keep that in
the back your mind when you're
looking at a lot of these
requests that there there's been
a lot of federal support for a
lot of these items and it's
likely going to be continued
federal support for them as
well.
So.
He just.
So we have a lot of language
here in particular on items
number ninety five to ninety
eight from the department of
health asking to have their
appropriations to their
different divisions the non
reverting
you know it's interesting that
will we'll see this in section
six that DH also asked for a ten
million dollar supplemental this
year so that means they've got
money in their accounts that
they might otherwise revert and
they don't want to but they're
also asking for more in fiscal
year twenty one that raises a
flag for a staff well that's
kind of what we didn't recommend
one hundred breeding language
here.
One item number one hundred on
the into the page here
again this is a.
A special request for the
department of the environment
for.
Comment expenses
again it's something we would
have hoped that some of the
providers really fun money that
the state did get would have
helped cover or you know for
future years the president has
directed FEMA to start
reimbursing a hundred percent.
State expenses for COVID
starting January twenty one so
there may be some of the state
could have that could be covered
by FEMA in the near future which
is why we don't recommend it.
Anything else for page two.
Yes thanks Micaela
You know some of the similar
rationale.
On the other department health
language request is giving them
more flexibility I believe the
most important one that they
really feels importance in that
dell developmental disabilities
how a support program that the
extending that language as per
the Environment Department
I would just mention that this
request was made at a time when
it looked like this the R. F.
was
Going to expire on December
thirty first.
And
So that was why they submit
those funds that in whether
anything would be available this
year for them to continue
spending that certainly so
that's certainly something that
and you know they've been
impacted by having to do all
these inspections and being
involved with all the businesses
affected by the by the shut
downs and all of that so that's
that's reason why they were
requesting some more funding for
that so I'll move on to the next
page yeah.
The
only paid number on the next
page on page eleven no
is item number one of three yes
to the department of environment
for drinking water analysis the
executive recommended one point
two million the LFC is it six
hundred I do want to note that
the agency does have another
four hundred thousand dollars in
their base for this purposes
well
And.
That's that's the only one I
have for this page Andrew have
any.
I'm not only have anything else
on the stage right.
We'll go to page twelve.
Page twelve the item I wanted to
know was this item number one
twelve the department of public
safety just because it's a large
amount
this is a special appropriation
where in the department's going
to be moving Senator
transportation officers out of
the
Out of the existing para plan
that they were in the the
regular plan for state employees
into the enhanced plan for
police and they'll they're going
to send back money to parent as
part of this
Our analyst Connor Jorgensen's
have a lot of back and forth
conversations with them and
they've they've.
They've come together on this
number for two point six million
dollars of
need to pay back period for that
cost.
When I have on the side this
page.
Thanks Miguel yes I think you're
correct we can come together on
that number for a private number
one twelve
I would also just point out item
number one thirteen that's just
seven point six million dollars
for vehicles and I have one
fifteen R. one million dollars
recommended by the executive for
purchase of our in car cameras
body cameras and some other
equipment for us yes.
I wanted to point one thirteen
oh two LFC didn't recommend
anything here but I did want to
note that there is two million
dollars and the department space
for but for vehicles as well.
See here page thirteen.
One twenty one here DPS comment
hazard pay you know
this is this is an executive
that they came after the LFC a
recommendation was adopted so I
think it's something we didn't
recommend a here but maybe
something worth considering in
the future
the same let's see here.
The same yeah the same goes for
we're going to move into the
Public Enemy Department ones for
this I don't want twenty eight
one twenty nine for a total of
four point five million dollars
general fund to PED for
emergency school supports and
cybersecurity now these ads came
in well after these these ask
you then well after the LFC
budget was recommended for
adopted in generally with these
PED one deal see you're gonna
see a lot of different line
items and a lot of them are
using what's called public
education reform Fund and you
know different staff scenarios
for how that hundred seventy
million might be mobilized so
I'm not going to go into the
details of of too many of these
items unless you want to Andrew
just knowing I think they're
still this budget hasn't been
heard in the house yet they're
still probably a lot of movement
on these items.
That's correct Miguel E. I don't
think we need to get into too
much detail on our public reform
what find items because as you
said it will be discussed
elsewhere I would just reiterate
those two general fund one
twenty one twenty nine items
those are two general fund
priorities the executive orders
want to point those out.
Will these are all again PED
items
There is a request here for
see here lost.
Item one forty two here to the
higher education department for
teacher preparation
affordability scholarships the
Executive recommended two point
two million dollars the LFC
reckon and I think it's
significant amount more but in
our fund transfer section and
not here in section five so
we'll go over that just a little
bit is there anything else would
just note on this page Andrew no
I'm good thanks.
And then
this will this will be the end
of section five that are special
appropriations I will notice
this last item to the consent
computer systems enhancement
fund.
So this line is a little funky
it what it does is it
transfers money out of section
five and for expenditure in
section seven for the I. T.
projects so this is the general
fund portion of those requests
so
you'll see that you know.
We're pretty close and you'll
see when we get to section seven
the LFC and exec are pretty
close on this recommendations
but just wanted to explain what
that line was so for section
five we're at a hundred and
fifty two point three million or
point four million for LFC one
hundred and sixty point two
million for the executive and
general fund for a difference of
about eight million.
So we can move into section six
now which is our supplemental in
efficiency request.
So.
This these these three items to
the first second third judicial
court you know the LFC didn't
recommend any or as much of the
amounts that the executive Dan
that's mostly due to you there I
am also vacancies those those
courts had or projections of
need that were lower than these
requests that we got from those
courts in any of these Andrew
no I'm good thanks.
So Sarah page.
Sixteen.
This big difference item here
for the General Services
Department item number one fifty
nine for a projected shortfall
in the employee group health
benefits funds he noted GSD had
the shortfall last year as well
and there was some expectation
that they'd be raising rates to
help cover that shortfall in
future years but that didn't
happen you know there's this
frontier also helps cover local
government employees not just
state government employees so I
think there's some interest in
trying to figure out how we can
get local governments to help
pay for their share of the
shortfall as well as state
governments.
And then also note this last
item for the state fair
You know the state fair had to
shut down because of COVID it's
not been the fair didn't happen
it's not been doing activities
that boosting activities that
are normally when a normal year
but it has been serving as a
pretty active you know COVID
testing and vaccination location
so you know we would have hoped
that some of the shortfall could
have been covered again by that
Corona virus relief fund but it
might be again a good option to
help to submit for female
expenditures in the near future.
I got anything else on here
Andrew.
Yes thanks just just briefly I
subcontract one fifty nine GSD
talking about local governments
I think there is there's also
some concern that local
governments have also been you
know hit hard by the pandemic
and the resulting economic
impacts already just want to be
careful about.
You know what whatever sort of
impact that might have on them.
And just to in terms of the
state fair appropriation I think
you know again.
This is made a timely seems like
corona virus really funny was
going to dry up and we weren't
sure of the no one was really
sure about what was going to
happen there might be depending
on what.
Congress passes in the next bill
there might be.
Might be some opportunities to
maybe as Micaela said maybe use
some revenue from any new
allocations to help kind of make
up that difference but that's
something that remains to be
seen.
Thanks Andrew we're coming to
the end of five and six year
we've got one more page page
seventeen.
all note on this one sixty seven
that's that.
There is a ten million dollar
shortfall
That was requested by the
department of health
I think we're still as a staff
waiting for some projections
that help back up that number
which is it was also executive
and which is why there's no LFC
recommendation here.
The big differences on this page
are for items one seventy one of
one seventy two both her page
for impacted liability is in
fiscal year twenty one and
twenty
The federal government
tentatively approved our fiscal
year twenty one credits and
impacted and so that was a
liability that there is concern
would be there but hasn't
actually materialized
twenty this number this twenty
point twenty one million
essentially is the difference
between impacted the total
impact a liability which is
almost sixty million and what's
already in the state support
reserve fund that was plugged in
there by and legislators and
that.
During the special session so
that's the difference in the
recommendations there.
So that would bring us to the
end of section six where LFC
recommended twenty eight million
in supplemental deficiency
general fund appropriations and
the executive was at a hundred
and thirty seven point eight.
Yes thanks Micaela does not
provide item number one sixty
four that's for the spaceport
Authority one point seven
million recommended by the
executive healthcare shortfall
that's mainly.
There was a recent ruling
basically are finding that that
G. R. that spaceport wasn't able
to use DRT in mortgage cover
their expenses so that's kind of
making up for that and then
terms of that department health
shortfall that is a very
important priority for the
department to make sure that
they have sufficient funding
across their programs to
continue to operate during the
pandemic and so that's something
that they'll be definitely be
working on with with us and LESC
to make sure that need is
communicated so that's all I
have to say.
We wrap up section five and six.
The committee to fast forward to
the very last page of this
packet page twenty five.
we're sorry to page twenty
fourth second.
Second to last and I'll just
talk about because these are
part of the LFC recommendations
but not necessarily the
executives but they're still
pretty big one time spending
items the section nine is that
roads that special
transportation appropriation
section that I mentioned the LFC
has hundred fifty thousand
dollars for state roads and a
hundred thousand dollars for
local roads there.
And in this section ten after it
is that fund transfer section
which acts a lot like a special
that is a little bit different
mechanics and then it moves
money from the general fund to
the specific funds so the LFC
recommendation includesd three
hundred thousand dollars there
for the Filipendula make its way
into the unemployment trust fund
twenty thousand dollars for
early childhood education and
care
on that next page you'll see
that.
Teacher about practicing ability
scholarship funds twenty million
and all together that's there's
three hundred seventy five
million dollars in the LFC
recommendation there the very
end there you've got a sum up
we'll go over IT appropriation
special next that this is a sum
up of all that back in the bill.
Spending from the LFC and
Executive recommendations so Mr
chair if you'd like we can.
I go to questions about six or.
We could also just move right
into section seven if that's
easier.
We're going to move into section
seven.
Will hold all the questions to.
Thank you senator and so for
section seven I'm going to say
about Dr Miner for his
colleagues Mr Simon Miller who's
a they do it and I. T. analyst
over at the department of
finance and administration.
Let's see here.
In your packet to page eighteen.
So eighteen again starts are
section seven appropriation
you'll see all the probation in
this other state funds category
because as I mentioned earlier
there's a section of section
five minutes the general fund
for this into computer systems
enhancement fund hence making it
other state funds so that's why
you'll see all the spending
their.
You know LFC and exec we're
we're really close on the
section seven recommendation
there's only a very few little
items and different so I'll just
go over those and then turn it
over to Simon for any other
comments
So on page nine there's nothing
on page eighteen on page
nineteen
this one ninety nine for the
early childhood care department
I'll just note it's just
extension language I think there
was just a typo on our part at
the at the onset extending it
through fiscal year twenty three
usually on extend these
appropriations for one year so
that executive recommended only
through FY twenty two and that's
a good that's a good idea the
LFC supports that.
and there's another item.
Previous as well.
The biggest difference between
the two recommendations are on
this item number one ninety nine
at the.
At the bottom of page twenty for
the department of health to
continue the implementation of a
consolidated pharmacy system
there.
The executive recommended the
full amount of three point five
million where LESC was only at
four hundred and forty two
thousand I believe that's at a
level that our analysts thought
was adequate to support the
initiation initiation and
planning phase of that project.
Note that you'll see a bunch of
language here that says
executive that extending past
appropriations these were mostly
just requests that came in from
the department of health mostly
and they came in late
but so there is the executive
recommends that in the LFC does
to.
And they weren't in our original
recommendation for the bill I
think that's all I want to cover
for section seven Simon do you
have anything.
yeah thanks Micaela good
afternoon Mr chair members of
the committee again my name is
Simon Miller and I'm an analyst
at the FAA
like Micaela party said the LFC
and Executive recommendations
for I. T. appropriations are
very similar LFC recommendation
totals fifty six point five
million seventeen point six
million of which is general fund
for eighteen IT projects across
thirteen different agencies
the executive recommendation is
about two million higher
totaling fifty eight point eight
million nineteen point eight
million of which is general fund
for nineteen projects across
fourteen different agencies
what kilo RT said the major
difference between the two
recommendations relates to that
item number one ninety nine
which is the department of
health consolidated pharmacy
system project
I don't want to take up too much
of your time here so I'll just
go ahead and focus on that
project since that's really
where the major difference was
for section seven.
So
at the O. H. there are currently
three separate and distinct
pharmacy records in management
systems across I DO H. health
care facilities so this project
seeks to replace these three
pharmacy systems with a single
platform
this project has many benefits
first and foremost the new
system will allow for inter
operability between the O. H.
division's allowing for proper
records management as patients
are transferred between
different healthcare settings.
Additionally having a single
system will resolve the current
issue of staff expertise being
isolated to the specific system
that they work on.
the project will also lead to a
reduction in medication errors
and will be more cost effective
as it will be less expensive to
manage one system as opposed to
three separate systems is the
department currently it
currently has to do.
overall the executive
recommendation fully funds
agencies requests there three
point five million to keep the
agency on its projected timeline
of project completion in FY
twenty three the LFC
recommendation provides partial
funding of four hundred forty
two thousand which would delay
full implementation until at
least fiscal year twenty four
assuming that the agency
receives an additional
appropriation next year.
and and that's that's all I have
for a section seven so I can
turn it back over to you Micaela
order to the committee for
questions are you want to do it.
Thanks same and I I think I'm
I'm finished and ready for
questions if that's alright with
you Mr chair.
Mr Chairman Mr Chairman are you
there.
The chairman and then also you
there I think the reception was
really bad for he was yeah okay
all righty well let me see yeah.
The representative Gonzalez.
Are you there.
Things like the something went
wrong here everything is like
blank and stuff on the screen
Senator Gonzales.
Okay center there right now
yeah.
Senator Gonzales are you there
did you
go I just service.
And I have a question the.
Yes.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Americans also.
Thank.
Senator.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
yes I just have a couple of
questions let's go thank you
Micaela and Andrew and that
everyone who present here today
thank you let's go for a moment
to the early childhood Care
Department Micaela and they were
asking for a language amendment
having to do with the reversion
non reversion language our with
our pre K. program after the
private pre K. or the public pre
K. but apparently they're
already doing it but they need
the language to
To be in the bill can you tell
me a little bit about that.
Mr chair and senator Andreas I
don't I don't know the exact
details of that request but
yes if the if if generally if an
agency wants to keep its money
and not revert year over year
that has to be done through
language
Either for a special
appropriation section five here
yes they have spoken to me and
that means that I and others
from the house I knew they were
gonna trying get numbers
language in the House
Appropriations in this
particular area but I don't know
they have to have the access to
work on the education on that
are we education project right
now they will working together
with the appropriate and I
didn't see it on she.
That.
You're welcome thank you Carol
and I just have a question
General Services Department from
only and that one they are the
vehicles that in the thank you
touched on that the people they
requested I think there was a
special one million dollars for
that now and the LESC
recommended that well they did
didn't they didn't recommend
anything the general fund or
otherwise except for from the
Volkswagen settlement fund and
as we indicated that provide no
guarantees that the General
Services Department will be what
I'm gonna be on a competitive
basis and these requests are
hiding that.
Whether or not they get much for
the week off and we heard as a
presentation from and while
backing will be very all right
that is the work our results to
differ Center higher percentage
had over one thousand miles
lower pool fell I just wanted
that like that and
we think we want with everything
going on.
Heart breaking down and always
out there so thank want to
mention that then also on the
I see it on there maybe you
haven't won by pretty fast hello
but on their request for
thirteen point five million for
the year employee health
Programs it's not general fund
request there's no impact
general fund on that as we now
this is merrily they need
authorization to spend the money
they have because the funds come
from other sources from ways and
as we know this apologies and
their employers and nine on so
I'm is that in there I didn't
see it Senator actually is a
general fund request at two
point five million.
Sixteen of your packet okay look
at it supplementals yeah that
thirteen point five seconds
right is is the general fund
request okay it was my
understanding that that funding
comes from the present their
presentation while back that it
comes from municipalities are
ending in four years and someone
not specifically from the
general fund that there have the
funds
they would need to distribute
can we check into that place to
make sure that we're on the same
page.
Yes will double will double back
with you on that for sure thank
you very much Sir Senator I I
believe what you're talking
about is pertinent to the FY
twenty two operating budget
where the executive was about
that amount higher than the LFC
and I agree with your analysis
for twenty two from other state
funds but this is a shortfall
for the current fiscal year
covered from general fund which
is different.
Yes it would be from twenty to
one fiscal year twenty to okay
that was probably the piece that
was missing there thank you very
much we appreciate that you.
So one of the thing on the box
working.
Yeah that methodology it might
use when you successfully to get
the public school capital outlay
fund funded to buy school buses
from the Volkswagen settlement
so it is a little more work but
I I think it's reasonable to try
to get agencies to do a little
more work in order to save
general fund and we know that
method has worked in prior years
that way.
Thank
for explanation I think we are
we will I have one more question
that is on the tax
Representative let's but have to
reprimand a lack and the five
million dollars that they were
requesting the dictator somebody
that
hopefully it passed unanimously
on all those other bills that
day yeah impute more work for
tax Rapp they just want to make
sure that we have some funding
to our in order to accommodate
requirements on and so I think
we came out or someone else
mentioned about the possibility
of getting that on the from the
appropriation contingency fund
to the state for finance and
that would be fine to just so
they are we have the ability to
to do their work because we have
not by that mandate many times
passed legislation.
Department can't do it thank you
I think that is one more victory
that the first initial that went
on to the first initial letter I
guess it went by fast and I
don't have that she right Madam
yeah glance you just give me
that number make him up for the
first judicial district from the
executive and the LESC.
See here.
Supplemental you want to go
ahead and.
Of course Mr chairman Senator
Rodriguez yes the peach for you.
I like to make sure government.
Fifteen you don't have.
Okay so for the first initial
District Court by the shortfall
that they requested for the
judgeship with improved any
twenty twenty regular
legislative session.
West was four hundred eighty
nine thousand which the
executive recommended people
about the LFC recommended ninety
thousand and LFC analysis came
up with that number you're
looking at funding agency rates
on the court and looking at
their outlook your budget
projections so it's it's pretty
close
One and half right of the house
issues that that what is the
budget for the remainder of the
fiscal year.
Okay all right Google will not
look at that she did you have
thank you so much more that's
all I have Mr chairman thank you
very much Hey you know very well
we'll go to loan Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman would you
skip over me and take me out for
the next speaker please.
Okay Senator Burt thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
makayla thank you that all of
you for the report.
few questions a.
First off you mentioned that the
AG's office has a money that
about thirty million dollars
that they received from from I
guess winning lawsuits is that
correct.
Consumer settlement fund which
is monies that they get from
settling lawsuits where it goes
into they my understanding and
Amanda might want to clarify is
that that they need settle the a
couple of major lawsuits in the
last couple of months this year
that is and led to a lot of
money going.
And that's wonderful that's okay
I just I just wanted to know if
that was actually money they had
in the bank or is that lawsuits
that they wanted we're gonna
wait for weeks months or years
to collect that money depending
on where it's coming from.
Mr chairman senator Byrd so the
projection of about thirty five
million that's not that that's a
projected amount by as of
yesterday the cash balance for
the Attorney General consumer
settlement fund with about
thirty two million they just
here to really excel at
yesterday so there is about
thirty two million available
right now.
Okay great.
Mr chairman
let's see
What.
D. O. H..
Do they have a lot of money in
reserves right now I mean
they're asking for a lot of
money but did.
And they depleted all the
reserves or do they have
reserves.
That's a good question I think
David might know more.
Particular answer but they must
have some because they're asking
for a lot of non routing
language so that their
appropriations that they do have
will go back to the general fund
so they need to have some and
David is that correct.
Okay Mr I I guess the reason I
ask is is it seems like a.
In in this I do maybe I get some
clarification from David or
someone.
We had the special session to
shore up the budget last year we
took what seven hundred sixty
million dollars from the COVID
relief money put it into short
the budget and now I see
certainly the O. H. what other
agency asking for money to
compensate for the the COVID
issue
it it is there any money left in
in that seven hundred sixty
million dollars to be spent at
all.
Is there any other sources for
this so we spent a short the
budget but it actually and
really go to into areas that it
that it would have gone to under
normal circumstances is that a
fair assumption yes this Senator
wrote the the seventy six year
so was committed.
Full that from April cares I do
think we want to look to the
December I'm the best act of
Congress which took to look at
any other places that additional
Pirtle Rovers are coming in
we've talked with the FAA about
the importance of updating
budget projections from the
department of health to get a
better handle on the need and
DFA is a great to find that so I
would do this is a work in
progress and finally we have.
The potential of another round
of federal stimulus coming in
you know one point nine trillion
for the United States of which
New Mexico could easily get a
billion dollars or more for many
different directions so we wanna
look at all these factors
before of back before we would
suggest you look at these
factors before committing more
general fund.
Okay all right thank you for
that I just think there's so
much money flowing right now and
and.
I guess I'm being stingy I don't
want to put but additional
taxpayer dollars into these.
The department of funds if we
have federal money coming.
You know to cover the cost of
some of this a COVID issue.
let's see back online one forty
five of of the the budget
there's fifty million for PED
pilot program for additional
twenty five days and I did I
understand and I'm sorry I don't
have enough information is
looking for one it's was my time
up.
is that fifteen million dollars
are we recommending that as well
as the exact is recommending
that.
Mr chair senator Byrd's the LFC
recommended that from the public
education reform Fund The
executive.
Okay all right.
Thank you so.
One more thing about the federal
funds last week we learned that
female waved at twenty percent
match requirement for
expenditures and many state
agencies right so we had to
spend that money in the last ten
months to match the most
requests that went to many
agencies and now we are relieved
of that obligation of the twenty
percent so that's one more area
we want to look to see if those
funds that are freed up can
address the kind of need your
pointed out and now.
And that's fine I I may have
some other questions as we go
through the process but I I just
wanna make sure that we're
tracking whatever federal funds
are coming down or that we have
so that we're not doubling up on
taxpayer dollars and and making
sure we're making efficient use
of of our money as well as the
federal money so all all defer
to some other folks right now
and I may have some of the
question before the end of the
session thank you Mr chairman.
Very well thank you Senator
berdoa Senator Steinborn you
ready now sure I..
So I'm going to kind of pick up
or Senator Burt laptop.
You know what all the federal
money coming down the pike the
ability to what about general
fund for for those by.
Mr Abbey and anyone else how do
you do that Representative
timing perspective fitting into
recession.
Getting the.
If we have the opportunity to
swap out general fund report
coming federal funds.
First you chair and senator
sideboard
trying to pin down Congress on
exact date of anything so that
guessing game but.
They have both the house and
Senate have started the what
they call the budget
reconciliation process the house
where they did the app framework
among their committees those
committees report back on you
know specific recommendations
back to the whole body that
state where there those
committees are supposed to
report back is February
sixteenth and so and it doesn't
look like there's a lot of to me
a lot of back and forth on you
know changing out that framework
a lot so my educated guess would
be that we'll see a stimulus
sometime in March
that will include significant
funds for the state.
Sure.
So thank you so with that much
money Mr chair
Yeah I would hope that our our
our goal and again year after
earlier I'm sure it is to try to
integrate that into our HR
Planning.
Before we finalize the budget so
that we can maybe.
General fund that our goal.
Mr chair senator Sam when he's
giving it a thumbs up if you can
yes Centers for ari I'm driving
I can't do it okay thanks well
that would be my goal to realize
that maybe but I do not the
budget normally but through the
process but
Right yes I concur totally with
what Senator bird that sure what
you are thinking as well so
that you could probably have I
just want to ask about a few of
the items on the left
dealing with
Dealing with the outdoor
recreation field.
And I saw that the LFC at.
Why usually.
Four more funding for trials
then all well that that
executive is at this point.
And which I support which I will
notice last than what they
originally asked for so I get
that just part of the
negotiating process with that
you know I guess I don't have a
question that you asked this
later on on this call what LFC
agreed that the higher amount
it's a it's a good
recommendation I will just say
Mr chairman I don't know how to
do anything other than give a
suggestion at this point are bio
just.
Yes but.
You know as we grow outdoor
recreation in the state of New
Mexico which is one of
the.
Gross sectors it outpacing other
sectors it's been pandemic
resilient and that's because
people think on and on Dr Torrez
is one of the things that we
think will be the first
industry.
What people are free to travel
but they can still maintain
social that.
You know investing in trials
it's just great for all of our
communities that we got a great
return on investment on it is
great for public health New
Mexicans get out on the trail so
I think
One just want to encourage us to
support that and Furthermore I I
would just as a little copy up
to that that your chair you know
the status is actively planning
this five hundred mile trail
through the heart of New Mexico
call the Rio Grande trail and
they're actively now planning.
Infrastructure on that trail to
be able to attract more tourism
to the state frankly and this
trial go through many of our
communities on this committee
report most
of it so it would be kind of
neat to explore having a little
bit language be for this LFC
higher trail number that maybe
it just to put this money
towards infrastructure for the
Rio Grande trail to meet their
and destruction needs that
they're planning.
And
So I just put that out there
that I but does work with
whoever it that's something
that.
We can maybe do.
And then
Finally Mr chairman I just want
to drop a little plug to the
outdoor equity fund which is
also part of what we create we
create outdoor office and back
New Mexico was the first day the
country.
To create this fund to get
judge.
Particularly lower income kids
the family may not have the
means to get outdoors to be able
to travel you know what gas
money and.
But not be able to find grant
and.
The outdoor recreation division
this stories of the the from the
Navajo Nation down there are
other Dona Ana County and the
kids they've got not forced
incredible and it's just such a
great investment in our future
and I realized the executive is
requesting one million dollars
she's not recommending anything
that you say that such a
special.
Investment for our state that
that would love to do something
there as well and that those are
kind of my main question at this
point well.
Sorry I'm gonna say one more
myself the tourism money Mr
chair at another meeting to
start thank I'm I don't I'm sure
the analyst covered tourism but
Yeah my interest there is just
making sure that those dollars
are being spread around the
whole state.
And
So.
Yet still continue to do more
research there and just want to
help us optimize that so we can.
Coach for them in all parts of
this great state.
And that's all I have Mr
Chairman thank you very well
thank you all Senator Steinborn
of next we have all Senator of
crystal diamond.
You Mr chairman I just want to
echo what Senator Steinborn said
I I to like to see this
investment these outdoor
opportunities I think we have
presenters that said that even
over the last year of COVID we
saw a steady amount of true
outdoor tourism in fact in some
areas there was an increase and
so I think New Mexico has a lot
to offer in that area and I like
to see those investments as well
so I want to echo what what you
just said but on the same page I
have a little bit of concern so
the the Economic department
of development department is
requesting a total of four
hundred fifty million dollars
for different film projects that
were not introduced when they
presented to us so I'm trying to
look back to all paperwork and
understand perhaps this is more
of a question for David on how
that then gets in here we've got
line sixty one line sixty three
line sixty seven are requests to
some of our filmmakers and in
addition with the massive tax
breaks that we already get this
industry I'm having a hard time
believing that four hundred
fifty million dollars in in
these film projects is a smart
way to get our economy back on
track with.
David I think this is just kind
of a technical question how does
how does projects make this
recommendation but are not
presented in the budget when
they come in front of us.
Are you are you Sir diamond are
you referencing house bill
eleven which are mechanism to
generate gross receipts tax
related projects that there was
an investment no I'm just
referencing a slide show in the
all the packets that they
presented to us on their budget
requests and then in this.
And then in this one on the
final they never mentioned
anything about about these
grants administered for the
black eight no projects about
grants administered for the lot
next or or the native American
projects so how I'm here.
I I I think on behalf of the
committee my comment would be
when they committee refused
these requests for additional
requests I think the committee
was very calm cognisant of the
generous tax credit thirty
percent plus five percent more
rural and west of the mind that
that was a very strong incentive
and maybe would be important to
prioritize other items that were
filled of spending well and I'm
glad to see that that's an
executive requested not to
respect a request on our side I
just all twelve visit with you
offline on how and I wish they
were here to answer that because
that was not part of the request
when they presented in front of
us and yet it's a massive number
in the request when they come
here but you Senator Diamond I
just a point of clarification
these numbers are and and
thousand so it's four hundred
and fifty thousand all together
not forty or fifty million but
very important detail.
It doesn't into your other
questions but just wanted to
clear.
Yeah that's an easier pill to
swallow regardless.
Thank you guys.
Amanda you have your hand up.
Mr Chairman.
His handout but I think I think
You Like dressed part of the
issue I was also just gonna.
For the Senator that sometimes
agencies when they present their
budget try to keep the
presentations strictly to their
recurring operating budget so
presentation you heard from the
Economic Development Department
focused on what we call section
for which is you know they're
they're overhead do they get
every single year section five
and six that we're looking at
today are one time
appropriations theoretically so
sometimes agencies try to keep
the request that you madam chair
really good answer thank you
madam.
Hey very well included to one
that more.
Mr chairman and members of may
just briefly yes I think they
they dress the concerns there I
just want to make sure
reciprocation of these are for
one fifty thousand total are
requests so relatively small and
yes that the agency or generally
instructed to not discuss their
special appropriation request
too much when they are before
the committees if I may just
briefly of the there's been a
lot of comments about the
incoming federal funds and you
know that's something that the
executive certainly want to look
into and able to
use as possible as I'm sure you
know that the governor's in DC
today you're working toward that
and I think we just need to be
careful that whenever any sort
of new funding comes in that
from the budget that it's not
applaud and stand in the in a
way that is consistent with what
is allowed for example one big
stumbling block with that crime
virus we Fund last year was that
cannot be used for straight
Revenue replacement had to be
used for you know at COVID
related expenditures so for
example that can be used for to
help the state fair replace
their route lost revenue or for
D. O. H. in more than their
facilities so we're hoping that
you know in the future us this
funding will hopefully be a
little bit more broad and how it
can be applied and used but
that's definitely something that
we want to look into and be
happy to work with that the
legislature on on getting right
thank you.
You know very well.
is there anyone else you
chairman I will I have a
question at this.
Yeah my hand.
No worries laced Madam was chair
go ahead thank you Mr chairman
let me just go back to David or
Micaela either one I'm going to
go back and revisit a little bit
what we talked about just
briefly on that employee on the
group Fund in our write it down
that we were time play group
health benefit program
and I learned that the request
is for general fund for now
because it is a deficiency it is
merely the fact that after the
last year is merely the fact
that the three percent that
would have fund up salary
increases that were we're sorry
the three percent insurance
premium increase that was
supposed to set in July first to
cover this thirteen point I
never took place because of the
pandemic and the governor
decided that it was not a good
idea of course to raise premiums
and so on during the time when
this hit so the we rescinded the
salary increases in the special
session the three percent for
the insurance premiums would
have been part of that salary
increase and would have
effectuated the thirteen point
five million so they would have
to be back before us but because
they didn't make we didn't we we
send of the salary increases in
the three percent for insurance
premiums did not happen for
materialise that's why the
decision to retain point I
ordinarily this fund does not
use general fund as we know this
program I should say the rate
paid by employers and
municipalities but that's why
the deficiency is there so I
just want to make sure we're on
the same page and we're looking
at it is to not fault of their
own that this thirteen point
five isn't there for the issue
thank you can you respond a
better Micaela or somebody and
we can just look at what point.
I think I think I would question
the recession right greet that
that the there was a direction
not propose a rate increase and
I think the LFC is concerned to
have the general fund which
accounts for we think somewhere
from thirteen most are asked of
the cost there are a hundred
percent of the cost of the
shortfalls it's not just that
about a third of the revenues to
respond R. one by local
governments but another child is
born by not general fund
agencies like the highway
Department so it's top with the
general fund which has this
needs and schools public safety
health to bear a hundred percent
of the cost of the shortfall so
the intent of the LFC
recommendations like that and we
suggested trying to find ways to
impose sure taxes on non general
fund users for sure over cost
sure.
Okay well thank you for that
explanation I just wanted to
bring it up you can set you
apart you have to have the
support group health benefits in
place thank you David and Mr
chairman all I hear.
Okay very well all.
So if I see any more hands.
yes.
Zoom Senator Gonzales okay very
well.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Hey David could you prepare
say she on how the cares money
was spent within agencies and
what they use that for and what
dollar amount they they got.
Yeah we we've got a few
different members membership
we've got a Micaela Fischer led
that effort on our part she's
not you've done it for cash
right Micaela.
A pretty high level.
For the December package and you
even have an estimate of Abidin
plan which could bring in
another billion on top of all
that so let Micaela consolidate
all that analysis and and get it
to your even this afternoon on
Monday.
Thank you and then then we'll be
able to do some strategic
planning with language so that
these agencies don't.
Spend dollar general fund the
next and when the out years ago
to be flat and let's try to save
all dollars use of federal
dollars first.
Especially with education
because.
Up do we have an what what the
education given the last cares
package even how much money did
they get statewide.
Mr chair
Welcome though in the last the
number on the bus got about four
hundred forty million dollars
for K. twelve.
And so that went to the this
school districts right much
winter early childhood to be do
we know that another I believe
eighty five million went early
childhood Mr chair.
Okay I'd like to see some of
that before we.
Really tighten up some numbers
at for the members I mean I I
want to get you familiar with
the language in behind behind
the bill so you know what's
what's going on when agencies
are requesting that they missed
and and samples of us
supplementals and in non
revisions but I think we're
gonna review this again House
Bill to again should be to us by
the twenty fourth it should have
been to us by this Friday we can
get it yet and so I think we're
gonna get the twenty for someone
to get use prepared on the
budget is we can't as we move to
some of these agencies.
So thank you Mr chairman.
Hey you very well thank you
chairman of Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My question
Zoom and.
Seventy three.
It has to do with state meet
inspectors and there's been
quite a little bit a talk.
In the state about the
possibility of this in.
I know we have federal
inspectors in a no we quit this
program a few years ago.
There's quite been quite a bit
interest in reinstating this
program.
So.
I guess I'm asking process year.
On on.
What we can do to help reinstate
that program.
Mr chair.
I have no I'm I'm David Greene
not only know what to ask your.
That we know there's a bill on
that.
I and the ask is in the range of
one to two million there's my
thought is if there's a dot and
desire to do it it probably can
be done in house bill two
whether the without necessarily
passing a bill but that's
something we need to.
Representative double triple
check we've seen in remained for
many legislators there's
interest in that the executive
at a million so I know that HSC
will be you've got HFC members
who are interested in getting to
the executive director New York
have sent a finance members to
one do the same thing.
Thank you okay I guess it was
process is what I was asking
that yeah thank you Mr I believe
the process is mostly are
amendments and incorporating it
into house bill two and just
ensuring that we don't need
separate legislation okay okay
thank you.
Okay very well.
I don't see anyone else is there
anyone else.
If not makayla I only have one
question and I don't have the
spread sheet in front of me now
but I think it was on line item
one seventy two of the impact
Kate.
And the so what it's showing
there are no would that be a
credit right now because you
have it on the right.
Mr chair
what the LFC recommended was
filling out money in the state
support reserve parent to make
the life of the not being able
to take credit for impact aid.
Okay very well.
Okay thank you I don't see
anyone else so then the with
that we can move on to our next
part of the agenda.
So.
Share.
Committee made the next party
agenda I believe is is the
department of information
technology is budget hearing.
normally we'd have our analysts
to do it analyst Jessica has
been doing this all issues had a
death in our family so I'm going
to sub in for her as best I can
so again Micaela Fischer LFC
staff
Simon Miller from DFA will be
doing this budget along with me
again and I believe we also have
secretary Salazar I see him on
the screen for the department of
information technology.
So it's okay with you chair I
can go ahead and share the LFC
different sheets and get.
Go ahead.
Department nations geopark is
the right towards turn it over
to them secretary Salazar so
agency heard this budget and
they adopted the LFC
recommendation or which is a one
point two percent or eight and
sixty one point one thousand
decrease from the departments FY
twenty one operating budget.
And that recommended decreases
primarily in person funding to
address the departments large
vacancy rate
and is another initiative to try
to decrease that you know
persistent vacancy rate but the
LFC and exec supported the
removal of thirty six long term
vacant FTE positions and the
department as well as the
transfer of six among programs.
You can see up here the general
fund the executive recommended
an extra three million dollars
in general fund revenue and that
was for cybersecurity
initiatives of the department
which in the past have been
supported mostly by one time
appropriations on the agency to
request this funding and issued
a note in the twenty twenty
interim for those numbers that
are on LFC might remember we had
a program evaluation staff
prepare a memo that recommended
that do it develop a state
cybersecurity plan.
just a few other notes do it
decrease their agency service
rates by three point three
percent as the rates they charge
state agencies and that red
salted and
one point seven million dollar
budget reduction for fiscal year
twenty to.
the executive and LFC
recommended eight point six
million for expenditures from
the equipment replacement fund
which is a three point five
percent increase from the FY
twenty actual expenditures.
And then
There's been a lot of discussion
of broadband I do it does have
some.
If he dedicated to broadband not
a specific office right now a
combined the LFC recommendations
for capital outlay and what you
just saw for special
appropriations together I have
twenty million dollars for do it
for broadband expansion efforts
so with that I'll turn it over
to sign.
Thanks Micaela good afternoon
Mister chairman reserve the
committee again on Simon Miller
from DFA
thank Micaela.
Pretty much covered everything
you know like like she said that
almost the entirety of the
difference between the two
recommendations is the executive
included that three million
dollars in general fund for a
cyber security assessments and
upgrades statewide on a
recurring basis
the the number of cyberattacks
in state and local government
has grown substantially over the
last several years in addition
to the concerns regarding
privacy and data integrity these
attacks can also be very costly
for example the twenty nineteen
cyber attack on the city of
Baltimore costs the city over
eighteen million dollars to
remediate and so that is why
you'll see that three million
dollar increase there from the
executive in general funding.
So with that I'll turn it over
to secretary Salazar thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on John Salazar
cabinet secretary designate for
the department of information
technology I'd like to introduce
my staff members real quickly I
have Andrea Martinez Martinez
our chief financial officer
Brenda frescoes project manager
that works with strategic
planning and quality assurance.
Organizer of the mobile funds
our general counsel Rajasthan
band our chief information
security officer Michael
Rohrbacher our acting director
for public safety radio and I
have Kendra carp are director
for office of broadband I also
like to if I can I have a short
little presentation I want to
walk you through real quickly if
I can share the screen here and
let me get to the item that I
need.
Can you guys see my screen The
presentation.
Awesome thank you so just an
overview of our presentation
today we're going to go through
our twenty twenty one
legislative session agency
overview and budget priorities
within that group we're gonna
talk about a and our agency
goals and priorities are FY
twenty two budget overview.
Then I'm gonna jump over to the
executive general fund
recommendations for cyber
security and give you an
overview of five percent to
cybersecurity I'm gonna talk a
little bit about the twenty five
public safety radio
communication systems and then
I'm gonna wrap up with
broadband.
As part of the do it the
strategic plan well we have I'm
sorry as part of the do it rule
we have to create a strategic
plan every year to identify and
set parameters force the
strategic I. T. infrastructure
in the state of New Mexico R.
for FY twenty one to twenty
three we identified this
specific goals we really want to
mature cybersecurity
capabilities and practices.
We want to enhance state
broadband technologies in
support support to get out
capabilities.
We want to modernize the state's
information technology
infrastructure we want to
implement an integrated public
safety communications network
and we want to develop and
deploy and geospatial technology
strategy based upon our
strategic goals we came up with
the following three priorities
that we want to tackle doing FY
twenty two.
We really want to focus on
cybersecurity going forward are
we want to expand our public
safety radio communication
system and we want to start a
new program for broadband grants
and expanding a broadband
throughout the state of New
Mexico.
On the next slide gives you guys
a little bit more information
related to the budget but I can
keep the budget numbers have
been covered pretty good by LFC
and all.
And DFA are what I did want to
focus in on the next slide is
cybersecurity all we did submit
this a request from the
executive for three million
dollars for cybersecurity we
anticipate to use it in this
format we want to spend four
hundred thousand on employees
services employee benefits are
one point two million for
contractual services our other
services four hundred line item
one point four for a grand total
of three million dollars again
this request came in from the
executive and we would like to
go forward with that
asked respectfully for that
recommendation from the the
committee today.
I want to talk a little bit
about what would be doing in
cyber security I hired a
cybersecurity security officer
on in may of this year prior to
that we didn't have anyone here
at the agency kind of did their
own cybersecurity thing but it
was it was important to know
that we need to centralize cyber
cybersecurity guru to really
establish the.
The strategy and the bill the
technology and the framework for
cyber security in the state of
New Mexico.
We've been using RiskSense for
about a year now and you guys
are familiar with risk since
they got their beginnings New
Mexico tech it's Sayuri losses
of.
Company has Wallace's technology
and what we've been doing with
RiskSense they do
an analysis on a quarterly basis
of all the computer **** and
forty five state agencies we
have forty one executive
agencies and for non executive
agencies are participating on
those counts or through the
course of the scans we
discovered
and we've we've analyzed almost
fifty thousand computer hosts
out there we do fill out the
defined issues on two hundred
sixty three host lab that have
potential issues we have a
hundred eighty seven apps that
happy eight thousand nine
thousand findings that have to
be addressed and then we're
dealing with threats on a
regular basis.
What we want to do with how
cybersecurity going forward is
one to develop and implement as
I mentioned an enterprise
cybersecurity program and we
want to partner with industry
experts to ensure best practices
are we want to invest in cyber
security tools and capabilities
to mitigate risks such as
ransomware and denial of service
attacks.
And the last thing that we we
are working on as well as
Connecticut continue to
implement cyber security
awareness training for all state
employees.
next I'm gonna talk a little bit
about public safety radio this
is another big priority for us
since FY nineteen the department
has been modernizing our
existing of P. twenty five
digital technology it has an
estimated price tag of one
hundred seventy millions hundred
seventy million I'm sorry do it
continues to upgrade and replace
public safety radio equipment
and systems as funding allows
our FY twenty two goals is to
expand service area to
approximately forty percent
coverage are we want to complete
on boarding of the department of
public safety the port
Department of game and fish
state parks and completion of
several major road corridors.
that some sorry.
The next slide talks a little
bit about what we're doing on
the twenty five again as I
mentioned it's a statewide
digital radio system on a single
unified platform we're.
Looking at coverage and services
are being shared by state and
participating local agencies
we're providing inter
operability between state and
participating local tribal and
federal agencies it's a eight
year capital project from FY
nineteen to FY twenty six.
Our potential revenue with
participating external agencies
this estimated at five million
dollars per year at the end of
the project completion.
And a deployment plan is a faced
approach for service area
coverage including major and may
and mileage and minor roadways.
Our area of state service
geographically eighty five
percent mobile coverage and
opportunity for local agency
investment are matching funds.
I want to talk a little bit
about broadband because there's
been a lot of discussion of
broadband and broadband is a big
ticket item for New Mexico we
did a study was completed last
year and and June twenty is
identified that a hundred and.
Twenty six thousand premises in
New Mexico that's homes and
businesses do not have internet
because they don't have.
Fiber or wireless running
through their through their
neighborhood what we want to do
with the with the broadband is
develop a good road map on how
we should roll out broadband in
New Mexico we want to establish
a governance structure that
identifies roles and
responsibility for everybody
involved in broadband all we
want to establish performance
measurements as broadband gets
rolled out we want to develop a
grant methodology there are the
areas throughout the state that
the broadband as we bring
federal grant money into the
state we want to be able to
identify and have some kind of
methodology so that we can agree
on what is priority as we roll
out those projects all we want
to establish bonding
requirements what is funding
look like because this is should
be reoccurring funding in order
for us to be able to solve the
gaps.
and we want to determine
strategies for technical
solutions there's a lot of
activity you new ticket out
technology that's being
developed and regular basis we
want to make sure we bring in
the latest and greatest
technology and the last thing
that we want to do is we really
want to focus on leveraging
state funds as seed money to
attract federal funding and
private investors vestment to
move and expand on broadband.
Moving on to the next slide to
the brought the do a broadband
strategy we have two areas that
we have to address the first one
is availability
and what does that mean.
Availability means being able to
find fiber to the home
then the next item that we
really need to address is
affordability we have some areas
of the state that are that do
have broadband going through
streets but our citizens can't
afford it so we need to come up
with a plan on affordability as
well we believe we have a vision
for going forward with that
items so are on the next slide
to broadband grant program
strategy again we initiate this
just meant that was completed in
June of twenty it identified
that we have a one billion gap
in broadband in New Mexico all
we would like to have a two
million state funding grant
that'll provide forty million
dollars a year for five years in
the state of New Mexico to
attract that's that federal
funding the state ranchers also
be matched by our worries that
individuals or businesses that
are being granted
funding and again the last thing
that we want to do is leverage
federal funds up potentially six
hundred million to be able to
bridge that one billion dollar
gap
so with that Mr Chairman my
staff and I stand for any
questions the committee members
may have thank you.
Thank you thank you for your
presentation and your time
Senator Steinborn year first on
the list.
Thank you Mr chairman secretary.
Good to hear you have not been
very good to hear you I have a
question let me check.
The card what do you think about
the proposal to create an
independent office of.
Broadband I think you're like
you're a.
Kind of in that role now in that
what you're planning for.
Mr Chairman Senator there's a
couple of bills out there Senate
bill ninety three and house bill
down that propose creating a
broadband office I think it's a
good idea because right now do
it has some involvement in
broadband but it's providing
broadband to our public
facilities right to our all our
public buildings are schools.
The state buildings etcetera but
board the gap is that is right
now we're we're the gap is that
now is at the residences at the
businesses and we need to be
able to expand our methodology
and what the hospitals do in the
Senate bill is it creates the
responsibility of the broadband
office it really tells meeting
the region's.
It really tells us what our role
is going forward and how we
should operate so I think it's
it's it's a good idea.
Okay and so but your plan your
billion dollar plan it and
It's.
Statewide it's largely the
residential areas that are not
covered right now is that right
your is that this new office
within very work on.
Mr Chairman Senator yes Sir the
this the strategic plan that we
did identify different projects
that be can be done based upon
their analysis they did a lot of
engineering they did a lot of
mapping to really define work
the on served our so we want to
be able to pick up that
strategic plan and roll with
that and the try to bring
technology in the areas that are
lacking.
Thank you and forget if you
Senator and I didn't see it did
you is that plan then sent to
legislators or is that something
that can be sent.
Mr Chairman Senator yes we can
send it out to you it's on our
on our website there's a do it
website for broadband and it's
one of the links in there you
can click on it but will be glad
to reach out to you and send
that to you personally as well.
I think that would be really
really interesting to see what
where where the where.
NFI deficiencies final question
do you with the satellite
broadband technology being
deployed now have you look at
that or and how does that fit
into this landscape.
Mr Chairman representative
that's that's an excellent
question we have been talking to
starlink about starting a pilot
project here in New Mexico are
we're on their priority list so
we are looking at a pilot that's
going to serve about thirty five
households in New Mexico we have
three or four sites that we've
identified that could be
potential candidates for that
technology and I want to talk a
little bit more about the study
because it identifies it has
three different strategies it's
really not fiber to the areas
where homes are clustered
together and fibers kind of a
proven technology and it's it's
it's it has decades worth of
life you know it could be twenty
years before I fiber has to be
replaced the study also and the
study recommended there are
fifty thousand households that
can be served by fiber.
The second strategy was to use
wireless technology wireless is
good but it has a lifespan of
five to ten years the equipment
has to be replaced on a regular
basis because the technology is
changing very much like your
home your wifi rollout routers
and modems they need to be
upgraded especially with wifi
being outside the the elements
to the weather except for a our
workers on that equipment so
wireless can reach about forty
five thousand residents.
So that leaves thirty one
thousand residents that can only
be access via satellite so the
goal is to to try to get
satellite to those individuals
and starlink is a very promising
of technology as that's going to
be rolled out but is probably
two to three years away before
we can see it expanded and it
has limitations as well so what
we're trying to do is work on
rolling out those three
technologies and to address that
need across the state is going
to take all three in order for
this to work efficiently.
Okay thank you very much for
that answer.
No further questions.
Most of the thank you center
standpoint Senator.
Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
number secretary thank you I I I
don't have a question I just
want to say thank you and
applaud you for your priority
list you know cybersecurity is
is paramount in any industry any
agency any government that we
have today.
In order are making a lot of
money creating a lot of havoc by
hacking into systems and
it is truly a a problem that we
we must address and I'm glad to
see that the state is.
Making up its priority in that
area we just talked about broad
banding in that last that last
mile as we call it trying to
connect the rest of the state
especially under the current
conditions of the pandemic in
schools from last year been
unable to be attended and have
to have their kids online the
last thing is is public safety
which is really hot button with
me I.
There are so many parts of the
state where Here saucer.
Or or any other agency officer
is opening canyon somewhere and
does not have contact New
Hampshire serve papers or they
have to.
Address of coal.
Whatever that call may be and
they don't have communication
they have no way of getting back
to other than that the house
that they're going to has a land
line and then have access that
obviously so I really appreciate
you in looking into that and I
know that is true out on the
reservation I also know that
it's true that.
Oftentimes one system doesn't
talk to another system.
You know you you're doing a
tandem call with the chair
Sanchez and state police.
And and they don't communicate
communicate with each other and
so continuing to put emphasis
into our public safety officers
and the tools that they
desperately need to to do their
job correctly is is greatly
appreciated so I just wanted to
say thank you for your
priorities and continue to work
on those and we'll do the best
we can to support all through so
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Burke Senator Burke I
apologize.
Thank you senator birch Center
what.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My question is is probably the
the stupidest question of the
day the sector.
Why don't we use something like
that's already out there like a
like direct TV or satellite TV
something like that.
Try to make a deal with them to
service some of these areas that
we can't.
reach with wire what you know
that why don't we use.
You're talking about starlink or
something like that why don't we
do simply use a carrier that's
already out there in production.
Mr Chairman and Mr secretary.
Mr chairman senator woods
There are some companies that
are the are providing satellite
communications and to provide
broadband but they're so high up
in the the atmosphere you know
way out there in space that
there's latency issues and there
are the speeds that they provide
aren't adequate to conduct
meetings like we have today so
that the new satellites are
being developed in our the new
technology they're called low
earth orbit satellites they're
just above the earth so the
licensee issue and the speedy
issues is eliminated by the new
technology the older technology
like direct TV that's out there
right now it won't give us the
the the speeds that we need for
the connectivity that we have
currently of the needs of we are
currently out I hope that
addresses your your question.
Yes thank you very much thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Woods in I
don't see anybody else on the on
the list.
Stubble checking your Mr
secretary what you're vacancy
rate at do it.
Mr Chairman
right now we have I I got that
information in front of me give
me a second we pull it out.
Right now our vacancy rate is
thirteen point eight a we have a
hundred sixty seven budgeted
positions and we have a hundred
thirty nine there are currently
filled we had two hundred three
but and the August September
time frame of last year our
state person.
Inactivated positions that have
been filled for two years so we
lost some of the positions that
we had we had a vacancy rate
there was like thirty two
percent but I what I would like
to take a moment to explain the
regular vacancy rate.
Do it has an enterprise
organization all unlike other
state agencies right we don't
get we do get a little bit of
general fund money but our our
overhead are costs associated
with our employees and all the
services that we provide.
We have to charge back the
agencies for those services that
we provide so if we have too
many people on board our rates
go up and our rates affect our
sister agencies so we try to
keep our our rates at a lower
level to not impact the rest of
the General Fund agencies.
So we we have that challenge
that we've had for many many
years on how we operate to try
to keep those rates low because
every time we pull out the rates
that the agencies
it affects them and and they
have a hard time paying for some
of the services.
So currently the.
Tell me tell me how many current
employees you have and and how
many vacancies you have.
We have a hundred and thirty
nine positions that are filled
and we have a hundred and sixty
seven that our budget to.
Okay and so how many am I I I
understand how do it works
I just hope you're paying rising
this time because that was an
issue with years ago.
in so tell me how many employees
you have just on broadband in
that division.
Is it is a division.
Mr Chairman it's not a division
and our current environment it's
part of our overhead costs are
to about a month ago we have to
one person Kendra carp that was
running broadband she was being
supported by our geospatial
Officer on guard Clark he does
all the mapping on our behalf so
we had one and a half
individuals supporting broadband
in New Mexico
since.
Our about September October we
requested to file approval from
CPO governor's office to hire
additional staff members we now
have two more additional staff
members in there so we have
three individuals and broadband
now not including our.
In in so let me and that this
may be a dumb question but how
do you find someone that has
broad experience or what
experience they have is it
beating is a contracting is of
how may I I I just don't know.
Not trying plans pottery I just
need to be educated on.
Mr chairman that's that's a good
question so our to our broadband
director Kendra part came from
P. SFA she helped build that
program there for developing
broadband and bringing broadband
into the schools in New Mexico
she's she has a lot of
experience with not just the
technology but with the funding
part of it as well being able to
find the requests and apply for
the grant money to bring that in
the other two individuals are
project managers because there's
a lot of activity within
broadband there's a lot of
reaching out to the community
coordinating events but.
What we're looking for when we
talk about the broadband office
and we want to build would like
to have a mapping expert that's
dedicated full time to that
because a lot of this is that
Leising were infrastructures
that were our citizens are at
how long is how what kind of
technology that we need to roll
out how far is that technology
could go a Sandra we also need
in our architect that has some
that work building abilities
that can design stuff for us so
those are things that we're
looking for as we build this
broadband office.
Good I'm glad to hear that you
know where you want to add in
what your needs are
I mean broadband is a big push
right now during the COVID
because everybody wants to work
remotely year has to work
remotely and so those are some
of the key issues I think we're
going to hear in the coming
weeks I think we're gonna bring
you back to to the Senate
finance along with some other
panelists on broadband.
If you had two hundred million
dollars today.
I do not answer this question
could you just tell me how many
employees you have how would you
spend that money.
How many years would it take you
to get two hundred million out
into the economy.
Employees you have right now.
Mr Chairman L. pointing back to
the study the study identified
projects that we could start
rolling out immediately I think
there's fifty different projects
throughout the different areas
of the state part of our
strategy is is bringing and
federal funding because even we
got two million to two hundred
million that's not enough the
gap right now is one billion
dollars so we need to be be able
to bring in six hundred million
from the federal government R.
two hundred million and then the
grantees that we're awarding
money they should be
contributing two hundred million
as well so it's coordinating all
those events to be able to roll
it out but we know the areas
that it with this the strategies
there and we can start working
on that.
That to to roll out the money
it's different and and I'm a
contractor so I know how hard it
is to lay things in the ground
and indignant sentient
infrastructure but if you had a
billion dollars today.
You still want to be able to get
it out for what time frame are
you thank you.
Our Mr Chairman our plan is a
five year plan we want to be
able to solve the gap in five
years you're absolutely right
you've got a billion dollars
we've got to dig trenches we've
got to climb poles we got a
string wire we got a bill a bill
towers we have to install
equipment it's it's going to be
a up you know all three to five
year project to get that done
but we gotta start somewhere
because we're so far behind the
eight ball and and where we're
at we need to move forward.
In.
And may be older but I'm not I'm
pretty well technical quality
driven right so it it I mean
there's availability with the
tethered balloon by the by a sub
orbital satellite right which
you can buy the cues for a
hundred thousand dollars apiece
and loginis space for another
two hundred so I mean some of
those technologies were great
use that does not work at all
that satellite technology that
they have is is I remember It
may be scandal Simpkins of
strings that is how well it
works
what other technologies are we
not looking at for some portal
for
tethering that that we as a
legislature should be looking.
Mr Chairman so you know there's
there's a couple of drop
projects that we're working on
we've looked at the loans right
now that's a good rules.
Our platform they were doing
that in Wyoming they cancel that
project a.
A month or two ago because it
wasn't viable it was viable as
far as technology but the
investment just wasn't up there
was in the pay off for them to
do that Popstars ink and the
lower earth orbits satellites is
very promising but just like us
rolling out fibre New Mexico is
going to take them some time to
roll out all the the satellites
that they need out there and in
those satellites have a lifespan
as well that the they live for
three to five years and then
they die and you have to pull
them up again so the
technology is constantly
changing the other area that
this looks promising and this is
something that economic
development is working on
there's a company in Roswell by
the name of sky and they're
doing chips right and the going
into the stratosphere and they
have technology this looks
promising but it's not proven
they're working on a pilot
project to get that done so we
are exploring every single
Avenue that we can we've been
working with cell companies with
and working with
you know starlink we've been
working with the team mobiles up
Verizon's of the world trying to
get solutions in place as
quickly as possible.
Okay I think.
Some questions I had I don't see
anybody else's hand race thank
you for your presentation your
time today we're gonna try to
circle back around to broadband
and figure out exactly what's
best for New Mexico what works
how we get there quickly in in
is quick as we can and and
figure out how we don't get
left.
Bearing stuff that's that it's.
Subject to transients and cuts
in wind and weather so we have a
live system in New Mexico so
thank you and and will be
chatting again in the next week
or two.
Thank you for your time thank
you Mr.
Thank you.
Before members get off at I want
to try to set up some committees
for the junior bill in center
share I think you're on I'm just
double checking yeah sure on yes
I'm here.
Senator sure so what I want to
do it the junior bear is and
want to appoint.
Two members of
Senate finance in Senator
SharePoint two members on his
site to start reviewing junior
bill money and when it comes in
the staff will help you gather
those separate help people put
their junior money in the right
place and and then I want the
the committee members to go out
there on and then we'll bill the
bill brings back the
recommendation and all added to
the junior bill and and send it
out of the Senate
so.
Senator Campos would you be on
that committee and chair chair
force and then the Senator
Candelaria I will also like you
on that committee.
You sure you want to thank you
and so
Mr chair for the for the
Junior bill I would like to get
both of Senator alright in
Senator Woods to look through
that and we're gonna use Senator
Diamond for some else more
important.
Okay so Senator Woods in Senator
a.
burn center Campos and and
Center compasses on or not.
In Senator Candelaria.
On Monday I'd like to maybe
visit with you guys individually
and get you with with John in in
Wayne in a dream that to help
you sort some of that stuff I
believe the email went out
today.
With the guidelines the the.
The forms for them to place
their junior money in that.
And so
The deadline is Thursday to get
him back so we can wrap it up
and get a bill in in may be here
at the following week and get it
sent over.
That'll be just about in time
for House Bill to to come over.
So we'll still working we're
gonna forms more committees with
house bill two we went over
language today because I wanted
to fill familiarize everybody
with languages and how it works
well we're also going to have a
language committee.
And to look at language that
that's coming on and so any
questions from committee
members.
No.
No I'm.
You're good.
All right I think that's it
Senator Rodriguez I'm gonna call
you in just a few minutes and
you to chat with you for more
about capital outlay in I hope
everybody enjoys their weekend.
You had a pretty easy week next
week we're gonna have to spend
some time getting caught up on
HSD so maybe if we can get you
the stuff for a couple days
early you can review AUMENT and
focus on your questions and and
not comments about where
agencies are headed and and what
they're doing but now you'll see
some of these agencies have a
language behind in the back
House Bill to.
And so
you'll you'll get a little more
familiar with what's happening
so thank you guys appreciate it
enjoy your weekend.
Just like all the shoveling snow
tomorrow somebody wants to come
volunteer center.
I'm sure that you'd love to
have to buy you a knit hat.
Well gladly do that.
Enjoy your don't wait on me.
Great senator Byrd at any.
Don't wait on me go ahead your
start okay I'll turn either
since I can all right I
appreciate that thank you guys
have a good weekend.
Appreciate everything you do for
us thanks thanks.
He.
