Where hi can't see this give me
a moment here.
Okay how many members do we have
with we have a quorum.
Okay so we want to start with
you and then you all follow from
their introduce yourself one by
one thank you for.
Very well a good afternoon thank
you madam chair hello.
Of state senator local Bobby J.
one side is districts six some
but for some of more Sen Mary by
Thomas thank you.
Next.
Madam secretary madam chair it
is bill Burke Senate district
thirty three Otero Lincoln in
Chattfield counties in the
Thursday almost Friday yeah.
Yes thank you senator all right
next person who is that is that
this state.
All right here required you
counties district seven all
right Senator thank you next
person.
Madam chair Jacob Candelaria
Senator for the twenty second
district is Albuquerque's
beautiful website at the by the.
Thank you senator okay next for
your senator bill sure from
Senate district one which is
Farmington.
Right Senator good afternoon all
right next madam chairman
crystal diamond from Senate
district thirty five in southern
New Mexico.
Right thank you very much next
person.
Who else do we have or not have
you're looking down a list yes
If you are we missing Senator
Campos are you here.
Hey health are we missing so
yes I'm bored and Hemphill Siah
Correa Hemphill I'm here.
Thank you your it is yourself
yes I am Senators by an array
and then fell from Silver City
Senate district twenty eight
which includes Grant County
patron county and most of the
car account.
All right I'm going here.
Senator Steinborn madam chair I
am here and it's great to be
with everybody I am senator Jeff
Steinborn at your service.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator all right US doing
Senator Campos once again are
you here Senator.
Okay we might Senator Campos is
here did I miss anyone the
committee.
Okay we do have a quorum right.
What I can tell okay great let's
get started then so we can we
have a long agenda now we're
gonna go and start with that
Senate bill two thirty four
lottery for home school students
and that is that Senator Pirtle
this is the agenda I'd I
received and that not Madam
chair Senator Parnell is not yet
request
Prepare to per present that bill
it's very straightforward only
take a minute.
Okay all right well we're gonna
go ahead and let you go ahead
and do it Senator thank thank
you guys he's been on the agenda
for a couple days this is a very
straightforward bill Senate bill
two thirty two thirty four I'm
sorry applies to full time
students who completed all
requirements of a home school
based or non public school
program so according to this the
bill addresses the fact that
home school students have to go
through an unnecessary
additional steps to make
themselves available for the
lottery scholarship all this is
doing first of all it identifies
PED has identified three hundred
and sixty six home school
students in the twelfth grade
which would apply to this and
all it's doing is removing the
additional step of of
requirements during school
students to have to get a GED to
qualify for the lottery
scholarship currently they go to
the all the other standard as
any public school student one it
in addition to having to
complete a high school
competency exam all this is
doing is removing that G. D.
staff that would allow them to
also qualify for the lottery
scholarship I did want to point
out as I just ran through this
the FIR is incorrect there is
not a fiscal impact statement
are impacts with this bill is a
net zero by simply removing that
G. D. requirement and making
sure that our home school
students have access to a
lottery school scholarship in
the same way that all of our
public school students here.
Thank you senator we're gonna go
to the public is there anyone in
the us in the audience Nathan
pro or against this bill madam
chair that members of the
committee that reside there
opposition and our support no
indicated okay thank you very
much members of the committee I
don't see any hands up to pass
madam chair okay there's the
motion for all the debate on the
bill.
Okay is this I don't hear
Loretta speaking so eight years
thank you senator okay can we
disco had Senator I don't have
your hand here but I know your
tax probably so go ahead and ask
your question Senator.
So madam chair thank you Senator
Diamond thank you the
legislation in removing the G.
T. requirement
from what I can tell state law
imposes without the need to be
very few requirements about the
standards or.
Quality quite frankly of a home
school program.
And so without the G. D.
requirement how is the state to
be assured that the graduating
home school student essentially
means basic.
Threshold.
That we have hold other
graduates to madam chair.
Thank you senator Candelaria
madam chair from what I
understand is that the state is
still requiring these home
school pro programs of which
these children are plying then
into the waters still be twelve
and so in here and it's also
important that the bill still
requires them to complete and
and meet our standards that
we've set for the high school
competency exam so that they
would be they would be required
to take the same testing
requirements as any of our other
graduating high school students
I don't believe that I'm looking
through this just as quickly as
you guys are I don't believe
that this bill addresses the
accreditation standards of home
school programs
and and how we assess that I
don't believe that that is is
included in any part of this
particular legislation.
And I'm sure thank you I I think
the challenge for me is the
current statute discusses in
twelve private school and not
languages struck and in the new
legislation just as or non
public school.
So.
I guess my you know it.
My concern quite frankly is this
and I'm sort of abstract madam
chair because I understand to a
certain degree these issues are
sort of collateral but.
From a policy standpoint
I think the state has an
interest in ensuring that any
graduates from home school or.
On a non public school which I
do think under this bill does
not need to be an accredited non
public school I think the credit
Dacian requirement is completely
stricken from the law and and
and and I'm sort of torn madam
chair and I appreciate the
Senator engaging in discussion
on this because.
On the one hand I understand the
lottery is sort of the right of
of of of New Mexicans right and
I I don't think it's fair to
exclude classes of students
right but by the same token I am
sort of thinking through
This issue because you know I
just don't want.
I I just don't want state
dollars going to and I'm not
insinuating any intends or
anything here I'm just thinking
of hypotheticals to a degree I
just would really not want state
funds going to.
Not twelve education programs
that.
Let's say like you know just.
Don't teach maths right or you
know you know refuse to teach
history prior to five thousand
years ago
that is troubling and that's
difficult so I know this is the
debate maybe no more I think
there are two different good
ideas competing here so thank
you Senator Diamond for bringing
the issue and for your responses
thank you very much thank you
senator.
Thank you madam chair and I know
that Senator share yeah stand up
and Senator you have any
questions are we just going to
stay with the motion that you
made earlier both Mr chair of
madam chair
Just to address some of senator
Candelaria concerns I I I
understand those are that much
there's two points here one
about forty I think it's forty
three percent of our high school
graduates from public high
schools are functionally
illiterate today.
So saying that you have to have
some special something from high
school.
It already had work the other
part of this is if one of these
home school students for any
student for that matter wants to
go to college of if they cannot
succeed in that first semester
well they're gonna drop out
we're not gonna spend anymore
money on so it's not really a
waste of money there because if
they can't handle it they just
won't be there so I I I don't
think that that's a I understand
the concern but I don't think
it's a real concern with that so
I just wanted to address those
those issues there are some home
school students that I know
there are incredibly well
educated in other states
What public school students say
they know about the same stuff
so I don't think it's a lesser
school of specially today would
more more parents are actually
teaching at home because well
you can't go to Albuquerque
public schools so
so I think this makes sense
thank you madam chair and I will
do that thank you senator and I
know you move for the past I
just had a the the question or
perhaps a comment before we move
on is that I I was happy to see
that we are making an effort
here to remove that requirement
I actually thought it was out we
had discussed the right that the
fact that
Home schooling requires AGD just
to get to still post secondary
education I I think it was long
overdue that that be removed and
so I'm I'm happy this never per
was bringing this forward but I
do have to say that with the
comments that senator kind a lot
it just made it seems like there
is a need just to clarify the
accreditation question on there
so this is what I'm gonna do I
don't want to hold the bill up
but because I think it's a good
bill I think we need to remove
the GED requirement from there
but I also think that you may
end up on a scene the.
A an amendment I would hope the
Senator Pirtle too bad he's not
here would be willing to work on
an amendment to clarify this
when it goes to the floor
I think it does need to be
clarified but somebody else is
gonna say something here I'm
sorry madam chair still work
I would second the motion the
motion the motion at madam chair
was about secondly to qualify
for college don't you have to
have proof of the GED or some
kind of a transcript or some
paperwork that says you have
accomplished your high school
accreditation and also probably
some SAT or ACT or whatever it
is they they use nowadays to
qualify for the college so I I I
think it may already be there I
don't.
Someone smarter in the it's been
awhile since I graduated so
someone smarter than I but I
would think to qualify for
college you have to have a lot
paperwork in hand anyway.
And why where yes but the fact
remains Senator that there is a
question here on the language
the way the provisions the way
they're written and so they're
good there's two options here we
could hold the bill here and
Senator Pirtle works on an
amendment to clarify this
because I do support the bill I
support removing that
requirement that is so archaic
anymore in their but at the same
time I want to make sure that
there's clarity on the
accreditation so there's no
problems of hang ups later on
our students are trying to move
on and so we can hold it here
for a for a day until Senator
Pirtle
decides what he wants to do or
we can just move it onto the
floor and put an amendment on on
the floor so at this point I
have Senator Woods I'm gonna
have allow senator which to make
your comments Senator before we
move on.
Senator Steinborn was.
A request in the a minute ago
madam chair and I would gladly
yield to him and speak after
here thank you I there's and
it's not up so I right now I
adequacy right but you
know I I'm still working out the
whole forgive your chartered
about my tech issues work it out
I'm not I just had the same
question madam chair along the
same lines as you and I I've
been doing some research online
I think the concept is about
equity in it makes total sense
to me I just I'm wondering what
a.
Requirements home school kid or
family has in order to kind of.
Have some validation David chief
the course work and I see on the
website the current talks about
it a little bit but that's all
so I just want you know ready to
learn more about it but
otherwise I appreciate the
equity involved in the bill so
sure that's what thank you all
right Senator Wirth madam
chairman I would the personal
guarantee that that will come up
to Senator Pirtle and make sure
that any amendment have you
talked to you personally and
make sure any amendment that you
see fit that that might need to
be in there for clarification
get that.
Get that done for you if that
would be satisfactory to move
this bill about today.
Thank you senator would let me
ask you a question Senator
Candelaria yeah and I wish
against their per was here
because we're we're doing this
with it out in here but would
you be willing to work with that
Senator op hurdle to work on an
amendment Senator you clarify I
think your point to a very good
absolutely no problem with
moving this on out of committee
I think we can all we can all
talk to each other tomorrow yes
great thank you very much I
would prefer that because I
think it is exactly on it's very
necessary to to move it on so we
can just remove that provision
in there the GDP so thank you
and I'm going to go to the
committee for there's a motion
for a new path by Senator share
and there was a second by
Senator Burke and let's put it
up for a vote Pat are you there.
Yes I'm here madam chair thank
you okay Senator yes Senator
Burt yes Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator share yes
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Woods yes Senator
Woods yes and Senate to
Accenture Rodriguez yes Senator
Rodriguez yes and senator the
osis excuse so you have ten yes
and one excuse to.
Thank you very much Senator
Pirtle
you Senator Diamond your
communicate those concerns with
what Senator Pirtle thanks thank
you very much please hello and
yet you have on the line okay
thank you all right we're gonna
move onto the next item next
time is that Senate bill one
thirty three rural air service
enhancement Act we have Senator
Gonzales
are you that we are yeah find
their present Sanchez thank you
senator I.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee all.
With those Senate bill one
thirty three L. O. madam chair
members some.
Of this is that right hi with.
project.
The.
BOCES to create a new aviation
grant program within the New
Mexico transportation D. O. T.
under the rural air service.
Enhancement act the purpose of
the program would be to provide
financial assistance to regional
air service providers located in
rural communities through a
grant program administered by
the New Mexico deal team Senate
bill thirty three relies on this
fella these are counties to
procure administer the air
service the local government
would have to provide either a
ten percent match if there is no
existing air service or a fifty
percent match if there is an
existing care service.
The maximum grant would be
either up to.
One million two hundred and
fifty thousand if there's an
existing care service or one
four one million seven hundred
fifty thousand when there is no
existing air service the grant
would be for a two year period.
To fund the purpose of Senate
bill one thirty three creates
all rural air service
enhancement Fund in appropriates
an initial nine million in
general funds to the fund for
expenditures of the year twenty
twenty two and future the FY
Year The appropriation funds
would not revert to the general
fund.
madam chair members of this is
what the bill does some there is
an amendment that I have.
The end of the school so brought
up during our last.
Our last meeting.
I'm sorry your LESC committee
meeting.
Thank you senator can you that
we need a motion to to move the
amendment up for discussion in
do have a number for the
amendment yes Madam chair of the
the amendment is so point two
two zero zero three two point
three.
Okay thank you
there is that I need a motion to
move the amendment up for.
Some of thank you.
The second all right do we have
any opposition to move the
amendment for discussion.
All right you can proceed
Senator.
Thank you madam chair members so
the amendment to what we would
do is some on page one line
twenty five after counties in
search and related
infrastructure improvements.
The second part is on page four.
Line seven strike the twin
engine turboprop.
Request inserting Lujan off
they're all the passenger
capacity of not more than nine
first.
The third part of the amendment
is on page five between line
since line five and six insert
the following new subsection.
And this would be H. no more
than ten percent of the balance
of the rural air service
enhancement.
Fund on July first of any here
maybe you by the division for
infrastructure improvements
associated with the individual
grants awarded through the rural
air service enhancement grant
program.
On page six line eleven after
program insert and related
infrastructure improvements and
then the fifth part is on page
six line nineteen after program
and Sir related infrastructure
improvements hold madam chair
members so what this does and so
just to be able to allow the ten
percent to be able to use for
infrastructure.
The madam chair and members so I
do have some The New Mexico deal
T. S. expert witness Mr Kudlow
rail Mr de and more ram yes
there are so many questions.
Thank you senator do we have any
questions on the amendment from
the committee thank you madam
chair Senator Steinborn.
Senator Christine thank you
madam chairs Senator Rodriguez
so that the words and related
infrastructure.
Is that.
I'm not looking at the amendment
is that.
I'm gonna be privately owned
infrastructure probably or
destruction.
madam chair members so you know
might my part is that he would
be public the the to make sure
that I'm correct I would ask one
of our witnesses to
well expands on that question so
either Mr Dan Moran or district
level right now yes.
Sentencing madam chair.
I am the director of the
aviation division I have a just
to a little bit about me over
thirty years of flying time I
have been of my career was
actually is an attorney that
knows a district judge for
awhile and I have
It has been for over three
thousand dollars in small
aircraft.
The.
The question relating to whether
these.
Infrastructure would go to
private property the answer is
not all the all of the airports
that would be included in this
that the aviation division deals
with are all public airports
they are owned by the county or
a city so I would just remain
within the public sector.
Okay thank you and of course you
all know when asking a question
just that in this anti donation
kind of question that's all I
have on the amendment sure thank
you you can bring things to the
gentleman for Mr rail for
answers all right let's see do
we have anyone any other
questions on the.
Okay do we have a motion to
adopt the amendment
To adopt the amendment chair the
past.
There's more for the past by
Senator Steinborn we have a
second for the amendment.
We have a second.
All that.
The second amendment and is
there any opposition.
I don't see any so okay Senator
you can proceed with that
discussions or or you
presentation of the bills there
is there someone else with their
hand up here there's more flight
did you have a comment to make
mark on the amendment itself.
No you are you to take public
comment on the bill yes on the
bill itself I was okay I would
do your day to do that okay
thank you you want to get on the
left for public comment on the
bill itself is that what I yes
thank you yes I intend to ask
for that we're just dealing with
the amendments now they will
will work on the.
Madam when the bills together
with you then.
Thank you all right so.
And we move on to more
discussion on the bill said.
Madam chair members San.
with that I would just ask my
expert witness if they want to
add any additional comments.
This is.
Again at the
I I understood there would be
two amendments one of the
infrastructure Senator Gonzales
and.
Madam chair and also that there
was going to be an amendment for
the
To the proper place to be
changed to our kinds of whatever
planes killed nine passengers
this.
You Mr rail.
At this point madam chair
destroy all this by we're just
dealing with the the legislation
of the one amendment said Dr.
Thank you.
All right thank you very much
any other questions from
committee members here I don't
see anything else so let me ask
this question now do we have any
one madam chair right.
Yes
Madam chair I'm totally confused
so are you saying there's I do
have questions of the bill but
here is our our I I I'm sorry
I'm just really lost and where
we're at sorry.
This.
Hi Senator.
We got.
Madam chair can you hear us.
I think her video for us.
But she was very nice expression
one of the friends.
The committee as Senator
Rodriguez just called me and
said that her power went down so
the low lying to reconnect
momentarily I apologize for the
delay.
Go on the public comments.
Center Senator Campos.
The member of merit issue when I
take over Cherry with public
comment while we wait on them
Senator Rodriguez to join up.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you very much Senator
Steinborn at this time then
we're going on to public
comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee have we received
ninety eight and the opposition
to this bill at in support we
have Jason Weaks The New Mexico
hospitality association.
Mister sea.
It passed on to be with us at Mr
Fleischer.
Thank you.
Yes yeah.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Marc Fleisher
registered lobbyists for the
city of Gallup in advanced here
in both in teacher support in
support of this legislation SB
one thirty three offers
important economic development
opportunities for rural New
Mexico cities like Gallup
Farmington Roswell Alamogordo
Clovis and others would benefit
by being connected to a major
airport the city of Gallup the
vents yes done favor this
legislation the amendment to
change the type of aircraft from
twin engine turboprop to enter
crafts of the Mexican pass the
of nine passengers as well all
airports all airports can
schedule this type of service
with American nine passengers
are less small jets which were
expensive to operate in the
thirty two a passenger capacity
or more require part with three
line through the cation which is
very expensive for most rural
airports so we certainly support
the line passenger capacity
thank you.
Thank you very much why should
we not anyone else what is.
At Mr chairman members of the
committee that includes public
comment on this bill.
Thank you very much I really
appreciate that we're moving
along and to questions from the
committee.
What
sorry I objections that are
entry gate okay.
That's great Senator Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Senator.
I appreciate Mr rile up
observation that I want to make
sure I'm correct that the the
line airport.
That could potentially benefit
from this legislation they are
owned by municipalities or
counties correct their public.
This is the New.
Madam chair in the Senate and
the answer is yes they are all
on hundred percent but counties
and that is in the state as a
minister palace in New Mexico
all public service airports.
So madam chair I guess the
question for me really in the
struggle I have with this
legislation.
Is it is not supportive of the
concept.
But I I see with the legislation
is trying to do but I'm a little
concerned.
because as you know that you're
actually committed nine million
dollars recurring money of
general fund.
Shoot just subsidize the
infrastructure development of
what are essentially local
affects their own by cities and
counties.
As I guess the question for us
right yes Mr Chairman was that.
Is does the department of
transportation currently have
the authority to issue out to
include these airports again in
its bonding authority.
Mr chairman of the.
Of the Senator for the first
part you know
all the I did do some research
before we came on two percent
for the yes of that it is not
recurring funding it is a
program for two years the state
hi.
Now the second part of the
funding I would refer to my
expert witness.
C..
Does not take a stab at it in
Dan Randy other the manager of
the aviation division is also
with me but in terms of any
monies
That are appropriated like if
it's that the nine million
dollars that I'm going to.
Public institutions and there is
no bonding requirements the
legislature the bears require
matching funds those are.
Included by the city or the
county that is involved in the
project this is standard
operating procedure that the.
Beijing has been doing since I
believe nineteen sixty three
when it was first started is
nothing now for example to us in
terms of
The grants that are required by
the act so this is not not
anything you whatsoever that
there is there's never there's
no funding that I'm aware of
that is required it would simply
be the nine million dollars
appropriation and the
and the matching funds by the
municipalities or counties.
Thank you chair and thank you
senator thank you very much
Senator please proceed.
Mr chairman you can add me to
the last.
I'm going to go I'm gonna try
once more with senator
Candelaria centered on the line
sorry sorry sorry
sorry I'm sorry we're fine so
the Mr Mr chairman and Senator
Gonzales I I think the issue is
this I think the issue for me
is.
You know what I understand the
department of transportation
doesn't currently issue now
include these airports within
the scope of their of the of the
of the bonding act but we could
you know we could include them
as one example.
the other the other struggle I
have is you know
the NMFA for example has a lot
of programs where local
governments can go and see very
low cost financing and sometimes
that comes in at zero interest
rate but sometimes it comes in a
small interest rate and I guess
the challenge I really have with
all due respect Mr chairman is
this which is if I may it makes
you know debate about
nonrecurring dollars on going
but eventually it is recurring
once we once we commit
our revenue stream to subsidize
this which is a noble idea
we will continue to use that
general fund and what I'm
suggesting respectfully is that
you know perhaps not best that
we look general fund dollars
just fund this infrastructure
perhaps it's best if we revisit
the bonding authority of the OAG
or perhaps it's appropriate to
set up a new program to NMSA or
simply to get at MSA connected
with the local government
to to find other financing
sources.
What.
Downward pressure especially in
the long term on the general
fund so I I appreciate again
Senator Gonzales.
All you're trying.
The all I'm not going to be a
high the NMAA at least in the
past I've been able to chair
that committee and I would
certainly like to engage in a
more thorough conversation
around those sort of concept
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Sir the experts thank
you very much Senator on the
line yeah we're going to Senator
Woods now we're going to Senator
Steinborn Senator Woods please.
Thank you Mr chairman
Chairman Gonzales all the.
On the H. B. two is this money
in HB two right now as Senator
Campos Senator Gonzales.
Mr chairman of the Senator Woods
yes it is on house bill two.
Okay.
In I also have the problem with
that Senator Candelaria does it
looks to me that this is they
should be capital money there
should be long term money that
should be C. general fund money
and so you know I I have that
problem
Mr chairman I guess that's my
problem that of course and
that's all of that thank you Sir
thank you very much chords we're
going on to Senator Steinborn
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
chairman and Senator Gonzales
couple questions for you Senator
why the focus on the twin
turboprop engine that can only
be a certain type of plane
servicing that to receive funds.
So.
Mr chairman of bill Senator
Steinborn no if I may L..
you know again just so I I begin
to
give you the definition of the
legislation this that all it's a
pilot.
The you know one of the
discussion so was this with the
terrible yes the amendment this
would bring in the larger
airports and the there is only
nine million dollars so you know
it's it's taken by the larger
municipalities you know that
would leave again for the rural
part no not an opportunity to
have all of that with pilot
project you know that is the
reason behind it but the other
party is that all looking at the
sum hi.
And you know again you know
though to have an expansion
eventually you know that's very
successful you know to where we
can have an expansion to a
larger you know airports you
know it works in the for example
in the inTaos there is one which
this particular legislation.
The grant money would not be
eligible to tiles but there they
started one and doing to the
based on the COVID nineteen that
sort of thing some halls where
we was started and it was so
very very ingenious so strategy
and economic development is so
bring it in the passenger
specially for the recreation
awful and mostly skiing.
But then instead of the.
Of the airline's going back
empty they got creative to or a
lot of the local.
Local residents from tiled walls
were scheduling medical
appointments in the very large
hospitals you know where it's
large to get us specialties it
was working very well both ways
you know where someone could go
and get the medical appointments
for that day in return back
Coleman the same day.
So that was just the.
Excuse me a very creative way of
working with this the whole
thing again this so well a pilot
project economic development and
bring in an opportunity to the
small rural areas.
Okay thank you and then
so I I don't know enough about
technology to I mean to
understand if that's being
overly.
Restrictive I can see I'm sure
budget some companies that they
use that technology but maybe
something like this would
recruited a different type of
provider with a different type
of plane in which cases language
would really.
Maybe be helpful to some but not
others and maybe not to the
community so I am concerned
about that limitation but I see
your point.
At the same time but.
And then the other question is
it it kind of the purpose of the
bill is to get their service.
But at the same time we allow.
We allow grants to airports
whether or the where they
already our service.
So why is that what's would you
explain that kind of conflict to
me.
Mr chairman would be helpful.
One of our expert witness if
they want to expand on the.
If there is one of the experts
wishes to expand on the issue
thanks again fire cell that make
your state thank you my name is
Dale and the what the that I
read the bill as it presently
stands the actually allows some
of your smaller communities
gives them of.
A sort of a bit manage if you
will and those would be
there about six communities in
the area the ones that already
have their service or Santa Fe
Silvercity Carlsbad Clovis herbs
and Russell both six would have
would be getting
a small amount of funds which
would be one point two five
million a year and they would
have to match that with fifty
percent the other six of which
are from read also to Farmington
and they go around the state
including Gallup the more the
less Cruces and and a couple of
other ones would actually be
eligible for one point seven
five million and it would match
that ten percent rate which
means the way that the act is
written it gives the advantage
to the smaller communities that
do not have any service at all.
Okay.
It's we're yes I understand okay
that's all I have Mister
chairman Senator.
Thank you very much Senator
Steinborn we're going to senator
Byrd Senator Burt please thank
you Mr chairman and and Senator
thank you for the bill I I
appreciate what you're trying to
do and I think
Possibility of water to my
communities would benefit from
this however I'm eight is there
a reason why it's limited to.
Just the I think there's I think
we should never so six or seven
that already have a certain
services and they we get a
little bit lower amount and then
I think there are six or seven
new ones that will be added to
this I assume there are
additional airports around the
state
and they would not be eligible
for for this program is that
correct.
Mr chairman and senator Byrd
you're correct and maybe just
give me a little bit of
background and history on this
so.
the local backstage maybe like
about four years.
On the during the though western
states transportation alliance
conference which is almost every
state in the west including the
New Mexico we had a presentation
that this model was presented
with the state of Wyoming.
The end of the made it very
successful and also from there
are you know well some of us
legislators that were there were
talking about it and you know we
should work with the something
like this for New Mexico and the
I took some lead on this you
know working with the state of
what you will be the lead also
Representative Lundstrom is been
very involved with this so you
know again it's so it's a model
that.
Implemented in other states.
Has done well.
The eventually you know we want
to will be able to where this
would be another
Fully strand of economic
development to to everyone in
the state.
Well you have to start somewhere
you know in the will you so.
You know all the growing pains
and everything that goes with
that you know with with a pilot
for government them from their
home you know we can reevaluate
and of course with a big bill.
Big assistance with the
department of transportation.
I is there something within the
bill or or or existing
legislation that.
Would only allow all these
airports to participate or.
What is the determining factor I
mean at least in identifies the
airports we want to work with or
do the other airports get cut
out because of rules regulations
or or part of the legislation
that we're we're trying to pass
here I'm just trying to
understand why some are excluded
I guess but yes very well all of
Mr chairman senator Byrd let me
refer to for witnesses.
Thank you very much.
So Mr I. L. or someone else
The.
There is no absolute exclusion
of any airport the there are six
airports that already have the
service and they will not
qualify for as many as many
funds as I said earlier the
other six are big enough to have
enough population the minimum of
twenty thousand within fifty
miles that would allow them to
apply and they don't have any
service at all of any errors in
the scheduled air service so a
lot of those communities that
have no service to get more
funding
under this bill to get one point
seven five the match is a little
less the communities the six
communities that already have
the the air service would which
can still compete they can come
in and do it it's just a more
costly to them they would have
to they would get less money and
and they would have to put up a
bigger amount themselves so it's
not a and I mentioned the six
they don't have any because if
you get past all six you're
talking about some very very
small airports in New Mexico the
total of twelve.
There are under discussion are
the ones that would have twenty
thousand or more within fifty
miles if you get away from
violence you get into areas like
resort New Mexico maybe maybe
requests may be up and down in
there is that just don't have
the population that would
warrant.
Consideration of such as your
service thank you chairman thank
you senator thank you thank you
for the explanation so this
basically is.
Elation German at this point
time so Mr chairman that's all I
am thank you.
Thank you very much senator Byrd
are there any questions.
C..
Yes Senator Candelaria please I
respects no to table.
Okay we have a motion to table.
That is what the motion is
before the committee is there a
second of course so.
Right of also moving forward.
Is there a second chairman at a
table in most does not require a
second.
Correct.
We're gonna go ahead and call
the roll them.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Burt.
Yes.
Okay Senator Campos thank yes
for Senator yes.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales no.
Senator Gonzales now Senator
Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn.
No to table.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez is excuse and senator
Munoz excuse so we have seven
yes.
To no and to excuse.
So it stable
thank you very much Senator
consenus.
Senate bill one thirty three is
this table
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you members thank you very
much and senator once is for
moving down the list next we
have a Senator Burt that's going
to be for Senate bill two fifty
six as amended senator Byrd
please thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate.
I hear you I I'm sorry I don't
know if you can hear me
everything went blank my
internet grant I'm so sorry Dr
Stewart so I don't even know if
I'm back in India okay I'm not
sure we can see and hear you
okay thank yes.
Thank you.
I am so sorry you the
I and everyone we were on Senate
bill one thirty right at that
already happened here as.
Okay and so can I get a little
better is that.
They have.
What what is the outcome there's
the.
It lock it lost by one vote
madam chair.
Just kidding it
Don't wear your your vote your
vote would not have made a
difference.
Okay so what the table do I mean
that held over what was the
outcome.
So for the second time it was
okay thank you center I I can
hear again this is resetting
hearing business online.
Okay all right so we're gonna
move on then to two fifty six
right that's where we were going
to start I want to thank Senator
Campos for stepping in Senator
thank you for stepping in and
helping in this is this zoom
internet crashed on me thank you
very much of Madam chair and
Thank you madam chair two fifty
six Senate bill two fifty sixty
fifty six and is working with
the fire protection grant Fund
this bill allows one hundred
percent of the funding balances
to be kept with the council and
the fire fund to be distributed
to fire departments all over the
state of New Mexico.
It over time it decreases the
ISO rating which allows for
lower insurance rates in any
funds remaining at the end of
the year would revert to the
general fund and madam chair the
reason this is being brought up
is up over the years in times
when times are tough in the
state people looking as well
know for pots of money to be
used they started dipping into
this fund over a period of time
it just became almost an
automatic that the we're taking
funds out of this and originally
this money was designed to be
used by fire departments all
over the state of New Mexico for
metro to rural fire departments
to allow training for their
officers for recruiting for
equipment and so the purpose of
the bill is to keep all of the
money from the annual fund in
the funds so that fire
departments all the state that
can use it to do just that to
train their people to read hire
people into replace aging or
enhance that they may need at
this time.
And madam chair for me with me
to date on we have three of our
expert witnesses ready federal
law the deputy fire marshal also
with this is Robert Lee Alcon
Jaga the fire grant council
chairman and also make the staff
will general counsel for New
Mexico department homeland
security and emergency
management and
if any of them madam chair if
any of them have any comments to
make or we can move on to
questions that will be up to the
chair.
Thank thank you senator Byrd do
we have any public comment
before we move on for and madam
chair madam chair members of the
committee have we do have public
comment on this bill we received
now indications of opposition
and we have a number of people
with us at to speak in support
if everyone could please
remember that is a at ten
minutes at a.
Time limit for all support to
speak first we have Jerry
fanning junior public and
government affairs director Eddy
County.
Thank you madam chair in members
of the committee my name is
Gerry fanning I am the public
and government affairs director
for Eddy County Senate bill two
fifty six is about protecting
New Mexicans the three percent
premium tax on auto and fire
insurance is assess to provide
funding for our fire and
emergency services each year
there are more requests for
grants from the fund then there
is money in the fund due to the
present distribution of the
formula.
We believe the Senate bill two
fifty six will help resolve this
issue and for those reasons we
believe Eddy County will ask for
your support of Senate bill two
fifty six thank you.
Next we have joy as far Senate
deputy executive director for
New Mexico counties.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee as was mentioned
earlier this is a the that is
assessed on homeowners with the
intention that it would support
the infrastructure of the local
fire departments and essentially
lower the ISO rating so that
they save money on their
property insurance this is
something New Mexico association
counties has been supporting
since two thousand and six we
applaud the sponsor for bringing
it forward we think it's vital
that these funds stay where they
are most needed and as evidenced
by the request on the grant Fund
there is clearly a need for
additional funding for example
Otero County at one point.
They have over a hundred
different pieces of motorized
equipment when you think about
the land mass that these
counties need to cover in all of
these rural fire districts there
are definitely needs and so
often we get lost in the one or
two large purchase trucks but
there are expensive needs for
training for volunteer
recruitment as well as for
operations and equipment thank
you for supporting this bill.
Next we have Joshua Matt that
Eddy County fire service
director and fire marshal.
Yes my name is Joshua Marshall
not far Marshall for Eddy County
we cover forty nine hundred
square miles and we're mostly
volunteer about ninety eight
percent I also come from a
volunteer history sixteen years
and San Juan county New Mexico
which is fifty five hundred
square miles as seems to kind of
be the bill we all cover large
areas without.
Needed equipment that any
additional money is great for us
and as far as recruiting
volunteers as a vital part of
our everyday efforts to provide
fire protection so we appreciate
everybody's support thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee.
Next we have Jon Boller fire
chief for the San Juan county
fire department.
Yes madam chair Senator so as
you mentioned Jon Boller of fire
to San Juan County we ask you to
support this bill we have many
needs cover large areas almost
entirely volunteer rural areas
could use this money as
mentioned this is not a
A new tax this is existing money
we're just asking to be directed
back to where it was originally
intended thank you.
Thank you it looks like we also
have at Robert Sanchez.
Yes so madam chair chair
representative on the president
of New Mexico professional
firefighters I represent over
two thousand paid professional
firefighters in the state of New
Mexico and we are in full
support of this bill as well as
a Representative the
international association of
firefighters thank you.
And it looks like we have in
John eight cents.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee John the kids with
The New Mexico federation of
labor AFL-CIO we stand in
solidarity with our firefighters
and I ask for you to support
this measure thank you very
much.
Madam chair members of the
committee I believe that
includes public comment on this
bill.
Okay thank you very much and
thank you for the audience your
comments also do we have anyone
in the legislators and the
committee finance committee
members.
Have a question.
Right.
I'm sorry it's time for me to
say have a question thank you
the you can proceed please thank
you madam chair Senator Burt
The question I'm just trying to
understand the amendment in the
in the.
Tax committee transportation
committee here probably both.
What is it would you explain
what that amendment does it
seems like your your bill
directed the balances go to the
fire.
Protection fund under no go to
this other funding now they're
amendment on get that send those
balances to the general fund so
the analysis says but you can
you explain it sure I'm more
than happy to madam chair and
senator the original version of
the bill indicated that all
funds would.
The reserves for the counseling
for the fireman's fund and as we
look at this technically room
felt it would be a the probably
proper in the the right thing to
do at the end of the year if
there are any remaining funds
they would revert to the general
fund.
Forgive madam chair center isn't
that.
Don't all the.
Isn't that the hopes and dreams
of everybody who supported the
bill that they would remain in
the fund that they can get
requests for what am I missing
here well in the thing is if
they're if they're the only
money that would revert is any
money left over
the reality and madam chair and
senator is we doubt there will
never be any money left over to
revert back to the general fund.
It's just a catch all
centrifugal.
Okay.
Okay I'm not sure I'm I mean I
realize that demand exceeds the
amount of money but
Okay well a look at a little
more thank you madam chair
Senator.
Thank you Senator anyone else.
You past madam chair this is
senator Candelaria thank you
madam chair from share.
The motion by Senator Candelaria
pretty passed that by yeah
seconded by Senator share
Pat can you call the roll yes
madam chair Senator Burt yes
thank you for yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator share yes
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes and Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz is excused.
So that is ten yes and one
excuse.
Hello you Senator you have a new
path thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and the
thanks to all the supporters
online to help us out thank you
madam chair.
You're welcome thank you all
right Senate bill one ninety
three we're going to keep moving
here so we've got rural equity
but then we have Senator
Hemphill in Senator Diamond.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee it's an
honor to be here today.
As usual to have and have this
opportunity to introduce Senate
bill one ninety three with
Senator Diamond Senate bill one
ninety three will provide a
rural adequately but and that
job will be to work on issues
that affect rural and frontier
communities we should have our
expert witnesses with us
crystal of the Santo she is the
executive director of the
southwest New Mexico council of
governments Stacey **** the
director of the national center
for frontier communities and
Carol Miller she's a board
member from the national center
for frontier communities and the
reason the bill is so important
right now it's just because in
rural New Mexico there are a lot
of us where a lot of us are from
our communities are often under
served or un served in many
areas and of course with the
current pandemic all of these
disparities have been
highlighted so when school went
virtual children and our rural
and frontier communities
suffered the most because of the
lack of broadband
infrastructure and in many areas
we don't even have cell phone
service and even though we
suffer from a lack of resources
we have so many people in rural
communities who are full of
creative ideas and solutions and
we felt like we can address the
challenges that we face fast and
so with that I'd like to turn it
over to my co sponsor senator
crystal document.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you Senator Hemphill I'm
glad to have an opportunity to
join Senator Hemphill on this
legislation to address not just
the needs of our rural
communities in the districts
that we start with the rural
areas that so many of we of us
collectively serve out their New
Mexico so as to the intent of
this bill is really to address
the disparity and programs and
projects and in a resources they
get out to rural New Mexico I do
want to point out that in
determining where we should
House this position it was
ultimately determined that we
should have and the department
of India's state department
finance under their local
government division it seems to
be a perfect fit we've had
conversations with them and they
agree and so this position would
be nonpartisan it would report
to the secretary of DFA and it
would not just address the needs
of rural New Mexico is as lined
out and outlined in the bill but
also would serve as a point a
central point for any concerns
for our constituents that we can
we can bring our concerns to
that one collective point which
we address all the needs that
impact will New Mexico there is
an amendment to the bill that
we're gonna bring up here is
Senate finance that's four three
six point one.
What this ammendment does is on
on the on the bill itself it's
just simply adds the
appropriation to fund to this
position it ninety five thousand
dollars appropriated to directly
to DFA
and it is an H. B. two with this
at this time now so with that as
as Senator Hemphill mention we
have Priscilla lucerna on issues
like to say a few words there is
she's an expert in her field and
can certainly talk to the
disparities that exist out there
in rural New Mexico okay thank
you Senator and I think we have
to do first and you brought up
the amendment Senator is to this
move to to elevate the amendment
for discussion and and we.
If you can't do a motion for
that the move thank you Hey
there's a motion to have a
second.
Okay thank you motion a second
or discussion of the amendment
so if there's no opposition we
will proceed and now before we
go for a vote we can that go to
here the person you just
mentioned Senator.
Good afternoon I'm personal one
on the director of the south New
Mexico council governments madam
chair it's great to see you
again I'm hoping to have you in
that area again soon and can you
legislators that are not
representing their areas welcome
aboard and to all those familiar
faces that I work with in the
past I think if there's one
thing I want to say and I don't
think this takes a whole lot of
explanation but in in my over
thirty years of my career in
working in rural America and
rural New Mexico and all the
incorporated I think we're
pretty areas we still have
challenges lost mostly committee
and corporate areas as a right
the representative not only of
from service is being rolled out
of the rural areas into
metropolitan areas whereas also
we're seeing those different
things with them many funding
mechanisms and I think we need
to figure out how we can
actually are disbursed the funds
more geographically based on
whatever those needs are within
those communities because in
those unincorporated areas we
find that those those our system
for entities have less capacity
and that's what I've devoted my
career to is making sure that
these rural communities have a
voice and actually providing
that capacity that they don't
have at the local level with me
every day I encounter a
situation whether it's out of
federal program or service in
which I'm advocating for not
taking that program is service
the way and these much needed
underserved and economically
disadvantaged areas and I think
that's been my passion I was
raised in one of those low
income neighborhoods and I
continue to be the advocate for
even just providing your wall
space that you need which is
what our I worked in housing I
worked in facilities and
programs and services and so I'm
totally supportive of this
opportunity to be able to expand
the knowledge of the role
committees and how we can be of
greater service to that.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you very
much for your.
Okay
Next we have someone else
Senator madam chair we have
Stacy **** next thank you I
think.
Thank you for having me and
thank you to Senator Hemphill
and Senator Diamond for
sponsoring this bill into the
committee I am a native New
Mexican but our board chair
Carolyn Ford for national center
for frontier communities wrote a
letter that I have I had such an
impactful statement that I
wanted to read it she's
Assistant dean emeritus for
frontier and rural health for
the university of Nevada school
of medicine won't again and
national center for frontier
communities board and here's
part of her statement critical
critically important relative to
this bill is that it signifies
to those of us outside of your
state this is a national model
that can be replicated
especially in states with
pockets and vast expanses of
rural geography it inspires an
intergovernmental collaboration
and cooperation elevating and
recognizing the critical
importance of rural and frontier
populations insurers will equity
sharing and resource and
services allocation rolling
frontier at because see data and
also the metrics and addresses
structural barriers to re
resources and services for
policy statute or regulation
these are all milestones so I
just really want to point out
that most states don't have this
we've seen the need in the state
over and over and Senator
Hemphill said during the COVID
it became even more clear
anything so thank you very much
for the opportunity to be here
and I'm glad to answer any
questions that you have.
Thank you for your comments
Senator is that it for your
witnesses.
Madam chair we have Carol
Miller.
After noon of madam chair
members of the committee I also
want to recognize Senator
Gonzales who helped us get this
bill drafted last year when it
was ruled non germane to the
budget session
I was laid low for awhile out of
commission this year and members
of our workgroup are trying to
work group who is been meeting
and working with the Legislature
since twenty seventeen stepped
up and I'm really grateful to
all of their relationships with
Senator Hemphill and Senator
Diamond to pull together such
great supporters to move this
forward is an incredibly
important bill and it's
important this year because just
as we sit here the census bureau
is once again in the process of
redefining what constitutes
rural in America there is no
federal register regulatory
process that closes in may and
so many people are after each
census it's a very important
time to help in on but in state
government that can help us
navigate many of us are in very
rural places may be rolled
metropolitan of the census
bureau has always considered San
Juan County as a metropolitan
county just as one example so a
lot of those said follow census
and how that trickles down into
state programs have a lot of
concern Census moves forward and
having a single point of contact
within the state government is
a huge balance of for the state
of New Mexico and for all our
hard hit really ready to step up
communities to have a voice and
to have an update your so with
that I thank you very much for
having me here.
today thank you Caroline.
Okay anyone else.
Madam chair that's it for expert
witnesses and we stand for
questions okay thank you I was
the only amendment on that that
you have yes ma'am creation
thank you okay do we have any
public comment for or against
the bill Mason before we go on
to committee members you madam
chair members of the committee
yes we do we received no
indications of opposition to
this bill in support we have
Karen Witt lock with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter.
Okay Mr.
Step up.
And we want to hear your
comments thank you I'm madam
chair members of the committee.
Karen would walk with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter we
think Senator Hemphill for
bringing this bill we stand and
strong support best B. one
ninety three so much of the
state is rural yet many of the
concerns of rural areas are
overlooked rural areas often do
not have adequate low income
housing behavioral health care
or medical services we believe
that this on but will be able to
provide guidance to ensure that
rural interests are recognized
and that unintended consequences
of legislation and policies
impacting rural New Mexico or
addressed thank you again I hope
that you support this bill.
Thank you Karen.
Next madam chair members of the
committee next we have Lauren
Patterson president elect for
the New Mexico cattle growers
association.
We're and we're next.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee one Patterson F.
New Mexico cattle growers our
membership is scattered in every
single county of this state and
we strongly support Senate bill
one ninety three.
We are at would like thank the
sponsors for bringing it forward
there's not a day goes by that
we don't get a call similar to
someone looking for direction
are advice on how to contact
their state senators their state
representatives are any other
branch in the state government
for concerns in more rural
communities for that reason we
strongly support this bill and
and look forward to it going
forward.
Thank you Lawrence.
You madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee next we have support
in the past.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Secora
Nefish and I'm the registered
lobbyist for New Mexico thrives
the state nonprofit association
we have members throughout the
state and have long known that
the disparities and inequities
in rural New Mexico we stand in
strong support of SB one ninety
three thank you thank you for.
Next person madam chair members
the committee back brace public
comment on this now okay thank
you very much for all your
comments and now we're gonna
move on to committee members any
questions or comments on this
bill I don't see any hands
Senator Senator yes.
Steinborn thank you in senators.
Yes there is one section in the
bill which I am concerned about
and that is on page four number
four.
And that we are directing your
the but then to but this person.
To take it resolve complaints
from rural.
Roger communities about laws and
rules that are intentionally or
unintentionally biased against
rural frontier communities.
So to read that again to take
complaints from communities
about rules that are biased
against rope frontier
communities I think it's
And then down below we ask the
person to make a report on the
amount of complaints that they
resolved so I I have a.
It kind of it's kind of an anti
government provision actually a
little bit I mean I'm all for
them taking advocating and
taking concerns which I think is
addressed in the other
provisions that particular one.
creates a.
A kid and a premise that that.
I don't know that.
It's supposed to be a conduit
for.
laws that are biased against
their community.
So I don't know I just don't
think it's appropriate and I
think it's kind of covered I
mean I appreciate all the other
apps the aspects I think the
bill would be stronger without
that in it and and I think
hello.
You know on the for a number six
B. rather than say complaints
received
You know issues received a
request received and resolved I
think that that would be a
strong effects to the bills I
don't know how you all feel
about that madam chair.
Thank you senator that response
from the the Sanchez on that
suggestion.
Madam chair I'm gonna see as
Carol Miller my expert witness
wants to speak to that.
Here are you there.
all your muted.
Madam chair and members of the
committee of.
I understand would
the senator has suggested of the
words that are normally used
with regard to on but programs
our grievances complaints and
that's where that came from of
course issues would be of fine I
think the
if the Senator is suggesting
possibly
doing I wouldn't amendment to
that to.
Change compliance to.
Or concerns receive full I think
that would be a friendly
amendment I can't speak of
course for the Sanchez spent
You know Senator Steinborn is
that what you had in mind.
Madam chair and Sanchez I mean
that would be better it's really
the latter half the sentence
that's the big problem Mr Miller
and good to see you here which
is a.
If it were the part that says.
That are intentionally or
unintentionally biased against
Roland frontier communities so
okay we're just say taken
resolve issues.
Concerns from rural and frontier
communities.
even if you were to say about
laws and rules in the state of
New Mexico it just ended right
there.
I feel more comfortable and
saying the part about it that
are biased against state there's
a perception of a blast but.
I feel better if it was out all
together but I mean that that
would be a compromise maybe.
Thank you senator if I may
Senator Steinborn a lot of this
language actually mirrors on but
then language that appears and
we have that the department of
aging and long term care we have
a legislation of on budgets
within CYFD so a lot of this as
far as resolving taking in
resolving complaints is pretty
much more language program
that's built as far as I think
you're what you're saying is is
that's not necessarily your your
concern as much as intentionally
or unintentionally biased yeah I
would assume that that the role
of this arms management would
still have to identify and maybe
in past legislators there was
some and
and intentionally or maybe even
intentionally biased towards
their urban areas in identifying
when those decisions were made
and how we make more equitable
decisions whether they were
intentional or unintentional is
how we best resolve of.
Thank you senator a Senator
Steinborn and and help us to
step in and then I have to
become a lot in this point but
there's time for all of you to
proceed okay well well I'm again
I I think having given the work
complaint and probably okay I
mean that's fine and the
appropriate even I just I just
think the last half of that that
clause is.
Kind of not appropriate for for
law it's like saying.
I don't know I I made my point I
think and.
And I also think that were
required that to hold that
person accountable in the
required report later down on
six state on the complaints
received a result so now we're
requiring them to report on the
amount of resolved complaints on
rules or laws that are biased
against rural New Mexico it just
kind of sets the stage for some
things that I don't think are
helpful or constructive
apparently.
That's all I have for now
welcome continuing discussion
madam chair yes thank you very
much and I think this can be
resolved as we continue to
discuss this year but let me go
to senator Candelaria on that
point Senator.
Madam chair I think the thing
about it is.
Once we create this ombudsman.
You know all of the calling out
of the specific duties it's it's
great intend language but really
it's.
They have the authority to
liaise and this way right and
you know I think this this
legislature struggles all the
time with these sort of
statements right to ensure that
their reflective of the body
sentiment.
And I think this is a great
piece of legislation I think my
only when I was an offer on the
bill as I really appreciate the
leadership Miss Vigil Senator
Diamond and senator Cory and
what brought to this committee I
mean that sincerely as a still
kind of a sophomore member here
the other contributions made a
great deal to us so I I would I
would hope that we can adopt
Senator Steinborn.
Marshall amendment as a friendly
amendment I think we always have
to be careful in built about.
Presupposing our or riding into
the statute a presupposition
that there is you know.
I I you know I know must be very
frankly for me you know it
becomes I think.
No complaints about implicit or
or other bias.
You know I can see the value of
that when it comes to like
No funding and those issues but
I think it could become a
lightning rod for controversy
that's unnecessary if for
example that was used as a
rallying cry against certain
civil rights legislation
and that's where I start having
problems right so I I I I do
hope that we can just gonna
miss.
This a little bit I would love
to get this out of here with the
unanimous bipartisan support in
the sense that I hear everything
that's being said I don't think
that keeping the language as is
is is actually necessary in a
small change you know was still
affect the intent which is very
good so thank you for listening
and for those of us actually
baking bread it's my new pastime
so thank you.
Now you tell of that result I'm
very all.
Thank you very much okay thank
you for your comments to well
I'll tell you what I before I I
move on with them of the ten
July action you're right you've
got to share you had your hand
up Senator
yes madam chair and and senator
Wirth of so we've talked about
this ammendment of this would be
if would this be a friendly
amendment to do on the Senate
floor and then we can all be
happily ever after thank you
that are out of that what was
discussed earlier yes it will be
a brand name and just wanted to
make sure that we could do it
tomorrow and and if senator
Candelaria brings a little bit
of bread I'd make a do pass
most.
Is there yes thank you Senator
Steinborn thank.
Madam chair I don't I mean I I
and I apologize to Sanchez that
I you know had had time to look
at this and bring a state no
suggestion have time but I think
this is a really pretty simple
straightforward bang and I would
wonder and we can make the
change I would wonder how the
Sanchez Bill of on page four.
If we were to just put a period
after the work communities taken
resolve complaints from rural
and frontier communities.
And just put a period at the end
and strike the rest of it and I
would be.
Right with that and then also
six B. would work with that as
well.
Madam chair senator I think
that's a great suggestion I I
appreciate your insight and
learning from all of use so
thanks for catching that I
appreciate that and that would
be considered a friendly
amendment.
Thank you Mr thank you Senator
Steinborn I think we can get
that repaired UNM's move out out
of here to the floor this
weather over bill here and she
we have thank you so yes the
table furniture and the like and
yes next on board are madam
chair and forget it then make
that motion right now and we
just strike it right now.
Yes you can they can give me one
second etcetera Act can't
finance wanted to say something
I want to get the opportunity
thank.
Okay that we make system then
not subject to review of the
amendment.
By the Sanchez and by the chair
of the Senate finance.
The.
We look at it before we
actually.
In the committee report.
R. thank you.
In written amendments since and.
I'm sorry we usually do written
amendments is that we usually do
not do I mean sorry we usually
don't do verbal amendments I
think it's fine because it's
it's clear what you want to do
but we should just make it.
Thank you.
All of I understand so with that
madam chair with all the cob
yachts I would move that up we
put a period on eight four after
the work communities forgive me
on what I'm looking on I don't
have line numbers yeah but on
page four number four after the
work communities with the period
and strike the rest of that.
Subsection.
Okay and are you taking that.
I am and I will contact
Legislative Council four years
committee in the way here.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn we still
motion madam chair thank you
thank you very much okay so we
have a motion to for me to
submit an amendment or you
actually motion and amended
already working wage and so do
we have a second.
All second that motion so
there's a motion and second for
this amendment and we will
proceed with the bill here in
just a second now let me make
sure we all understand we're on
the same page that we're going
to go ahead and do this
ammendment in the finance
committee so that we do not have
to take an amendment written
amendments to the floor Senator
Hemphill and senator dined in so
it will be hopefully approved
here once we go for about within
amended bill and then they will
present the amendment writing to
us to see if there's any
opposition wants to distracted
it is assumed based on what we
what we heard and what we all
agreed on here that that it's
accepted so let's just proceed
with that no okay do we have any
Senator staff time were you okay
with that I'm great with that
thank you and thank you Sanchez
will just under your thank you
very much okay now do we have a
motion for the madam chair I
move to pass again okay I will
send you thank you I met as
amended is what I was looking as
amended.
As as amended thank you as
amended okay thank you just
amended twice it's been twice
that we have to do indicate that
okay so there's a motion and a
second here or ask Miss amended
bill for the past all of the
sales favor signify but I forget
do not the real thing here so
Pat can you take a vote please.
Yes madam chair.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator yes Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria a test Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes Senator yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes and Senator
Rodriguez yes.
I want to thank you
representative yes thank you
Representative monsters good
idea get out
the help preparedness The Lion
Senator Steinborn we have a
better.
The great thank you all right
guys thank you all.
We're gonna move on to Senate
bill one forty eight diversity
commissions Senator Stewart.
Senator your your yes thank you
madam chair and.
Lady but.
All right so madam chair of
Senate bill one forty eight is a
creates a commission on
diversity equity and excellence
in education.
the commission is required to
develop a long term plan to help
us transform public education in
New Mexico this idea for
commission came from two sources
one for two years the L. E. S.
C. has studied the no time to
lose that came out of the NCSL
where we did a study of the the
a high performing countries
around the world and look at
their educational systems to see
if we could.
Learn from those countries most
of the states that have taken up
the study have set up a
commission so commission like
this has been in Kentucky
Maryland Delaware California
Kentucky and Massachusetts the
commission is made up of the
stakeholders in education a
broad number of stakeholders
I've also been meeting
with the groups that are
concerned about our education
system including of the the
tribe's transform New Mexico and
the plaintiffs for Yazzie
Martinez they have made some
suggestions for the bill and
that is the purpose of the
amendments that I'm bringing so
madam chair of those amendments
are zero point zero point zero
one zero point four if you want
to do those at this time.
Thank you very much Senator yes
I would like our motion to menu
then discussion right.
We have a motion.
All of Madam chairman we are we
are just second.
Motion and a second by Senator
Steinborn and so with that we
will continue discussed any
anything else on the amendment
Senator yes madam chair I would
like to explain the amendment
find out for sure thank you
senator.
So
We have of for tribal members on
this commission the first
amendment it's actually number
two
of the.
Set some place that one of those
tribal members will be the vice
chair of the commission of the
chair is chosen by the speaker
pro tem and the governor this
bill was written before I even
ran for pro tem I'll just tell
you that
this is an L. E. S. C. bill so
that is a one amendment and of
course for taking off the
appropriation the amendment
number five to set the chair
will point members two
subcommittees the folks that
have looked at this the
commission have said that
there's just other people that
should be involved and so we've
laid out of those subcommittees
areas bilingual professionals
Indian education experts ELL
specialists and experts special
education teachers instructional
support providers and student is
considered at risk by Martinez
Yazzie the next amendment is
that.
The commission will start by
reviewing the Yazzie Martinez
rolling.
Then the amendment that we want
to add is that then they will
review the plans developed by
the researchers stakeholders and
the public education department
in response to the lawsuit so
that second part is the
amendment and the third and
final substantive amendment is
that we added to the the work of
the commission that they will
look at what providing adequate
funding for our public school
system would look flat so that
are those of the amendments and
chair and I stand for questions.
Thank you madam chairman not
being that sorry thank you
yeah and I'm looking at an
amendment we are of the four
hundred and it's that point
three but I thought you
mentioned was point four I want
to make sure more what you're
trying to it's a point four
Madam chair thank you then we do
have thank you very much all
righty so thanks for explaining
that well I any any Act concerns
about what the docking this
ammendment I am chair yes Madam
motions Madam chair Steinborn I
don't have a concern I just for
whatever reason my package I
don't I don't have these
amendments I don't know if
others do you.
I.
Zero three that they that that
you're you're you're on your one
your point you know what I'm
sorry for the with these with
these email to us.
Well I'm sure you've you've had
them for a long time the point
four was taking out the
appropriation they've been email
to your secretaries and your
analysts yes thank you very much
and and they were in the email
for them okay well that's my dad
all right thank you madam chair
I can share it on the screen if
you are other members of the
committee would like.
Madam chair I would think as we
move forward that would be very
helpful.
If if if amendments could be put
on the screen and I know we do
that on the floor and I think
that's and then also people
watching our webcast can see it
as well so thanks.
Thank you.
And I do apologize madam chair
at senators to eight can I have
that the two oh two number for
that again so I make sure that I
have the correct amendment on
the screen.
Two two zero zero one zero point
four thank you.
thank you very much and we will
see what we can do that.
Just gonna be great for the
future at all and put it on
there anyway so if it.
And I'm ready for a motion after
the committee is but.
Thank you madam chair I think we
were very well explained but I'm
happy at least on the screen
cell populations be at and
there's any questions The
standing out here not very many
are catching up thank you very
much and thank you senator all
your work I don't see any other
questions north and you can
member of the amendment and I'll
see if anyone else in the
question before I ask for a
motion or a there we go thank
you I don't have anyone else on
the list I'm looking at
participants are committee
members we have a motion for a
new path the man that or our
motion thank you.
You start.
Okay I'll move to pass as
amended.
And.
There is a motion and second for
the past hour Pat can you call
the roll.
Yes madam chair Senator Burt
yes.
The path Senator Pat Senator
Campos yes.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos you're Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
Now Senator Diamond no Senator
Gonzalez.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share no Senator share no
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods no.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
your No sorry there yes thank
you yes yes and it did that
Senator Byrd did pass did you
know what no Senator Burton now
so that is for no and seven yes.
Senator Stewart yeah the past
motion thank you.
Thank you.
Your thank senator Munoz you are
backed by the.
About the what proceed then
madam chair to the next bill
okay thank you all right so we
have Senate bill fifty the
heightened transport special
fuel permit Senator Woods thank
you madam chair what I have here
I've got a a Gen operator that
since trucks in in New Mexico to
pick up New Mexico copy it in
early run.
Anywhere from eighty to ninety
to fifty miles and what we would
like to do is to allow him to
have a permit the two hundred
fifty dollars per truck.
And with that he wouldn't have
to pay your the permits which is
a special fields package for
more in a trip Tax.
I have with me today.
Yes.
Right here madam chair of this
committee.
Roschbacher and he is the.
General manager of opportunity
cotton gin and Farel textures
and he can explain what is
happening in his area over there
if you are allowing madam chair.
You very much yes we bring in
that makes sense.
elevated your.
I.
Great.
Everybody thank for the time
with you this evening as.
Mr would just stated that.
In just five miles inside the
New Mexico or Texas line but I'm
and curry county residents are
problems for our producers in
the farming area is that we
have.
The girl cotton farms across New
Mexico but unfortunately many of
these I'm producing areas maybe
over two hundred miles away
from.
The nearest content so they
realize that you located across
the state lines I it operate
with such one of these
Chattfield and we're five miles
instead of Texas so it's much
closer for these growers to
utility the issues we have to
pick up this cotton in the
specialized truck.
And that the transfer D. Scott.
The their large.
I'm waiting to see
because of this we're not able
to use to open tag but we are up
we are legal to operate under.
Under section.
Six to.
Thirteen point five eight except
to the port of entry on the trip
by trip basis for a twenty
four seven operation we're
trying to get cotton process
timely for producers and the
court may or may not be
available for us to go to most
of our travel our economy rural
roads and very few of them are
state highways so for this
reason or at us for
For over we are over for ten
years we were having a thirty
day permit that was available
for the port of entry they do to
the interpretation of rules but.
Or of injury specials this
option was removed from this and
so it did where only.
Action was to use a trip permit
it was recommended by
enforcement from Santa Fe that
the only long term remedy was to
make operation of these vehicles
in bring it into law and given
guidance to enforcement and
eliminate any to a tee the bill
is not designed to reduce
revenue to the state of New
Mexico which allows for the
efficient process New Mexico
caught.
And then I'd be happy to answer
any questions thank you.
All right Senator any other
witnesses.
No of that total witness I have
are we much go to public comment
but I would be happy I know that
that was a pretty choppy
statement because of the
internet
so are.
I'm sure there is some questions
from the from the committee but
it we can ask for public comment
then we'll go from there yes
Senator that's what what my next
point was going to be is to go
to the public first and see if
there's any Adam India people
supporting it anymore somebody
against it nation are you there
madam chair I am here
There was that night is support
opposition indicated that it
looks like a representative from
at the department of
transportation may like to make
a comment.
Okay thank you.
The Franklin with that
department transportation I had.
Yes good evening Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Franklin Garcia the mobile
director at the department
transportation our ports of
entry is responsible for the
permitting process for the state
of program and for the oversize
overweight program and well we
are neutral on the bill we we
understand to seasonal the
situation that happens with
these a consulate reason cotton
transports and so we would be
working with the the sponsor if
this bill were to pass to make
it up.
Manageable and easier for the
the industry to manage and
administer this permit it would
be similar to our border
crossing special fuel user
permits so we have a process
that we would probably follow so
it is something that we would be
able to work in as far as these
harvesters thank you thank you.
Comments and madam chair members
of the committee I believe that
requests public comment on this
bill.
Thank you very much let's move
on to committee members anyone
have any questions or comments
on this belt.
Madam chair I move to pass.
Thank you senator doing there's
a motion for a new path by
Senator us here do we have a
second thank you.
Hey there's a motion and a
second so Pat can you please
call the roll.
Yes madam chair Senator Burt yes
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria this Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond.
Yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzalez.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes Senator share yes
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz.
Yes my vote.
Thank you yes yes and so.
Yes.
Thank you senator Munoz would
you like to explain your vote
sure it mean.
Our committee is about finances
and what I'm saying is is a
partisan split in here.
Weights are public and bill the
Democrats are help in both
public and and what is
democratic bill the Republicans
are loading up so.
Madam chair that's all I need to
say.
Thank you for your comments
Senator okay Senator would you
have a do pass on your bill
Senate bill fifty thank you very
much all right
Senator let safe when I was your
leader proceed right so we're on
seven Senate bill seventy three
certain fees to motor
transportation the fund we have
center had a meal right
right here Madam chairwoman.
women and members of the
committee thank you for
listening to Senate bill seventy
three this evening now it's
important to note that Senate
bill seventy three is strictly a
statutory cleanup bill with no
fiscal or administrative impacts
of the bill was right and to
direct all revenue remitted to
the state.
Being imposed by the federal
United carrier registration act
to the motor transportation the
fund which is that after
distributed to the state road
fund what this means is there's
current fees for this
registration that are native to
the PRC and the PRC re directs
those funds to the M. D. O. T.
and so the statute was updated
in two thousand six and again in
twenty thirteen but it fails to
replace the language to include
any revenue distribution and so
this bill remedies that
oversight so would eliminate
that middle them that's correct
practices been to distribute
that you are C. revenue to the
state road fund which is
approximately three point two
million dollars per year and has
been the practice under the
prior law this bill seeks to
specify that revenue
distribution in statute now with
me today Madam chairwoman are
couple of expert witnesses
including at this Mallory eight
months I'm not just the HSD
director of the NMDOT and Mister
Jerry Valdez the executive
director of an M. D. O. T. Madam
chairwoman I would like to yield
the floor to assist land some
others to speak on behalf of the
bill seventy.
J. thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you Senator how to meal
this billing center how to meal
didn't mention is extremely
statutory cleanup this is a
whole as a C. imposed to motor
carriers that travel the
interstate the department
currently receives three point
two million dollars this money
goes to maintenance activities
throughout the state of New
Mexico and we ask for your
support thank you and it would
ask if Jerry would like to say a
few words.
Thank you yes proceed please.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much my
name is Jerry about this I'm an
executive director with the
department of transportation we
want to.
Thank Senator harm you or
helping to sponsor this bill and
supporting these funds going to
their appropriate space to make
sure that the road fund and that
hi we and safety projects
continue to be
funded do this you see our seats
and we will stand for any
technical or any other questions
you may have with regards to
this bill.
Now madam chair what we'd be
happy to hear from members of
the public followed by questions
from the committee.
Thank you very much do we have
any public comment Nathan.
Madam chair members of the
committee neither opposition nor
support was indicated for this
bill.
Thank you very much members of
the committee any questions or
comments on this bill I don't
see any hands and if there is
none can we have a motion for.
Sure pass where I seconded
Senator Gonzales wants to move.
There's a motion by Senator
Gonzales and a second by and
your share of Jack can you call
the roll.
In New Mexico yes madam chair
star Harris rating that motion
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
But.
Yes this is very thank you
senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Yes right level.
Okay Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Red is yes Senator no sorry
there.
I think he's gone into a meeting
Senator so I have ten yes and
one excuse.
And it was wants to bring the
photo.
You know I just appreciate the
fact that we're actually put
money back in for the funds that
was actually meant to go in so
ground breaking thank you very
much if senator thank you.
Madam chairwoman let the record
show that I'm doing my happy
dance because this is the first
bill that's gonna pass to
committee and make its way to
the Senate floor so thank you
members of the committee thank
you so much I really excited
about this thank you senator and
I was going to comment to say
you did such a great job I
remember my first bill twenty
six years ago when I was before
a committee and I did not do
nearly the good job that you did
thank you so much elation
Senator thank you Senator have a
great evening everyone thank you
to.
All right we're gonna move on to
Senate bill ninety and this is
senator Munoz so Senator.
Are you hear certain overtime
pay a salary in P. E. R. A. and
everyone else.
You go on to another meeting.
Madam chair I believe he may
have gone on to another meeting.
Hey.
I believe we have and Senator
Campos is witness ready for the
next bill.
I yes I was going to proceed on
when I just want to make sure
that Senator one office not
around because I know this was
an important bill for his.
Senator Rodriguez yeah this is
senator Munoz after Senator
Ingle was present and if he is
he could do the bill for him.
Senator madam chair madam chair
I may Senator Ingle of was
called down the hall for a
second I will try not to get a
missus for his bill or no bill.
Percent or ninety.
At.
One of these top permit here
senator Munoz has requested that
the Senator Ingle if I
understand Patricia right
angles.
Your present for him is that
what I understand Patricia
that's what I understood from
him let me double check if.
Madam chair if you will give me
sixty seconds all trying to run
down the hall and a drugs
increase will affect okay yes
Representative yes thank you
never but let's wait.
Are you senator Munoz that case
and then we will move forward.
Thank you senator Byrd for your
willingness to do that but we
will wait just a moment all
right.
Okay Senator no he it just ask
that you roll it over for a few
minutes okay thank you very much
we will oversee them over until
zoom off get back so we're gonna
move on to Senator Campos and
it's Senate bill one eighty six
transfers certain DPS duties to
DOT department public safety
duties to department
transportation Senator Campos
thank you very much madam chair
members of the Senate finance
committee this is Senate bill
one eighty six transfers of
certain story related to the
operations of the ports of entry
with respect to the tax act
weight distance tax act and the.
A patient
Act from DPS to D. O. T. in
essence madam chair members of
the committee that's what this
bill does and we also have an
amendment.
And with that madam chair the
amendment would be
Point two two zero one one nine
point one and what it does is it
clarifies the definition of our
trip tax act and that was
something that was in a
virtually left out of the of the
bill itself so within that madam
chair however you wish to
proceed were ready and I also
have my expert witness today
there might be more than one
individual available for
questions but with the today is
Mr Franklin Garcia from the New
Mexico department of
transportation.
Sure sure thank you before we
call our doctor Frank Garcia
we're looking at the amendment
your thank you Senator Steinborn
make that I want to make the
recommendation right that we
have the land on the screen
thank you for that now let me
ask before we do we need a
motion to elevate the amendment
for discussion in some of the
madam chair thank you we have a
second.
It is not.
Thank you.
I don't any opposition.
Thank you that we will continue
on the discussion Senator so.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the Senate finance
committee in essences I
indicated with the amend the
amendment itself innocence but
it does is it strikes public
safety and inserts
transportation within the
language and from there madam
chair what I'd like to do is
also called on Mr Franklin
Garcia are to also indicate the
purpose of the amendment from a
place okay thank you very much
and that you can remember the
amendment of the spring
maintenance so I can see who it
is you're on now thank you very
much thank you Senator Campos
yes proceed with
your expert witness thank you
very much and chair of Mister
Franklin Garcia and if you could
address the amendment and then
we'll go to the bill thank you.
Yes.
Good evening madam chair members
the committee Franklin Garcia
again with the duty mortal
Division our ports of entry does
fall under our model a section
so
the the amendment is really a
technical fix that was
identified after we drafted the
bill and presented originally
there's it's a thirty page bill
so there was several moving
parts within their track
changing the language from
department public safety to
department transportation and we
identified that if you change
the definition in the trip Tax
definitions that that would make
sure that we were fully meeting
all the needs that department
transportation needed in order
to the.
Allow for the commercial vehicle
permit sales under department
transportation.
Thank you very much madam chair
were available for questions.
Thank you thank you Franklin for
that also okay do we have any
one of the public the audience
Nathan madam chair members of
the committee we received
neither a request to speak in
opposition no are and support
this bill.
Thank you Nathan are I would go
on to members of the committee I
don't see any hands up and we're
making some progress here so
madam chair all movie do pass
again.
Thanks to a bad day for me have
to do this couple times thank
you is this as amended Senator.
A yes as amended to pass as
amended thank you have a second
I will second madam chair Hey
there is a motion for the passes
amended in the second half call
the real quick.
Yes madam chair Senator Burt yes
and your bird yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond Senator Gonzalez
yes.
Your Gonzales yes.
Your Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes Senator sure yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
And senator Munoz is in the
meeting so nine yes and to
excused from the past public you
have to be passed motion on your
bills and and that thanks very
much madam chair members of the
Senate finance committee thank
you.
Okay we move onto the next item
one ninety six charters code
reform task force Daniel Lopez
and Representative.
Senator Lopez are you here.
Senator Lopez I'm here madam
chair thank you all on the I do
that more than one sometimes too
many times because with them
staff then we just sometimes can
hear it thank you okay you can
proceed Senator.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I am here in front
of you of course was a Senate
bill one ninety six which is
creating a task force to visit
look at reform the children's of
code here in our state
and madam chair members of the
committee just a there was an
appropriation on this particular
measure and I was able to fund
and fifty thousand through the
June your bill so that will make
sure that at least helps to
cover
for these this first year of
work the money does to the AOC
administrative office of the
courts and as you can see madam
chair members of the committee
there are.
Several members who would be
participants of this particular
task force and I want to sit
madam chair monitors that be a
commissioner on the supreme
court's a children's support
improvement commission and I
have brought this up of course
to our chairs of the commission
they are supportive of this N.
as is working with some of our
Supreme Court justices who have
a definitive interest in working
with children.
And
The bills pretty explanatory
madam chair you know we have not
had an opportunity over many
years so I've been here to
really be visit the children's
code and see what we can DO
we've had conversations madam
chair of the session about how
we kind of piecemeal different
parts of of the law and this is
another opportunity I think that
we need to take to revisit it'll
be for two years comported
recommendations of course to the
legislature the appropriate
committees and of course to the
executive at that time and I
stand for questions okay thank
you thank you and other than
that do you have any yeah any
witnesses or anyone like that
are not okay thank you great
job.
Do we have any public comment on
this bill maker.
Members of the committee we have
no public comment on this bill.
Thank you very much members of
the committee I don't see any
hands up so.
Yes thank you senator thank you
thank you madam chair.
madam broke up so used to con
you madam chair Senator Lopez.
one question does this require a
two thirds or three fifths vote
of the members to approve
recommendations.
Madam chair Senator there's no
there's nothing this at about
that point time nothing that
nothing that intense on this one
okay just just a joke I don't
think I'm funny these days but I
still.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Sir thank you this time weren't
okay anyone else any questions
comments now can we have a
motion please.
I'm of the past there's a motion
for the past by Senator Hemphill
do we have a second please also
in my a second by Senator
Gonzales happy to call the roll
you can see we're moving Senator
Lopez.
Yes ma'am.
Madam chair senator Byrd yes
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos.
Here Senator Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
It's no longer here Senator
Gonzales.
Yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes Senator sure yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes it's yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz also you
back voting yes I'm back yes.
Senator then yes yes they have
nine yes and to excuse.
Thank you very much for you have
a do pass Senator Lopez and
Representative Herrerra thank
you madam chair members of the
committee thank you thank you
all right senator Munoz do you
want to go back to Senate bill
ninety at this point yes madam
chair if we could yes the press
the so thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Senate bill ninety
what currently happens what
we're trying to fix it is that
firefighters go to work every
single day and they have
scheduled hours there in the
fire station for twenty four
hours and.
How are you.
What's the thank you needed
senator Byrd.
So they have scheduled hours
that they work they get to a
certain point and after the
forty that they worked even
though they're required to be on
duty they are not paid for those
hours in their pension is not
funding for those hours
we discovered this during
pension reform and a year ago
they're required to be there
they're required to work it's
budgeted in the city's budgets.
And so we're trying to fix a
wrong that that if you go to
work every single day and you're
eligible for your pension and
every hour you work.
Should be counted and so that is
where we were trying to fix.
I do believe I have two or three
X. for war says Justin I think
is with us.
If I'm correct.
And I think Robert percentages
of what this is expert witnesses
and madam chair we do have and
then.
Thank you madam chair and what
we're gonna do is elevate your
members for discussion on the
can call in your expert witness
that thou art you're not on the
motion to elevate then.
And madam chair second Hey is
there any anyone opposed provide
you can proceed with the
planning the amendment and then
we'll get your experts thank you
madam chair so what the
amendment does is is para has
come back and said this is the
thirty five million dollar cost
to to parent to to catch up to
this page and.
Balance that out the amendment
strikes the dollar amounts that
the cities and the counties
would have to pay and it places
all of the one point five burden
on the employee so they've
agreed except that no work bill
rate.
Their share classes the state
share.
And fix that problem.
I'm sorry madam chair we do have
a committee so.
And the man so and.
Already know we will rely on
oceans right the and then we
will do our committee.
You madam chair I move a do not
pass on Senate bill ninety into
a do pass for discussion
purposes on the committee sub
for Senate bill nine.
Is a motion to have a second.
It would.
Thank you and yes.
Thank I'm proceed to do it
Senator thank you and that's
what the service to does and
madam chair I think Robert or
Justin Cheney in our alley you
want to go ahead and start off.
Yes I can if you don't mind
thank you Robert.
Okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee so this is nothing but
a fairness bill you know so I I
sent an email to all the
committee members in the the
finance committee madam chair so
you see on that email it gives
are facts and fiction to gives a
key points on this bill and also
it has us several minutes
municipalities and counties have
endorsed this
most want ministers in counties
want to contribute to our
members pair but they're not
allowed to prepare rules so
they've already budgeted for
these so if we look at the
letters that it's been sent from
Bernalillo county Los Alamos
city drive should be a Santa Fe
so they they're they're me so
those letters are endorsing this
bill so this bill all we're
asking is the traditional forty
hour work week employee gets to
contribute on a percent of their
payroll
and into there it should be on a
percentage of their
contributions into para you know
firefighters so there is you
know back you know I know needed
ever this this I was overlooked
so if if if firefighters are
FLSA suffocate Sam and we're
schedule we have to schedule
over time which we have to go to
work and work we're not allowed
to contribute a hundred percent
of our salary and a pair of
which causes you know
us not to receive the maximum
amount like every other
traditional of public employee
so we have alley it on here
you'll you'll give the numbers
on it if that's okay madam chair
and senator Munoz.
Senator Robert to proceed
without.
Thank you for your presentation.
Madam chair
secretary members the committee
just echo what presidents on
just to say this is a correction
for eighty this is the language
correction for power up we're
unfortunately only able to
report eighty four to ninety two
percent of our base annual
salary to a pension when the
rest of the work force is
allowed to four hundred percent
Senate bill ninety is a fairness
bill it is not a pension spiking
Bill so far firefighters based
annual salary is forty thousand
dollars they will only be able
to report forty thousand dollars
a year if they were to bunch of
additional overtime and make
eighty thousand dollars a year
they will only be able to report
forty thousand dollars a year
however under current parent
guidelines that same
firefighters only able to report
thirty four thousand dollars to
their final average salary
Senate bill ninety correct this
language
and that is where we are here
before Senate finance committee
questions I will stand for
questions for this committee
thank you thank you for your
explanation okay yeah do you
have anyone else Senator it
called out before we go on to
the public.
Senator Munoz.
Yes madam chair side do you have
anyone else you want to bring up
is no I think we're good will
stand for questions Madam are
thank you were going to move on
to the public if we have anyone
that and that is for a test is
they'll madam chair members of
the committee received
notification of opposition to
this bill in support the staff
is Justin Cheney president I A.
at at local two forty four.
Thank you.
All right thank you madam chair
Senators my name is Justin
Cheney on the president the
Albuquerque area firefighters
representing approximately nine
hundred firefighters we strong
enough we stand in strong
support of Senate bill ninety as
my brother said earlier this is
a fair next bill this would by
putting this it would make our
firefighters whole if we do not
passes would be like asking a
sanitation worker a police
officer to work a forty hour
work week however only thirty
two hours get reported to their
retirement so our firefighters
all across the state of New
Mexico are losing out on their
fair retirement so we asked you
to stand in support of Senate
bill ninety we thank you for
your time thank you Justin all
right next right next we have
Brian reed Brian Griese line
with the Albuquerque area
firefighters.
Your next.
Thank you madam chair and thank
all the members of the committee
act can you all hear me I'm
sorry I'm outside yes.
Excellent thank you very much
yes Sir my nose primaries on on
the vice president of the
Albuquerque area firefighters
IAFF local two forty four I and
my brothers before me we stand
strong support Senate bill
ninety.
It it is a bill that will give
us and ensure that we have equal
pay for work for not only now
but for for ever in the future I
urge your support thank you for
your support.
You.
It's not.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee challenges with
that New Mexico federation of
labor AFL-CIO representing the
tens of thousands of members
across the state we stand in
strong solidarity with our
firefighters who have been
putting their lives on the line
especially during this pandemic
as first responders and and
working as basically heroes in
our community and we feel that
this is are the least that we
can do to bring fairness to live
to live their pension and making
sure that they get treated the
right way I out with air reform
so thank you very much.
Then it looks thank god right
yeah I would like to make
contact.
Is a good evening madam chair
members on Richter here with the
P. E. R. A. the P. R. A. board
need to so data endorsed a this
bill with the appropriation but
we have not had a chance to look
at the committee substitute
however we do know the one point
five percent increase in
contributions does cover that
that equivalent amount of the
appropriation of the per board
hasn't had a chance to take an
official position however in
consultation with our board
chair in our legislative chair
we do not oppose the amendment.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee I believe that
includes public comment on this
bill.
Thank you and I just to clarify
Drake this is the substitute now
the amendment is with actuated.
It's up to you but thank you
it's it's in there in the
southeast the state thank you
madam chair thank you very much
okay I do we have in the land
many of the comments from the
committee.
Or any questions now let let me
just make a comment or two
before I put it up for a vote
here and that is I remember this
bill came before us I think was
last year in probably discussed
even prior to that and it became
very apparent that this is
something that we should have
done a long time ago because we
were short changing our
firefighters.
By virtue of the fact that we
had stepped up to make this
change and so it's a good bill
and I'm happy that we're finally
going to make our firefighters
whole with respect to the
retirement is never fair and I
said this last time and say it
again now that it is never fair
when your requiring an employee
to work overtime but then you
don't credit them for their
retirement or any other benefits
that they should have been
credited for and so they have no
other option than to work when
they're required to do so if
they do otherwise could be lied
to insubordination or or some
other
allegations Ezzell thank you for
all that you have done for all
of us and I'm happy that we're
finally getting this bill here
for on out for a vote here in a
few minutes thanks to senator
Munoz for operating the staff
and I think he was the center
brought up last year if I recall
to so okay then thanks to all of
you in the public for your
comments also in their Robert
and now it everyone who have
worked so hard on this amount
shall we go to the committee
yeah we have a motion please I
move that to pass.
Thank you Senator Hemphill mom
for the past.
Thank you and who was the second
we.
Okay thank you there's a motion
for a new path Senator Hemphill
a second by Senator here at and
we call the roll.
Yes madam chair senator birch
yes.
Yes senator protesters Senator
Campos is.
Excuse Senator Candelaria.
Yes Senator Candelaria yes
Senator Diamond.
It's also a way Senator
Gonzales.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes Senator sure yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes
Senator then yes yes it is nine
yes and to excuse thank you
thank you have to do that
well Senate bill ninety Senator
thank you thank you.
Okay then we're gonna move on to
your meter presi Senator or do
you want to go ahead but thank
you very much we have Senate
bill a committee substitute for
Senate bill three seventy five
officer training and
certification are we there again
but yes everyone else you're
added again and then Senator
Ingle thank you in the LFC their
Ingle starters options use the
more senior legislators okay
great when I get to do that too
because I've I've been here long
to.
Instead of four.
Thank you madam chairman can you
hear me.
Yes I.
I'm here yes I can hear you
Senator Ingle thank you well.
Madam chair members the
committee what to Senate bill
three seventy five the issue
Judiciary Committee subject to
pre seventy five.
There is an amendment there but
I'll go through the bill first
because the amendment is
basically just deals with some
technical things.
And senator Munoz are sponsoring
this bill because of the
problems we've had basically
with the some of the stuff I
know all of you are aware of it
that more police departments are
facing with the number of things
that have happened and what this
bill does it amended the
provision of the law enforcement
training deprivations redefine
the role and composition of the
law enforcement academy board
and to implement and basic
insurers training requirements
for law enforcement officers.
And basically we're going to
have a a nine member board of
folks that are part of this Law
Enforcement Academy board
Bill what this bill also does is
it adds a new section of the law
enforcement training acts
stating that the curriculum of
basic law enforcement training
Police officers shall include
crisis management intervention
dealing with individuals who are
experiencing mental health
issues methods of the escalation
peer to peer intervention.
Management racial sensitivity
reality based situational
training use of force training
that includes the elimination of
vascular neck restraint to choke
holds.
Madam chairman members of the
committee there's also some
folks from the and municipal
league and this thank maybe each
of the Johnson Tim Johnson state
police department where her ran
are also part of this
legislation and the they're
welcome to speak on this bill
and then Senator protection that
they need to and up.
I think it's something that
we're you we need to get past.
Enforcement officers better
training and know that we are
doing our very.
Thanks for the trained correctly
the we can we can the.
Not have some mistakes were made
by other police departments
thank you thank you Senator
Ingle nice to see you here on
zoom you know I have the new
year and the chamber and I the
more clear here and when I do
chamber with our guests are
shields and.
Those mash multiple things and
senator Byrd when he wears one
you can't see his face.
Thank you senator okay I do we
have anyone here anyone else you
wanna bring up any yet for
witnesses or anything else
Senator currently you want
people who want to the public.
You have to make sure your
oceans rivers welcome to make
any testimony he needs to do
this as well yes thank you R.
the amendment we can we can
handle that at any time I was as
I say it's just to take taking
care some technical things
are multi elevate that we have a
motion to validate your man.
Thank you Mr thank you on second
that so now the amendment is
elevated for that so Senator one
talk anymore about the amendment
or.
If there's no questions or any
concerns on the amendment from
the finance committee of can and
these were good estimates.
We see if we.
Quickly yeah we were going to I
was going to ask that nation and
put it up on the screen and
again I think Senator Steinborn
he's won the suggestive of.
The thing so Macon was put it
out for final review before we
insert it directly into the
building about.
At madam chair members of the
committee I believe there are
two amendments to this bill.
Okay so I move that we elevate
the second one also and we will
you it on the screen we have a
second.
Which should we not madam chair
should we not just deal with
them one at a time in the
community we need to remember to
the center yes thank you Mr yes
thank you secretary Schardin we
are going to do one at a time on
the story that I just wanted to
elevate the fact brought up that
way we can look at all.
Thank you senator all right
maybe you want to pay it Madam
up on the screen one first and
then we'll proceed to the
second.
Thank you madam chair this is
some cleanup that as we saw and
and move the bill along and so
the all this does is is strike
the board shall appoint a chief
executive offer our and that you
shall appoint an executive the
chief executive officer to
assist the board in carrying out
solid functions tracks with the
rest of the bill and it says it
shall imported person is
necessary this is the morning
carrying out its function and so
the rest of it cleaned it up and
I did that and that will stand
for questions.
Thank you and senator Dick and
the
legacy Committee substitute all
in there for ages Year
opportunities that's to to madam
chair the bill as a substitute
out of the Senate Judiciary this
is an amendment to the
substitute yes thank you want to
make sure we're on the page
thank you very much okay.
All right so thank you for
explaining the amendment any
questions on the amendment now.
You can remove the amendment
from the screen Nathan so we can
proceed and that the other one
on
Making you want to remove this
one from the strange so we can
put the second
this is the second amendment
this is the second one okay
thank you R. I. so are there any
questions.
I think we needed up the first
amendment yes thank you we will
move to do that options we have
the screen that we look at both
there.
Okay fine so do we have a a
motion to what we already moved
on that we just have to I did
indicated there was no no
concern on the first amendment
that we would move forward but
okay yeah that's thank you and
Senator Steinborn you had your
hand up I want to Madam chair
out of.
I move adoption of of the first
amendment.
Okay we'll go with the adoption
the person manning the vote on
madam okay okay that you want to
call vote.
The second amendment check I'll
second madam chair yes thank
you.
I did it earlier in the in a way
that I thought maybe would be a
little quicker and simpler and
by asking if there was no
opposition and there was not go
there you go we will if that's
okay with you Senator
sex thank you thank you very
much all right so we're gonna
move forward then
okay Pat so then this is the
second amendment also and I will
ask the same thing again if they
are you
there any concerns or questions
on the amendment and we will go
to the committee otherwise we
will assume the amendment will
be part of the substitute.
I don't see any hand during
concerns about it so you can
remove the amendment from the
screen now Nathan.
Thank you this time or did you
have any thank you madam chair
let me let me tell you what the
second amendment does.
Currently the death benefit New
Mexico is only two hundred and
fifty thousand for an officer
that has been killed in the line
of duty this increases four
hundred thousand dollars.
It is
only right now only fair that
that we take care of our
officers and their families when
their kids and in the line of
duty
So that is what the second
amendment that thank you very
much in the very late explained
in them on the screen so thank
you for further expanding that
Senator okay thank you any
questions on the amendment again
so we have to make sure we have
enough
time for the members I don't
have any questions myself so
okay then can we have a motion
for a new password motion for
this bill and.
S. U. K. there's a motion for a
new path as amended in so
substitute Committee substitute
for Senate bill three seventy
five you have a second.
Thank you.
The motion a second half
Colorado thank you.
Sure we are we back on the bill
or are we all thank you thank
you thank you thank you Mr I'm
getting that time of the day
right it's time to after this we
said we were going to stop
because we have heard all the
bills held over so thank you
senator yes we're back on the
bill now and I guess I assume
because all of it was
incorporated into the substitute
that we all know but maybe we
need to go back and take it one
step at a time okay back on the
bill in the.
Questions on the bill would you
like to say other things.
More on the bill Senator.
I know madam chair what will
stand for questions I think the
bills.
Pretty self explanatory if
everybody read it.
It is providing a need that that
we need to have the staff in New
Mexico so but we give the
officers the training and the
ability and goals so we don't
hear about incidents to happen
so.
I think we're good if there's no
question from committee.
Thank you all right I don't see
any hands up but also the ratio
okay can do we have a motion.
On the bill as amended again.
Again I didn't hear yes okay
yes.
Okay that.
Senator Hemphill seconds okay at
the.
Hi you can call the roll.
The motion and a second here in
I don't see any opposition so
next call the roll yes madam
chair Senator Burt yes thank you
for yes Senator Campos.
Okay sec excuse senator
Candelaria yes hello.
Hello yeah yes Senator Diamond.
Senator.
Gonzales yes
Senator yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes Senator sure yes
Senator Steinborn yes.
Your Steinborn yes Senator Woods
yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Yes yes that is nine yes and to
excuse thank you everyone else
you have an Senator Ingle you
have in the past or committee
substitute for Senate bill three
seventy five thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you okay I think it's time
to stop in and call it a day and
we will start new tomorrow.
Thank you very much senator
Munoz do you have anything else
you want to add.
No one will try to get Canadian
Marlins see what happens maybe
we will have to meet on
Saturday.
We hope that we'll we'll see
what we have in this queue for
Senate finance I know.
There's just a few bills there
and and there's a few more
coming on so we'll see what
happens as we create that gender
for the next two days thank you
I think we did get quite a few
bills down to date L. thank you
and we will we wanted to start
for tomorrow then thank you Mr
chair thank you thank you to the
committee you have a good
evening read your.
