Representing all the parts of
seven counties in northeastern
New Mexico and again to the
people that are participating in
the observers today welcome to
another Senate finance committee
meeting thank you Mr chairman.
you Mr chairman I think I'm up
this is senator Jeff Steinborn
from Dona Ana County.
Thank you.
Afternoon no all state senator
Robert the Bobby J. Andrew
Saunders Representative
All Santa Fe Los Alamos who
everyone calls coming thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon everyone I'm Senator
so I am going to ask him help
from Silver City I represent
Senate district twenty eight
which includes Grant County
catching County and most of
Sikora County happy for you to
join us this afternoon.
Senator chair senator Byrd
concerning dollars did you I
think you went Senator shares
center byrd  center dining.
And we have a visiting members
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman and
everybody else is out there
until share us and after one
which is Farmington and little
bit.
Thank you Mr chairman bill Burr
to Senate district thirty three
Otero Lincoln in Travis county.
Thank you.
Thirty five which is a doggo
Sierra Luna and you County thank
you.
Thank you I don't see Senator
Woods on so if he's in there go
ahead and introduce yourself
center was but I don't see
I'm cert Georgia yes I'm from
Gallup McKinley county and
sibilants one San Juan County so
we'll kind of get this started I
don't see Senator sold in our
room and we're gonna bounce
around quite a bit today
so he's not there I'm looking
for Senator Stewart is she with
us I don't see her either.
So Senator Candelaria why don't
you do a Senate bill two twenty
three force.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Senate Bill to twenty three
would re authorize and extend.
The portion of cigarette tax
revenue.
It is currently pledged to the
University of New Mexico
comprehensive cancer center with
me today Mister chairman she
should be in the room is the
director of the comprehensive
cancer center Dr Cheryl woman Mr
chairman I know she's in yet.
I am senator Candelaria Mr
chairman thank you thank you
thank you doctor well known for
being here Mr chairman as as you
know the legislature created the
comprehensive cancer center in
the nineteen seventies that was
this legislature that created
the concept The New Mexico
should have a preeminent
research and cancer care
facility serving all of New
Mexicans the UNM comprehensive
cancer center provides needed
cancer treatments to New
Mexicans from every corner of
the state
Well years ago the legislature
financed the construction of the
UNM comprehensive cancer center
by pledging a portion of
cigarette tax revenue to bonds
to service bonds that were
issued by the New Mexico finance
authority.
What this legislation does is it
seeks to extend the life of
those bonds and re authorized
them the first phase of bonding
the will be paid off I believe
in five years what this
legislation does extend that
time frame forward and uses that
revenue to construct phase two
of the UNM comprehensive cancer
center what's most exciting Mr
chairman I'll allow doctor woman
to explain to the committee the
specific uses of what this
capital appropriation would be
used for but ultimately one of
most important features of this
is that would allow New Mexico
for the first time to have the
laboratories in the facilities
necessary to do bone marrow
transplants in the state right
now if you need a bone marrow
transplant you go out of New
Mexico and pray god we can
figure out a way through
Medicaid and other sources to
pay for it by enacting this
legislation we build on the
success of this model we ensure
that New Mexico closes this gap
in our cancer care approach Mr
Chairman and this idea was
generated and was proposed by
the LESC as a way to Fund this
second phase development so it
Mr chairman with that I will
yields to drive on the.
Senator Ninos Mister chair and
members of the Senate finance
committee senator Candelaria I'm
doctor show and it's a pleasure
to see so many of you as a
senator Candelaria has explained
Senate bill two to three really
is adjustments and
clarification of the existing
laws that regulate the cigarette
tax and as he described the
University of New Mexico
comprehensive cancer center as
one of the state's first public
and service projects to form the
cancer center at UNM back in the
late seventies has worked very
hard over the last twenty years
to be of service to the people
of New Mexico and part of our
state support comes through this
cigarette taxes senator
Candelaria explained was used to
construct the beautiful facility
we have that now in Albuquerque
services sixty five percent of
the people affected by cancer in
the state from every county in
the state for those of you who
are interested Senator
Candelaria and I can pod a find
a map of the number of patients
who come from each county in New
Mexico to the center each year
that those patients look like
New Mexicans forty two percent
of them are Hispanic and
American Indian and the
remainder other races and
ethnicities.
we also have cancer outreach
programs and suburban Los crucis
with Memorial Medical Center and
Silvercity with you a regional
in Santa Fe.
We're really excited to be
opening a new cancer screening
program clinic in Gallup New
Mexico to serve northwestern New
Mexico more closely than we do
today.
But none the less we have
hundreds of patients coming from
most New Mexico counties for
treatment as senator Candelaria
said the cigarette tax that
comes to us is partly used to
finance facility construction
and expansion about a third of
it issues for our program and
that money continuing to us is
very important because we're in
the middle right now all of our
five year federal review cycle
The or retain our designation as
a national Cancer Institute
designated center that actually
brings the state about fifty two
million a year and federal
funding to support cancer
programs and one of the
evaluation metrics is is your
state also supporting the center
and to what degree so by
extending the existing cigarette
tax allocation that provides a
funding source that we use as a
match if you will a leverage for
those federal dollars but that
extension of the funding as
senator Candelaria explains
would allow us to issue new
bonds to expand the facility.
Currently we provide radiation
treatments to seventy five
patients a day although we have
ninety five to a hundred
patients a day seeking that
treatment so right now we're
very constrained in our ability
to provide radiation therapy.
Radiation treatment is changing
to where instead of just being
put in an X. ray machine and
getting what we call external
beam radiation we actually can
give the gift patients
radioisotopes targeted to the
tumor directly in the body or in
the bloodstream this is a whole
new area of therapeutic
radioisotopes we want to make
sure New Mexicans benefit from
this new form of radiotherapy so
part of our facility expansion
will have an expanded
radiotherapy treatment center
the ability to do know very
sophisticated stereotactic
radiosurgery some of the part of
cyberknife used in prostate
cancer and bone tumors and
spinal cords and to deliver
these isotopes the other
component of the expansion as
senator Candelaria mention is
going to support New Mexico's
only twelve bone marrow and stem
cell transplant program we just
received that accreditation last
year we were very quietly done
sixty adult apologists
transplants and actually last
week we just did our first
allogeneic transplant meaning no
matched donor to a relative for
a man and an elderly man
actually from requests with the
advance of Kenya so we're
thrilled to be able to expand
that program this this facility
for bone marrow and stem cell
transplant also gives us the
infrastructure to do all the new
anti cancer immunotherapy sure
reading about cancer vaccines
and T. cell therapies so again
as part of our mission to make
sure we serve all of the people
of New Mexico expansion of these
facilities are as our important
so continuation of the existing
allocation we would get gives us
that financial support for
programs to get the federal
matching funds and allows us to
continue the to work with NMFA
an H. TT to issue bonds for
facility expansion as US senator
Candelaria mentioned it was the
LFC and HEP and NMFA that.
Came up with this concept I
think it's also attractive
because it doesn't impinge in
the state budget and we're not
asking for other capital
resources simply creatively
using the funds that were
allocated to us previously so
we'd be very grateful for your
support and I too would be very
happy to take questions thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman madam vice
chair.
Thank you senator Candelaria
maintained we have anybody in
support or opposition.
We can't hear you need that.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I don't believe it
that we have any request Bacon
support or opposition to that
they'll need more right Amarin's
waving her hands sort of serious
not not my apologies I I have
you as an expert witness please
go ahead no worries native thank
you so much of a Chairman
million euros members the
committee thank you so much of
course and Senator Candelaria
thank you very much my name is
Barbara down right on the chief
government relations officer the
adversity Mexico as well as
being at a professor at the
school of medicine college of
nursing this is our priority
bill from UNM this and this
session this is extremely
important bill for us with the
working on this during the
interim knowing the needs the
cancer center has a document has
eloquently described for you
again it was LFC staff and
agency staff along with some
input from an essay that came up
with this a great funding
mechanism that does not increase
any money from state
appropriations or anything to
our taxpayers and sessions is
already existing tax money there
so we really really request your
support is very important
delicious pivotal to save lives
throughout the entire state as
doctor will mention are we treat
patients throughout the entire
state and the region as the only
NCI designated comprehensive
cancer center at four fifty mile
radius in our area here so
Mister chair members the
committee we thank you so much
for hearing this bill and we
really are just that you support
this and our doctor will will
stand for any question thank you
chairman and senator Candelaria
again.
Thank you questions from
committee members Senator
Rodriguez thank you Mr chairman
and first I want to thank
senator Candelaria for bringing
this very necessary bill forward
and I want to say hello to Dr
Lillian and Dr Gammon also and
everyone who has been so busy
working to get this bill passed
it is a good bill it is a bill
that you not only do we need to
pass that we need to continue to
support in the future are you
know this that UNM cancer
treatment center and all the new
innovative ideas and things or
do we extend the life of the
bonds and re authorizing them is
really an easy thank the
legislature can do to see such a
great great return in in the
City Lights in helping so many
people I'm impressed that you're
doing some bone marrow
transplants thank you for that
at least that I know that you do
in many other things so I just
want to stress my support there
may be others who want to speak
so I won't make a motion and to
other speak and you're ready for
it but I'm full support of this
bill thank you senator.
Thank you senator Senator
Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
wanted to stand in strong
support of this bill and thank
senator Candelaria for bringing
it forward my son was diagnosed
with bone cancer osteosarcoma
when he was four and it was
needless to say a life changing
experience for the whole family
and we were saddled with
crushing medical debt in spite
of having two separate
insurances so I thank you for
your work I thank you for your
efforts and I look forward to
supporting this bill thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman I do have
one question about this is is is
you know all of madam secretary
my wife had both a kidney and
pancreas transplants old.
That means a lot to me but when
we talk about stem cell are we
talking about embryonic stem
cells or adult stem cells in
this research.
Senator manuals and members of
the community center Senator
sure this is Cheryl woman I'll
be happy to answer that these
are not embryonic stem cells are
so what we're able to do in
patients and one of the reasons
that part of the laboratory we
would be creating we actually go
in and harvest adult stem cells
from the bone marrow and then
make sure that that bone marrow
that we've harvested either from
your bone marrow or blood is
clear of cancer cells and it's
been regained fused in New and
what's called an apologist
transplant in older adults with
leukemia or other solid tumors
we may go to a related family
member and harvest their bone
marrow cells again cleanup those
cells to the stem cells that
give rise to your blood and give
that to the family member that's
called an allogeneic transplant
those are much more complicated
to do and senator Sherrod really
proud to say we've done our
first one in New Mexico new
Mexico's never done this in a
fifty two year old gentleman
from grants to former miner is
affected by pretty advanced
leukemia this is his only hope I
would point out he doesn't have
the best insurance and probably
most hospitals in Denver or
Phoenix or Seattle where he
might have gone if you have the
resources would have rejected
him as a patient so being able
to do that treatment for anyone
here in New Mexico is very
important the solid organ
transplants that you refer to
Senator share those are
procedures that we would be able
to support at this lab.
UNM we have a whole new group at
UNM of liver surgeons that we've
actually recruited from memorial
Sloan Kettering in New York that
are beginning to do a pretty
sophisticated pancreatic liver
transplant procedures that will
also be supporting by the
technologies we can do in these
laboratories.
All right well thank you Mr
chairman thank you I appreciate
all of that and I'll definitely
be in support of this thank you
thank you so much Senator chair
members of the committee.
Thank you Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My question is kind of more of a
technical question on the money
side
Senator Candelaria if you could
cannot fill me in it says a
cigarette tax distribution.
So we are we've had cigarette
tax for a long time word is that
distribution generally go we're
we're designated a new place for
to go and and the password has
that money gone whereas that
flow in the past thank you
chairman and senator yes thank
you Mr chairman so what we're
talking about here is an
existing dedication of revenue
so current law already dedicates
a portion of the server
cigarette tax revenue to the UNM
cancer center right to provide
the service on existing bonds.
Funds will expire in five years
absent this legislation that
money would just go into the
general fund.
What this legislation says is
instead of reverting to the
general fund the the allocation
will continue a new set of bonds
will be issued on that revenue
going forward and that's the
money that will be used to make
the capital improvements the
doctor will then was explaining.
Okay.
Sounds good thank you Sir thank
you Sir Mr Chairman can you tell
me the less that I.
Senator Steinborn you are the
last I just I like that thank
you Mr chairman I'm using a new
laptop today and I can't on the
right hand it it that's what my
settings I have a question Mr
chairman.
It sounds like it's cutting edge
obviously super important.
Work that the cancer center's
doing and it's good to see a
doctor woman and and doctor
grammar good to see both you
here.
My question though is that it's
far as you know US pledging.
cigarette tax revenue to issue
bonds for capital project at UNM
this might be a question I don't
see a.
Miss Russell on the phone on the
line but I'll just ask whoever
maybe Janet or whatever does
maybe common knowledge to you
all you all but I know that like
my university MSU we we you know
we have to go through capital
outlay and kind of that kind of
a system for our capital
projects this is a unique kind
of a we're pledging tax revenue
to issue bonds for you on M.
obviously something very unique
I guess what I want to know is
this commonly done where we're
pledging this type of revenue
for universities all over the
state or is this a unique.
Situation it's kind of rare in
that sense so what I would be
comfortable answering if you
want that hold on everybody okay
hold on.
The UNM cancer center serves the
entire state not a UNM thing
versus MSU thing.
This is station at services
patients from Los crucis
justices Services ocean
Albuquerque but drive down
around and doctor will then
please.
Senator Steinborn and senator
Munoz members of the committee I
would point out
that these bonds were this this
funding streams Senator
Steinborn as Senator Candelaria
mentioned earlier was originally
created to allow us to build the
cancer facility in the first
place even that first cancer
facility went through the
process as you're describing for
capital project approval within
AGD approval and LESC review
even this time for the expansion
drive Cameron has led us through
those same processes so you'll
find a letter of support from
AGD and LFC so we didn't buy
passed the normal capital
project approval process we
actually did go through that
Senator Steinborn the great
thing that the committee is like
was this is actually going to
use the allocated capital
projects money it would allow
the existing cigarette stream to
provide it if you will that's
leaving actually more capital
project money for other projects
that have nothing to do with
this I hope that helps that
explanation but we did go
through the normal capital
improvement project a process it
was actually the LFC AGD NMFA
idea let's go back and extend
this funding stream and leave
more capital projects money for
everyone else Dr Gammon may want
to add to that.
Mr chairman if I may.
Mr chairman members the
committee Senator stock or the
exactly right this as a former
secretary not yet of course I
want to make sure this went
through every single process we
were well into the process
before this funding mechanism
option was even presented to us
it was a long way with that
process so this went through all
the regular capital outlay
process sees internet UNM the
higher education department to
the state for finances went
through all the regular process
sees it was along that path that
staff of their made this
recommendation for us so we did
not bypass any process it was
approved every single step of
the way with that thank you Mr
chair Senator Steinborn.
Okay thank you for answering
those questions and I understand
I just from a financing
standpoint just good questions
to help for my education and
maybe others on the committee
just as we kind of look at it
look at what we're doing here
and contractual I agree with you
totally Senator Candelaria this
is.
Really important services for
the whole state of New Mexico I
don't disagree at all and that
makes it unique.
So but then the last one and ask
questions I appreciate the
answers thank you very much Mr
chairman that's all I have.
Thank you.
Thank you center St Martin I
don't see anybody else on the
left Senator what is the balance
to be paid out I'm sorry Janet
do you have something you need
that
Mr chairman I just want to
respond Senator Steinborn
question there there are other
cigarette tax distributions that
are earmarked for facilities to
the department of health and
some to the rural cancer
treatment.
Of this is not the only
institution getting a cigarette
tax division.
Okay thank you Janet
Sir Ken Miller I just had a few
questions you know what the
balance of the bonds that that
are currently exist it that are
not paid off and the interest
rate on those Mr chairman I
yield to doctor will then drive
down around I'm cert fiercely
checking the outside are but
that number's not in here
doctors could you address that
for us.
Senator meals I don't know that
precise answer I know mark
Valenzuela could email that to
you so one of the things we've
talked about in the LFC and the
NMFA it's a pretty favorable
interest rate one of the things
are looking at as could you take
the existing bonds and
restructure them in length and
amount to cover the project do
you issue a new set of bonds so
I think the idea was if this
project of the extension of the
cigarette tax would continue
then NMFA would creatively look
at the best option to do this at
the lowest possible cost but
senator Munoz and and members of
the committee I can reach out to
mark balance Layla quickly and
and get that answer to you.
I wish we knew what the balance
of the bonds are and and what
right we can get in refinancing
and then adding that additional
what is the initial money can be
used for.
With this and I believe I know
the answer I just want to make
sure so Senator when you're all
set chairman on the news that
the first outlay was sixty
million towards the cancer
center my understanding is about
four fifths of that is paid off
now and we're coming into the
final fiveyear phase to pay the
rest but I will find out the
exact remaining balance of the
interest rate what the LFC and
AGD would have to do with NMFA
if you look at the legislation
is they've increased the bonding
amount another twenty two
million dollars the total
project is estimated to be
twenty eight point six million
UNM will make up that gap so
they believe by just as you said
Senator my nose through a
restructuring of the bonds are
extension they can they easily
have the capacity to release
another twenty two million in
bonds that with R. six point
eight million in addition would
complete the project we've
actually finished initial
drawing some we pay for the
planning and design out of
cancer center reserve funds so
we're really pretty ready to
start.
Barbara Deming did you have some
bad.
Yes Mr chair members the
committee we just contacted more
felons well of it he tells here
sixteen that you left on the
bonds at three point five per
year.
Sorry Barbara did you say one
six or six zero yes one eight
six six.
One six thank you.
Thank you what's the pleasure
that committee.
Chairman I move on to pass.
Okay so we have a due pass
motion by Senator Rodriguez and
a second by Senator Hemphill of
Pat what you call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt yes.
Senator is Senator Campos yes.
But yes senator Candelaria yes
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Rodriguez.
Yes I'm muted somehow yes my
vote is yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
manuals.
Yes Senator then yes yes it's
unanimous eleven yes.
Senator anybody got down at a
Senate finance so congrats.
We're on the next bill thank
you thank you so much thank you
doctor woman doctor DeMint thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you thank you
Senator Stewart I believe you're
with us for Senate bill one
twelve and we do have an
amendment.
Yes thank you so much Mr
chairman.
I'll talk about the bill first
and then the amendment.
I do have an expert witness but
he's on for answering questions
if necessary so Senate bill one
twelve creates a task force
using eight of the governor's
tech cabinet secretaries to all
look towards a sustainable
economy a developing a plan to
help us diversify our economy of
the I've been working with
several of the governor's
department secretaries of the
amendment moves the the running
of the task force and the
hundred thousand dollars from
junior from that DFA to the
Economic Development Department
they want to run the task force
so it's made up of the
governor's office land
commissioner the state treasurer
DFA taxed read of energy and
minerals economic development
and Indian Affairs each of those
cabinet secretaries can add
other members to the task force
it's a five year task force and
their job is to try to create
jobs and to transition the state
economy away from our complete
reliance on natural resource
extraction so they may hire
consultants and experts the
strategic plan will be developed
over a period of five years try
to diversify our tax base a tree
placed a revenue that we are
part of the boom and bust of our
current economic situation
they must consult with
communities affected by job loss
they must consult with tribes
and pueblos local governments
and local communities.
So the amendment replaces.
The number is zero zero seven
nine point three every place is
department of finance with
economic development department.
And it also changes the
strategic plan to develop a
strategic plan in fiscal year
twenty twenty two and then
update it annually through
twenty twenty seven that is the
bill quickly and the amendment
quickly I'm happy to stand for
questions.
Thank you.
Do we have any opponents or
proponents of the bill.
That Mr chair members of the
committee at yes we do.
There is no opposition to the
ballot indicated.
In the port we have a number of
people please keep in mind that
at the port had a total of ten
minutes to speak.
First we have there are quite a
prop Act it back it's very for
EMNRD.
Thank you Mr members of the and
sericulture props with.
That I'm also co chair Senators.
Use the pool no one thanks
Senator.
At the start.
You're cutting out on us so I
don't know if you can and see if
you're on camera not camera
maybe try to turn that off and
see we get a better connection
you're cutting out this year.
Share I apologize I turned my
camera off is that if that's
better all try and if not I'll
send something in the tax on
that effect.
You are good.
Thank you I'm sorry that we
support a bill one twelve tales
with that make the case and
efforts at the dip.
Economic department we've been
spread cares grant for.
Develop a comprehensive.
Strappy including operate long
term act yes you sent this
report renewable factor related
industries you are in a staff
person under that grant so we'll
be very well positioned to the
pay half force that Senate bill
the thank you Mr.
Next we have we've Martinez
division director for EMNRD.
Mr chair if we could simply be
as as I just yes.
A quiet and next we have at
your in and out then with the
EDD.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Joanna
Nelson and I'm representing the
economic development department
today and on behalf of the EDD
I'd like to say that this effort
is in alignment with our current
planning economic
diversification and recovery
efforts we are in favor in
support of this initiative in
this bill thank you.
Next we have pocket calendar
with the New Mexico oil and gas
association.
Thank you Mr chairman and vice
chair committee members I'm
Patrick Killen registered
lobbyists for chevron and
legislative co chair for the New
Mexico oil and gas association
the new mobile legislative
committee support Senate bill
one twelve and we think Senator
Stewart for bringing this
proposal forward as fellow New
Mexicans we collectively one is
here state grow diversify and
attract new business and and
better paying jobs in the same
way that surrounding states have
been successful in diversifying
their economies and should this
bill pass we would just
respectfully request that a
representative from the oil and
gas industry be considered for a
public member commission Public
member position on the task
force this will ensure a seat at
the table and economic and
energy transition discussions
for the one hundred and thirty
four thousand oil and gas
workers in our state and for
sector that accounts for upwards
of forty percent of the state's
budget and generates nearly one
point four billion dollars for
education so in closing I knew
Moga respectfully request that
the committee vote yes on Senate
bill one twelve thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee next we have Camilla
people then with the Sierra
Club.
Thank you so much chair and
members of the committee first I
want to recognize pro tempore to
work for bringing this
legislation forward and thanking
her for doing that sh I
represent the Rio Grande chapter
of the Sierra Club and R. thirty
five thousand members and
supporters.
That in this COVID time it's
become more clear than ever that
a sustainable economy is a
diverse economy that any
reliance on a given industry
puts us at risk when that
industry faces challenges and we
hope that this task force can
describe a way forward for New
Mexico that brings us that
diverse and sustainable economy
but also a diverse and
sustainable environment that
protects our air water and
community health thank you so
much for the.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we had Stephanie
Han I'm not them.
Thank you for hearing my
comments today Mr chairman
members of the committee on
Stephanie hunt Amato I'm a
constituent from Los crucis I
strongly support as the one
twelve to form a sustainable
economy task force I am a
biologist the assistant director
at a science education nonprofit
that reaches tens of thousands
of students in southern New
Mexico every year the immediate
past board chair of a charter
school in Los crucis and the
mother of school age children
I've been teaching students
about environmental issues for
over a decade and I can tell you
that our kids are concerned to
combat this same views hope for
the future and to my lessons and
I applaud your work on the
Senate to ensure that is also
I'm asking you all to support
this bill and consideration for
the future of our youth and our
state overall are heavy economic
reliance on a single industry is
analysed we need to diversify
our revenue base I've seen the
effects of the boom and bust
nature of the oil and gas
industry and education resources
first hand in years of low oil
and gas revenue in the state we
have fewer funds for education
programs and to give our
students the resources they need
so many of our children are
struggling and all of our kids
deserve study funding that will
ensure they receive an excellent
education regardless of their
resources at home in addition to
supporting argues with
diversified revenue streams I'd
like to see more opportunities
for talented workforce it take
advantage of our state's
abundant renewable resources
especially wind solar and
geothermal let's grow the
outdoor recreation and tourism
industry in our beautiful state
let's incentivize science and
technology industry I hope
you'll support SB one twelve
because our children's future
should be funded by things that
will ensure they can have a
bright future not industry that
degrade it thank you for the
opportunity to share this
information and thank you all
for your service.
Mr chair members of the
committee it back that way we
have Gerry at eight in reserves
and technical adviser with the
coalition to gamble community of
New Mexico.
Mr chairman committee members my
name is Gary Payton representing
the coalition of sustainable
could bid could be Communities
New Mexico our coalition is
comprised of the elected members
of the cities of Los crucis
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Santa
Fe County constituting
approximately forty percent of
the state's population we stand
strong support of Senate bill
one twelve across this
legislative session there are a
host of bills that addressed
individual aspects of economic
development in our state what we
appreciate most about SB one
twelve is the integrated nature
the long range planning nature
that this bill will be able to
lead us to creating an
opportunity for us to be able to
move more thoughtfully in a more
integrated manner into the
future we support this bill urge
you to vote for SB one twelve
thank you very much.
Chair members of the committee I
believe that that concluded
public comment on that.
Thank you Nathan of we do have
an amendment so I can I have a
motion or to move the amendment
discussion purposes hello Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman.
To have a motion by Senator
Gonzales a second by Senator
Campos I believe is that
correct.
Senator you went over the
management
I do have one other thing we
need to fix bill as we move.
And many distracted
appropriation because you had a
place the money in your junior
bill and so we need to strike
the appropriation Janet you want
tell us where that strikes you
to happen Mr chairman I think
you'll want to strike out of the
title on page one line sixteen.
The semi colon and making an
appropriation and then on page
nine of civilians strike the
entire section for I would
recommend that we get that as a
claim amendments that the
compasses of the Senators
amendment and this of the it'll
be easier on the floor for
everybody to follow.
Senator are you alright with
that Mr chairman I can have the
bill drafter do that yes.
Yes.
Okay so.
Questions on the amendment.
Senator do you have a question
on the mental pressures on the
bill.
No Mr chair minds on the bill
itself with or without the
amendment.
Okay.
No no well questions on the
amendment any objection to that
amendment.
M. C. Senator sure the other one
has your hand raised I don't
hear anybody objecting some
Senator you haven't amended bill
are back on the bill questions
from committee members Senator
share.
thank you Mr chair
So diversifying our economy
absolutely we need to do this
obviously I love oil and gas but
I I've also always supported
trying to find something else to
do because well we all live in
the boom and bust cycle and and
we need something else and
there's lots of something else
is out there that we can do.
But I am concerned about some of
the things I heard our kids are
concerned why are kids concerned
because it's been a fairly
a consistent diet of panic
without any real science behind
that panic and it frustrates me.
I want to share just a little
stories with you here.
Before before fossil fuels we
use what we use to move things
around and do anything well we
used slaves and we used animals.
It's always the biggest
pollution problem in most cities
horse manure.
Because you hold things around
the horses did what horses do it
left on the street.
Then what happened after that
well the flies visited that
horse manure in a word the flies
go they came into your house
they walked around on your
dinner plate on your pillow in
your mouth while you were
sleeping at night and what did
you do when you left your
droppings pod attorneys your bed
you would the flies to them will
they walk around there and then
they walk around on your dinner
plate there to fossil fuels
stopped that.
Full you'll have been heroes
what we used to hear homes
lumber forest trees we used to
cut down trees in mass so that
we can do things.
And now fossil fuels have
stopped that and we have cleaned
up the the the the problems with
fossil fuels immensely yes Cole
was a nasty thing.
Until we started to put all the
pollution controls on stuff no
coal is wait.
San Juan generating station
produces almost nothing today
all everything is measured as a
trace elements.
Natural gas used to be called
the clean alternative now we
hate natural gas this is this is
this is unscientific propaganda
that I personally cannot let
just pass even though I do want
to diversify the economy I do
want to find new things to do.
This particular bill sent
everybody is if the governor
gets to decide everything.
Because all these folks work for
the governor elected at the same
time as the governor there's no
I mean you heard the mold in
their state all we're scared but
will support you.
Because they want to sit at the
table they don't get a seat at
the table by this law by this
bill.
They're asking their banking to
be be be hurt.
The banking there's nothing in
here that's just any industry
can be heard not even the movie
industry can be heard in this.
They're just banking.
Because this is so lopsided.
And it's not real science not
really anything except
propaganda.
Real reform if we really want to
change our economy and I'm for
this.
Requires three simple things tax
reform so the people understand
what our taxes really are about
our taxes are so confusing
nobody knows what they mean.
Regulation reform because we
just keep piling regulation upon
regulation upon regulation just
this year there's at least
twenty five bills that piled
more regulation on small
businesses that were already
Amarin to death.
In a little bit of tort reform
with her to see the.
Then we can diversify our
economy then people will stay
wow New Mexico's really great
place then we can move to other
things.
But I cannot stand for the for
the insults to the industry that
have saved so many lives that
have saved our forests that have
reduced of of the pollution it's
out there and in fact raised our
life expectancy from about the
mid forties to the to the mid
seventies.
Fossil fuels did that fossil
fuels made our life better and
there's not one single country
in the world it does not have a
coal fired power plant that
wouldn't take one of ours.
Because electricity makes the
difference between first world
and third world countries.
In wind and solar are cool right
but they can not produce
electricity that's necessary by
themselves today.
They cannot and all these people
all look at Texas what it takes
to shut down their windmills
froze.
Texas down it wasn't there
fossil fuels that made him
freeze their windmills froze
that's what made him freeze.
And the things that brought him
back the things that they try to
use or fossil fuels helicopters.
Important fossil fuel
the icing of the stuff on on
windmills that's what happened
and then the sun started shining
in.
Wind and solar great I don't
oppose it.
But this is a very lopsided.
Operation here and all of you
people just hate inanimate
objects like coal and oil and
fuel or get over a little bit
these are great things can we
make a better yes we need to
diversify the economy yes and
I'm done with my speech Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator sure I think
we're gonna buy you a public for
your office.
sent.
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm having
a little trouble with this
the mechanics of this bill.
So I'll I'll tell you the way Mr
chairman and I'm reading this
bill.
We're going to.
Create a task force.
With the.
One two three four five six
seven the.
Eight of.
Members of the cabinet
governor's cabinet including the
governor or their designees E..
And then two public members.
And the members of the task
force even even the even the
hired people already on the
government payroll will receive
mileage and per diem.
According to Brigham and then
the Jack it will it so there
there are I guess my first
question Mr chairman and and
Senator is.
Do they get double rate.
They get per diem cluster wages
are ours we just talk about per
diem for the two public the two.
Members of public.
So Mister chairman.
That was force is made up of the
eight cabinet positions like you
mentioned each of them kind of
point up to two public members
and because of the amendment
they can also a point of
employees are appointed officers
of Department subdivision so it
could be up to twenty four
members eight cabinet
secretaries in each of them can
put public members are experts
are Mr Kaelin anyone else on the
task force it's not required.
In addition the per diem and
mileage as for those public
members that are not already
working I'm just cabinet
secretaries are Mr chairman and
then Senator I did not read
that.
Part of that they may appoint up
to two members each one so sorry
about that.
Number overlook that okay now
over here on
On.
page.
Some we're here we're talking
about as secretary.
The public members and and the
eight.
Cabinet members.
Will elected chair.
So we're here I read that there
was a secretary and their
duties.
So Mister chairman probably what
you're referring to is that a
separate section three and all
section three does is make sure
that the cabinet secretaries
that are on this task force has
the ability to implement the
plan that's the top of page
seven that whole section is
already current language for
secretaries I'm we're just
adding this responsibility and
for the next five years.
Okay so so on the land on page
four line twenty.
When you say the the secretary.
So Mister talk about a
cumulative of the secretaries.
Yes Mr chairman and Senator
Woods yes section five are the
duties of cabinet secretaries in
general and that's all current
language with the exception you
know our bill drafters always
try to fix the statutes when we
asked them to do a bills so
they're changing all the
designations from he or his or
him to that more neutral
designation.
Okay so we're we're.
We're calling this the executive
rigs re organisation act Mr
chairman and senator protein of.
A no no Mr chairman that that
again is
The drafters cleaning up the
sections so that
the secretary's duties changed
and this whole this whole page
is current language so I I
believe that what happened was
that so left over when it's
supposed to say except as
otherwise provided in this act
they had to determine which act
they were talking about they're
not talking about this one.
That.
So I.
Right I land eight words
underlined the executive
reorganization act that's not a
news a new statement in there at
all no no that's not Mister
chairman Senator Woods it's just
the way the drafters do when
they draft these bills they
clean up things and if if they
don't know what this means and
they put it in there.
So the only thing new and the
secretary's duties
responsibilities as at the top
of the page seven where we ask
them to implement as much as
permissible the strategic
strategic plan developed by the
sustainable economy task force.
Okay.
Are these.
This is a hypothetical question
Mr chairman and madam secretary
and and because.
I guess because I need to say
something
so what
I worry I worry a lot of.
About.
Our electric grid.
And what happened in my part of
the world.
When even though we thought we
had a very strong electric grid
very well maintained electric
grid but when a cold snap hit
fourteen stage.
And.
We found out that there were
constraints.
And and bottlenecks and.
We thought we had over
generation but all of a sudden
we had didn't have enough
generation.
And you know I worry.
About those catastrophic events
that happens give arms to keep
flying that.
These catastrophic you yes.
That happened because we are in
the mood right now to.
To.
Make everything consumer choice
you know we want to bring it
down to the macro management of.
a consumer deciding what I want
to buy my electricity from a
certain.
Supplier because he's got green
electrodes are blue electrons or
whatever but you know.
Then.
Essential their state and I
don't want to pay for that
generation that is not the color
that I won't that that Blacklick
trunk and.
Why why you know.
Do you see them study and things
like that it with this task
force also.
To to make sure that as our of
economy.
you you know you and I both.
Would like New Mexico to grow.
We don't want it to state staff.
We want our I'm sure we're in
the same feeling that we both
walked.
our people to prosper we don't
want to be up for state we will
we want them to be robust and
growing and and every generation
wants our kids to have more than
they did and have better jobs
and you know
I know I'm trying to.
To talk about the American dream
and.
When we when we put constraints
on some things.
We still need to stay warm in
winter.
And we need to stay you know
reasonably cool in the summer.
And.
You know I don't have a big
problem but I I want to make
sure those topics are covered
also.
Because sometimes we get so busy
rail.
Thank you in about a consumers
choice.
That we don't think about
everybody's welfare.
We don't think about the the
global let.
And just keep fund I apologize
to.
I know that I'm I'm get way off
track your Mr chairman it it in
Madam protium.
But you see my concerns.
And.
I just I had some real I had
some neighbors that would call
me when I stepped on the floor
in a zoom meeting.
Ended state.
Because I am a director on the
electric coop that state I have
just been called and they're
going to cut my electricity all.
It's it's close to zero out
sect.
How can they do that.
But that they had to do that
they had to have the rolling
blackouts.
To hold the grit.
And and I know we're going to
have a big discussion on that on
on Thursday and
in conservation but.
When we start talking about
sustainable I want to make sure
that point in the sustainable
discussion also.
Because if the the population in
New Mexico doubles.
You know.
Are we going to still be having
missed the state of are we going
to be scrambling to to provide
services to provide water to
provide whatever it's
electricity to provide housing
to provide.
And we need everybody to prosper
along with everything else and
sometimes I think sustainable is
getting a loan this getting
alone but we need to be robust
in our thank you we need the.
I hate the word think outside of
the box but we need to really
think about how we're going to
help our.
Our citizens.
with jobs with with economic
development and that means that
we've got to figure out how to
find that that are that water to
to help those citizens.
In those ways to so I I'm I'm
making a circle K. and rabbit Mr
Chairman enjoyed the visit
thank.
Senator Woods that please don't
chase rabbits around the
capital.
Whoa Senator you're next.
Thank you Mr chairman and a
great conversation and and
senator I appreciate what you're
trying to do here in New I hope
it's a success.
But it is we're looking at the
state New Mexico there's
there's.
You you know the lord bless us
with some great.
And natural assets extractive
industries being one but also
solar and wind and we're
capitalizing on that right now.
When economic development
started in with the new
administration they said they
can spend fifty percent or time
looking for new businesses new
industry came into the state but
the gunners the other half of
time again support industries
that are here.
You know I I'm associated with
with the the national defense at
home Air Force Mason and the
bases around the state and in in
national defense industry and
and there are.
There are companies cropping up
just every day and these guys
are are retired scientists from
prying Nassar where were that
really knows what they're doing
in their creating these
companies and the looking for a
place to to come to in New
Mexico has all the space in the
world we have natural energy to
to find them these things but I
don't see a lot of effort going
in that direction and cultures
this pretty much the stability
of the state next oil and gas
and I don't see a whole lot of
effort to support the the the
you know that during one over on
the eastern side of the state
and and we're one of the largest
cheese factories in the entire
world in we never hear anything
about it we we did that is an
industry that we could
capitalize on in some way shape
or form I don't see a lot of.
Economic development is is
making some some headway in
December to reset.
And and the the animal now
they're in and working with the
kids here is in New Mexico and I
think that's a great way to go
so so we're capping icing on
that but the thing that I hear.
Even before it became Senator
look working with the national
finance and and in the aerospace
industry and.
Is New Mexico just does not have
a environment that is enticing
to industry to come here so I'm
hoping not only are we going to
identify industries that we
would like to have here.
But we're gonna make some very
hard decisions to change the
perception of the state in so
many people's minds that we are
friendly to business that were
open to new ideas and business
we're open to technology and
we'd like to have people move
here I think I think something
like a Netflix or or Facebook
are is a good start Senators
Reese's helping a little bit but
we have to we have to get the
only input on steroids it
because we have other states
that are so far ahead of us
right now we have to make some
very big decisions on changing
policy rules regulations weather
before only gas whether it be
for high technology whether it
be for waste help whatever we
need to do to to let people know
in the United States and all
over the world quite frankly
that New Mexico really is open
for business so I I don't have a
question then secretary and in
and I like what you doing here
but I hope if this comes
together that you not only look
at it it identifying industry
you like to have your but making
plans to bring more what we need
to do to make that happen
because it's it's only half of
the game if you identify
something the other happen
that's the harder have is to get
them here and all the things
that you have to do within the
state to make that happen so I
hope that I'm planning to see
that if this bill goes through
that that you and this this
commission will certainly take
on this task force will take on
that challenge to prove to the
world that we can work hand in
hand with agriculture only gas
national friends as well as all
these new industries that are
perfect to come to New Mexico.
Thank you then Senator and thank
you Mr.
Thank you senator Senator
Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman yeah I
just ask one question is
sponsor.
Why is legislation necessary I
mean if the governor believes
that this is a priority for the
state why not direct eight
members of her own cabinet.
To do this and it seems to me to
be kind of a no brainer based on
the testimony.
Anyone looking.
Attention to the needs of New
Mexico is going to say we need
to have these kind of plans in
place so why why do we need a
bill setting up a task force.
For some to do something that it
is kind of just inherently the
executives Authority and I am I
wrong Senator what's the value
we adhere.
Well Mr chairman and senator
thank you for at least asking
questions so I can respond to
little frustrating I wanted to
agree with Senator share and
agree with Senator Woods so one
of the main reasons I believe
this is necessary isn't it
crosses over of the a political.
Time of this governor of any
governor so it requires that the
implementation of this is
reported to the legislature and
this requires that this economic
plan be created with extensive
consultation with affected
communities and when you involve
the state agencies and public
comment then I think that you
you have the people that can
make a difference so the bill
really the need of it is on page
three and four that's where the
task force duties are laid out
on I am not I was I was very
thrilled that the department
that wants to actually be the
fiscal agent a move forward is
the department of economic
development I had DFA in there
after a reaching out to the
governor secretaries of several
of them economic development
department said this this will
help us we've had some federal
funding we want to have this
kind of a structure where we're
in charge of this task force we
want to have a strategic plan
that we talk to you each year
about us so tell me this puts in
statute
the beginning of the governor's
of climate executive order on
climate change when she first
was elected but it focuses on
the sustainable economy you know
what can we do and and I agree
with Senator Burt we need to
look at everything and you know
when you have the mocha saying
you know we can get behind this
and we want to see to the table
it's another reason to say that
I think we're on the right tax
that we will continue to work on
this as we move.
Forward so I think there's
there's lots of reasons to put
in place and I'm thrilled that
the economic development
department says yes you know
will will run this and we'll and
we'll make it happen.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and not to get esoteric and now
the day is long but I think this
raises the challenge that we
face Mr chairman is we can we
can put the requirements and I I
do appreciate that I think that
the senator raises a very
interesting point that this is
multi year and thus would apply
to the next administration maybe
the same occupant of the not.
But but I guess that I guess the
challenges as the Legislature we
are so has it sent.
To ever actually enforce our
rights against the executive and
I think we can all point to the
stories we all have of multiple
executives from both parties
we've taken them a requirement
under statute saying you must do
this.
And and just crickets and maybe
that's just an advertisement to
my colleagues called me let's
start filing more lawsuits we
need more case law.
But you know that's that's kind
of amusing but I appreciated
senator thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you.
Senator Steinborn is that you
raising your hand there is Mr
chairman.
Thank you yeah I still can't I
still got a.
The settings here so Mister
chairman Senator Stewart so I I
just want to say at the outset.
Sometimes.
I wonder what is the plan what
is our strategic economic
development plan as a state.
And feel like we have a need to
create one if one doesn't exist
and if it maybe existed might be
kind of a kept secret but we're
kind of grabbing at industries
and opportunities that we know
are good ideas that we believe
are good ideas like outdoor
recreation and kind of venturing
for.
But I but I think we do need an
over arching economic
development plan so I I like the
concept here.
granted it's.
It's kind of done well no it's
it's done with a big frame which
is.
Replacing a lot of jobs that we
the trajectory says.
Might be going away eventually
so I just want to
Kind of offer up to I mean I've
I've created some of these
things I I created a
pharmaceutical council of
different state agencies and law
they've Matt to great fanfare I
don't think they've they've are
driven a hard bargain and so I I
long lines with senator
Candelaria was just saying I've
seen some of these things and we
just kind of get out of it what
you put into it depending upon
how ambitious you are and how
fast you are about it and then I
created the Rio Grande trail
commission which is doing
incredible work there meeting
all over the state they're all
their meetings are public it's
they drawn credible input and
it's so exciting and so.
There's so much energy there
what when it happens so I look
at this and it's a similar kind
of concept and I guess I just
want to offer up that a.
Well number one I'd like to ask
you
Mr chairman and madam president.
I like to offer a suggestion
number one get your thoughts on
it which is that on page three.
I think it's really important to
involve the public in the make
these plants Public.
But one thing that I'm not
seeing here is a requirement to
publish the annual strategic
plan.
Publicly it mean we require them
to report on it to the some
interim committees and I'm
wondering how you would feel if
on page three.
We added and published on the
department's website.
The Economic Development
department's website.
Mr Chairman I'm I'm doing this
in concert with state agencies
hi I prefer not to amended on
the fly now I certainly will
talk to them about that and get
their take on.
Well it's it's an easy amendment
and it's simple but I mean I
respect that
but I will offer that up because
otherwise.
You know you have these things
kind of going on in the meeting
that I think there's been a lot
of debate whether or not these
things even have to be open to
the public and I'm not I'm not
sure that it it does which is
kind of my second question which
is what's the what's the plan of
the economic development
department have these meetings
in public have them online or
anything like that.
So Mister chairman if the person
from the economic development
Department for Sarah Cottrell
Propst would like to respond if
they're still on otherwise I
would tell the Senator that I
will work on that I don't want
to do anything on the fly
because I'm working with state
agencies.
Right I wasn't suggesting an
amendment I was just asking
about the plan of the task force
if to see conceptually help
people imagine it so madam chair
Mr chairman president only
response I'll just say that I
think this will be a stronger
effort.
If it's engages the public if it
is public if they report of a
thing online they get people
engaged in following this and
kind of see the direction the
state's going and invite their
input frankly this well those
are my suggestions having again
created several of these efforts
and even then you can do all
that and if.
The executive is a really
passionate about it you know it
is get out we put into it but
thanks for listening not to my
soapbox.
Mr Chairman can I point the
senator to page four number
three he does the long term
economic plan strategic plan be
developed in consultation with
the community that will be
affected by the provisions
including Indian nations tribes
and pueblos located wholly or
partly in New Mexico local
governments and local
communities right.
Yes I saw that I saw that and
that can mean different things.
In all fairness but very good
well that's my soapbox thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you senator I know what to
get you for Christmas now new
soapbox.
Senator Stewart no I I agree
that New Mexico has to
diversify its economy I mean we
know we're we're in trouble oil
and gas is changing there's a
new economy coming it's
different and of for me it's
different in every section I
mean the thing I was taught by
my father is you want to own the
milk carton and not the milk
because no matter what they have
to have that card every single
day to put their product and and
and for me it's we have so much
transmission across the state we
can generate so much energy why
are we taking a portion of that
like gas tax.
There's tons of things we can do
in New Mexico and just for your
information then my friends of
always center and have this
conversation is white in New
Mexico not grow in other states
grew around this and and what
that made them more prosperous
than we and we are it always
comes back to the water
situation is we didn't develop
water like the other states did
they refused to put some dams in
place we heard the conversation
yesterday about how the state
parks health issues Is visit
state parks and so I don't know
how we have put that on place
but we have it is changing its
chain for my children is
changing for the future children
and we need to figure out the
revenue streams we need to
figure out how to operate in the
twenty first and maybe twenty
second century maybe a space
point can do a little bit of
that for us it's over wide
variety of things and so.
You guys move on and that the
secretaries do you want to just
make sure we keep an open mind
how to do that in in oil and gas
I think will always be part of
that no matter what happens
natural gas we know that it was
two hundred dollars per and see
and during the cold spell last
week and and so we have tons of
that we're just not able to get
it to market when we need to get
it to market or were hamstring
in production because we don't
have the upstream and the
midstream companies to lay that
infrastructure us so that is a
cost to the state so it is it it
is going to be a new economy
it's changing we need to change
with the times and be prepared
for that so with that could I
have a motion.
Mr Chairman I move to table.
So we have a table in motion by
Senator share
We call the roll.
Yes share our Senator Burt.
Your muted center part.
The.
Quarter sorry sorry so we're
going on the motion to table
press I'm gonna vote yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
no.
Senator Campos no Senator
Candelaria.
Since Senator Candelaria so
there.
All right he's there but I
wanted to okay and come back as
Senator Diamond.
This.
Great keep going back and
entertainment okay Senator
Gonzales.
No.
Senator Gonzales no Senator
Hemphill no.
Senator Hemphill no Senator
share well yes and has Senator
share yes Senator Steinborn the.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez how.
Senator Rodriguez no senator
Munoz.
No.
Senator Mineros now do I go back
and sorry did Senator Diamond
vote ended Senator Candelaria
issue with this.
I don't have a record of Senator
Candelaria concur I'm here I'm
going to the bathroom I'm sorry
I'm gonna vote yes to table I
can.
Senator Candelaria yes to table
and Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
To table so it is at six now and
I yes.
So it does not pass.
So we're back on the bill do I
have a motion for the past Mr
Chairman representative there
that second.
So I have a motion by Senator
Steinborn and second believe
that Senator Hemphill that maybe
the second the motion at
Colorado.
Senator Burt.
All right now.
Senator Burt no Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria no.
Senator Candelaria no Senator
Diamond no Senator Diamond no
Senator Gonzalez.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share no Senator
sure no Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods no.
Senator Woods now Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Yes yes that is six yes and I
nose has at.
Thank you Senator Stewart Avenue
past motion
Senator souls thank you
Senator so we're gonna try to
get through your your bill's
quickly if if.
We get hung up on on them we're
going to try to end this
committee by five thirty
so.
Senator so do you want to Senate
bill twenty nine first are
Senate bill forty three I'll
give you your choice.
Etcetera I be perfectly happy to
just do them in order.
What.
This last year I've been very
fortunate to the virtually chair
that public school capital
outlay oversight task force
which looks at all of the
buildings around the state and
the funding that goes for that
the funding is overseen by the
public school capital outlay
commission out for the New
Mexico for the for the public
school finance authority the
first one the cost of
photovoltaic systems twenty nine
the only thing that this bill
really does is it allows the
district if they choose but they
are making their recommendation
for school building upgrades and
other things that they can
include to put solar on as part
of that project they would be
subject to the state local match
as it's currently set up it is
always set up such that the
priorities for buildings being
built or other things that is
all set up to the new public
school finance authority and the
public school cap let me
oversight or not oversight but
that commission to to look over
those things as far as
prioritizing all of those
that's all it really does I've
got with me Mr Jonathan Chaplin
who is the director is that I
would I never get your title
right but the director of the
New Mexico public school finance
authority so if there any
technical questions but if not
that's what this does.
Additional units that are.
I know I stand here and talk to
myself I look at that question
in terms we often not they can
do we have anybody in opposition
or support.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
We received now indications of
opposition to the bill.
In quite well.
Then I'll remind that the
speaker you have ten minutes
total of the group to speak at
very we have the we could Adam
with the we are glad Rio Grande
chapter.
Yes hello good afternoon Mister
chair members of the committee
thank you so much for taking
your time my name is we just got
on the provided a political
organizer with the Sierra Club
Representative chapter action
one instrument Karen I'm so
sorry
The Sierra Club stands in
support of SB twenty nine a lot
of the state to match investment
in solar panels and schools
makes sense is an investment in
the health of our climate our
students and amounts to a
savings on future utility bills
hello I'm public school capital
outlay point use the life cycle
cost analysis to determine
whether it's prudent to invest
in for will take it panels for
school make sense and we fully
support this is a this bill
thank you very much for your
time and thank you senator souls
for.
Rebuild.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have Gary
Payton repairs and technical
adviser to the coalition of the
tenable Communities New Mexico.
Mr chairman committee members
thank you for being able to
bring this bill forward Senators
souls I remember standing strong
support of SB twenty nine.
Clearly our coalition is focused
on sustainability climate impact
and social equity and by
allowing the refitting existing
school buildings with affordable
takes our school leaders can
address the future of course it
will have an economic impact by
shifting to local renewable
energy with decreased emissions
but it will also have a
significant cumulative financial
impact in reduce electricity
costs over multiple years we
support the bills energy to vote
yes thank you very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee that include public
testimony on this bill.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
Chairman I don't have a quorum
there's other people who do so
all right to make a motion it
seems like a very simple build
amount of weight thank you.
Senator Diamond.
Thank you senator souls I just
want to clarify that this is
optional for school districts
and not required correct.
Mr chair and and center diamond
that's absolutely right you
districts do this as part of a
retro fit or something they're
working on the screen they can
do this and this would count for
the state local match.
Can the public school capital
outlay already grantees type or
a course or is this bill needed
in order to allow them to do so.
Mr chair Senator I think I know
the answer but I'd rather turn
it over to Mr Champlin to and
answer specifically but Mr
Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
souls and members of the
committee hopefully you can hear
me okay.
Of this bill would make a
portable tank systems one of the
building systems that eligible
for state funding to date OPEC
systems not been eligible for
state funding through the PSC
seeing funding program.
That would be the change from
this bill thank you for
clarifying so currently they're
not eligible do we know are
their star there is is there
going to be enough savings in
our utility costs utility
savings to offset the cost of
maintenance and and replacement
of what not are we pretty
confident that we're gonna be
able to offset that cost for
districts.
Mr chairman and senator and I
get I refer to the Mr chairman.
So Mr Chairman
Senator Diamond.
This bill sets up a mechanism
where as part of the application
for this funding of the council
yes you'll see and our agency PS
that they would look at each
districts individual request and
help the district understand the
life cycle cost analysis for the
pay back of control system.
And the each application would
be taken on a case by case basis
in terms of the.
The economic viability of of any
particular project that would be
part of the the whole decision
the council would be making the
PSCS in.
Thank you I appreciate that and
that as much as I as much as I
support local decisions and I
actually appreciate that this is
optional I'm not requirement
because a school district to
make the choice to do that I do
just think could be very
important to make sure those
districts understand that that
initial cost savings you know
maybe Matt by higher replacement
cost and maintenance cost and
just to make sure that their
budget for for that but I
appreciate that you're bringing
it forward they regardless they
have the local options thank you
senator Senator thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator Woods.
Chairman thank you very much six
so.
Good to see you again we walked
up the stairs.
So we both made it to the office
so it's all good.
What.
You know what we had a
presentation by the general
Services
our department the other day and
I was talking about their their
solar rooftop systems and.
And the question I asked was.
What was a pale on the solar
systems you know what was a pay
back what what did you buy
electricity for.
And and at what have how long
did it take them for this system
to fail.
And the guy told me twenty two
years.
Was a pale you could buy
electricity for twenty two years
before you pay desist from all.
So the question I didn't pass on
which I should rocked and me.
Was you know most of the systems
are flat tops are mostly rules
are flat top roofs that we put a
lot of the systems on because
that's that's kind of what we
build our state.
Our state buildings are a lot of
flat tops how does one of those
rural slash do you have any idea
or our one year experts no Mr
chairman and senator you know it
this system last twenty two
years.
This is a rough under on the
last twenty two years.
Or.
Gentleman and senator and and
first
Justin Ebeling it allows this to
be considered by them Mr chair
we can probably tell you the
specifics and etcetera I want to
warn you a little bit he can
probably talk for three hours
about how long roof last and all
of you without AUMENT absolute
everyday basis good systems do
not have to be rooftop as I
think one at least one of the
high schools here in Santa Fe
has completely ground mounted
system are there various others
that you also but Mr Chairman.
Mr chair Senator Woods to your
question most of roofing
products these days for a Los
low per flat roofs.
Come with the warranty that's
typically about twenty years
twenty to twenty five years is
typical
so in if.
If needed these systems would be
removed as part of in the
routing agreement I want a new
roof is installed and then
reinstall.
So there it's really easy to
take down and put back up if
needed but as mentioned as well
not all of these will need to be
on a roof.
And can also be installed on the
ground.
So there's a lot of options.
Yes.
Okay and I understand that so
when you when we're talking
about.
The economic viability that that
you mentioned earlier Mr chair
and senator
I know there's a formula I have
said in your committee a time or
two and and I know there's a
whole lot of formulas that use
as to right sizing things and
and that's all good that's all
good but because you know we're
in a declining population of
students.
And so when we do new
construction a lot of times we
are downsizing these bills.
And when we're downsizing the
billions were downsizing the
heating and cooling systems also
and actually we're going to save
some economies of heating and
cooling.
So
at I I guess the.
The heck up I have is not the
fact that the the photoelectric
systems work or don't work it's
a private phone and it's almost
as if.
It's a break even.
And it just bars dollars and
cents in my eyes and the.
Also we had a lot of trouble I
don't I know you were set no
beards side while ago when I
was.
Making a long speech and I won't
go through it again but you know
when that those things are
covered up snow they don't work.
And that was some of the problem
we just have an over in our
country with the renewables is
you know when when whether.
You know thanks thank you cover
the stuff up they don't produce
electricity cloudy days they
don't produce and I didn't
realize that so much to live but
one of these
Solar systems on a replaced a
windmill system.
To pump water to some cattle
with the so report.
And.
When it gets cloudy I had
problems keeping water up.
So you know you don't realize
that you just think that.
You know name plate says this
but there it's dependent upon
some thanks so that's that's my
problem with them and then.
So without any further ado
Senator thank you did say it
again.
Graeser.
Senator Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator souls and cheer expert
thank you for being here
question
There was a decision that came
out of Gallup McKinley this
Well.
Which found in part that the the
system we're talking about here
is unconstitutional and that
that the legislature is not
meeting its constitutional
obligations on
on capital outlay for for a
specially for rural underserved
schools.
I'm particularly up in areas
that don't have much taxable
property so Gallup McKinley
schools for example
you know a lot of that land is
Indian trust land federal land
can generate a property tax
revenue for schools well as
Albuquerque can.
Obviously and so Mister spurs
chairman I can to the center and
its expert.
I will admit I read the trial
court's order but the court
didn't go into various much
specifics at all and I haven't
had time to go read the hundred
fifty page findings of fact and
conclusions of law so could you
summarize for us Mister chairman
Senator an expert what exactly
did the court find was started
insufficient or
unconstitutional about the
current system.
Mr chair and senator
Mr Chairman I'm sure could that
really isn't have anything to do
with this bill the just enables
through the system that we're
working on what whether we can
put job solar panels as one of
those systems Mr chairman you
have dealt more with some of
those things are might know some
of the answers I I'm not sure I
could answer specifically what
the court found or didn't find
but it has to do with the
underlying system is not fair
and equitable and needs to be
changed but at your and senator
when I read it also they don't
really say what needs to be
changed they just kind of say it
needs to be changed.
But Mr chairman if you've got
any more insight on that.
so Mister chair and senator
Candelaria your question answers
potentially very long.
but.
Trying to keep it brief.
The ruling I think of found the
the the methodology the process
for making funding awards
Still needs to be improved and
is not.
Functioning as well as it should
for all districts that was one
of the the underlying issues and
the ruling from the end of
December was the fact that the.
Process for applying getting
state funding for any shape size
of project.
Is still too.
Cumbersome and doesn't allow
equal access to all districts.
It's a short simple very short
Maria.
Hello a long.
A ruling from the judge.
Mr chairman thank you I I I I I
do not mean and No Way attended
like gotcha politics are going
just sort of extraneous issues
but I do think we should have a
moment on.
Before we.
Expands the or give as senator
selecting is correctly said the
innate enable.
Districts to submit requests for
funding for these systems.
or for the next bill for
destruction or get started both
bills I'm I just because we
deposit thing we should at least
understand that there are some
larger dynamics at play right
now and and I certainly have
pause for that it's not out of
any concern about photovoltaic
systems in the United.
I would choose anyways mentioned
twice the reason that the Texas
grid failed as regulators there
made a choice not to whether
rise their system to save money
for investors which is and
that's what happened they're not
on the eastern and western
interconnect and that's it was a
failure of wind or solar is a
failure of decision makers to
make responsible choices.
That's it.
I'm really happy that the PRC's
plan that replaces the San Juan
generating station Kohli coal
fired generation will be
replaced with solar and battery
storage in my battery storage so
that we don't have these kind of
rolling blackouts and we can we
can ensure that renewable energy
can be a baseball source but I
mention that Mr chairman because
I am concerned about this
lingering sort of court issue I
think it's it's not been defined
for us in the legislature.
And I have a very poor
understanding of that having
carried the bill a few years ago
the avid systems and and
education technology into the PS
the OC I totally understand
we're doing here I just have a
moment of pause for that issue
so I appreciate the ability to
at least air out some of what's
going on outside the context of
this one bill thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator thank
you Mr thank you expert.
Thank you senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator souls.
In this I I got confused here so
it's local option but if we
build a new school is it
required.
Mister chairman Senator that is
not this bill.
Okay.
All right and why do why are we
picking just for will take I
mean there's lots of there's no
doubt my mind there's a new
technology that will be
introduced I don't know in five
minutes from now that we've
never heard of before.
Chair and and senator
Is there a question that I'm not
sure what you're asking why just
vote for will take this supposed
to broadening the to to
potential other new up.
I'm done Mr chairman.
I don't see anyone else on the
list.
This is an agency requests for
the members.
Knowledge.
Do I have a lotion.
Can I have a motion
passed Mr chairman thank you Mr
chairman.
Have a motion by Senator Campos
is second by
Senator Rodriguez and Pat we
call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Senator
Burt.
No.
Senator Burt now Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria no Senator Candelaria
no Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond.
I will come back Senator
Gonzales.
Is excuse Senator Hemphill yes.
Well yes Senator share no.
Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods no.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes Senator money else.
Senator Diamond you get Senator
Diamond yet not yet senator
Senator Diamond.
Is is
O. K..
She's still on the books
actually still in the meeting
Senator then else would you get
your preference yes yes.
But he is Senator Diamond
available yet thank you guys
hear me I think some note your.
I.
Thank you merry Center.
Yes yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Okay that is that makes six I'm
sorry.
Enrollment.
I yes.
For no one excuse.
The half.
Thank you senator souls you you
think we're gonna end up a lot
of data your next bill.
Senator I you know you're
committed better than I do but I
don't think so
this yeah would you like me to
continue with that yeah.
And and okay thank you I
appreciate that this also is one
that came from the public school
capital outlay oversight task
forces discussed it as well as
the the public school finance
authority it is an agency bill
if you will one of the concerns
we always have in the schools is
there a number of buildings that
are no longer useful I need to
be demolished however because we
require a state local match off
and the local committee has a
difficult time putting any of
the funding to demolish a school
and get support for doing that
there are not a large number of
these but anytime we can get one
of these off of the district and
the state's rules then the
district no longer has to pay
insurance on it it no longer has
to protected from vandalism and
other kinds of things and so
what this would do is if the
district comes to the public
school capital outlay
Commission that and again they
always prioritize what are the
highest priorities but if within
those priorities the does not
require a state local match that
they're a cost of demolition is
just covered so we can get these
off of the rolls and that means
more money going into classrooms
instead of into insurance and
maintenance of the building
that's not being used in should
be demolished.
Mr chairman that I'd explain
that properly.
So we're ready to go out to the
audience and and the committee.
Do we have anybody in support of
demolishing schools or any
anybody in opposition and
demolishing schools.
We can't hear you mate and.
Chair members of the committee
it.
There was that neither
opposition nor support indicated
for demolishing schools.
Mr chair I'm not sure I want to
be noted for the the bill that
demolishes schools but.
It's a great but that's not a
good title or monitor to go with
it but but thank you Mr.
Mexico today here Senator.
A question from committee
members.
No questions I'm gonna move that
we approve the demolition of
school ninety seconds.
One door classrooms.
Way to go.
Senator
just to have I have one question
or one or two so when it when
they rebuild the school why
isn't that included in that in
that in the project and Jonathan
can you answer that because I
assume when they and I'm gonna
use Gallup when they build the
school behind the old one are in
front of the old one I'm
assuming that they have the that
is part of the the project plan
for the demolition.
You're correct Mr chair Senator
Munoz up when a new project is
built there are mechanisms the
demolition of the old building
is part of the funded scope by
the state so it's eligible for
funding that demolition what
this bill addresses is buildings
that might have been built
decades ago exist around state
in different districts the work
part of the project and so
that's why there that's why
they're still sticking around.
And I might add and and Mr
chairman we haven't talked about
this so I don't want to mess up
the the bill but because this
bill is full coverage of the
demolition costs would that be
part of our new building that
the demolition costs would not
be part of the state local
match.
Maybe I should have asked.
Senator sold I believe that's
part of the project plan when
they build a new school that is
the demolition and and
reconstruction so this may be
for schools that are way out in
the hinterlands and have been
given to somebody or the school
district really gives away and
and sells
Senator Burt you have your hand
raised yeah just just a comment
Mr chairman
I I know two instances in New
Alamogordo a school enrollment
airforce base that can't count
against us because the way the
O. D. does this is they count
square footage of the school
weather's being used or not
against you basically so that
you you it's hard for you to get
up on the list to get your
screen replaced and secondly.
In and I certainly we could
stand to be corrected but.
To.
Fund the the destruction of a
school within a a of funding
process that built the new
school and also disruption to
school it adds to the cost of
does take a little bit longer in
NMAA pushers your project back a
year or two until you can until
you get the matching funds to
get to the point where you can
replace that screen so I just
know it has been a problem in
the past.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you center isn't that a
fighter squadron or is that a
bombing squadron over there it's
a training mission actually
pilot training.
And we won't deadline you we've
heard that before but we got to
chat.
The.
I don't see anybody else on the
list the.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
Chairman centers also I'm just
looking at the.
Yes I are well I'm trying to
find its renewable.
It says the public school
facility at forty.
Recommends clarifying the
definition of abandoned
buildings.
Since that that be kind of
important in this bill.
What are your thoughts on that.
For.
Mr chair and and senator and I'd
refer to Mr chairman because he
kind of is the public school
facilities authority.
so Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn to your question the.
A vacant or abandoned building
or unused building would seem to
be a simple.
Definition of that could be used
to evaluate a building
But it's it's not quite so
simple so insurance for instance
NMPSIA their rules among other
things are are their utilities
connected to the building still.
If there aren't utilities
then it's unused and abandoned
and potentially ready for demo
of their rules go further and
say no utilities and have it be
completely empty they can't
nothing not even just storage.
And so you know that would be
A potential item for clarity for
a for this bill Gregory one sake
is to get the multitude of
definitions about what's on user
vacant or abandoned because each
district has their own opinion
as well about which their
buildings might suit those steps
since.
I think that's why that issue
raised.
Not quite as simple as you think
it should be it Mr chairman and
senator I had lots of this
particular bill kicks in after
that's already been determined
by the district and they are
coming to the public school
facility authority for the the
hundred percent funding to demo
that particular building.
Mister chairman Senator well the
respective that that this is to
fund an abandoned building but
the definition that abandoned
building is an in law isn't
defined clearly doesn't that
create ambiguity some problems
and for the authority down the
road have to make that
determination.
And Mr chair I I Mr chair and
senator I have to refer back to
you Mr Champlin who deals with
us on a daily basis.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn it I
think the.
The mechanism is proposed here
would basically.
Put this on the district a
district to bring this kind of
request
to bring their their request and
their justification and
basically the the decision
ultimately comes down to a local
decision from the school
district to.
The side that they're building
more may not be at that
abandoned unused and ready for
them all it starts at the
district level with this
mechanism they would then be
obligated to come to the
council.
Through our programs and the.
As as noted there.
Provide assurance to provide
proof that the cost of
continuing to ensure the
benefits of the outweigh any
potential benefit.
And also to say that there's no
practical use for the building.
No other for districts
statements that would be taken
you know there at the station
that would be taking case to
case.
Well I was just following your
lead and that kind of made sense
that suggestion in the FY are.
But now we're saying some
ambiguities okay well at the
school districts decide and and
obviously abandoned I guess come
look like slightly different
things but.
What is the right if you have a
more precise definition I'm sure
the sponsor would be willing to
entertain that as the bill moves
forward so
Yeah it's good to get to get it
fixed and get it as precise as
you think it should be.
Okay so.
Just want to raise that issue
thank you Mr.
Mr Chairman.
Your turnaround the committee
this year.
Now it looks like he is stepped
out so I think that makes you
acting chair at this point.
Okay we see may just be across
the the office there.
Need to pass over unless he's
the.
He's wanting me to do that okay
well does seem like.
Coming Senator it's good yeah is
usually says something when you
can go about that.
Senator Steinborn you're done.
Yes thank you.
I'm I was just going to say that
the point that Senator Steinborn
made are reasonable in the
definition of requirement I
think that's something the Santo
souls can think about and and
look at as we move forward so
thank you Senator Steinborn for
that for that and I'm going to
move the do passed Mr chairman
of that Senate bill forty three.
We have a due minute do pass
motion by Senator Rodriguez and
a second by Senator Hemphill
that we call the roll.
Yes Mister chair Senator Burt
yes Senator yes Senator Campos
yes Senator associate senator
Candelaria no Senator Candelaria
and no Senator Diamond.
Yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales this excused Senator
Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share.
Yes.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yeah.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
manos no.
Senator manual snow that is
eight yes.
To know in one excuse the motion
passes.
Thank you committee I I greatly
appreciate it thanks for having
me on this evening.
Thank you.
So everybody knows I think
Senator Campos Senate bill three
seventy seven the languages
drafted we want to scrub it with
members Center share we should
get you a packet for your
members to make sure that the
dollar amounts in the language
right before we roll out three
seventy seven to the for us so
maybe we try to do that and
committee tomorrow and on the
floor make sure everything's
correct
and then we'll do that billing
committee on Friday and tried to
get it to the floor on Monday
Just for the members knowledge
we will have a hearing on house
bill two tomorrow.
just to go over the framework we
may start looking at.
Making room for the Senate and
making some adjustments there
salute
Stuff that needs to be looked at
really hard and house bill two
and so we're gonna go over that
what I'd really like you guys to
do it is read the bills before
we come to committee.
Otherwise we can started eight
in the morning and have a
committee reading of of of the
bills and and then we can come
back in the afternoon and and
star voting on bills
it kind of hangs up we're not
gonna have that much time going
house bill two gets here there's
gonna be a lot of moving parts
and a lot of things we need to
watch.
So if you don't want to have
at an ATM Committee.
Please read the bills before
they get here get to your
questions.
And and let's move on with a
vote of not providing down
that's that's your choice your
decision I I really do think we
need to make sure that we meet
the bills before you get here
and FIR cell.
I think with that I think we are
adjourned thank you guys for
your time.
Tomorrow when we come off the
floor will do the same thing
thank you.
